This is the best time to sow grass lawns, because there's still enough time for it to cover the ground before winter, and in spring it's in a position to withstand the drought, which is very contrary to it.
And to be sure of success, you mustn't wait until the plant is too old, because not only is recovery more difficult, but the products are less beautiful. And for plants that take root slowly, you need to transplant them in a nursery, i.e. put them in a good position and very close to each other.
You'll need to baste them from time to time with the small apple watering can, as the cuttings can only take root if the soil is kept constantly fresh;
Care should then be taken to remove any shoots that develop on the subject, as they will live at the expense of the graft. (1) Grafting wax is composed of two parts pitch resin, two parts yellow wax and one part tallow, melted together.
However, Laurel and Pomegranate trees need to be regrown more frequently, as the development of branches and twigs is always related to that of the roots, and as these shrubs vegetate much more vigorously than Orange trees, they need to be regrown more often.
Towards the end of August or at the beginning of September, orange trees need to be pruned, which consists in removing mature wood and all unnecessary or poorly placed small branches, such as those on the inside, which make the head too compact and hinder the circulation of sap.
And while they're in the greenhouse, they need to be turned over from time to time, so that all their parts are successively exposed to the light; for without this precaution, they would all be inclined to the same side, leaving them with an unsightly shape.
When the weather clears in the evening, and the outside thermometer registers no more than 3 or 4 degrees above zero, cover the greenhouse with mats, as it is likely to freeze overnight.
But however beneficial this watering may be, it should be stopped as soon as the first Pelargonium flowers bloom, as it will quickly dull their radiance.
but be careful not to give it too much water at once, as the excess humidity will destroy the budding mushrooms.
The bed must not be less than 20 to 25 degrees hot, because to obtain seedlings that don't bolt, the seeds must germinate in twenty-four hours, regardless of the season;
It is sown in June, but not later, as it must have time to peel before winter;
A month or so later, when the tips of the leaves begin to appear, cut them off at ground level, taking care not to damage the eyes at the neck of the plant, since without this precaution it would never grow again.
The thinnest and most elongated are chosen for replanting, as they produce the most beautiful bulbs.
and, if the soil is not of good quality, only well-consumed fertilizers should be used to improve it: for, when the roots of strawberry plants reach unconsumed manure, the leaves dry up successively, and often the clumps perish.
26), without taking into account the flowers, which are removed, because the first flowers of the Melon are usually male flowers, which are called false flowers, and if by chance there are some female flowers called meshes, the branches where they are found are also removed;
As frost approaches, a layer of manure or leaves is spread on the ground, so that harvesting doesn't take place until as late as possible, as the tubers grow until quite late in the season.
But first check whether the peas have suffered from frost, because then, to avoid losing them, you need to let them thaw gradually and only uncover them when the weather gets milder.
As the seed is extremely fine, it must be mixed with sand or fine, very dry soil: otherwise, the sowing would be 4 uneven or too dense.
However, pruning should always be carried out before the sap starts to move, because later on the health of these trees would be greatly impaired, and only very weak shoots would be obtained.
20 Trees should not be pruned too short, because then they grow too vigorously and yield little fruit;
These branches need to be renewed annually, as they only bear fruit once.
After having given a good direction to the young trees, it will still be necessary to prune them each year; because without that the branches would easily recede from the bottom; but by a reasoned pruning and made at the right time one will easily force the sap to flow back in the lower parts;
Fig trees are not pruned, as amputations are very harmful to them, due to the large amount of sap they lose each time.
But they prefer fresh, light, well-amended soil, as they considerably deplete the earth, and it is necessary, in order to have good fruit, to put new soil or used fertilizer at their foot in autumn.
but in those with only a shallow layer of good soil, with a tufa or clay base, they should be planted grafted on Prunier, as they have tracer roots that are content with shallower soil.
If there are a few staves with flowering buds, they should not be pruned, as this would deprive you of some of the fruit.
As it often happens that the limbs of a cattail tend to rise vertically, which is not only contrary to the principles, but also detrimental to the subsequent development of the tree (as these limbs then grow with such vigor that they absorb a large part of the sap necessary for the vegetation of the other limbs), we must in this circumstance seek the best way to remedy such a state of affairs.
Planting - The distance to be observed between each Vine depends on the nature of the soil: in shallow or poor soil, Vines should be planted closer together than in good soil, in order to give less extension to each member;
To achieve this, you need to keep an eye on the vegetation of the buds towards the end (as they are always inclined to attract large quantities of sap towards themselves), and, by pinching and palisading, force the sap to flow back towards the center.
When you have a large enough number of strong flowering Anemones, it's a good idea to plant only half of them, so that each tuber only flowers every two years, as the flowers are then more beautiful.
As soon as the frosts start to set in, you need to return the potted plants to the greenhouses, if you want to enjoy the full beauty of their bloom, which is so late that it is rare for it not to be surprised by the frosts.
- Dahlias should only be planted towards the end of May: if planted earlier, they often run out of flowers by September, which is the best time for their beauty.
and since, despite the rigorous temperature, it is necessary to baste the Melons because of the heat of the layer, it often happens that the atmosphere of the frame is loaded with moisture and that numerous water droplets form all over the interior surface of the panels;
Fig trees are not pruned, as amputations are very harmful to them, due to the large amount of sap they lose each time.
However, they are rarely given a place in gardens because of the space they cover (each one needs at least 20 or 30 meters) and the extent of their roots, which exhaust the soil and are very harmful to the plants;
- One of the most dangerous causes of tree destruction in our orchards is the sting of the acarus, which attacks peach trees and kills them.
A further advantage of light soil is that water filters through more easily than in heavy soils, where it causes humidity that rots manure in a short time and melts plants.
we must discourage those who have little of it, and whose grip is not easy: for this defect is most often the cause of their ruin.
These frames, because of the slope, are a few inches longer than the width of the layer, taken on its level; but this should not change the dimensions of the layer.
Neither rain nor snow penetrate, the most common cause of plant failure, as too much moisture is fatal.
For plants sown or replanted in March and April, which sometimes need to be watered because of the fairly ordinary sunshine in these two months, they should only be wetted in the morning or at midday;
which contain shiny, reddish seeds that jump from side to side with speed as they ripen, thanks to the elastic cap in which each seed is usually wrapped.
This cultivation is so simple that it hardly merits the name Fépilhète de forcéej. It is even very little practiced by Paris market gardeners, no doubt because of the fickleness of our winters.
If we now move on to the neck and roots of the cauliflower, we first find the cutworm, which causes exostoses at the base of the cabbage, lodges in its interior, digging it out and making it suffer;
However, Laurel and Pomegranate trees need to be regrown more frequently, as the development of branches and twigs is always related to that of the roots, and as these shrubs vegetate much more vigorously than Orange trees, they need to be regrown more often.
This means replanting every three years, to avoid any interruption in harvesting.
This first method would not be suitable for a garden, so you have to stick to the hoe, which is also the best, because it loosens the soil better.
Besides, I've found that when you sow prickly seed, sometimes feet come along that make the seed round; and similarly, when you sow round seed, feet come along that make it prickly: so it seems to me that this should be considered simply as a variety and a play of nature.
In heavy soil, the operation is done quite differently, for the reason that asparagus fears nothing so much as humidity, and that it would rot there, if buried as it is in light soil: the beds should therefore only be dug a foot deep;
they are therefore nothing more than the play of nature, which has no law for them, and the effect of a fleeting meeting of the elements.
11 You must remove the stamens from the flower whose ovary you will be fertilizing, without allowing them to spread their pollen, so don't wait for the corolla to open;
Caprons, with their lightly-colored, slightly musky fruit, have their male and female flowers on separate plants: the male plants, which are naturally sterile, therefore occupy precious space in the vegetable garden, but to no avail.
because melons of extraordinary size A their species are subject to variation the following year: we therefore choose for seed the best melon of its species;
The first half of October is the best time to plant crowns and carnations, as the young plants won't need any more care to overwinter than the old ones;
They can be grown like carrots, but they need more light, because the tops are much wider;
we cover it with litter during the winter, because it is delicate and sensitive to frost.
Pruning too long exhausts the trees, because they set too much fruit, and there's really no advantage;
It's wrong to say that these trees are too slow to bear fruit, because they grow too vigorously;
In light, warm soils, it is preferable to plant apple trees grafted on Doucin, as their roots go deeper than when they are grafted on Paradis.
These insects, harmful to fruit trees, vines, ornamental shrubs and vegetable plants, are difficult to destroy, not because of their agility, since in their larval stage they crawl slowly under the soil, but because they wreak their havoc hidden in the earth's core, and their presence is only noticed when the damage is irreparable.
Raspberries and melons, for example, on the same bed, are incompatible, because one requires eight to nine inches of compost, while the other only needs two or three;
Chervil and watercress can be mixed with transplanted lettuces, because they are cut before they are replanted.
We also heat balsam, cives and other lettuce supplies, which we plant on the same bed where we replant lettuce for peeling, because they provide as long as the lettuce remains in place.
we bring them from outlying countries, in preference to the larger species, because they are harder and more resistant to the car, and the seed is much cheaper for those who sell them.
this last way is the best, because it is easier to crimp them;
However, its grain is one of the softest and best there is, and its only drawback is its color, which makes the sauce blackish;
This first method would not be suitable for a garden, so you have to stick to the hoe, which is also the best, because it loosens the soil better.
Just remember, when planting any of them in the open ground, not to plant several beds in a row, as they will inevitably be overshadowed, and the flowers will tend to run downwards.
The Swiss pea, the Common pea, the Norman pea and the Black-bottomed pea want to be sown a little thickly, because they make a single amount;
As for the White and Green Square and the Long Pod, they only use five to six, because they fork a lot, and would choke if they were pressed harder;
This species of pea is extremely sensitive to thunder and lightning, which can ruin it if they occur at flowering time. This is the main reason why it should be sown every two weeks, from the beginning of March to the end of May, because if the first seeds perish, others that are more or less advanced will replace those ruined by the storm.
292, We reserve for seed the quantity we need, which we leave for a long time on the ground to dry, because its husk is fat and thick, and dries out only with time and good weather;
the first ones to be planted in March and April , 4 I should be further apart , although of the same species as those planted in July and August , because the days before are more beautiful than those after , and the plants grow stronger ;
It is preferred to many others in cold, mountainous countries, because it is highly resistant to frost and snow, which soften it rather than harm it;
but our turnips, which we use in the same way, are more profitable, because six of them grow in the space of land occupied by one of these cabbages, and they require no care.
It is broadcast on a fine day, when the soil is healthy, and is spread more or less, because a good portion often perishes in the ground: the usual rule is to put 1 two ounces on each board fifteen toises long by six wide, which can be adjusted...
Finally, we must make it a rule to leave only two arms on each foot, and a third, called a false arm, because it emerges from its stump between the good arms;
This prevents the disease, by preventing the sap from entering so abundantly: as much as possible, turn the head of the fruit towards the north, because this is the part where it most often cracks;
Most market gardeners choose it in preference to all the others, to make lettuce for cutting, both because it supplies abundantly, and because its leaves are blonder and broader than the others.
The other is that they often take on the taste of manure; it is useful to do this when frost threatens, whether the plants are tied or not, because this litter guarantees them ;
the one with the dark green leaf is the most cultivated, because it is more resistant to frost than the other, which is prone to yellowing and perishing.
Some people use chervil and parsley together for reasons of economy, because the chervil comes earlier and is removed before the parsley can be bothered. But this mixture of plants crumbles the soil a lot, and is only suitable, as I have already said, for that kind of people who use Ks ic ;
In market gardening, no plant can do without watering, because it needs to grow fast and well;
In summer, you can water all day long, - especially in the evening, because water poured in the evening doesn't vaporize, it's all for the benefit of the plants, and many of them grow more at night than during the day, when they don't lack moisture.
The Parisian market gardener always plummets or sinks the soil where he wants to sow seeds, because the roots establish themselves better there than in veu le or hollow soil.
The beds where it is to be sown are not ploughed deeply, because the spinach root likes to meet firm ground: When the seed is broadcast, we harrow it and bury it with a fork, then press it down with our feet, rake it to even out the soil, and finish by spreading a light mulch of very short manure over the whole sowing area, so that it doesn't harm the seed when it rises, which in this season happens after six or seven days.
We have to increase the coverage due to the intensity of the cold, and uncover the bells when the sun comes out;
The time of sowing must then be advanced or postponed depending on the nature of the soil;
As soon as planting is complete, the pots are placed on the bed, starting with the top row and always choosing the highest plants. This must be observed each time the pots are replaced, as the frames must always be sloped.
In the first days of May, a layer is made which must be much longer than the autumn layer, due to the development of the plants;
When the frost becomes more severe, the bells are lined with dry manure, which is increased as the cold increases.
but because of the pruning they have to undergo, it is preferable to grow them in clumps.
The reason for removing the most vigorous bud from ordinary eyes is that this same bud should be retained when disbudding the terminal eye of each branch;
The small grey radish is the same size as the previous one, but has less water, and therefore a stronger taste: its skin is grey, its flesh white, and its shape not very long.
This method is not widely used, because the plant often turns yellow when the winters are a little long, becomes tender and then perishes when put in the open air;
In the portrait I have seen of it, the apple is not as tight as in other species, because it has an extraordinarily large rib, which prevents it from styling itself perfectly;
because those planted before winter need to be buried less than those planted in spring, due to the humidity that causes them to rot when they are too far underground;
In heavy soil, the operation is done quite differently, for the reason that asparagus fears nothing so much as humidity, and that it would rot there, if buried as it is in light soil: the beds should therefore only be dug a foot deep;
