2444 yecou. 61ebet DEUESS S GOOgle SOUEESD CIOOgl0 P " Traité complet de ilture des Le DionteedU COO IMPRIMERIE CHENU, RUE CROIX-DE-BOIS, 21, A ORLÉANS. MIUEES E GOOgle POTAGER MODERNE TRAITÉ COMPLET DE LA CULTURE DES LÉGUMES APPROPRIÉE AUX JARDINS DU PROPRIÉTAIRE, DU LOCATAIRE, DU FERMIER, DU PRESBYTÈRE, DES COMMUNAUTÉS ET DES PENSIONS, DE L'INSTITUTEUR PRIMAIRE, DES GARES ET DES CAMPS, comprenant La préparation du sol, la fabrication des engrais, l'assolement, la culture et l'indication des variétés de légumes convenant à chacun de ces jardins, PAR GRESSENT, Professeur d'Arboriculture à l'INSTITUT AGRICOLE DE BEAUVAIS, Chargé des Cours des villes d'Orléans, Beauvais, Étampes, Noyon, etc. FIRST EDITION. Paris: Auguste GOIN, Éditeur; Départements: chez l'auteur, 42, rue Coq-Saint-Marceau, à Orléans. - Franco sent by mail. 1863. Disuises t (O -.-- bigt COogle "12.41* tie.-~. 3 ------.---- THE MODERN VEGETABLE GARDEN. FOREWORD. For a long time, landowners who attend my arboriculture courses, struck by the quantity of vegetables I obtain from very-small spaces, have been urging me to publish a book dealing with the cultivation of the vegetable garden; but a practical book in the genre of Fruit Arboriculture, with which one can, even without knowledge of gardening, obtain vegetables in sufficient quantity and at an advantageous cost price. DISRESO GOC I resisted for a long time; but soon, the owners were joined by tenants of small gardens, for whom the supply of vegetables is both a distraction and a resource; farmers, who, most of the time, lack the vegetables necessary for their numerous and hard-working staff; country priests, for whom the cultivation of their garden offers a resource for themselves and their parishioners; community superiors, spending large sums on labor and fertilizers, etc., etc., and not reaping the benefits of the harvest, etc., and not reaping, on average, half of their expenditure; schoolteachers eager to learn about useful crops and to teach them to their pupils; railway employees occupying their leisure time, and finding a product on plots of land bordering the stations; finally the army, which, in these times of progress, has also started to create gardens in the camps. During my classes, everyone insisted on the need for a practical book teaching vegetable cultivation, so useful and profitable for all classes of society. It would be ungracious to hesitate in the face of a desire so generally expressed in all the towns where I teach. Consequently, I am publishing the Potager moderne. The modern kitchen garden is destined to bring about the same revolution in the old kitchen garden that fruit growing has accomplished in the cultivation of fruit trees. Simplification of cultivation, savings in labor and fertilizer, considerable increase in produce - these are the goals that will be easily achieved with Le Potager moderne, a book that puts forward new ideas, teaches new but easy cultivation, and whose effects are sanctioned by several years' experience. Le Potager moderne does not deal with vegetable growing from a speculative point of view. You have to be a born vegetable grower to sell vegetables and make money. Those destined to become market gardeners can do no better than to spend a few years working in Paris. The Parisian market gardener is the world's leading producer, but he can only grow vegetables in Paris, where manure abounds and is sold for nothing, with the arms of market gardeners and for the Paris market. Vegetables grown too fast and too wet lack flavor. The marshes of Paris are the first school for the market gardeners of the provinces, even if it means modifying their cultivation according to the resources and consumption of the towns where they settle. My aim in publishing Le Potager Moderne is not to train vegetable merchants, but to teach everyone how to obtain from their gardens an abundant harvest of excellent produce at a price lower than the market price, when costs have not yet been reduced by selling surplus produce. When this goal is reached, which will be easy for all those who follow the instructions of Le Potager moderne to the letter, this book will have accomplished a useful work; it is in this hope that I am writing it. May it find the same welcome at the ministry, among the clergy, among prefects, mayors and among all my listeners, as Arboriculture fruitière and Les Lecons élémentaires d'arboriculture. Orléans, May 25 1863. SISEESSGO 26 WHAT IS AND WHAT SHOULD BE. Before proceeding with an examination of vegetable growing in most of France, let's leave out: 1° The crops grown by market gardeners in Paris and other major French cities. 2° The vegetable gardens of castles. The Parisian market gardener is a type found only in Paris. He is the personification of intelligence and hard work. These two qualities, taken to extremes, turn his crops into production phenomena admired the world over. The Parisian market gardener has two resources inherent to Paris: mountains of excellent manure for next to nothing, and the Paris market hall, a yawning abyss that swallows everything. Add to these two resources a great understanding of cultivation, an upright, unprejudiced mind that loves progress, and an incredible amount of work, and we have the key to the wealth of Parisian market gardeners, who annually produce a gross income double the value of the soil; but, let's not forget, these prodigies can only be achieved in Paris and with Parisian resources. Second in line is the market gardener from the big cities, who more often than not apprenticed with the Parisian market gardener. He has learned to farm and has acquired the habit of incessant work. His resources are limited, he pays more for manure and sometimes finds it difficult to obtain; what's more, his production is limited to the needs and habits of the country. The provincial market gardener, by dint of hard work and industry, earns an annual income from his land equal to the land value. Then there's the château gardener, who has conquered a good position by dint of hard work; he's a skilled florist, a good market gardener, and sometimes an arborist. The château gardener has a large staff of helpers, for the greenhouses, the greengrocers, the park, etc. There can be no question of cost price at the chateau, and yet all his crops, well directed and skilfully understood, are most of the time less expensive than those of owners with average fortunes and an ignorant gardener. We bow our heads before the results obtained by these three classes of growers; we can only admire the first two and thank them on behalf of all for possessing the intelligence and arms likely to make the soil produce an income exceeding its land value. What's more, the market gardeners of Paris, like those in the provinces, all set an example of morality and probity, and prove to the lazy that to want is to be able. Let's thank them again for the example they so modestly set, which is rare and salutary in these times. Let's not forget the castle gardener; he is often the expression of horticultural science and proves abundantly to those who visit his crops that the word impossible is no longer French in horticulture. Let us thank him sincerely for the brilliant results he has achieved, and urge him, in the general interest, to make many more pupils. Let's also say that, within a radius of a few leagues of Paris, there are skilful gardeners who have learned and know; their well-tended crops bear witness to this, and always produce a product equivalent to the expenses incurred. But as soon as you move away from Paris, the center of enlightenment and learning, what do you find in the way of gardeners? Very good people, it's true, of irreproachable probity, we're happy to say, full of good will, but ignorant of the first elements of cultivation. This is where the modern kitchen garden begins its useful work, to be continued in the gardens of tenants, farmers, presbyteries, communities, schoolteachers at stations and camps. Let's take a look at what most gardens at a certain distance from Paris look like. In terms of appearance: a general jumble of high-stemmed, pyramid-shaped fruit trees, entangled with vines, currants and raspberries, and in the middle of this hideous mess a few withered flowers and impossible vegetables. There are many very large gardens that have been cultivated in this way for centuries, and for as long as they have been cultivated, the result has always been the same: no fruit, no vegetables and hardly any flowers. If the owners of these gardens take the trouble to count what they spend on fertilizers, labor and all kinds of expenses, and if they are willing to estimate their harvest at the market price, they will give up cultivating their garden the next day, so eloquent will the figure be. Let's now take a look at what we call a vegetable garden, and what it achieves. A vegetable garden is a necessity for the homeowner who spends a large part of the year on an estate far from the city. He needs vegetables, whatever the cost. Here's how this owner sees things: he hires a gardener for 1,200 fr. and a boy for 800 fr. for a total of 2,000 fr. and spends around 1,000 fr. on frames, cloches, seedlings, seeds, mats, etc. for a total of 3,000 fr. for the vegetable garden. What does the owner get for 1,000 écus? A kitchen garden sometimes adorned with high-stemmed fruit trees, but always planted with pyramid-shaped pear trees on either side of the long avenues, accompanied by flowers. It's essential to water the flowers and, by extension, the trees. The latter grow with extreme vigor until the roots rot, and, because of their vigor and often the pruning applied to them, don't bear fruit; during their short existence, it's said: "They're still too young to yield!" and when they're dead: "The land is worthless for trees!" As a result, the owner sends the fruit to the market! Let's move on to vegetables. If, as is all too often the case, the gardener grows vegetables in the local style, he doesn't know which varieties to introduce into the owner's garden; he plants the local varieties, very rustic indeed, but good for carters. Cabbages as acrid as they are monstrous, peas as big and hard as rifle bullets, carrots excellent for cows, woody radishes, and so on. This same gardener often ignores the needs of the plants he cultivates, and acts according to this learned axiom: "You have to grease the soil to harvest," and then he scatters what fertilizer he has all over his garden, and invariably obtains this result: leafy vegetables, which require abundant manuring, languish for lack of sufficient nourishment and give a quarter of a harvest three months too late, and what a harvest!... filanders everywhere and in everything. Roots, which require humus-filled soil but no fresh fertilizer, grow as stems and don't form roots; lettuces climb before they can peel. Excellent herbaceous harvest for rabbits! Dried-fruit vegetables, which require soil that has been free of fertilizer for at least two years and potassium silicates, grow in stalks; you have two-meter-high peas with no pods, giant beans with no fruit. We see this every day, and yet in such a garden perhaps more work and as much fertilizer have been expended as would have been needed to obtain, not only a quantity of excellent vegetables, but also an abundant harvest of melons and early fruit if the fertilizer had been well spent. The melon, such a precious fruit, exists only in the leafy state in most gardens. However, nothing is so easy to grow, and without any expense, when you know how to cultivate it. Sometimes the gardener obtains abundant produce, but all at once; the owner finds it necessary to feed the vegetables to his animals so as not to let them go to waste, and then runs out for months on end. So he returns to the market. Now, let the owner estimate his harvest and say how much the few bad vegetables he got cost him. Many have counted and all say that vegetable gardening is a ruinous necessity. This is true when growing in poor conditions. Most gardeners, at some distance from Paris and far from educational centers, are simply former manual laborers who are more intelligent and dexterous than their colleagues, and who have devoted themselves to garden cultivation, having only good will in terms of horticultural science. We have no right to reproach them for their ignorance in cultivation, since they have not been able to learn; but we can guide them with a practical book and help them to achieve fruitful results; this is the aim of the modern Potager. We have just examined what is and dwelt on the disadvantages of the present state; now let's look at what should be, to avoid falling back into the errors of the past. WHAT SHOULD BE. Let's start by saying that growing vegetables is incompatible with growing fruit trees and flowers. Vegetables require soil with a high humus content and constant moisture; such soil is fatal to trees and harmful to flowers, which grow in stems, flower little and give small blossoms. In addition, vegetables and trees require a great deal of air and light to grow and bear fruit. When the vegetable garden is planted with trees, their shade is very detrimental to vegetables, which, deprived of light, grow upwards, producing etiolated stems that become entangled in the trees and prevent any fruiting on the branches at the base. Frequent watering of vegetables first makes the trees grow very vigorously and then leads to their death by rotting the roots, before they have produced a serious harvest - an almost negative result for both fruit and vegetables! I refer the reader to Arboriculture fruitière for fruit trees. In this book, I have given all the indications needed to obtain, with certainty and even without any knowledge of arboriculture, a large quantity of the finest fruit from the smallest of spaces. The only planting possible in the kitchen garden is on the walls, in front of which a 1.5 m wide flowerbed is set aside for planting a double cordon, independently of the espalier. (See Arboriculture fruitière for advice on how to do this properly, and obtain fruit in the first year after planting). As a matter of principle, we believe that the kitchen garden should be devoted exclusively to vegetables, and that no trees or flowers should ever be planted there, if we want to get the produce it is likely to yield. I know that this will seem impossible at first sight to people with old gardens where they cultivate flowers, trees and vegetables all at the same time. I know how strong the force of habit is, and how difficult it will be to get old gardeners to change their cultivation. A modification such as the one I'm asking for would have been impossible twenty years ago, when the gardener's dictum was the supreme law in horticulture, but it's easy today, when everyone is busy cultivating, and everyone has learned that with a little study you can get a high income from a plot of land that was only an object of heavy expense as long as it was abandoned to carelessness and routine. I'm not asking for a Saint-Barthelemy of old gardens; on the contrary, I'd like to see what's left to serve as a point of comparison. So I would say to an owner with a 50-acre garden of mixed crops: you employ a man and his wife all year round, plus men for the day to maintain your garden. In addition, you need enormous quantities of fertilizer to fertilize just a quarter of this large space, i.e. to obtain a quarter of a harvest, further diminished by the lack of air and light, and most of the time, eight years out of ten, you send part of your supply of fruit and vegetables to the market. Keep 35 ares of overgrown garden. Completely shave 15 ares and distribute them as follows: 5 ares in the fruit garden and 10 ares in the vegetable garden; give these 15 ares the same quantity of fertilizer that you uselessly scatter in your large garden; devote, on average, one man's day and one woman's day per week to these two specimen gardens; the whole will be perfectly tended and will produce with a saving of half the expense: The fruit garden, well organized, from five to six thousand fruits per year; the vegetable garden, cultivated for four years, a large supply of vegetables of all kinds, and even small early fruits: melons, etc.., for at least ten people, something you've never had, or even tried, because the cost price seemed so exorbitant compared to that of vegetables grown in the garden. When the owner has tried this for two or three years, and compared the cost and produce of the two crops; when he is convinced by experience that 15 ares of well-cultivated land cost half as much and produce ten times as much as the 50-acre overgrown garden, he will refuse to cultivate the latter at all, and will be the first to hasten its destruction, as that of something hideous to behold, costing a lot and producing nothing. We rightly assume that owners have a sense of beauty, and above all of improving their properties. We haven't mentioned flowers in our crops. The owner usually likes them. If he doesn't, his wife, daughter or daughter-in-law will love flowers and ask for them. What will the homeowner do, even if he despises flowers, with a comfortable dwelling surrounded by 50 ares of cluttered garden, of which he will have devoted 15 ares to a fruit and vegetable garden supplying him beyond his needs? Will he convert the remaining 35 ares into fruit and vegetable gardens? Certainly not! Unless he wanted to become a fruit and vegetable merchant! The 35 ares thus cultivated would undoubtedly bring him a high income, but he would be obliged to employ more staff and keep a closer watch on them, and what's more, since he wouldn't be selling his produce himself, he'd be constantly fooled either by the greed or the nonchalance of his servants. The owner won't want to create a real job for himself, a burden, and he'll be right. If his family asks him for flowers, he'll make them all happy by adding lawns and clumps of trees and shrubs to the baskets on his 35 ares, and the maintenance costs will be almost nil. Let's now look at the result of this garden conversion in terms of enjoyment, expense, income and increase in property value. I have assumed a comfortable or at least habitable house, surrounded by a cluttered garden of 50 ares. It's a city dwelling with a farmer's garden. Nothing is less appealing to the walker, and especially to ladies, than the sight of fruit trees, twisted and stunted; stalks of crabapple, beans, cabbage, etc., etc.; add to this the perfume of onions, garlic, etc., etc., and we have a fair idea of the repulsion such a garden inspires: no shade, no flowers; stiles, oars and branches snagging dresses and hats everywhere! If a property in this condition comes up for sale, buyers will value it for little more than its size, at the price of plain land. Most will back out, not so much because of the expense of creating a garden, but because of the time it will take. When you buy a country house, you're looking for a well-created garden, shade and flowers! The cluttered garden, which produces little or nothing, requires a high level of expenditure, a man and a woman all year round, plus men for the day at various times. Our fruit and vegetable gardens, together containing 15 ares and providing ample supplies for the house, require one man's day and one woman's day a week for their perfect upkeep. What will it cost the owner to convert 35 ares of overgrown garden into parkland? No cost at all! If he spends, in the year of creation, in three months, the same number of days needed each year for the overgrown garden, the park will be created. There's still the cost of trees to plant in the beds and a few flowers! This expense will be covered in less than two years by the savings on days spent without any profit in the clutter garden. A year-round gardener, even assuming average activity, will maintain 35 ares of lawns, beds and baskets; 10 ares of vegetable garden and 5 ares of fruit garden in an irreproachable manner. And all this, not only without expense, but also with profit for the owner, who will have in his expenses the reduction in workmen's days and purchases of fruit and vegetables at the market, which, calculated over a period of ten years, would make a considerable saving. What's more, a property restored and managed in this way would become an object of curiosity, the envy of all and cited as a model in the surrounding area. Let's say the owner wants to sell his property after restoration. Purchasers who would not have dared to buy in the original state will pay double for a property of pleasure and product, in which there is nothing to spend, and there will be twenty purchasers for one. What will the owner have spent to achieve this goal? Nothing, less than nothing, since he will have made a notable saving in expenditure and increased income. He will have spent a little intelligence and, let's face it, this last expenditure will have provided him with a pleasant and healthy distraction and a useful use of his time. Having said that, let's return to the creation of a typical vegetable garden, and examine the conditions under which we need to create it in order to bring together all the elements for success: situation, exposure, nature of the soil, its preparation; ripping, amendments; the crop rotation to which the vegetable garden must be subjected, the distribution of fertilizers, the organization of beds, frames and cloches; the main cultivation operations: plowing, sowing, transplanting, topdressing, watering, hoeing, mulching, etc., etc., etc. LOCATION, EXPOSURE, SOIL TYPE. It's not always easy to choose the most favorable location and exposure for the vegetable garden; the park has conformation and perspective requirements that are impossible to violate, and let's face it, the vegetable garden, for all its usefulness, is far from picturesque, so it has to be relegated to a corner and hidden from view. Fortunately, an absolutely useful vegetable garden is much less demanding than a fruit garden in terms of location, exposure and, above all, soil quality. With a little thought and imagination, you'll always find a way to create it under the right conditions, and to conceal it skilfully enough so that it doesn't clash with the landscape. To achieve the best results, the vegetable garden must be created under the following conditions: 1° Be naturally sheltered from the north and west winds; be closed to these two exposures, and open to those from the east and south. North winds are icy, bringing frost, hail, etc., etc., and a garden cannot be too well protected from these winds, which are pernicious to all crops because of their harshness, the havoc they wreak, and the delay they cause in vegetation. West winds, less cold than those from the north, are no less to be feared: when their violent gusts don't break plants, they torment them enough to considerably delay their vegetation. A good garden should be hermetically sealed to the north and west, by natural shelters, or failing that, by artificial shrubs. If the same garden is open to the east and south, it will be remarkably early, sheltered from cold winds and storms, and exposed to the first rays of the sun and the warmth of the south. Everything can be done and everything can be hoped for in such a garden. 2° The vegetable garden must be as even as a table; if it has a slope, it must be levelled with the greatest care. A sloping vegetable garden, even one that faces south, is always in an unfavorable situation. Vegetable gardening is a very intensive activity; each bed' must produce an average of at least three harvests a year, and this can only be achieved through active cultivation and frequent watering. A slope, however slight, is an obstacle to cultivation, and almost an impossibility for good watering. 3° As water is essential to the vegetable garden, if not near a stream or spring, then at least in a place where you can be sure of drilling a shallow well, providing abundant water that never runs dry. The surrounding slopes form a natural shelter from the winds; the soil is rich and fresh, and there are often springs or fountains providing large quantities of water. In the absence of surface springs, you can be sure of finding abundant ones at shallow depths. h° The vegetable garden should be created in soil of medium consistency, rather light than compact, but still substantial enough. Soil is one of the most powerful natural agents of vegetation; it counts for a great deal in the success of cultivation, but we must not exaggerate its importance, and blame its poor quality for the many disappointments caused by ignorance, laziness and carelessness. Vegetable cultivation is not only possible but profitable in all soils, except pure silica and limestone, where it would still give passable results if the soil were properly amended. So, let's state the principle: VEGETABLE GROWING IS POSSIBLE IN ALL SOILS. With this in mind, let's take a brief look at the soil's constitution and the amendments that need to be made to it, in order to create, if not an artificial soil, then at least one that is suitably amended to come close to the type I've described and give certain results. Let's begin by examining the three main elements that serve as the basis of fertility, and are present in greater or lesser quantities in the constitution of all soils: clay, silica and limestone. CLAY, composed of 52 parts silica, 33 parts alumina and 15 parts water, is plastic, tenacious and difficult to divide; it retains a considerable quantity of water, about 70% of its weight; it has the ability to seize ammonia gases and retain them between its particles. Wet clay forms a soft paste that adheres to tools; dry, it acquires the hardness of stone. In both cases, it is impermeable to air. In addition, the clay must be completely saturated with fertilizer for the plants grown on it to feel the effects of manuring. Clay soils are cold, damp and, consequently, late, and they add to these disadvantages the double drawback of giving way to frost and splitting in very hot weather. These soils are suitable for artichokes, cabbages, leeks, broad beans, etc., etc., but most root crops and dried fruit vegetables do not do well in them. Despite these drawbacks, excellent vegetable gardens can be created in clay soils, if suitably amended. Amendments that are impossible in large-scale cultivation 2 can easily be applied to the vegetable garden where, as in the fruit garden, we will be cultivating intensively in the full sense of the word, i.e. spending a great deal of capital and labor to obtain an abundant harvest in a very limited space. The 10-acre vegetable garden I mentioned in the previous chapter is intensive cultivation; the clutter garden is extensive cultivation. We're dealing with very clayey soil, destined to form a vegetable garden with a soil plastic enough to make bricks or pottery. If we leave the soil in this condition, a few leafy vegetables, such as artichokes, cabbages, etc., will give good results, while all the others will languish. The first thing to obtain from the amendment is a friable, air-permeable soil, which doesn't stick to feet or tools when wet, and doesn't crack when dry. On the contrary, it's one of the most favorable conditions for vegetable gardening, saving on watering and ensuring fertility. It would be a serious mistake to drain the garden, unless you find stagnant water in the soil at a depth of less than 60 centimetres. Watering is the most expensive part of growing vegetables, and we must do everything we can to reduce the cost. So, to keep the soil fresh and healthy, we need to find ways of making it divisible and permeable at the lowest possible cost, according to local resources. If the soil to be amended consists entirely of brick or pottery soil, and it is possible to obtain some kind of fuel very cheaply, the most energetic method, giving the fullest and quickest results, is to burn it. It doesn't matter what kind of fuel you use: in Sologne, it's fir bunches that you don't know what to do with; in Picardy, it's peat; in Brittany, it's gorse and broom; elsewhere, it's coal or coke, or brushwood. The earth is opened up to form ridges 60 to 80 centimetres high; enough fuel is placed at the bottom of these ridges to make a fire that can last about two hours; the fuel is covered with large clods of earth to form a kind of furnace and allow the flames to penetrate between the clods; the fire is lit, then the holes are plugged with new clods of earth wherever the flames emerge. When the furnaces have cooled down, the clods are broken up with the head of the pickaxe; a single blow reduces them to dust. All that's then needed is to mix the product of the burning with the soil, add a generous amount of water and a good manuring, and the soil is immediately brought to the highest degree of strength and fertility. Whenever burning is not more expensive than transporting sand, it should be preferred. Not only does heavily heated clay never become plastic again and act like sand, but in this state it greedily absorbs atmospheric gases, and contributes powerfully to increasing the action of manures; in addition, burning radically purges the soil of all the insects that devastate the vegetable garden. For less clayey soils, known as "terres fortes", well-chosen amendments and good cultivation will soon make them remarkably fertile. Let's not forget that our vegetable garden will be abundantly smoked, ploughed three times a year, and hoeed eight or ten times, with each bed producing an average of at least three harvests. We'll add a few amendments to increase its fertility and hasten its loosening, and we'll only resort to burning for soils deemed impossible. First of all, let's assume that limestone amendments add an enormous amount of fertility to clay soils. If the soil is too compact, sand should be introduced, mixed well with the soil, and then limestone amendments18 should be used. Depending on their cost price, the following can be used indiscriminately: quicklime, in the proportion of two hectolitres per acre. It is first mixed with three to four times its volume of soil, to let it melt, and then the whole is mixed well together and added to the fertilizers to be spread evenly over the soil; MARN, in the proportion of two hectoliters per are, and mixed with the fertilizers; PLATRAS and old lime mortars, coming from the demolition of houses: they only cost the trouble of removing them in the vicinity of towns, and are as effective as lime and marl. They should be pulverized and mixed with fertilizers; ASH, in the absence of lime, marl or platras. Wood ashes are the best, but often very expensive. Charrée, the ash used to make laundry detergent, can be used successfully. Ashes from lime kilns and brickworks, less pure than those from fireplaces, are excellent and not very expensive. Coal ashes from factories are also a valuable soil improver, costing next to nothing; locomotive ashes, which clutter up all railway stations, are always very happy to be disposed of for a small gratuity. Locomotive ashes are a veritable treasure trove for vegetable gardens, field crops and vineyards, and almost everywhere they are dumped in public refuse dumps, just as black was once dumped in refineries. I have had large quantities removed from several stations, and all those who have used them following my advice have obtained excellent results, as I did. I cannot urge landowners, growers and winegrowers enough to remove them, and not to let a precious product intended to increase the richness of harvests go to waste, especially in clay and silica soils. Finally, if the landowner has no lime, marl or platras, and cannot obtain ashes, it will be easy to make them in thickly wooded countries such as Brittany and Sologne, etc., etc., with brambles, thorns, fir thinnings, heather, gorse, broom, seaweed, varecs, etc., etc.. The labor used to make ashes will be paid a hundredfold in Brittany shales and Sologne sands, which do not contain an atoma of limestone. A vegetable garden created in clay soil thus amended will give the most brilliant results; it will not be very early, but after four or five years of cultivation no garden will equal it for the richness and quantity of its produce. Well-cultivated clay soils are the most fertile, but also the most demanding; the owner must always remember that they need to be carefully amended, and the gardener must not forget that these soils require more work, and must be constantly loosened by good ploughing and frequent, deep hoeing. SILICE or sand is present in greater or lesser quantities in the constitution of all soils. It is found in several forms: as a rock crystal, insoluble in water and acids; as a very fine white powder, soluble in water and acids; and in combination with other substances, forming salts, where it plays the role of an acid, such as alumina, potash, etc. Siliceous soils, which vary from white to red depending on the quantity of iron oxide they contain, have the opposite characteristics to clay; they are friable, easy to work, permeable to air, but always exposed to drought, retaining only about 25% water. These soils are hasty, but very scorching in summer, and unless they can be watered constantly and copiously, it's hard to get a decent harvest. Vegetable gardens created in the sand are a ruin for the owner; he can only hope for good results once they have been completely saturated with fertilizer, and if he is able to water them at least twice a day from May to September. A vegetable garden of this kind is impossible; it uses twice as much fertilizer and ten times as much water (watering is the most expensive part of the job), as the harvest is worth, and if you neglect watering you get nothing. In that case, you have to abandon a ruinous crop in order to amend it. The most effective amendment is clay, which gives consistency to the soil, increases its fertility and enables it to retain a greater quantity of water. But clay doesn't mix well with sand; when used wet, it stays in clumps and doesn't work. To get good results, you need to do the following: obtain clay during the summer, lay it out in the sun, in a yard or in the alleys, until it is completely dry; then pulverize it completely, and cover the soil with a layer of this powder, about a centimetre thick, then plough it in during very dry weather. It's a long and painstaking operation, but it's the only and most economical way to improve soil that's too siliceous. Thanks to the perfect mixing of the clay, the soil takes on consistency and immediately becomes creamy. The result is a twofold increase in produce, and half the reduction in the twofold expense of fertilizing and watering. If the owner has an absolute need for a vegetable garden, and can only establish it in very siliceous soil, his first operation should be to amend; this will cause him an initial expense, but this expense will be an enormous saving of time and money, and the amendment, which is not very expensive, can be done in several stages. You can amend a quarter of the vegetable garden every year, and in any case, it would be better and more profitable to amend half or even a quarter of the garden completely, than to do the whole thing imperfectly. Cultivation is a work of knowledge, time and experience, and is as profitable when carried out under the right conditions as it is ruinous when directed by ignorance, routine and haste. If the necessary quantity of clay cannot be obtained cheaply, it can be replaced by the sludge from ponds, ditches, sewers and public laundries, which can be used in the same desiccated state as clay. Ashes also produce the best effects in siliceous soils, making them unctuous and increasing their fertility through the addition of potash. The best way to use them is to mix them with fertilizers. While essentially siliceous soils have many disadvantages, let's hasten to point out that there are some very fertile sandy soils, those containing a certain amount of clay, commonly known as greasy sands, and strongly colored red. This is the best soil of all for vegetable gardening. Its earliness and extreme fertility are due to the presence of iron oxide, which attracts and fixes atmospheric nitrogen in the form of ammonia. CALCIUM SOILS, made up of lime in the carbonate state, and containing varying amounts of clay and silica, are the least favorable for growing vegetables. Their white color repels the sun's rays, they heat up very poorly, absorb a considerable quantity of water very quickly, and dry out quickly. As a result, they are cold, late and always too wet or too dry. Calcareous soils, depending on their consistency, are amended with greater or lesser quantities of clay and silica. Strongly colored materials should always be chosen to mix with calcareous soils, either for amending or for smoking, so as to allow the action of the sun's rays to take hold and make their white color disappear. Brown clays, red sands and blacksmith's ash are the best amendments to introduce into limestone soils, along with animal black, soot and topsoil for fertilizers. With care and reasoning, these ungrateful soils can be improved enough, in just a few years, to produce excellent and abundant products. The first, most urgent and most profitable of all actions is that of amending the soil and placing it in good conditions of fertility; by giving it sufficient water, fertilizer and the necessary cultivation care, good results can still be obtained. It follows from the examination we have just made of the three main elements making up all soils: clay, silica and limestone, that not only does each of these elements separately provide an imperfect soil, unfit for most crops, but also that when they are mixed, the dominant element is detrimental to the quality of the soil and requires amendments. The model soil is Loam, known as Terre Franche in some countries. Loams contain 33 p. °l. of clay; 33 p. silica and 33 p. of limestone. All crops are possible in these soils, everything thrives and yields abundant produce with less fertilizer and labor. It's up to the grower to try to get as close as possible to this type of soil, with judiciously applied amendments; let him study, examine scrupulously, and operate wisely, without parsimony or prodigality, and he will soon be convinced of this great truth: there are no bad soils, only bad growers. Nature is more generous than the nonchalant suppose; she possesses treasures that only the industrious and enterprising man knows how to discover. It is not uncommon to find a clay soil on a siliceous subsoil, and a layer of limestone at a shallow depth. In such cases, all that needs to be done is to mix the separate layers, an operation made easy by breaking up the soil. As a general rule for all fruit and vegetable gardens, never choose a site, and never start any improvement work until you have sounded the soil in several places to a depth of one metre, and are fully aware of its chemical composition, and the resources of amendments it contains, if you don't want to expose yourself to making a bad operation, starting your work all over again, and making a double expenditure in pure loss. Before concluding on the subject of soil, let's say that the best soil will be almost infertile unless it contains a certain amount of humus. Humus is the basis of soil fertility; it comes from the decomposition of plant and animal matter. Humus supplies plants with nitrogen from the plants from which it is formed, and with carbonic acid gas, which permeates the water in the soil, forming an atmosphere overloaded with this acid at the foot of the plant and under the shelter of its leaves (plants absorb carbonic acid through their roots and leaves). Humus is all the more effective on vegetation because, like porous bodies, it has the ability to capture and condense the gases surrounding it. These gases are released when the temperature rises, or when humidity drives them out of the pores. Humus is a sort of reservoir of nutrients placed at the foot of the plant. We can easily introduce a greater or lesser quantity of humus or loam into the soil, and consequently direct vegetation almost as we please, if we know how to choose and manufacture our fertilizers properly and use them with care. Now that we've chosen our plot of land and recognized that it's suitable for establishing a vegetable garden, let's look at its design, shape, extent, distribution and layout. 10 SHAPE, EXTENT, FENCING, DISTRIBUTION, LAYOUT. I said earlier that the modern kitchen garden would bring about a revolution in vegetable cultivation as complete as that of fruit growing in the cultivation of fruit trees. I could say that this revolution has already taken place; my fruit gardens gave birth to it, with the first attack on the cluttered garden; all my followers are the instigators. It had to be after the results obtained in the fruit garden. Like arboriculture, the cultivation methods taught by the Potager Moderne are based on immutable principles rooted in the fundamental laws of vegetation; this cultivation has been sanctioned by many years of experience, and consecrated by success. It is enough to say that the exact application of the principles of the modern kitchen garden will be as fruitful in terms of results as the cultivation of fruit gardens; but we must not conceal the fact that this new culture, like all useful reforms, will meet with opposition from certain gardeners, because it opposes knowledge and logic to routine and prejudice, and modifies contracted habits through reasoning. The modern kitchen garden will eventually lead to the destruction of the cluttered garden. This destruction, so much to be desired from the point of view of the general interest, and above all the increase in public wealth, will undoubtedly stir up the camp of the princes of routine and the knights of the beaten rut. It will be up to the innovators to raise the flag of progress by producing comparative trials everywhere. This is the only way to convince the stubborn and even the furious. The result is everything for the masses; it's the supreme law before which those who don't want to take the trouble to study or reason bow. Nothing is so difficult to do as good! Nothing provokes so much anger and hatred as a just and sound idea, put forward to replace a program dictated by stupidity and routine; this is a sad and indisputable truth, but it is the duty of people with a good heart to have the courage to do good, and to brave stupid outcries and hatred, when they work to improve the lot of all and increase public wealth. I am starting a work of improvement with the publication of this book; I shall pursue it with the energy and perseverance that my listeners know me for, and I appeal to the most zealous among them, to assist me by creating everywhere the greatest possible number of specimen vegetable gardens, as small as they wish, but conforming to the indications of the modern Potager; they will not only work for their personal satisfaction, but will also contribute powerfully to a work all of utility and prosperity, here is how: The cultivation of vegetables is as backward as that of fruit trees. Everyone grows vegetables: only market gardeners cultivate them profitably, and yet vegetables are an object of primary necessity for all classes of society; their production can easily be increased tenfold on a third of the space occupied by the cluttered garden. Not only would this abundant production bring great well-being, especially to the poorer classes, but it would also create excellent positions for new producers, and work for a large number of workers, who, finding a high wage in their own country, would be less tempted to come to Paris and the big cities in search of misery. They occupy no less than a thousand hectares of the best land per department, i.e. 84 thousand hectares, not counting Corsica, Algeria and our new Savoy possessions. One third of this well-cultivated area, while increasing fruit and vegetable production tenfold, would make 56,000 hectares of elite land available for all crops, all of which would be a pure loss for the landowner, since these gardens are nothing but a burden for him, and for the public purse to which they contribute nothing. The destruction of overgrown gardens, to replace them with good crops, is therefore a humanitarian and national task, to which everyone is called upon to contribute by setting an example of more productive cultivation. Having said that, let me return to my subject: the first thing to do, after surveying the soil and making sure there's water in it, is to take a plan of the plot and study it on paper. The kitchen garden is not a luxury garden, still less a place for strolling. It must above all be a garden of produce, laid out and distributed for production. Fertility is the coquetry of the vegetable garden. Landscape architects have created many round vegetable gardens; the circular shape favors the exposure of walls, and is easier to conceal with flowerbeds; therein lie all its advantages, because on the other hand, it wastes the gardeners' time and hinders them from organizing the beds. The square shape is preferable and more convenient for cultivation. Secondly, a square is rarely perfect, and the tips often become a valuable resource for layout, and kitchen gardening. The abundant production we demand from the vegetable garden does not exclude order and cleanliness. 18 Nothing is more disgusting than to see piles of manure and debris of all kinds in a garden; tools, mats, bells, frames, or pottery lying around in every corner; whatever the shape of the vegetable garden, it's essential to establish everything close by, better still in a well-hidden corner: 1° a small yard for making manure, potting soil and mulch; 2° a greenhouse for tools, in which they will be carefully hung; 3° another greenhouse for frames, bells, useless pottery, doormats, etc., etc.; 4° An attic or small room of some sort to hold oars, stilts, stakes, etc., etc., etc. The main flaw in today's vegetable gardens is that they are always too big: this is more than a flaw, it's a vice. A vegetable garden that's too big requires very expensive labor, which always leaves something to be desired, and there's never enough fertilizer. The expense is high and the harvest mediocre. The size of the vegetable garden should be calculated as follows: two acres of land for each inhabitant, master or servant, and one acre for each stranger who comes to stay for a few days. Let's assume what happens very often: a house where the husband and wife live alone with a maid; a vegetable garden of 6 ares will suffice to provide for all their needs. 2 If the master of the house has a taste for gardening, his small garden will cost him 4 cars of manure at 6 fr. per year. . . . . 2h fr. 8 man-days at 2 fr. at different times, for plowing and bedding... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 16 hOfr. If the owner likes gardening, he'll do all the rest, which is not at all tiring, and with an annual expense of L0 fr. he'll supply his house abundantly with vegetables. 20 melons will totally reimburse him for his expenses. Who's to stop him from sending 20 melons to market, in addition to his supply? If this same owner doesn't want to touch his garden, and is content to direct the gardener, following the indications in Potager moderne, his garden will cost him per year: h cars of manure at 6 fr. . . .. 2hfr. 20 gardener days at 2 fr. 50C. . 50 10 of woman at 1 fr. . . . . 10 Seeds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 4 88 fr. At this price, there's still a big profit to be made from harvesting all your vegetables, not to mention the fruit on the walls. For an average house, with four masters, two servants, a gardener and his wife, and where four foreigners are received each year, a vegetable garden of 20 ares is sufficient to be richly supplied all year round. If instead of four people, eight are received, the vegetable garden will be increased by h ares. A gardener with his wife will perfectly look after a vegetable garden of 25 to 30 ares, and will only need a helper if he also has a somewhat extensive park. I insist on the figure of two ares per person because it is more than sufficient, if we apply to the letter the culture of the modern vegetable garden. The vegetable garden must be enclosed, to defend it from the attacks of marauders and rabbits, and to further increase its earliness, with the help of artificial shelters; the best of all fences is a wall; it is also the most expensive, but the interest on the capital employed for the construction of the walls is very largely paid for by the production of espaliers. If the vegetable garden is round, we don't need to worry about the orientation of the walls; the circular shape is favourable. But if it's square, we'll have to place the corners at the four cardinal points, contrary to what's usually done. Here's why: if we orient one wall to the clear south, an exposure at which the trees roast and the fruit burns nine times out of ten, the wall facing it is exposed to the north, and remains bare most of the time because nothing comes to it; the side walls offer the east exposure, which is too dry, and the west exposure, which is too humid. In short: four walls with four bad exposures! However, if these walls are to be built, they should be used as they are - Fruit Growing provides the means to do this - but if they are to be built, you should proceed as follows: place the four corners of the garden, to the north, south, east and west. In order to have, on the walls, the mixed exposures of south-east and south-west, north-east and north-west, all excellent and likely to give a product double that of the previous ones. If the kitchen garden has to be set up in the middle of a park, and needs to be hidden from view, only two walls can be built: one to the north, giving the southern exposure; the other to the west, giving the eastern exposure. These two walls can be trimmed with espaliers, and the other two faces, those to the south and east, can be enclosed with a dry hedge, or better still, with four or six lines of horizontal wire, placed 20 centimetres apart, and against which a hedge of Bengal roses is planted, having the double advantage of perfectly masking the vegetable garden, and giving flowers all year round. Here's how it's done: (see Arboriculture fruitière for how to lay the wires.) Once the wires have been laid, the Bengal roses are planted 30 centimetres apart; they are left to root well for the first year, and in the following spring only one stem is kept, the most vigorous, which is itself received 25 centimetres from the ground. Only two buds are kept on each stem, one on the right, the other on the left; they are planted on the wires, inclined at an angle of 60 degrees, and when they have reached a length of around 60 centimetres, they are intertwined with their neighbors. The hedge formed from regular lozanges is very attractive, and remarkably strong, in that all the branches naturally graft together at all points where they come into contact. A hedge formed in this way provides an impenetrable enclosure and a magnificent blooming appearance. Large trees can be planted in front of the two walls built to the north and west, firstly to hide the walls, then to double the artificial shelter with a higher natural shelter, but the large trees must be planted at least six meters from the walls so as not to harm the espaliers, either by their roots or by their shade. Finally, with a little imagination and practice, it's always easy to create a fertile vegetable garden, even in the middle of a park, and to hide it completely by clumps of trees, shrubs or rose hedges. Once you've chosen a location and fencing system, it's time to think about the distribution of the vegetable garden. The four-year rotation is the one we'll generally adopt as the most profitable; we'll therefore need four squares of equal size, in the center of which we'll set up a well or basin, so that we can water these squares copiously with a small pump. This is the most economical method, and I'll talk more about it in the chapter on watering. You should never be frightened by the irregularity of the terrain when creating a vegetable garden; the most irregular sites are those from which the best advantage can be taken, and which can be laid out most conveniently. In addition to the four squares, you need to think about creating a plan for asparagus outside the crop rotation, and sometimes small reserves for raising flowers destined for the beds, a small yard for manure and potting soil, and sheds, in the absence of buildings to hold tools, frames, etc., etc., etc... It's urgent to have all this on hand, and you need to have been a grower to know how important it is. Let's assume a 30 to 40 ares vegetable garden, well laid out, with all its outbuildings to hand. This vegetable garden will be perfectly cared for by the gardener and his wife, but if the manures, potting soils, frames, bells, stilts, oars and stakes are squeezed into a remote place, the gardener and his wife will have to go out of their way twenty times a day, to fetch a hundred items they'll need every moment. One of two things: either the work will be neglected, and the produce reduced with the same expense, or a helper will be needed who will increase the expense, to obtain the same result as if the vegetable garden had been well laid out. Cultivation is only as profitable as the work is well organized, and this is what is lacking most of the time in the creation of gardens, because most often those who create them are strangers to cultivation; they make very pretty drawings, it's true, and very elegant fantasia, but they know neither the needs nor the requirements. Hence the incessant to-ing and fro-ing, wasting half the time of an intelligent man paid according to his merit. Where the hard-working gardener will inevitably lose a third of his day in coming and going, the non-hard-working gardener will lose most of it. It's impossible to give a specimen plan that can be used for grounds of different conformations. Nevertheless, I've included plans of two vegetable gardens I've created, which may be of use to homeowners who wish to design their own gardens. If they don't want to take the trouble, or are afraid of making a mistake, they'll have to ask a special man (pl. 1 and 2). In any case, anyone designing a vegetable garden must never forget that manure, soil, water and all the necessary shelter and tools must be at hand. If the vegetable garden is large enough, look for a place outside the crop rotation to create an asparagus plan; divide the four squares subject to crop rotation into equal parts, and orient the square beds from north to south, and make alleys around and in the middle of the garden wide enough for wheelbarrows to circulate easily. When the plan has been sufficiently worked out on paper, the layout is laid out on the ground as follows: first, the beds and squares are marked out with a chalk line; at each corner, a sturdy stake is driven in at least 60 centimetres to find the reference points; all the measurements are checked; the paths are then emptied to a depth of about 20 centimetres, with the soil thrown back onto the beds and squares so that the layout does not fade, and the soil is prepared. DISEESOE GO LEVELLING, AMENDMENT AND RIPPING. Once the layout has been laid out on the ground, and the stakes placed at each corner for easy retrieval, we proceed to levelling. But first, the ground must be carefully examined to level it, if it is not well levelled, which is the first condition to make watering profitable for the plants. Levelling should be carried out at the same time as ripping, by the diggers who perform it, and without any great increase in cost. It's easy for them to do when their work is well prepared, and costs them little more trouble, which is a great saving for the owner. Levelling by the day, before or after ripping, is often more expensive than ripping, and has the disadvantage of damaging the soil, especially after ripping. However, if the ground is covered with mounds of earth, or has a very steep slope, it should be roughly levelled before scribing. In all other cases, proceed as follows: Take three levelers (pl. 3, fig. 1), or better still four, for each side of the square to be levelled, i.e. twelve for a square we assume to have 18 metres on each side. The first leveller is placed not quite at the corner of the square, but 20 centimetres from this corner, in the driveway, so as to drive levelling pegs all around the square, so that the diggers don't disturb them while digging and use them for levelling. With the first leveller placed at a height of around 80 centimetres, a second is driven in 6 metres from the first, and at the same height; then the third is placed 6 metres from the second, all three are aligned one on top of the other, and the fourth is placed at the other corner. Then, as we've just done, we place three levelers, 6 meters apart, on each of the two faces adjoining the one already levelled, and two on the fourth, to determine a perfectly horizontal line all around the square. Once this has been done, a levelling rod (pl. 3, fig. 2) is adjusted to the length of a leveller of average height, which is the height the ground should have, and a peg is driven in between each leveller with a mallet, adjusting its height with the levelling rod. In addition, when placing the levelling pegs, you must take into account the overrun of the excavated earth, which is about one tenth: thus, when excavating to a depth of one metre, you must count on ten centimetres of overrun, and place the pegs ten centimetres higher than the actual level. Once the stakes have been driven in, the levellers are removed one by one, and a stake adjusted with the levelling rod is placed in their hole, and if necessary with two rods when there are not enough levellers left. The head of each stake represents the exact height the ground should be; these stakes, placed three meters apart at the edge of the path, are a sure guide for the diggers, and make it easy to check the levelling at any time, with a rod placed on the stakes at each end, and a third placed on the ground. A bonus of five or ten francs, depending on the size of the garden, will sufficiently compensate the diggers for the time they have wasted checking their levelling with a levelling rod. The same stakes will be used to level the paths once they have been levelled. It is useful to give them a general slope, almost imperceptible to the eye, but necessary to facilitate water run-off during rainstorms. A slope of two millimeters per meter is sufficient; let's take as an example our 18-meter square, with seven stakes on each side. These stakes are placed three meters apart, and the overall slope is 36 millimeters. The stakes must therefore be driven in as follows: the first will not be touched; the second will be driven in by 6 millimeters; the third by 12; the fourth by 18; the fifth by 24; the sixth by 30, and the seventh by 36. All that remains to be done is to put soil up to the head of the stakes, and the slope will be adjusted with great accuracy, without pain or unnecessary expense. Alleys should not be levelled until at least three weeks after breaking, when the earth has regained its plumbness, and the levelling has been checked and found to be accurate; but, I cannot recommend it strongly enough, the levelling stakes should not be disturbed until the broken ground has been completely settled. Once the levelling stakes have been placed, we proceed with the general ripping. There are three ways to break up the soil, depending on its quality and depth: 1° WITH OPEN GAUGE. If the soil is of the same quality down to a depth of one meter, and if there are no amendments to be introduced, all that needs to be done is to break up the soil, at the following depths: 80 centimeters in clayey soils, 1 meter in medium-consistency soils, and 1 meter 10 centimeters in sandy soils. This work is paid by the job: 25 to 30 centimes per metre in clay soils, depending on their tenacity, and 20 centimes in medium-consistency soils and in sands. In all cases, whether for planting trees or for vegetable garden beds, smoking must never be allowed while ripping. This is what is most often done: in this case, manure buried very deeply, and therefore placed beyond the reach of the roots, is entirely lost. Ripping must always be done by the company or by the job: only then can it be done at the prices I have indicated. Whenever an owner tries to have them done by the day, no matter how cheaply he pays the workers, the work is poorly done and comes back at an exorbitant price. A good digger does an average of 20 meters of digging in a day; he always asks to work by the job; he prefers to take the trouble and earn the money. A poor day laborer, on the other hand, does barely four meters a day, and constantly repeats that ripping is an impossible job. In this case, if the owner lives in a country where the workers are too soft to undertake the task, i.e. are not willing to go to a little trouble to earn h to 5 francs a day, he will have a great advantage in bringing in diggers and paying them for their trip there and back. I sent some to Berry and Touraine, the owners were delighted, and the local workers considered them fantastic workers. Ripping should never be done with a spade, but always with a pick and shovel. Breaking up with a spade is disastrous for the landowner, in that the soil is turned upside down, with the good soil at the bottom and the bad soil on top, and can remain completely infertile for several years, and ruinous for the workman, because he makes no progress, and earns pitiful days with great difficulty. Both would do well to keep quiet. Raking with a pickaxe is the only way to benefit the owners, and the only way to benefit the worker, especially if he knows how to avoid transporting earth: Let's say we have to break up four vegetable garden squares separated by a cross-shaped path (pl. 3, fig. 3). We'll have all four squares dug without rolling a single wheelbarrow of earth. We'll open the trench at the corner of the first square facing the middle alley (A pl. 3, fig. 3). This trench will be four meters wide and two meters long, so that three men can work in it abreast without getting in each other's way. The earth from the trench opening will be thrown into the alley next to its opening (B pl. 3, fig. 3). Six men will go down into the trench and work in threes abreast: three to pick and three to shovel, taking turns. The first three will cut the soil at the bottom of the trench, in 30 to h0 centimetre thick slices, to the required depth; the second three will pick up the soil with their shovels as it falls under the pickaxe, and mix it again by throwing it behind them, up to the height of the levelling stakes. In this way, the soil will be perfectly mixed, giving one meter of ford of excellent soil of the same consistency. This soil will always be fresh, remarkably fertile and, thanks to its natural freshness, will save half on watering. The trench has been opened at the left-hand corner of the first square; the trenching will be carried out in such a way as to end at the opposite corner, the right-hand corner at the bottom of the square, where there will be a void equal to the soil removed and left in reserve in the alley (C pl. 3, fig. 3); this void will be filled with the soil from the opening of the trench at the right-hand corner of the second square; this soil will be shovelled over the alley (D pl. 3, fig. 3). The second square will be ripped out like the first and finished with the left-hand corner at the bottom (E pl. 3, fig. 3); this new void will be filled by opening the trench of the third square at the corner facing the void (Fpl. 3, fig. 3); this square will be ripped out like the previous two and finished with one of the corners bordering the transverse aisle (Gpl. 3, fig. 3); the void will be filled by opening the trench of the fourth square (H pl. 3, fig. 3), which the diggers will end at the right angle, at the top, where the earth reserve from the opening of the first trench is located (I pl. 3, fig. 3). All that's left to do is shovel it in to fill the final void. In all trenching operations, it is essential to mix the top, middle and bottom layers of soil together; to remove stones and roots with the utmost care, to break up any clods of soil, and to bury quackgrass very deeply if there is any; it never grows back when buried more than 60 centimetres deep. The soil in a vegetable garden that has been broken up must be completely cleaned. This is a one-off operation, but it must be done properly if it is to be profitable. 2° DEFONCEMENT WITH AMENDMENT is done at the same depth as the previous operation, and is carried out in the same way, with a shovel and a pickaxe, so that the mixture of soil and amendment is perfect. If the soil is clayey, it's best to use as much topsoil as possible. Soil from the surface of the alleys should be removed to the depth of a spade shoe, and thrown into the flowerbeds, to be replaced in the alleys by soil from the bottom of the trench. Surface soil, exposed to the influence of atmospheric agents, is always loose, whereas bottom soil is excessively plastic. When an amendment is added to the soil, such as platras, sand or coal ash, it is spread evenly over the square to be trenched; the soil from the alleys is thrown on top; the whole is mixed well while trenching, and the soil from the bottom is thrown into the alleys to replace that removed. The price for this breaking down is the same as for the previous one, but with the difference that the earth taken from the paths is paid to the earthworkers at 10 cents per metre of surface area. When the amendments are applied to siliceous soils, and it is not necessary to take 8 soil from the alleys, ripping is paid for at the same price as open-gauge ripping. Only the spreading of the amendment is paid for separately, by the day. 3° DEFONCEMENTS WITH CHANGED SOIL are the longest and most expensive, and are carried out in shallow soils whose subsoil is unsuitable for cultivation, when it is composed of clay, marl or tuff. We start by taking all the topsoil from the alleys, and throwing it onto the squares; we open the trench as I mentioned earlier, mix in all the good soil, and throw the subsoil back into the alleys. When there are 50 or 60 centimetres of good soil, the work isn't enormous, and it's quite easy to make a metre of excellent soil, without too much ploughing. In this case, you pay an extra five centimes for breaking up the soil; the paths count as breaking up the soil; the diggers graze the earth and level the paths. But when there is only 20 or 40 centimetres of good soil, the operation becomes more difficult and more expensive. In this case, there's no room for hesitation: create deep, rich soil where none exists. Despite the apparent difficulties involved, it is no more costly, when done properly, than a poorly executed rip in good soil. The first thing to do is to take all the topsoil that can be found in the alleys and throw it onto the squares. Once the trench has been opened, all the good earth is used; the bad earth is then extracted and used to fill the voids in the alleys, and the excess is taken away, to be replaced by good earth, strong or light, depending on the consistency of the soil, taken from elsewhere, and used lastly to recharge the trench and complete the levelling. These extremes are rare and exceptional. Most of the time, the subsoil can be partially mixed with the soil from the squares and alleys, without having to resort to costly ploughing. However, when it comes down to it, and a vegetable garden is essential, it should be created as small as possible, but done properly: such an operation, if poorly executed, would be quite costly and give only poor results. In this case, the cost of clearing is ten centimes more per metre than the current price; the driveways count as clearing; the earthworkers level them and load the cars with bad earth extracted from the ground, and they are paid extra, by the day, for spreading the earth brought in. Before concluding on the subject of ripping, it should always be done in advance, and in dry weather, especially in clay soils. As far as possible, they should be done in autumn or early winter, so that the garden can be cultivated in spring. Creating a garden is a serious matter, if you want to do it well and achieve profitable results. It requires the intervention of a special man, for the plan and arrangements to be made, and the indications to be given for execution. This man, almost always overloaded with work, needs the time to study the necessary arrangements in all their details, and also, for the workers, the indispensable time to carry out their work in good conditions; if haste is harmful in almost all the circumstances of our lives, I could say that it is the worst of all things in the creation of a garden. DIEEEGE GO ASSOLEMENT, FERTILIZER DISTRIBUTION, LAYERS. Crop rotation! It's the key to fertility, the basis of production in the vegetable garden and in field crops. And who doubts, in this day and age, among the majority of gardeners, and even among some doctors of horticulture, that a well-understood rotation of the vegetable garden is the first element of success, a sure guarantee of both richness and economy in production? Rational crop rotation is the basis of the soil's fertility, and the key to the vegetable garden's wealth, because crop rotation contains: 1° RESPECT FOR THE LAW OF ALTERNATION. This law means that the same product, however abundantly smoked and well cultivated, rarely yields a maximum crop two years running in the same plot. Old practitioners, measuring their knowledge not by experiments, which they refuse even to indulge in, but by their dexterity in handling the spade and rake, will say from the outset, and without any circumlocution whatsoever: This is all nonsense, I sow peas and onions too, for four, five years, in the same plot, and I still get some! Some go so far as to ask us in all seriousness whether we invented peas and onions, and then dare to hold it against them, who sowed them before we were born! We hasten to decline the honor of inventing peas and onions, and even go so far as to confess, in all humility, that we still harvest them by sowing ten years in a row in the same soil; But on the strength of our studies, our observations and our experience, we affirm that from the second year onwards, there is a decrease in the product; in the third, degeneration, tardiness and a very noticeable decrease in the harvest, and I would even go so far as to assert that the longer successive sowings are in the same soil, the greater the degeneration. What's more, I'm deeply convinced that the bastardized vegetable varieties, barely fit to feed animals, found in almost all regions of France where vegetable growing has been entirely localized, have only reached this state of degeneration and tardiness as a result of successive sowings in the same beds. I would go even further and say to those who want to propagate routine varieties: Take your seeds of varieties that have returned almost 4 to the original type through promiscuity; sow them for five or six years, and every year the new seeds in new soil, and you will succeed, if not in recovering the primitive variety, at least in appreciably improving the one you have sown. Neither you nor I made this law, it emanates from God, your greater or lesser skill in handling the spade and rake will not destroy it, and routine is powerless to ward off its effects. So let's put all false pride aside and sow our vegetable garden for four years, so that the same species only returns to the same patch every four years. In this way, we'll not only be assured of maximum harvests, but also of keeping pure the precious varieties that will replace your woody vegetables. I'm not calling for the upheaval of everything that exists in order to create something new. Far from it, knowing how great the force of habit is, I will say here, as in my courses, to all those who hesitate: Before destroying, experiment; make comparative tests, they alone can enlighten you in a certain way. If you have a vegetable garden made up of four squares cultivated in the local fashion, continue your usual cultivation in three; try the one taught in this book in the fourth, and when you have seen the results and compared the expenses and produce of the two crops, adopt frankly and without second thoughts, the one that will have given you the best and most abundant produce, with the least expense, 2° THE ECONOMY OF FERTILIZERS THROUGH THEIR REASONED DISTRIBUTION. I posit that the same quantity of fertilizer, used with discernment over a given area, will produce six, when the same quantity, and even a greater quantity, distributed wrongly over the same area, will produce barely one, with the same amount of labor. Let's suppose a vegetable garden of twenty-four ares, divided into four equal parts, spending annually twenty cars of manure. If this vegetable garden is not subject to crop rotation, these twenty cars of manure will be equally distributed over the twenty-four ares. In this case, the four squares will receive insufficient manure, and especially if it has been buried before it has entered a state of decomposition, as is done almost everywhere, under the pretext of warming the soil, here is what will happen almost infallibly: Artichokes, potatoes, cabbages, leeks, etc., etc., lacking sufficient nourishment, will give stunted, hard, stringy, stunted, in a word inedible products, which will take twice as long to complete their pitiful vegetation, as these same prime products would have required, with sufficient nourishment. Roots, strawberries, lettuces, etc. etc., will sprout leaves and go to seed on their fresh manure, before they have produced a passable root, a succulent fruit or a presentable apple. Poorly applied fresh manure, sufficient to destroy the first crop, will be almost totally absorbed by it, and the following crop will be nil. Peas, beans, etc., etc., on a quarter of fresh manure, will produce gigantic stalks and no grains. The owner and gardener will watch them grow every day, hoping for fruit when they stop growing. Finally, when they've smothered everything, the fruit appears so scarce that it's decided to uproot them to save the other crops, and the gardener says as he loads up a car with fodder: the land is worthless for vegetables, nothing succeeds! The soil is excellent, most of the time, the crop alone is bad. The twenty-four-acre vegetable garden, smoked in this way, has yielded nothing but pitiful produce: not a single melon, not the slightest early crop. If we sow this same vegetable garden with an equal quantity of manure for four years, we'll obtain maximum crops of open ground everywhere, and a good supply of melons and early vegetables, a huge advantage of crop rotation; 3° THE POSSIBILITY OF OBTAINING AN ABUNDANT PRODUCTION OF EARLY VEGETABLES AS AN ADDITIONAL CROP, NOT ONLY WITHOUT ANY INCREASE IN FERTILIZER EXPENDITURE, BUT ALSO BY IMPROVING FERTILIZERS AND MAKING THEM MORE SUITABLE FOR BURIAL! Fertilizers can only be assimilated in a liquid or gaseous state; in other words, plants can only absorb the nutrients they contain once they have decomposed. Once it has been proven that decomposed fertilizers have an immediate and more energetic effect on plants than fresh manure, it is to our advantage to decompose our fertilizers before burying them. The most economical and profitable way to decompose fertilizers is in layers. These layers will give us all the primeurs we want, at no cost other than the initial purchase of a few frames and bells. The savings in manpower that would have been needed to handle the manures will more than cover the cost of maintaining the frames and bells, and the annual harvest will only be burdened by the initial purchase of the equipment. In the past, the installation of a bed was considered difficult, expensive and even ruinous. It's a mistake we're beginning to come round to, and let's face it, when the use of diapers is popularized, and their usefulness is generally recognized, open-ground crops will double their output, and the smallest garden, while doubling its production, will yield melons and early fruit without any expense whatsoever; there won't be a village, a hamlet, where the parish priest or the schoolteacher can't harvest in quantity if they want to take the trouble. We are assured of the praiseworthy zeal of the country parish priests. We have seen them at work in several départements, and we know how enthusiastically they have welcomed our arboriculture lessons, and how devotedly they continue to teach them to their parishioners, in their own interest, and in that of public wealth. They eagerly await the modern Potager to complete their work, all charity and devotion. I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the clergy, especially those of the Oise department, for the special care they have shown me, and for their noble zeal in bringing light to the most backward regions. Thank you for having so helpfully assisted me in my work; thank you to the clergy, thank you for the country, thank you again to the Brothers of the Christian Doctrine for their praiseworthy eagerness, and their tireless zeal to teach the true principles of cultivation and arboriculture to children. Their noble efforts will be crowned with success, and soon their dedication will bear fruit in bringing light, ease and progress to small farmers. Thanks to the initiative of several prefects, and their particular benevolence for agricultural interests, primary school teachers are rendering important services by teaching cultivation and horticulture to the children of rural populations deprived of the courses given in the towns. This useful and praiseworthy teaching is already bearing fruit in certain areas, especially in the department of Oise, where primary school teachers, encouraged and stimulated by higher authority, are competing in zeal not only for teaching, but also for horticultural practice. The teachers of the Oise department, authorized by the Prefect to give their pupils time off to attend arboriculture lessons, have already achieved brilliant results in arboriculture, and are also waiting for the Potager Moderne to teach and practice vegetable growing, which is so useful and profitable for rural populations who are unaware of it, and can derive definite benefits from it. Assured of the intelligent and devoted support of the clergy, schoolteachers and a good number of landowners, I close my ears to the cries of routine and actively pursue a project which, I am convinced, will render important services by creating new wealth in regions deprived of horticultural education. Layers are, in fact, the factory of assimilable manure and fertilizer par excellence, and it is in the grower's interest to establish as many of them as possible, in order to increase both the crops grown in the open ground and the products from frames and bells, which are always very expensive, and cost nothing when layers are included in the vegetable garden rotation. It's easy to build up a large number of layers with a great saving in fertilizers, frames and bells, by using horse manure mixed with leaves for warm layers; cow manure mixed with leaves, mosses, etc., for warm layers, and herbaceous matter mixed with a little manure for dull layers, and by using economical shelters for certain products instead of frames and bells. In this way, we can considerably increase the mass of fertilizers and potting soils, so useful for certain vegetable plants and for flower breeding, and obtain everything we could possibly want with the greatest economy, while at the same time improving fertilizers. I shall devote a special chapter to the manufacture of hot, warm and muted layers, and to the shelters designed to cover them. I shall also devote a chapter to the rotation of each of the gardens I deal with: those of the owner, the tenant, the farmer, the presbytery, the communities and boarding houses, the teachers, the railroads and the camps, each of which requires a special cultivation and rotation. I'm only dealing here with the four-year vegetable garden rotation in principle, and reserving the right to modify it for each of the gardens I've mentioned. In the kitchen garden, we grow vegetables that require very copious manuring to give good results; these are artichokes, potatoes, cabbages, leeks, etc., etc.; others that require a large quantity of humus in the soil, and do not do well on fresh manure; these are roots, strawberries, lettuces, etc., etc.; still others that require a large quantity of humus in the soil, and do not do well on fresh manure; these are roots, strawberries, lettuces, etc., etc.; still others that require a large quantity of humus in the soil, and do not do well on fresh manure, etc.; still others produce only stems on fresh manure, and require a certain quantity of potash instead of fertilizer in order to bear fruit, such as peas, beans, etc., etc. We have seen the results of these various crops on a quarter, and even a third, of fresh manure, results that are unfortunately all too frequent in the many gardens we visit during our excursions in the départements; let's now look at those obtained in the vegetable garden subjected to four-year crop rotation. Let's assume a vegetable garden of twenty-four ares, divided into four equal parts, and with twenty cars of manure to spend annually. If we don't let anything go to waste, and if we carefully make our composts, we'll make twenty cars with five of manure. In the first year, we'll spread the twenty cars of compost on square n°1, to which we'll mix the most active manure from the demolition of the layers, and we'll bury the whole thing in this square, destined to receive all the vegetables requiring very abundant nourishment, then we'll reserve the most decomposed compost and manure from the demolition of the layers, to mulch and top-dress the vegetables in square n°2. The previous year, square n° 2 received the same amount of manure as square n° 1, and produced a maximum harvest of hearty vegetables. The composts and bedding manure are fully decomposed, and despite the abundant production of the previous year, the soil is saturated with humus, thanks to the maximum manuring given. This same year, we'll be growing roots, strawberries, tomatoes, lettuces, etc., in plot no. 2, without fertilizer, as these plants dread fresh fertilizer; a topdressing and mulches applied with our layer residues, which have been set aside, will be sufficient to obtain a maximum harvest in this plot. Two years ago, square no. 3 was fertilized in the same way as square no. 1, and the previous year with the same topdressing and mulch as square no. 2. This unfertilized, but abundantly ashed square will be devoted to the cultivation of vegetables with dried fruits, such as peas, beans, etc., which will still give a maximum harvest, in soil depleted of fertilizer, but provided with ashes, the only condition in which they can fructify abundantly. Finally, square No. L, which was fertilized three years ago, top-dressed and mulched two years ago, and ashed the previous year, will be destined to receive : 1 The beds we will build there with our reserve of fifteen cars of horse manure, with added leaves, for the warm and hot beds, and herbaceous matter for the dull beds; 2° Without any manuring, all the flower and vegetable seed crops, which will give the best results in a soil exhausted of fertilizer and still well ashed; 3° An early pea crop, without fertilizer and with partial ashing, and even a green bean crop if required; 4° Flower and vegetable nurseries with topdressing and even maximum fertilization, ending the rotation and starting it again the following year with full fertilization. So, after harvesting peas and green beans, it's easy to use the compost or manure from the first layers to establish the vegetable nurseries so necessary in the kitchen garden. Four-year crop rotation offers the following advantages over other crops: 1° To produce maximum harvests on each sole, the land being in the state of cultivation and fertilization that is most favorable to the plants it supports; 2° To spend no more on fertilizers or labor than crops with much lower yields; 3° To enable the grower to produce an abundant crop of early vegetables, with almost no additional expense; 5° To regularize the fertility of all parts of the garden, through regular fertilization and cultivation; 6° To further increase fertility, by introducing into the soil, at regular times, a stimulant (ash) that powerfully activates the action of fertilizers. Having set out these principles, let's look at the most suitable rotation for each of the gardens I'm working on, according to the fertilizer resources available, the means of producing the greatest quantity, and the vegetable varieties specific to each garden. 19 FERTILIZERS, CROP ROTATION, VARIETIES OF VEGETABLES TO BE GROWN. I have purposely excluded from this book the kitchen garden of a château that always has a skilled gardener. By owner's vegetable garden, I mean that of a house with a fortune of ten to twenty-five thousand francs, large enough to provide vegetables for the countryside during the summer, and for the town throughout the winter. FERTILIZER SERVICE. First and foremost, we need to organize the fertilizer service and production. Let's assume that the house has two horses, two cows, a pig and a farmyard, and that with the fertilizers from these animals we have to meet Siuseg G the needs of a park adorned with flower baskets, the fruit garden and the vegetable garden. This is possible if we take the trouble to make our fertilizers properly, and don't let anything go to waste. The first thing to do is to organize the fertilizer factory. We'll choose a northern location, sheltered by tall trees, where the sun doesn't easily penetrate; we'll set up two platforms, about 30 centimetres above ground level, and both inclined towards the center (A pl. 3, fig. 4), so that all the liquid parts fall into a pit that we'll establish there. LIQUID FERTILIZERS. The liquid fertilizer pit will cut the platforms in half along their entire length (B pl. 3, fig. A); it should be wide enough and deep enough to hold twenty to thirty bariques of liquid. This pit must be perfectly watertight; the best way to do this is to build it in bricks macerated with cement, and to line the inside with a good cement plaster, which is the most solid and perhaps the most economical. The liquid fertilizer factory should be all the more active as it is intended not only to supply the needs of vegetable and fruit gardens, but also to contribute to the manufacture of a large quantity of excellent compost. We'll put in this pit all the liquid manure from the stables and cowsheds, the urine from the house, the water from 8 dishes, soap, washing powder, in short, all the liquids we can get our hands on. Nothing could be easier than to collect the liquid manure and all the household wastewater in a receptacle of some kind, and carry it to the pit every day, or to install very economical underground pipes, with cement-welded drainpipes, which will carry the liquid manure from the stable and barn, and the household wastewater from the dwelling house, to the liquid fertilizer pit. In addition to the liquids brought into the pit, we'll add all the manure from the pigeon houses and hen houses, which must be carefully cleaned every week. This is an infallible way of ensuring that we don't lose the pigeons, keeping the poultry healthy and ridding them of the insects that devour them. Latrines with a movable barrel will be set up for servants and workers; all faecal matter from them will also be disposed of in the liquid fertilizer pit. If it is possible to set up mobile barrels, as is done in many places, for the masters, this should be done as a matter of urgency, and the product added to the liquid fertilizer. A few kilograms of iron sulfate thrown into the pit immediately neutralizes the odor. If it were not possible to collect the faeces, it would be necessary to buy

In all cases, liquid fertilizers should be disinfected, firstly in the interests of health, secondly to remove workers' reluctance to use them, and thirdly because iron sulfate, while disinfecting, also increases the value of the fertilizer. With twenty-five or thirty barrels of liquid fertilizer composed in this way, together with manure from cows, pigs, rabbits and the farmyard, it will be easy to make a very large quantity of excellent compost that will ensure the fertility of the vegetable garden. MANURE. Horse manure can be stored in reserve for making diapers. Simply place it in a dry heap, sheltered from rain, and store it for as long as you like. Horse manure has the property of keeping indefinitely when dry, and of fermenting and developing its full caloric action as soon as it is wetted. The mass of layers can be increased by mixing horse manure, which has been set aside for this purpose, with leaves from the park and, if necessary, those collected in the woods. Some cow manure, mixed with leaves, can also be used in the spring for warm, muted layers. Now that we've secured our layer service, let's get back to making fertilizer. With the pit filled, as we've just indicated, with liquid fertilizer made from liquid manure, urine and all household water, plus columbine and faecal matter collected in the house, and in their absence of poudrette, we need to think about increasing the mass of fertilizer, with composts of herbaceous matter, which are most often left to waste. Here's how it works: COMPOST. Start by making a heap of all the detritus from the vegetable garden; herbs from weeding and hoeing: stalks from vegetables, asparagus, artichokes, peas, beans, cabbage cores, lettuce, etc., etc.; in a word, all the vegetable matter you can get your hands on; all is good, provided it is used fresh and never left to dry out. To avoid weed production, it's a good idea to use only plants before they flower, or even in flower, but never in seed. This would have the disadvantage of filling composts with seeds that would soon germinate and, if not suffocate crops, at least cause enormous weeding labor. Any defoliated grass should be set aside for burning, and the ash added to the compost. Depending on your resources and the size of the property, you can considerably increase the compost mass by adding broom, gorse, heather, reeds, leaves, marsh and ditch grasses, seaweed, kelp, hedge and lawn clippings, etc., etc., etc... If the property contains a certain quantity of brambles and thistles, they should be cut back as a matter of urgency to prevent them from multiplying, and burning them produces excellent ashes that add to the quality of the fertilizer. 8 Sawdust and shavings left to rot in the woods for most of the year will provide valuable ashes, which will also bring their share of fertility to the vegetable garden, especially in regions where the soil is devoid of limestone, such as Brittany and Sologne. You can't make too much of ashes in these regions, where they're more valuable than fertilizers. Once the plant matter has been brought together, a first bed, thirty to forty centimetres thick, is formed on one of the platforms; this bed is covered with manure, then watered copiously, every two or three days, with the liquid fertilizer contained in the pit. This is done with a scoop when the pile is not too high, and with a liquid manure pump when it is higher. A few days later, the heap is covered with a new bed of herbaceous matter, which is then topped up with another bed of manure. Every day, all kitchen scraps are thrown onto the compost heap: vegetable peelings, eggshells, scraps, feathers and blood from poultry and game; soot from chimneys, house and yard sweepings, etc., etc.; ashes from the compost heap are also thrown on, (Wood ashes from fireplaces will be set aside and kept for pea and bean seedlings, etc.), etc.) Continue to build up the compost heap, alternating with a bed of herbaceous matter, manure and kitchen waste, until it reaches a height of two meters, taking care to water it every two days with the liquid fertilizer contained in the pit (C pl. 3, fig. 4). If this is done as I've indicated, fermentation starts immediately, and the plant matter rapidly decomposes. When the heap has reached a height of two meters, dismantle it by cutting it into vertical slices (D pl. 3, fig. 4), mix all the decomposed herbs with the manure, and form a heap next to the first (E pl. 3, fig. 3; water five or six more times with the liquid fertilizer, copiously enough for the liquid, filtering through, to animate all the herbaceous parts, then break up this compost heap a second time, mix all the parts well together again, and put it in reserve on the other side of the platform (F pl. 3, fig. 4). In this state, it's one of the best fertilizers, and perhaps one of the most powerful you can use. With a good supply of liquid fertilizer, it's easy to make masses of compost, and considerably increase the fertility of the vegetable garden, with no other expense than a little effort and activity to collect, gather and mix together all the fertilizing substances that are most often left to waste on the public highway, to the detriment of everyone's health. The manure factory should be set up in one of the reserve yards I mentioned when creating the kitchen garden, within easy reach of the gardener. The first platform is dedicated to manufacturing, the second to storage, i.e. to the manufactured fertilizers. So, as soon as the first compost heap is dismantled and rebuilt next to it, to receive a few more sprinklings of liquid fertilizer, a new one must be built in the place it occupied; as soon as the first has been reworked a second time and transported to the reserve on the other platform, the second, dismantled in its turn, takes its place, and a third is built. Pond silt, like aquatic grasses, is excellent in composts, but it is urgent to add a little quicklime before mixing it into composts. I insist on this lime mixture, because I've often seen these vases and herbs used fresh, and when they are, very poor results are obtained. Most often, they are left to air-macerate for a year, and are used with no other disadvantage than that of having piles of sludge spread out in a park, and this is one that can easily be avoided with the addition of quicklime, by leaving the vases to drain for only eight or fifteen days, and mixing them with the composts. When the manufactured composts remain in reserve for a long time, on the second platform, it is a good idea to water them, from time to time, with the liquid fertilizer from the pit, especially with the bottom, which is always thicker. I cannot overemphasize to owners and gardeners the importance of making composts; you need to have made fertilizers yourself, and had as many made as I did for others, to get a fair idea of the immense resources to be found in a host of objects that are allowed to go to waste, almost everywhere, to the detriment of cultivation. The manufacture and economy of fertilizers is an important question, not only from the point of view of the fraction of cultivation which is the subject of this book, but from the point of view of general production. Large-scale cultivation, which possesses a high level of capital and knows the value of fertilizers, not only lets nothing go to waste, but also buys artificial fertilizers for large sums, and makes considerable profits. Small-scale farmers, with little capital and no knowledge of the value of fertilizers, let their manure run through village streets, and sow their fields with weeds and crop failure, instead of increasing the mass of fertilizing substances. Small-scale farmers support themselves through hard work, and if I may put it this way, excessive hard work partly compensates for the lack of fertilizers. But if we could prove to him that, by wasting manure and a host of other fertilizing substances, he is wasting whole loaves of bread, we would quickly improve his position and significantly increase overall production. Many mayor-cultivators have issued by-laws to prevent the discharge of liquid manure onto the public highway; we congratulate them on this, as it is bread that they are giving to the peasant without him even suspecting it. If this measure, which is as wise as it is healthy, were taken everywhere, the mass of fertilizers would be significantly increased, and general production would rise, in proportion to the quantity of fertilizing materials introduced into the soil. The Emperor's powerful protection, and the very special care with which he surrounded cultivation, drove agricultural progress forward by leaps and bounds. Several prefects, faithful interpreters of the thought of the Head of State, have encouraged agricultural education; their efforts are tending to spread it in the countryside, and we are happy to note that primary school teachers, encouraged in this way, are competing with zeal to spread the first notions of agriculture and horticulture. I appeal here to those who have heard me so often; let them prove, in their lessons, to the children of the countryside, that it is as reprehensible to lose fertilizer as a piece of bread; they will have accomplished a great work, and contributed, more powerfully than they perhaps suppose, to the increase in public wealth. FOUR-YEAR CROP ROTATION. The most advantageous rotation for the owner's vegetable garden is the four-year rotation; but as it is urgent for the owner to be abundantly supplied with everything, it will be useful to reserve, outside the rotation, the space necessary to create an asparagus plan and an artichoke square. These two crops should each occupy a space equal to one of the four squares sown every four years. 0 Will that be a lot of asparagus and artichokes? It's true, but to have enough, you often have to grow too much, to prepare for bad years. VEGETABLE SALES. Asparagus and artichokes are vegetables par excellence, first for the home, then for sale; they can be transported, and always have a well-established value on all markets. If there are too many in good years, nothing is easier than to send them to market, and even to Paris, if the local market price is not sufficiently lucrative. In the past, it was difficult for the owner to sell excess produce, as commercial bad faith was an insurmountable obstacle. The owner was offered 25 centimes of what was worth three or four francs. In such cases, it was preferable to give the surplus to the animals after everyone had had their fill. Today, thanks to the fruit and vegetable factors set up by the City of Paris, the owner can still sell excess produce at the going market price, for a commission of 5 p. O/0, without having to deal with buyers. To sell whatever you want, all you have to do is ask M. Langlois, fruit and early produce letter carrier, rue des Halles-Centrales, Paris, for a few rubber-stamped addresses. You put your produce in a basket, stick the gummed address on it, put it on the railroad without franking, and the next day you receive your sales account and your money. Everything is sold by auction; and the bond paid by the factors, as much as strict inspections, vouch for their good management. The asparagus plant can last from 25 to 30 years, if well cared for. Artichoke patches, on the other hand, will only remain in place for four years to produce good products. Its size being equal to that of the crop rotation squares, and the artichokes having been fertilized four times in four years, we'll move them to crop rotation square no. 1, and place the crops intended for square no. 1 in the old artichoke square, without changing our crop rotation. Four years later, we'll put our artichokes back in the next square, and have them successively occupy all the squares in the rotation. In this way, the artichokes will only return to the same square every twenty years, so to speak, in new land for this crop, where they will always produce superb and abundant produce. When the asparagus is exhausted, we'll also have to create a new plan in another square, and subject the one that used to grow it to crop rotation. Crop rotation, I can't repeat enough, is the key to the richness of the vegetable garden, and it's only through it, with its manuring, its cendrages and its regular harvests, that we can be sure of producing abundantly, without more labor and without more fertilizers. But to achieve these results, crop rotation must be applied to the letter, not just about. Many gardeners, unaware of its importance, said to us when we introduced it into their gardens: "I do pretty much that, only I give less manure to square n° 1, and I give a little to all the others, that's better! They'll be able to cultivate in this way for many years, without having to bring their land to a state of cultivation. That is, to saturate it thoroughly and regularly enough with humus, to bring it to the highest degree of potency and fertility, in all parts of the garden. Almost everywhere, the same products, especially those that require a lot of fertilizer, come back every year on the same beds, especially in the flowerbeds, for which the gardener has a particular predilection, because he claims they are well greased. And every year he loads these beds with the same exhausting crops, and gives them half a manure, and since most of the time he doesn't make composts or layers, he misses the fertilizers and the rest of the garden goes without. The gardener then says: I've greased my beds well, I don't need manure to grow potatoes, beans, etc., etc., and he gets the results everyone knows about. We had great difficulty in introducing a regular crop rotation in certain vegetable gardens, where the owners had asked us to guide their gardeners. This regularity of cultivation offended received habits, disturbed the way things were done; changing the layers seemed monstrous. The owners wanted it, we persevered, and I'm happy to say today, after seven years of application, that the gardeners most opposed in principle to rotation, those on whom we imposed it, are now its strongest supporters. They say that no garden can compare with theirs, and that cultivation there takes care of itself. This is true up to a point; they complete the second rotation, their garden is in what we call a cultivated state in all its parts, and fertility, far from diminishing, can only increase with each rotation. If the owner's house is of a certain size, if he lives in the country in summer, in the city in winter, and if he wants to be supplied all year round by his vegetable garden, he should apply, to the letter, the four-year rotation as I have indicated, and establish six squares of equal size in the vegetable garden: four will be dedicated to the rotation, the other two: one to asparagus, the other to artichokes, and will return to the rotation when these two crops have been moved to occupy all the squares in succession. Artichokes will be moved every four years, asparagus every fifteen or twenty. As it takes three years before asparagus can be harvested, as soon as production begins to decline, half of an asparagus square should be created first, and half of the existing square destroyed; in other words, only what is needed to supply the house should be kept, and sales eliminated, so as not to hinder the other crops and give them the same amount of land. As soon as half the newly planted square is in a position to yield, the other half is planted, and the old square is completely destroyed and returned to the crop rotation. We create squares of asparagus that are a little too large to be able to replant half of them in another square, so as never to be deprived of this precious vegetable, to have enough with half a square, and to find a fairly high indemnity in the sale of the other half, when the whole square is in yield. By adopting this crop rotation to the letter, and with the quantity of layers that I have indicated, the landowner will always be abundantly supplied with all kinds of vegetables and early crops, throughout the year, and if the crop rotation is strictly applied, far from decreasing, the produce will only increase with each rotation, i.e. with each four-year period when the crop rotation starts again. Some landowners, out of a misguided sense of economy, and perhaps also under the influence of the prejudice that layers are ruinous, will want to apply crop rotation without layers. It will be a ruinous economy for them, and I'm going to prove it to them. Let's take a look at the expense of layers. If the park is a little large, and has a certain number of baskets, the flowers will first have to be cared for, and this is the job of the head gardener, who carries out this task in the same way as he does the kitchen garden; in addition, the paths have to be raked once a week, the borders mowed, and the heavy work in the kitchen garden carried out, which is the job of the gardener's assistant. A gardener's helper is indispensable for a property of any size, and costs an average of six hundred francs a year. If the owner wants to make a false economy, dispense with this gardener's helper and replace him with day laborers, on the pretext that he only lives in the country from May to November, this is what will happen. Day laborers are rare in the countryside, and during the summer they cost the farm 3 fr. a day; but as soon as they have to go and work for a rich bourgeois, they will demand 3 fr. 50 c. and even 4 fr. a day. A day laborer at 3.50 c. a day from May 1 to October 31 will cost the owner 649 fr. For this sum, he'll be giving his gardener a poor helper, incapable of doing any gardening work at all; he'll be more of a driving force than a helper, and even then, the gardener won't have the driving force he needs when he needs it most, because he's hired by the day. For example, during the scorching heat of July and August, when the vegetable garden needs to be watered twice a day, the gardener will be alone in the morning to do this work, which is materially impossible; he will have nothing to ask of his helper, who will show him the clock marking five o'clock. That's when the day begins, and the gardener has been watering for three hours. In the evening, the helper leaves at seven o'clock - that's the time, there's nothing to say about that - and the gardener waters until nine and sometimes until ten. This helper costs 49 fr. more than a boy who works hard, because he's learning a trade, and is always next to the gardener who gets him up at the same time as him, and only sends him to bed when he goes himself. The owner, who is the gardener's enemy, will say to me: "But in winter, what will I do with this boy whom I also pay? To which I reply: "Sir, your boy costs you 19 francs less than a day laborer who hasn't done half his work. I must admit that if you don't have diapers, frames and bells, it will happen quite often, when the winter planting and ploughing are finished, that your gardener's boy won't get much done, and your gardener will have to rest completely from his summer fatigue. You like activity, Monsieur, and you're right; give your two men frames and bells, let them do diapers, they'll send you to town, all winter long, salads, peas, green beans, melons, tomatoes, etc., etc., etc. You'll have the satisfaction of having early crops that cost you only the purchase of the glass, and their cultivation will keep your gardeners busy, who, while giving you great satisfaction, will also improve the manure destined for landfill by making the layers. It has been proven that manure used to make layers, and which has produced a harvest of early crops free of charge for labor and purchase, is preferable for landfill. So far, we've made a profit of 8. Let's see what glass costs. One-meter iron frames cost 8 francs. Single glass is 3.50 c. a meter, and double glass 7 francs. You won't take single glass, because you'd break windows all the time; double glass is as solid as stone, so you'll choose that one, it's the cheapest. Give your gardener 25 iron frame panels, glazed in double glass, at 15 fr. 375 " 150 button bells at 1 fr. . . . . 150 " Total... ... . 525 "This equipment is sufficient to obtain all the early fruit and melons you want, and will last for twenty years; so you have to spend 26 fr. 25 c. each year on your melons and early fruit. Sell fifteen melons for 2 francs, they're available everywhere at that price, and you'll have melons and early fruit for nothing, and what's more, you'll have improved your manure at a profit. To finish convincing the enemies of layers, should I tell them the account I give daily to the owners who come to visit my garden, and say to me on seeing my melons and vegetables: what a production! it's superb! but how expensive it must be! to which I reply: every year, in January, I buy two cars of manure to build up a warm layer on which I sow my melons and some 3 spring vegetables. In February, I buy about three cars of inn manure, the best of all, with which I build up a second warm layer, which I use to transplant my melons in the nursery, and in April, I buy another three cars of the same manure, which, mixed with leaves or moss, is used to make warm layers, on which I place, under cloche, the melons of the last season. Total, eight cars of good inn manure at 5 fr. .. .. . A0 fr. Plus, about three meters of manure, picked up by old men and children, at 5 fr. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .  55fr. With the three meters of horse manure, and the household water, I make about ten cars of excellent compost, mixing it with the detritus from the vegetable garden, the fruit garden and the kitchen. My composts, together with the manure from the demolition of the diapers, are more than enough to smoke my vegetable garden to the max. Every year, I mulch the fruit garden with my excess manure; in addition, the layers give me considerable quantities of potting soil. My total expenditure on fertilizer is 55 francs a year. I have about twelve ares of vegetable garden, the land is in perfect condition for cultivation, and these twelve ares, cultivated when we have the time, produce the following annually: 1° Two hundred first-quality melons; 19 2° All the vegetables I could possibly want for my household, consisting of three masters and two servants; 3° The complete supply for my gardener and his family, consisting of six people; 4° The surplus of certain harvests, so abundant that it is impossible to eat them, such as peas, artichokes, beans, etc., these are sold for around 80 francs a year. I must say, as a tribute to the truth, that my vegetable garden is cultivated in the worst possible conditions. During the winter, I use it to temporarily bury trees destined for expeditions and the creation of fruit gardens. I often have to keep a supply of trees until March, and even April. It's only towards the end of this month, and when my pupils are not too busy with work outside, that I put my vegetable garden fully into cultivation; and in these deplorable conditions, twelve ares that I fertilize with an expense of 55 francs produce for me annually: 1° 200 melons; 2° Vegetables for eleven people; 3° A silver product of 80 fr. I haven't taken labor into account. Let's assume that my garden spends one man's day a week, it doesn't, but let's count 52 days at 4 francs to account for all costs to the maximum, i.e. 208 fr. 8 Now let's draw up a strict account: Rent for 12 ares of land at 10 francs. 120 fr. Fertilizer ... ... ... ... ... ... . 55 52 days at h fr. . . . . . . . 208 " " Interest on equipment and tool wear . 10 " Total... . 393 "Let's say that instead of giving surplus vegetables to my servants, I sell them on my own account, and that instead of giving my melons to my friends, I send one hundred out of two hundred to the market, the product will give: Vegetables sold . 20 melons sold at the end of May . 5 fr. 20 Id. 20 Id. 40 Id. Id. in June. 4 fr. 80 fr. 100 " 80 " Id. in July, 2 fr.50c. 50 " Id. in August.. 2 fr. 80 " Total... ... . 390 "Operating like this, my supply of vegetables for eleven people, including one hundred melons, would cost me 3 francs. I've drawn up this account here, which is shown to my many visitors perhaps a hundred times a year, because the produce of my garden, like my expenses, is a matter of public record. If this same garden were not overcrowded with trees for half the year, and my students were able to carry out all the work on time, it would produce half as much. If, in spite of everything I've just said, some owners persisted in considering layers as an object of great expense, and wanted to try to assolate their vegetable garden without layers, they would have to adapt the three-year assolement. This would be more costly and less productive, but admittedly far preferable to the cultivation practised there. The three-year crop rotation would still bring them significant savings on what they do, a marked increase in produce, and a great improvement in the soil. This rotation will serve as a transition between the old and the new crops, and will be a stepping stone to the four-year rotation with layers, the only one possible, to give a large production at the best market. In this case, the vegetable garden would have to be divided into three or six equal parts; all manures would have to be mixed with composts, three-quarters of which would be buried on the first sole, forming one-third of the vegetable garden, and one-quarter of the most consumed fertilizers would have to be reserved for topdressing on the second sole; the third would only receive energetic ashing. The rotation is established as follows: maximum fertilization on square or squares n° 1, if the garden is divided into three or six parts; topdressing on square or squares n° 2, and ashing on square or squares n° 3. The following year, the part ashed the previous year is smoked to the maximum; the part smoked the previous year is terreauteed, and the part terreauteed the previous year is ashed, and so on, without interruption, from year to year. But we mustn't forget that without layers, we're deprived of potting soil, the first element of success in vegetable growing, and that handling all manures to make them suitable for burial is as labor-intensive as making and cultivating layers. The same expense will be incurred, and the harvest of early vegetables and the essential potting soil in the vegetable garden will be lost. Everything we've said so far about crop rotation applies to crop rotation gardens. Let's now look at the most economical ways of introducing three- and four-year rotations, in new gardens as well as in old ones, which you may wish to subject to them. The first step in subjecting a new vegetable garden to a four-year rotation is to organize the manure and compost service a year in advance, to set up a liquid fertilizer pit, and to stockpile the necessary ashes. 1° All horse manure will be stockpiled for bedding. It's best to pile it up in a conical wheel, and only put it in the wheel when it's dry. 2° A reserve of leaves, equal in volume to that of the horse manure. These leaves should be collected and piled up very dry, to avoid fermentation; they will be used partly to make warm layers, mixed with horse manure, and partly to make soft layers mixed with cow manure. 3° At the same time, build the liquid fertilizer pit, and immediately fill it with liquid fertilizer, made as I indicated above for making compost. If liquid manure and faeces are lacking, the pit can be filled with water, and horse dung, collected from the streets and roads, and poudrette can be added. 4° Make as much compost as possible, and store it on the second platform as soon as it is made. 5° Store all ashes from fireplaces, and all ashes available from factories, lime kilns and even railway stations. If the soil is clayey, it's a matter of urgency to mix a quantity of lime or marl into the composts, to a greater or lesser extent, depending on its tenacity. The best practice is to first melt the lime with five or six times its volume of soil, amalgamate it well and then mix it with the composts. However, if the composts contain tough plants that are difficult to disintegrate, it would be advantageous to throw quicklime on top, and then mix the whole thing very carefully, dismantling the pile. Marl can be mixed as is with composts. I forgot to mention rapeseed straw when making composts. It's the richest in nitrogen, containing more than all the others, but it has the disadvantage of being difficult to break down. Rape straw is a precious substance, and has the added advantage of being very inexpensive. If you plan ahead at harvest time, you can get large quantities for very little money. It should be cut on a log, with a billhook, to a length of about 30 centimetres, mixed with herbs, and wetted a little; throw a few quicklime stones on top and cover the whole with manure. Once we've assembled all the fertilizing materials I've just listed, we'll still need potting soil to cover our layers. Potting soil is indispensable for seedlings, and especially for covering the beds, and it's the rarest thing in countries where horticulture is not advanced. There are even regions where we don't know what it is. Let's say we're completely lacking in it to start our new garden, we'll have to replace it with a mixture for the first year, because in subsequent years, the layers will provide us with it at our discretion. First of all, let's explain what potting soil is, for the benefit of those in distant lands. Quite simply, it's manure that has been used to make layers, and which has been left to decompose until it's powdered like snuff. It's pure humus, and anything is possible with potting soil. We mix it with half good soil to cover layers, and use it pure to cover seedlings. To replace the potting soil, we'll collect a certain quantity of horse dung from the streets and roads, which we'll leave to ferment in a heap. Next, we'll choose the best soil in the garden, put it through a sieve to extract all the stones, and mix it in halves with the horse dung; but it's urgent that the dung be ground to powder before mixing. Break it up well with the rake, and if necessary, crush it with your hands if it's too hard. This mixture is not as good as potting soil, nothing can replace it, but in its place, it can usefully cover the layers. Now that we're armed with all we need in the way of fertilizers, let's proceed, in the spring, to the cultivation of our new garden, newly broken in and devoid of fertilizers. First, we'll choose the oldest, most decomposed composts, to be buried in plot no. 2, destined for roots, lettuces, strawberries and so on. Depending on the richness of the plant, we spread from four to eight centimetres of compost on the soil, and bury it, taking care to reserve the most decomposed part to cover the seedlings. Two treatments a fortnight apart, and three or four successive waterings with liquid fertilizer will bring this result. We then build our warm layers on square n° A, with some of the horse manure in reserve; a few days later, the warm layers with the rest of the horse manure mixed with leaves, and later still, the deaf layers, with cow manure and the rest of our leaves. All these layers will be covered in the first year with the mixture I indicated earlier. (I explain how to establish these various layers in the chapter specially devoted to them). The layers constructed, and square no. 2 ter~M F=R: ----= i.:i ....... H54A LESt. 6́ reauté, we'll take all we have of manufactured composts, and spread it on square no. 1; we'll also bring in all we have left of available manure; we'll also spread it on top of the composts, so as to cover the soil with a thickness of fertilizer of about twenty centimeters, and we'll bury everything in the same square no. 1, destined for cabbages, artichokes, etc., in the ground. Plot n° 3, for peas, beans, etc., will not be fertilized, but will receive a good ashing. In addition, some of the best ashes from wood-burning fireplaces should be set aside to cover certain seedlings, as described below. As soon as the manure has been buried, it's time to make new manure, both for the season's needs, and for next year's reserve. All fertilizing substances must be constantly and relentlessly collected, and immediately put into decomposition. The fertilizer factory must always be in operation; when the service is well established, it's easy to leave nothing to waste, and to produce large quantities of excellent manure without too much work, and almost without expense. The organization of the first year is more difficult than that of the following years, and even if you put in more effort, you won't get as good results. The land is new, not yet ready for cultivation, and will not be until the fifth year, when the rotation will have been completed, and each of the squares will have received in turn maximum manuring, good topdressing or mulches, ashing and layering. It's hardly until the second rotation, when the maximum fertilization is applied for the second time, that the vegetable garden has acquired its full fertility, to be further enhanced in subsequent years. This is when gardeners who were unaware of the advantages of regular rotation, and who have tried it, somewhat in spite of themselves - which they agree with the best faith in the world - say that: the crop grows by itself, so abundant and fast does it grow. The harvest in the first year of the crop rotation, while lower than in subsequent years, is far superior to previous ones. It should also be said that the gardener was learning the ropes that first year, and that with the best will in the world, his services were not organized in the same way as in subsequent years. By the second year, when two squares have been smoked to the maximum, when the layers have yielded a certain quantity of compost, and also when the gardener is more up to speed, the appearance of the crops changes so much, and he achieves such rapid results that he redoubles his zeal, and by the third year achieves very fine production. When the beds are demolished at the end of the season, the old topsoil that covered them is first removed and set aside; it will be used to top-dress square no. 2 the following year. We then sort out the manure that has been used the least, and mix it with the compost, either by building piles on the reserve platform, or on plot no. 1, at the time of burial. Then, the most consumed parts are set aside in piles in the shade, to be converted into new potting soil, intended to cover the layers the following year, and to be applied to crops that require a slightly energetic fertilizer. You may be a little short of potting soil the first time you demolish the layers, but in subsequent years you'll have larger quantities, once the services are well organized. Once the first year's work is done, all that's left to do is to follow the steps laid out. When the vegetable garden has already been created, and you want to subject it to crop rotation, nothing is easier. Allow me to remind the reader of two of the most important recommendations: the first is to clear the garden of the sad fruit trees that line the squares, invading them with their shade and roots; the second is to break up and level the squares if they have not already been done. These two operations are indispensable, and are the first keys to success. If the landowner is too attached to his old trees, he should shave and level just one square, which he will then divide into four, so that he can practice the four-year crop rotation I have just described. It's a comparative trial that will be more profitable than he thinks, and it's my principle to provoke comparative trials, well convinced that in the third year, if not the second, the whole cluttered garden will be destroyed to make way for a modern vegetable and fruit garden. In the event that the square intended for the comparative trial has been smoked the previous year, it will be necessary to smoke square no. 1, top-dress square no. 2, ash square no. 3, and build up the layers on square no. 4. If the owner wants to cut down everything, and subject his entire vegetable garden to a four-year rotation, and finds it impossible to clear everything at once, he can carry out this operation in four years. Here's how to proceed: 1° Choose the leanest square No. 1 in the crop rotation, the one that will have remained the longest without manure, and have it completely ploughed over, smoking it no more than one month after ploughing. This square will be terraced in the second year, ashed in the third, and will receive the layers in the fourth to become square n° 1 again in the fifth year, with maximum manuring. 2° Choose the best-smoked plot from the previous year for plot no. 2, plow it very deeply, and add topdressing and mulch. This square will be ashed the following year, will receive the layers the third year, and will be broken up as soon as the crops have been removed. 3° Take the best-smoked square after No. 2 as No. 3, and ash it abundantly. This square will receive the layers the following year, and will be broken up as soon as it is cleared, to become square n° 1 in turn, with maximum manuring. 4° Establish the beds on one of the least 48 well-smoked squares. This square should be cleared as soon as it is free, to become square n° 1 the following year, with maximum manuring. In this way, the clearing can be done in four years, and the expense, as minimal as it is, divided over four. What's more, you have the resource to use up all your fertilizers. For all crop rotations without exception, you should always start by organizing the fertilizer factory, if not one year, then at least a few months in advance. If the owner has no fertilizers at his disposal, he can buy some, but it is urgent to handle them two or three times, and to water them with liquid fertilizer, to decompose them, before burying them; and in this case again, to immediately set up the liquid fertilizer pit, and the platforms to make the composts. If the garden to be planted under the four-year rotation had an asparagus bed and an artichoke patch in good condition, but insufficient for the house's consumption, the garden would have to be divided into six equal parts, and these two crops enlarged. If they were in poor condition, we'd have to keep them temporarily; plant two new divisions: one of asparagus and the other of artichokes, and destroy the old crops to bring them back into the rotation as soon as the new ones produced. The three-year rotation without layers will be introduced by the same procedures as the four-year rotation, but with the difference that the garden will be divided into three, if there is no reserve of asparagus and artichokes, and into four if there is. One quarter will be devoted to these two crops. VARIETIES OF VEGETABLES TO GROW. Now that the fertilizer factory is well organized, our beds built, and our land smoked according to the requirements of the crop rotation, let's get busy looking for the varieties of vegetables to introduce into the vegetable garden. I said earlier that most of those grown in regions where vegetable cultivation had been entirely localized were pitiful. I humbly apologize to gardeners who have not left their homeland, but this is all too true. Sometimes, landowners introduced a few good varieties and shared the seeds with their friends. Each gardener constantly harvested seeds from his garden, only to sow them the following year, and often the lack of suitable cultivation, combined with this abuse of the soil, led to the complete degeneration of the varieties. Then, the owner, more enlightened than the gardener, says: the new varieties are better, but they have no fixity, and the gardener repeats his eternal refrain: dam, sir, the land is worthless! If the owner had taken a little care of his garden, and not abandoned it entirely to the carelessness of his gardener, he would have preserved his pure varieties for an indefinite time, by first giving them the right kind and quantity of fertilizer, and then exchanging his seeds with one of his friends, in order to avoid the degeneration that infallibly occurs when seeds that have been harvested there are sown in the same soil for three consecutive years. A sure-fire way of preserving pure varieties when harvesting seeds is to share the first seeds with someone who has a garden whose soil is not quite the same as ours, and to exchange seeds every year. The varieties will remain pure as soon as the seeds are no longer sown in the soil that produced them. Let's also say that the choice of seeds is of great importance, and that the best varieties produce impossible seeds in the hands of gardeners who, most of the time, know neither how to grow them nor how to harvest them; let's also say that it's difficult to buy good seeds, and to always be sure of getting the variety you asked for from the merchant; this is usually due to commercial rapacity, sometimes to the disorder that exists among certain merchants, and to their lack of knowledge of cultivation. You should never buy seeds from a house that does not have a well-established reputation for honesty and order, or from houses that sell all kinds of things, and seeds over the counter. Seeds should only be bought from a seed merchant, not from wheat, oat, bran, etc. merchants, who sell vegetable and flower seeds as an accessory, but from a true seed merchant, selling nothing but the seeds needed for all branches of horticulture. I beg the reader's pardon for these details, which may seem superfluous, but I have bought, and sent to buy, so many seeds in my life...., that I want to avoid schools for those who will do me the honor of following my advice. So, send a small village gardener or a laborer to fetch seeds from a good house, if you don't demand a bill, he'll go to a one-eyed grocer who also sells seeds, and he'll go because the grocer is good-natured. He has excellent procedures, indeed, he's full of good intentions, offering your man a glass of beet brandy, but most of the time, his seeds, squeezed into the drawer intended for the serins' millet or the parrots' chenevis, are mixed up, and sometimes too old to germinate. The owner must always buy his seeds himself, or have them brought in directly. There are several firms in Paris that offer every guarantee. The first of these is MM. Vilmorin Andrieux et Cie, 30, quai de la Mégisserie. I mention this one because I've been in contact with it for over twenty-five years, and the many people I send there have never had anything but praise for their dealings with this company. Maison Vilmorin is unique; it has no depot in the provinces, and is only responsible for what leaves its premises. People who rarely go to Paris can write and have their seeds sent by post. Having said that, let's get back to the varieties to be grown in the owner's garden. What does the homeowner need? Good, beautiful vegetables, especially good ones, and he needs them in every season! So, as far as possible, we'll combine beauty with quality in the homeowner's garden, but we'll always sacrifice volume for flavour. I assume that the owner is a disciple, more or less ardent, of Brillat-Savarin; I believe I'm right, and act accordingly. If a few, by exception, profess the cult of bulk, and despise taste, let them take the trouble to choose their varieties in the farm's vegetable garden, they'll find some very large ones, making a lot of profit! In principle, we should stick to varieties that vegetate quickly, the early varieties, which are preferable for all crops. They occupy the soil for only a short time, make it possible to multiply harvests, and are generally of better quality. Each square of the vegetable garden should produce an average of three harvests a year. Later on, I'll show you how to obtain them easily, with the help of square organization, counter-planting and crop succession. I've only indicated the varieties to be introduced into the homeowner's garden, and I've listed them in alphabetical order to make it easier for the reader to find them. 18 VEGETABLE VARIETIES TO GROW IN THE HOMEOWNER'S GARDEN. ROSE GARLIC. Earlier and slightly weaker than the common variety. ARROCHE BLONDE. The most suitable variety for softening the acidity of sorrel. ARTICHAUT GROS VERT DE LAON. The best of all, the largest and most tender of all known varieties, as well as the most fertile, and almost as early as the VIOlET, good only for peppers. ULM ASPERGE. One of the most beautiful varieties of purple asparagus, very colorful and with the merit of being the earliest. Ulm asparagus should be grown in the homeowner's garden, to the exclusion of all other varieties; its earliness, combined with its beauty and quality, give it top ranking. When the harvest is too abundant for home consumption, Ulm asparagus will be the first to appear on the market, where it will fetch a higher price than other varieties. LONG PURPLE EGGPLANT. The best. BEET PETITE ROUGE DE CASTELNAUDARY. Remarkable for its quality, this is the only variety that can be introduced into the vegetable garden. NASTURTIUM PETITE. Gives enough flowers and seeds, and is preferable to the large variety that harms neighboring crops. CARDOON. Despite its thorns, this is still the best variety, and should be preferred to the others. 48 CARROT. There are several varieties, of which only two will be allowed in the homeowner's garden: The early red Dutch carrot, the best of all, and with the immense advantage of being able to be sown successfully all year round. With a little care, the short red Dutch carrot produces new carrots all year round, and I can't say it often enough: it's superior in quality to all the others. It is preferable for the first sowings in the ground, and successive sowings are perfectly successful right through to September. Here's what I usually do with this variety, which I grow alone and to the exclusion of all others: I sow two beds only at the end of February or first days of March. These two beds provide me with excellent carrots, from the end of April to the end of May; we only thin until then. By mid-June, the crop is ready for removal, so we clear the soil of it and store it in the vegetable greenhouse. I successively sow one bed at a time, in May, June, July and even into September, to supply the needs of the house; and the last seedling, that of September, is pulled up before the first frosts, and kept for winter provision. This way, you'll never have any hard, limp old carrots to send to the kitchen. BELL CARROT. A sub-variety of the previous one, but much shorter; this variety is never grown in the ground, and is used exclusively for early harvests, under chassis. CELERI. There is only one variety to be grown as a salad, the full white celery; it is a little less early than the short hative celery, but preferable in that the latter is not always full. The next most valuable variety is : ERFURT CELERIAC. The best and earliest of all celeriac, this excellent vegetable is not widely grown in France. FRESH CHERRY, for supplies. It has the same fragrance as common chervil, is just as easy to grow and has the added advantage of being very pretty. In my opinion, it's a sad vegetable; many horticulturists have become passionate about this plant; the majority of gardeners who have experimented with it claim that it's a bad vegetable; I share their opinion, until further experimentation. MUSHROOMS. In the interests of public health, we only allow cultivated mushrooms. I'll come back to this in the special crops section, which forms the third part of this book. CHICORICE. Let's start with wild chicory, which is excellent for hens and rabbits, and can be used to make a winter salad, commonly known as capuchin beard. The only variety to grow is the improved variegated wild chicory, an excellent variety with a tendency to peel, producing almost as many leaves for poultry as wild chicory, and having the advantage of giving, when grown in the cellar, a very pretty red variegated salad. For cooking, and for use in salads, we grow only two varieties: FINE ITALIAN CHICORICE, excellent and very fine, with almost no ribs, for all seasonal seedlings, and: The CHICORÉE DE MEAUX, for the last sowings only, those starting in June; and finally, as a number, the escarole, of which we'll grow a single variety in the owner's kitchen garden. The SCAROLE FRISÉE, not much better than the other varieties, but prettier. CHOU. The landowner who has neither harvesters nor carters to feed, must be very sparing with cabbages, and scrupulously choose those that are suitable for his table; above all, he must see to it that his kitchen garden is not invaded by those immense cabbages, with their gigantic apples, broad, tough ribs, and pungent, musky taste, which are the honors of the gardener's pot in general, and his happiness in particular. The only cabbages that the homeowner should admit to his kitchen garden, as worthy of a place on his table, are: The YORCK KALE, with its small, elongated head, very early and of excellent quality. This variety will supply first and second saigon cabbages. ULM KALE, belonging to the curly savoy variety, the smallest but the best; it is the cabbage par excellence for the proprietor, and is also the earliest. The Ulm cabbage is especially valuable for partridges with cabbage; it has no ribs, its head is hardly larger than that of a lettuce, but it is extremely delicate. It can be grown from early spring until the frosts, and harvested from June to January, stored in the vegetable greenhouse. It is, I can't say enough, the best of all cabbages, almost the only one that should be grown for gourmets. However, as a mansion is made up of a certain number of staff, we shall introduce into the owner's vegetable garden: MILAN, SHORT OR Dwarf, stocky, very dark green, quick to pick, and of remarkable quality; it keeps longer than Ulm cabbage, is worthy by its quality of appearing on the masters' table, and can be used profitably for that of the servants. BRUSSELS KALE, excellent and very valuable, providing excellent produce throughout the winter. Brussels sprouts are very hardy; they even thrive in snow. RED cabbage, used as a medicine, in salads, candied or stuffed; the best variety is the blackd̂tre D'UTRECK cabbage. Caou vear, is highly esteemed in western France for making soups. Green chom soup is very refreshing and even purgative. For anyone not born in the western departments, kale is purely an object of fantasy. The preferred variety is Poitou branchu cabbage. CHOU RAVE BLANC HATIF; the best variety of kohlrabi. CAULIFLOWER. We'll be adopting just two varieties for the homeowner's garden: ERFURT HATIF CHOU-FLEUR, the earliest of all, and the most suitable for early cultivation under frame and cloche, and : LE CHOU-FLEUR DEMI-DUR DE PARIS, a variety of the Lenormand cauliflower that has caused such a stir in recent years. The Lenormand cauliflower, which owed its fame to advertising, is soon as completely forgotten as the almanacs and small newspapers that praised it so highly. What remains from all this fla fla, and countless scissor blows, is the semi-hard Paris cauliflower, an excellent variety for all outdoor crops. I won't mention Broccoli, Pe-tsai (Chinese cabbage) and crambe maritime, whose reputation is declining as a result of the publicity they receive. We'll wait for further experimentation before talking about them. CIBOULE. The preferred variety is the perennial ciboule, also known as ciboule de Saint-Jacques. CIVETTE-APPÉTIT, very useful for sauces. CUCUMBER. If you want to harvest a lot of cucumbers, you need to grow three varieties: BLANC HATIF, for early harvest under a frame; 8 GROS BLANC DE BONNEUIL, for cultivation on a deaf bed and under a cloche, and : Le PETIT VERT, used exclusively to supply gherkins. CRESSON DE FONTAINE (see special crops). CRESS ALÉNOIS. Excellent supply for salads: sow curly watercress. ECHALOTTE (see special crops). BLOND SPINACH WITH SORREL LEAVES. This is the variety that takes the longest to bolt, which is the main advantage of spinach. We prefer this variety. ESTRAGON (see special crops). MARSH BEANS. It's useful to grow two varieties: RED BEAN, under chassis, and : FÈVE A LONGUES COSSES, very early and very fertile for the open ground. STRAWBERRIES. If you want to harvest excellent strawberries without interruption, from the end of May until the frosts, you need to grow the GAILLON STRAWBERRY, an excellent variety with remarkable fertility and the advantage of not producing runners. This precious variety could, in a pinch, replace all the others; it must form the base of strawberry plantations, and moreover it gives without interruption, throughout the winter, when you want to give it the honors of the frame or greenhouse. There are a great many varieties of large strawberries, some of which are highly recommended. I'll mention the following varieties, mainly for the sake of force: KEEN' S SEEDLING, an excellent variety, very beautiful and very productive. PRINCESSE ROYALE, very beautiful and very fertile. DUC DE MALAKOFF, large and excellent fruit. DU CHILI, the largest of all known varieties. Fruits reach the volume of a small hen's egg, and require a lot of chastening. It should only be grown in the open ground at noon. I quote a few varieties of large strawberries as being the most recommendable. There are countless other varieties that I will not mention here, as my aim in this book is not to collect varieties, but to provide assured harvests. I urge lovers of new varieties to ask for MM. Vilmorin and Andrieux's catalog, or to consult Le Bon Jardinier, where they can choose those that seem most deserving. GIRAUMON. The best variety is Girgumén Turban (see Special crops). HARICOTS. Several varieties need to be grown for dry and green beans, and especially for green beans, for most of the year. The best-known bean for eating as dry beans is the Soissons; it is of excellent quality, but does not give satisfactory results everywhere. There is a much preferable variety whose products are always of superior quality: HARICOT SABRE A RAME. This is the best of all beans for eating as dry beans; it has almost no skin, and always cooks well; its only disadvantage is that it rises very high and requires large oars. The oared saber is also very fertile, and its long pods contain a large quantity of beans. When it comes to eating green beans, there is no variety that can replace the HARIcOT FLAGEOLET, which is all the more valuable for its remarkable quality, high fertility and success at all times of the year. But you need to get hold of real flageolets, and be careful not to sow the ignoble beans to which many countries give this name. For red bean lovers: RED FLAGEOLET is the best and perhaps the most productive variety. For green beans, the following varieties are the most recommended: NAIN DE HOLLANDE, the earliest of all, and the best for growing under chassis, and even in the open, as an early green bean, in a warm, sheltered spot. HARICOT GRIS DE BAGNOLET is very popular in the Paris area for green beans. They remain firm and retain their regular8 shape after cooking; they are more sought-after for this reason than for their quality. HARICOT FLAGEOLET is the best of all and the most tender for making green beans. The pod is wide, curved and rather poorly shaped, a disadvantage that is compounded by the fact that they fall apart when overcooked, but these disadvantages are redeemed by the possibility of making excellent green beans in any season. Flageolet can be sown as late as September. This concludes my list of bean varieties: there are many others that are highly recommendable, but these are enough to obtain, without a doubt, an abundant production of green beans and beans all year round, and in the modern vegetable garden, as in fruit growing, I am sober with varieties. Experience has shown me that collectors often lack the necessities with the most extensive crops, and the shortage invariably comes from the fact that such and such varieties, on which one was counting, were lacking. I might even add that the richest in collections are the poorest in produce. True to my program, I confine myself to varieties that have been tried and tested, and that give certain results. Enthusiasts are free to try whatever they like. MILK. This is the salad par excellence: you need them in all seasons. To achieve this, we'll classify them into three categories: spring, summer and winter lettuces. SPRING LETTUCES. GOTTE LETTUCE. Quite small, sprouts quickly and rises steadily. Excellent for cultivation under frames and cloches, and for the first outdoor harvest. DAUPHINE LETTUCE. Beautiful, good lettuce, green, blond with a hint of red, but for spring only. SUMMER LETTUCE. VERSAILLES LETTUCE. Excellent variety, green, blond and hard to climb. BATAVIA LETTUCE. The largest of all, very good, golden green, a little red on top. PALATINE LETTUCE. Excellent, very rustic, green, almost red on top; best for late sowing. BLACK-SEEDED BLOOD LETTUCE. Charming and delicious lettuce, very strongly variegated with red on the inside. The heart is yellow and pink, the top dark brown. One of the best and prettiest lettuces, it can't be grown enough in the owner's garden. WINTER LETTUCES. PETITE CRÊPE OR PETITE NOIRE. Small and low yielding, but very valuable under frame and cloche. This is the only variety that can complete its vegetation without needing to be given air. It is the winter lettuce par excellence, LAITUE DE LA PASSION. Small and low yielding, but very versatile; its main merit is its earliness. MORINE LETTUCE. Slightly better than the previous variety, and better apple-holding. ROMAINES. Romaine is not as good as lettuce. We'll be content to grow varieties that cap naturally, i.e. that pump very well without being tied. This saves time, and in fact, these varieties are more than worth the others: MARAÎMER GREEN ROSEMARKS, suitable for early cultivation, very large and very good. MARAÎCHER ROMAINES BLONDES, also very pretty and very good. GREY MARAICHER ROMAINES, larger than the above. We make an exception for Romaines who don't wear their hair up, and want to be tied up, in favor of: RED WINTER ROMAIN. A very rustic variety, which tolerates frost fairly well. A precious resource in spring. LENTILLE, the blond, is the preferable variety (see Special Crops). MACHE. The Italian variety has broader, blonder leaves. It's the only variety to grow in the home garden. MELONS. Nothing is better and more desirable than a good melon, especially in the country, when you're far from Paris, which provides excellent ones at a moment's notice. Yet nothing is more difficult to obtain as soon as you move away from the capital. Most of the time, melons lack the necessary care; but often, too, the owner has a lot to do with the gardener's lack of success, by making him grow so many different varieties of melon. When he hears of a variety that is said to be good, he immediately starts growing it among the others. All these varieties fertilize each other, producing impossible mullets, melons that are shapeless, tasteless and inedible. This is sometimes blamed on the soil; I've heard owners tell me in all seriousness: "My gardener doesn't make melons any more, the land isn't worth anything to them. Melons are never grown in the ground; they are grown in artificial soil, so they can be grown with equal success in a paved courtyard, or even on a rock. For my own part, I've been growing only one variety of melon for over fifteen years, and I've never harvested a mediocre melon. Owners who grow twenty varieties at once will think themselves ruined if I advise them to grow only one, and yet this is the only sure way of harvesting good melons. I'll allow three varieties of melon in the owner's garden, three varieties for three different seasons, but with the express condition of growing them in such a way that they never flower together, to keep them pure. Not only melons, but all gourds fertilize each other, even at great distances. It is therefore essential that all the species grown in the garden: melons, cucumbers, pumpkins, giraumons, etc., never flower at the same time, if you don't want to risk losing everything. We exclude from the owner's garden all embroidered melons for the benefit of cantaloupes, and even watermelons, which only do well in the olive climate, and even then are far from being worth a very ordinary cantaloupe; we grow them all over France: The PETIT-PRESCOT, for early melon, and under chassis, as one of the earliest, among the best early varieties. The PRESCOT A FOND VERT, for the whole season, as being in my opinion the best of all melons. The ribs are very scabby, the flesh red; these melons are always very full and very smoky. They are also remarkably fertile and very rustic. This is the only variety I grow, to the exclusion of all others. I may have improved it through cultivation, but I never harvest a second-rate melon. I know a lot of people are going to object, and say that white bottoms are better! I don't think so, although the white bottom 16 cantaloupe is grown exclusively in many parts of the world. It's bigger than the fond vert, but it's almost never full; its pale, almost white flesh lacks flavor; I've rarely eaten a good fond blanc melon, and I've tasted hundreds of them, precisely because I was told they were the best. I even went so far as to grow them for three consecutive years, with all possible care, and the result of this trial was to make me abandon this variety altogether as being initially not very fertile, more delicate than the fond vert, indeed giving very-large melons, but always hollow, bland and far from being worth the fonds verts. Cantaloupe fond blanc is the only variety grown in a large part of the Loiret region. The result is that most owners harvest melons one year out of three, and their melons often have more in common with pumpkins than with melons. This doesn't stop owners and gardeners alike repeating in chorus that the white bottom is the best of all melons. I've persuaded a few gardeners to sow the seeds I gave them; they've obtained melons every year, and good ones at that; this lasted as long as they were willing to grow a single variety, but from the day they mixed white bottoms with them, scarcity and poor quality returned. The MELON D'ARKHANGEL is an excellent variety, very rustic, precious for the last season. The fruit is average, but excellent, and the variety is so hardy that in a pinch it could be grown outdoors. Owners who want to stick to these three varieties, and even to the last two, or to one of them, if they don't grow first-season melons, will always be assured of excellent melons every year, but on the express condition that they ruthlessly uproot the marvellous trial varieties; even one plant is enough to lose everything else. Green-fleshed melons can only be grown in olive climates. The Cavaillon variety is the best. NAVET DE FRENEUSE, excellent quality, remaining whole after cooking. It is one of the most prized for stews. NAVET DES VERTUS, very early white, precious for the first season, and excellent quality, but a tender turnip. NAVET JAUNE D'ECOSSE, semi-tender, fairly good quality, very rustic and frost-resistant. FINNISH YELLOW TURNIP, semi-tender, of remarkable quality, with a very long shelf-life. I highly recommend growing this precious turnip in the owner's garden. WHITE ONION HATIF. An excellent variety, and very valuable for providing the first onions, when sown in August and transplanted to a warm, sheltered spot. The white onion, sown very early in the spring, provides the best onions for preserving; it is milder than the others, and much preferable for this use. 9 OIGNON BLOND DES VERTUS. The best of all varieties for spring sowing. FLAT YELLOW ONION, also very good for the same use. PALE RED ONION, to be sown in small quantities for spring transplanting. BELLEVILLE sorrel, broad-leafed, less acidic than common sorrel. BLISTER-LEAF SORREL. A very fine variety, multiplying by bursts of plants, with very large leaves, very fine, and especially very early in spring. PANAIS ROND. This is the best variety to grow in the homeowner's garden. VIOLET POTATO. The most sought-after and best variety. VERY CURLY DWARF PARSLEY. A variety to be cultivated in preference to any other; remarkable for the beauty of its leaves and its slowness to bolt. SPANISH SWEET PEPPER; the best to grow. PIMPRENELLE, to be grown in borders, rather for animals than for cooking purposes. POITOU YELLOW PEAR, very large and excellent. VERY CLEAN PEA WITH FRAME. Very early and very small variety; valuable for cultivation under chassis only. MICHAUX PEAS FROM HOLLAND. Such an early variety that, sown in spring, it yields at the same time as peas sown at St Catherine's Day and sometimes earlier. Dutch Michaux peas are remarkably fertile and of excellent quality. I can't recommend it highly enough for cultivation in a homeowner's 18 vegetable garden; it combines all the qualities of earliness, goodness and fertility. In recent years, the Prince Albert pea has been highly praised, especially for its earliness. This pea is much less fertile than Michaux de Hollande; its quality leaves much to be desired, and in three comparative trials, I found it no earlier than Michaux de Hollande. I disagree with several people whose names have great authority in vegetable growing, I know, but I back up my opinion with three comparative trials, in which I could not find a day of earliness in favor of Prince Albert. Moreover, there is such a difference in quality and product that I would still prefer the Michaux from Holland, assuming it ripens eight days later. ALLEY PEA. An excellent variety, as remarkable for its quality as for its fertility and earliness. POIS MICHAUX or PETIT-POIS DE PARIS. Very fertile and excellent. This variety should form the basis of autumn and spring sowings. POIS DE CLAMART, quite productive, very good quality, and very valuable as a late pea; it can be sown until August, and always provides until the frosts. I completely banish snow peas and chickpeas from the owner's kitchen garden, as unworthy of being served on a master's table; they belong in the farm's kitchen garden. POTATOES. Only varieties of recognized merit for the table should be grown in the owner's kitchen garden: KIDNEY HATIVE, also called marjolin, and even marjoleine, elongated yellow, good and very early, excellent for chassis and for the first sowings in the open ground. SHAW, round yellow, good quality and very early. CHATAIGNE SAINVILLE, long yellow, superior quality to all other varieties. ROUGE LONGUE DE HOLLANDE, good quality and fairly fertile. VITELOTTE ROUGE, long, indispensable for cooking, in that it never crushes in stews. GREEN SPANISH PUMPKIN. Small but excellent green fruit, the only one allowed in the owner's vegetable garden. CHINA WINTER RADISH. The best variety to grow with: YELLOW HATIF RADISH, also excellent, and very good for autumn sowing. RAVE PETITE HATIVE; the only one to introduce into the owner's vegetable garden. RAIPONCE, to be sown in small quantities as a winter salad. RHUBARBUS. A British import, deserving of pride of place in the homeowner's garden. Makes excellent pies and compotes. The best variety to grow is Nepaul rhubarb, which also makes good jams and excellent syrups. SALSIFIS. A vegetable of very mediocre quality, to be grown in very small quantities. Spanish scorzonera is preferred to salsify. SARRIETTE. Aromatic plant to be grown as a seasoning. THYME, to be grown as a border plant. RED TOMATO WITH CRISP LEAVES. The best, earliest and most fertile. We can also grow: The BIG YELLOW HATIVE TOMATO, as a fancy; it is not as good as the previous one. TRUFFLE. The means of reproduction are as yet unknown. But we can tell them that the area around Etampes (Seine-et-Oise) is literally stuffed with excellent truffles, perhaps preferable to those of Périgord for their finesse and perfume. This is the opinion of some edible merchants, and it's ours too. Etampes truffles didn't find buyers in principle; they were first sent to Périgord, from where they returned to Paris with a patent of superiority. Today, Etampes truffles, which are better appreciated, are taken to Paris. They are sold every year for considerable sums. So let's hear it for amateurs. I have indicated the most suitable vegetable varieties for the homeowner's kitchen garden, all those that give certain results and combine the triple advantages of quality, fertility and earliness. There are many others, also excellent, but perhaps not combining the same advantages as completely. All the varieties I have indicated are available in very pure form from MM. Vilmorin et Andrieux, 30, quai de la Mégisserie. Those wishing to increase the number of varieties need only request a catalog from Vilmorin et Andrieux, or consult Le Bon Jardinier; they will find all the necessary information in this excellent book, written by the leading lights of horticultural science. See Special Crops for the care to be given to each species, and the place it should occupy in the ascolement. I exclude from this chapter the garden of the tenant with a certain fortune, and taking a lease on a house and garden, for a period of time varying between six and twelve years. This tenant will have to apply to the letter the cultivation indicated in the previous chapter, for the owner's garden. Some people, objecting that the soil does not belong to them, will shy away from the organization, and especially from the expense of fertilizer, necessary for the rotation of their vegetable garden, to avoid giving up, free of charge to the owner, the benefit of the fertilized soil. This is a false calculation. It's true that the tenant who improves the land leaves the landowner with a surplus value, but by the time he gives it up to the landowner, he has withdrawn almost all the benefits. If, on the contrary, he does nothing to improve, for fear of giving a profit to the owner, he places his garden in the condition of a cluttered garden, and is himself the first dupe of his parsimony! It's true that he leaves nothing for the landlord, but for the duration of his lease, he has spent without reaping anything, and if he would take the trouble to count the expenses incurred, he would quickly recognize that he is losing enormously by not wanting to leave anything behind. Whenever a tenant only has a nine-year lease, he will benefit from sowing the vegetable garden, and even planting a fruit garden. The vegetable garden will give him a definite profit on the first rotation; this profit will increase considerably on the second, and will cover him well beyond his expenses, while abandoning to the landowner a piece of land brought to a state of cultivation. The fruit garden will produce from the second year onwards; by the fourth, it will have repaid in fruit the capital spent on creating it; after full repayment, the tenant will still have five years to harvest, including three of maximum production. The tenant therefore benefits from planting under these conditions. There's no doubt that the landowner gains a great deal, but the lessee has a real advantage in doing so. The cultivation I'm going to describe in this chapter applies to the tenant with a limited income, who rents a house with a garden, not to make a literal profit from it, but to find a free supply of vegetables and fruit as compensation. This is easy: not only will he harvest all that is necessary for his household, but he will also be able to find in the surplus of his harvests, sold at the market, an indemnity sufficient to cover all his advances, and even part of his rent, if he operates with discernment, and above all without parsimony. There are many small annuitants, whose income is very limited; most of them have a taste for gardening, and find in the produce of a small garden a source of well-being. It is for them that I am writing this chapter; they will obtain more than they expect, if they follow my instructions to the letter; but let them not forget that the earth is a generous borrower, giving much when it has been lent, but refusing any produce to anyone who does not begin by making the necessary advances. The tenant's first concern will be to gather and manufacture the necessary fertilizers in advance. The only animals the tenant will own are a few rabbits. I don't even suppose he'll have any chickens; I assume he knows how to count, and half a dozen Cocottes locked up in an aviary, and fed on purchased grain, will lay eggs for him, at a cost of at least 50 centimes. Locked-up poultry is a luxury item, and very expensive; if you want the proceeds to cover your expenses, you need to have pedigree poultry, whose eggs sell for at least two francs, and you also need to be sure, in advance, of the placement of the eggs. If the tenant, placed in the condítions indicated, has Cocottes, he will put them in his marmnite, and will buy every aunóc, with half the expense of the grain, a car of horse manure, from an inn, it is the best, and that which carries the most profit to mix it. Let's suppose that our little annuitant, living with his wife and a maid, has a garden of ten ares: he'll keep two of them in bloom; cultivate the fruit trees in espalier, against the walls, and completely raze eight ares, to make a vegetable garden, subject to the four-year crop rotation. He'll be able to make enough layers, with his car of inn manure, by adding leaves. Let's look at the most economical ways of making enough compost, with no other resources than a few rabbits. Like the landowner, the tenant will first have to install a platform for making fertilizer; it will be smaller, but set up in the same way. An old broken-down barrel, two if necessary, will serve as a reservoir for liquid fertilizer. If it's possible to have mobile latrines, with a barrel that can be removed at will, this will be an excellent thing, a powerful means of obtaining, at no cost, a very energetic fertilizer for animalizing vegetable matter. If fecal matter is in short supply, there are old women in every town, and even in every village, who are too weak to go out during the day, and who are always happy to earn a few pennies. In the absence of old women, we take on kids, and deal with them, from one franc fifty to two francs, to collect one meter of horse dung. With two meters of dung, you can make four cars of excellent compost. The same people can collect leaves in autumn for next to nothing, and cut broom and gorse in the woods in summer. For ten francs, you can have mountains of all these things, and convert them into excellent composts. All household water is carefully collected in barrels to increase the liquid fertilizer. Then proceed to make composts, as I've described for the owner's garden, page 76 and following, adding every day all the wastes from the vegetable garden, kitchen and house. With the fertilizers made, and the garden divided into four equal parts, all that remains to be done is to organize the four-year crop rotation. The first act should be to build up the layers with the carriage of inn manure, mixed with the reserve of leaves. Don't be afraid of these layers, it's nothing to do; they'll bring you profit, and will double your full-land crops. The small rentier doesn't have the resources of the landowner, and will sometimes run out of frames, and even bells. But that's no reason not to make layers and do without melons; he'll make layers and have excellent melons, a little later than if he had frames and bells, but he'll have them! Glass, which is quite expensive, will be replaced by calico; nothing could be easier. All that's needed is a little imagination, not too clumsy hands, and a few pennies to work this miracle. Here's how it's done: to make an economical frame, first make a box with four planks of white wood and eight nails. White wood is preferable to all others for sash boxes; the more porous it is, the better, and you must be careful not to paint or tar it. Paint clogs the wood's pores, preventing the stoves from working; tar has the same effect, and also kills plants (pl. 3, fig. 5). Once the box is made, a frame of the same size is made to cover it. Four wooden rods, two centimetres thick and five or six centimetres wide, are required; a mortise is cut halfway through each corner; eight nails complete the operation (pl. 3, figs. 6 and 7). A calico hoop, or even a piece of old curtain, or anything else you like, is stretched over the frame, as long as it's white. Nail the fabric firmly to all four sides of the frame, taking care to stretch it tightly, and you've got yourself a trunk, and a frame that costs just a few pennies, and is likely to last for many years. Nothing could be easier than to raise excellent molons under this frame, only instead of sowing in January, as under glass frames, we'll sow from March 15 to 39, and we'll have the luxury of laying two doormats every evening instead of one, and even three, one on top of the other, if it's a bit frosty. 8 Now we need bells; it will be just as easy to make as many as we want, and it will be even cheaper. If we want to make them very solid, we need to get twelve small wooden rods, 40 centimeters long and one centimeter thick; nail them together to make a 40-centimeter cube (pl. 4, fig. 1), and nail on five pieces of fabric of any kind; four for each side, and the fifth for the top (pl. 4, fig. 2.) Should you find the fabric and rods too expensive, you can achieve the same result by making a wicker cage covered with oiled paper (pl. 4, fig. 3 and h). I give all these means, because I want to prove that to want is to be able. Anyone who doubts success, and is reluctant to spend the money on one or two frames and a few bells, should give it a try with calico or oiled paper the first year; their melon crop, taken to market, will put them in a position to mount themselves well in glass, without taking a penny out of their pocket. I insist, because a four-year crop rotation is only possible with layers, and layers, far from costing money, bring in a lot, while doubling the yield of field crops. Only warm, muted diapers can be made with economic shelters; they cannot be used for warm diapers. These layers will be set up in vegetable garden square A, as I said for the owner's garden, and the rest of this square will be used for flower breeding, seed and vegetable harvesting, and on a maximum smoked part, for vegetable nurseries, intended to repopulate the beds, as and when they are cleared of their crops. The horse manure and leaves will be used to make the beds on square No. 4. About a third of the compost, the most decomposed part, will be ploughed into square n° 2, taking care to reserve enough of it, and of the most consumed, to cover the seedlings. Plot no. 3 will be ashed, and two-thirds of the compost will be buried in plot no. 1. In the first year, we cover the layers with the mixture of horse manure and soil that I indicated in the previous chapter, page 96, to replace the compost. Finally, in the second year, we'll distribute the product of the demolition of the layers, the composts, etc., and we'll continue with the crop rotation as I've indicated for the owner's garden, page 99. If, in spite of everything I've just said and indicated to make cheap layers, the tenant persists in giving them up, he will have to sow his garden for three years, without layers. This crop will be far superior in yield to the one he has grown to date, but the lack of diapers will cause him to lose more than half his harvest. The three-year rotation will have to be introduced, and continued as I indicated in the previous chapter, p. 93. The tenant's garden, as I see it, must produce a high income, and give certain harvests. To achieve this goal, a strict choice of varieties must be made, and in the grower's own interest, he must obtain these varieties, very pure and from a good source, to be assured of success. VEGETABLE VARIETIES TO BE INTRODUCED INTO THE TENANT'S GARDEN. HATIF GARLIC, or ROSE GARLIC; better and earlier than the common variety. ARTICHAUT VERT DE LAON; the best and most fertile. ASPERGE VIOIETTE D'ULM; the earliest and most beautiful. A precious resource for the market, when there are too many. BIG RED ORDINARY BEET, Variety, very beautiful, very rustic, and asgez big; good in salads, and profitable for animals. CARDON DE TOURS. The best of all, with a long shelf life, HOLLAND SHORT HATIVE RED CARROT. The best of all, as well as the hardiest and hardiest. Sow from February to September for good carrots all year round. HATIT SHORT CELERY: very good, easy to grow. CURLED CHERRY: sow a few at a time, every two weeks. FINE ITALIAN CHICORY. Excellent, very beautiful and very good for outdoor cultivation. CHICORÉE DE MEAUX, for cultivation under frames and cloches. CHICORÉE SAUVAGE AMÉLIORÉE PANACHÉE, for making capuchin beard in winter, in the cellar, and for feeding to animals in summer. HATIVE ROUND SCAROLE, very good and easy to grow. COEUR DE BOEUF cabbage, excellent for spring. CHOU CONIQUE DE POMÉRANIE, excellent, for summer. CHOU DE MILAN DES VERTUS, for winter. CHOU DE BRUXELLES, for late winter and spring. CHOU-FLEUR DEMI-DUR DE PARIS, superb and excellent. HATIF WHITE CUCUMBER, for eating cooked, and : LITTLE GREEN CUCUMBER, for making pickles and cucumber salads. SHEEP CUCUMBER, to be grown in borders, to season salads. ECHALOTTE DE JERSEY, earlier than the common variety. FLANDERS SPINACH, very broad-leafed, very good and very productive. FÈVE A LONGUES COSSES, very early, excellent and very productive. FRAISIER DE GAILLON, delicious fruit, very productive. This variety can replace all others. Produces excellent strawberries from May to December. HARICOT FLAGEOLET BLANC, the most productive and the best, in green and in fresh grains, and very good in dry grains. Flageolet can be sown from the second half of April to September. FLAGEOLET ROUGE, the best and most productive red bean. SOISSONS NAIN, for eating as dried beans. As the locatairé garden is quite small, we have banned pole beans, which would cause shade damage to neighboring plants: LAITUE DAUPHINE, for spring. LAITUE DE VERSAILLÉS, for summer. LAITUÉ PALATINE, for late summer. LAITUE SANGUINE, black-seeded, for all summer. LAITUE MORINE, for winter: LITTLE CREEP, for winter cultivation only, under frames and cloches. ROMAINE VERTÉ MARAÎCHERE, very large, excellent, and peeling without being tied. ROMAINE ROUGE D'HIVER, very rustic, good, and withstands frost well. Requires tying for good flavour. ROND MACHE, very good; sow in squares to harvest in winter. MELON PRESCOT A FOND VERT: the best variety, very-rustic, very-fertile, and advantageous for the market. NAVET DE FRENEUSE, hard. NAVET BLANC DES VERTUS, tender. NAVET JAUNE DE FINLANDE, semi-tender. OIGNON BLANC HATIF, for sowing in August, and transplanting to give the first onions in spring 6; it is also sown in spring to have small onions to preserve with gherkins. OIGNON BLOND DES VERTUS, to be sown in spring to provide the year's supply. OSEILLE DE BELLEVILLE, fairly sweet, with broad leaves, sow in borders. PANAIS ROND, in small quantities. PARSLEY, to be sown in borders. PIMPRENELLE, to be sown in borders, for rabbits. POITOU YELLOW PEAR, very nice and very good variety. POIS MICHAUX, for sowing at St Catherine's Day. POIS MICHAUX DE HOLLANDE, for sowing in spring, in two batches, one month apart, the best of all. CLAMART PEAS, for sowing in summer. EARLY KIDNEY POTATOES, for the first season. POMME-DE-TERRE SÉGONZAC, excellent and very fertile. GREEN SPANISH STARCH, small, the best of all, and keeps well. RADIUS ROSE HATIF, very good and very fast-growing. RAIPONCE, for sowing in squares, as a winter salad. SAISIFIS. Preferably grow SCORSONERE from SPAIN, which is earlier. SARIET, in small quantities, for seasoning. TAYM, to be grown as a border plant. RED TOMATO WITH CRISP LEAVES. The best, the most fertile and the earliest. With these varieties, you can be sure of abundant harvests of excellent vegetables, if you really buy the varieties I indicate. See Special Crops for the cultivation of each species, and the place it should occupy in the crop rotation. Distsed CO I have made a distinction here between the farmer's vegetable garden and that of the farm, because according to the regions where this book will reach, there are farmers of all classes. I cannot confuse together, and indicate the same culture, for the farmers of Brie, Laonnais, Picardy and the North, often richer than their owners, and those of various regions where the farmer is at the head of a farm bringing in from 600 francs to 2,000 francs to the owner, and where the farmer, a hard worker, gives the example of manual labor to his servants, and lives with them. The needs of these different farmers are different; their vegetable crops cannot be the same. The big farmer who lives comfortably, heads a large staff and has extensive gardens around his farm needs a vegetable garden similar to that of the landowner. If, as is the case most of the time, the farmer is in charge of the cowshed, the dairy, the farmyard and the vegetable garden, she will benefit from a four-year rotation with layers. The vegetable garden, thus treated, will supply the needs of the farmer's table, and the surplus, taken to market, or sent to the Paris market, if the farm is near a railway line, will pay with wear and tear all expenses. As long as there are no large quantities of flowers or greenhouses to maintain, there is no need for a gardener to run a four-year rotation vegetable garden. I'd even go so far as to say that an intelligent farmer, with this book in her hand, will get better results with a man who knows nothing about horticulture, and a few women for the odd jobs, than with a head gardener. The day labourer, or all-purpose servant, such as there are on every farm, ignorant of horticulture, will carry out to the letter a concise order given by the mistress of the house. In this case, success will be assured, because the application will be exact. The gardener in charge, almost always as ignorant as the handyman, but believing himself to be the world's foremost horticulturist, will perorate on receiving the order, modify it in execution to suit his ego, and often the result will be negative. So we'll set up two vegetable gardens on the rich farmer's property: one subject to a four-year crop rotation, cultivated in much the same way as the owner's. This garden, adjoining the owner's house, will be planted in the same way as the other. This vegetable garden, adjoining the farmhouse, will be managed exclusively by the mistress of the house; its produce will supply the needs of the master's table, and any surplus will be sold. The second vegetable garden, established on the plain in the best parts of the farm, will be part of the crop rotation, with a huge profit for the farm. This kitchen garden will be managed by the farmer himself, and cultivated by his servants. The produce, consisting of large vegetables of hardy, fertile varieties, will be used to feed the farm staff. May the farmers, of whom we do not have the honor of being known, allow us to give a few words of advice to their ladies, and to enter the heart of their crops. We are almost authorized to do so by their colleagues, who have honored us with their friendship, at whose homes we have created fruit gardens, and who have all said to us: We lack vegetables for ourselves and our people; we have tried some orange blossom gardeners; they have given us masses of bouquets, but not a vegetable for us, nor a cabbage for our servants. We paid these gardeners crazy prices; the product was nil, we cut them out, because it was

a dry expense. Give us the means to have enough vegetables for ourselves and our servants, you'll be doing us a great service. To which I replied: wait until I have a few weeks to spare, and I'll make you a practical book, with the help of which Madame will be able to manage her vegetable garden, with the first man who comes along, provided he has good will and a little intelligence, and a little time taken, from far and wide, from the farm maids. With this same book, it will be easy for you, if your gardens are not big enough, to grow vegetables on the plain, and to harvest, not only without cost, but also by improving your land, all the vegetables necessary for your servants and your harvesters. You've got the modern vegetable garden in hand, so all you have to do is get to work. We're not going to have fun making compost. There's too much work to be done on a farm, and servants' time is too precious to spend on making a few truckloads of manure that wouldn't pay for the labor of a farmer with a large herd of cattle. If we have masses of manure in the yard, we'll choose fresh or consumed, depending on our needs: a cart driver will bring it in a dumper, and we'll have saved a lot of time. The same cart driver will take the garden's detritus and throw it into the yard, where it won't go to waste. The chickens will eat some of it, and the rest will rot in the manure. You have a medium-sized garden, sufficient to provide vegetables for your numerous staff, but more than enough for your provision. If you receive guests, you need to be well supplied with all kinds of vegetables. And if you live in a country where horticulture is on the increase, you'll be well advised to grow good varieties, because the exotic produce will be sold on the market at a high price, and people will come to your house to buy it, without you having to go out of your way. This garden, whose produce is destined solely to supply your table and the market, will be entirely under Madame's management. You, sir, will grow vegetables on the plain for your servants. Here's how you should proceed, to obtain certain results, in the masters' garden. Start, madame, by carefully examining your espaliers; if they produce little or nothing, don't hesitate to replant. Please consult Arboriculture fruitière; this book will tell you all you need to know about how to plant your walls properly, how to obtain fruit very quickly, and even how to care for your trees in such a way as to obtain a crop that's equal every year, to within a tenth. Then, you'll ruthlessly raze all the clutter that clutters the vegetable garden squares, starting with old cattails and funnel-shaped cups, which give you a few bad fruits by chance; prevent, by their shade, your vegetables from growing, and are only good for exhausting the soil, to the detriment of other crops. If there are any tall trees, cut them down, unless they are very valuable, in which case you will have to give up growing vegetables for a diameter of about 10 meters around them. Finish clearing your garden of anything that clutters or shades the squares. Divide the kitchen garden into four or six equal parts, if you want to grow asparagus and artichokes, as described for the owner's kitchen garden, and have the whole or part of it cleared, as you wish, as I mentioned earlier. We have a basin in the center of the kitchen garden; with a Perrault pump which will serve your husband for his liquid manure, and which you will find in case of fire; two twelve-year-old children will water the four or five squares (asparagus needs no water) in less than two hours. The Perrault pump costs 130 fr. with the air tank; it's sturdy, portable and easy for a child to operate. I'll talk more about this in the chapter on watering. February 15 is here; the vegetable garden, divided into four or five equal parts, is broken up; the basin is set up, the first layers are put up, the soil is fertilized, ploughed and sown. You have, madame, an intelligent and devoted man; you told him that he would obtain abundant harvests by following your advice, and he believes you. What's more, his self-esteem is at stake, and he's ready to be put to the test. You can count on him to carry out your orders to the letter, and the mere prospect of doing better than the gardener working for such-and-such a man will be enough to keep him working hard for a long time. Have him choose fresh horse manure to build up the first warm layer, on the leanest square which will take the n° h of the crop rotation. You'll sow the first melons and all the early plants on this layer, covered with sieves. Three weeks later, sow two warm layers to transplant melons and other plants; later, sow the warm layers, and finally the muted layers, in the same square no. 4 (see the chapter on layers, for how to make them, and the special crops for the vegetables to be sown in them, for sowing and transplanting times). Towards the end of February or in the first days of March, you'll have a selection of well-consumed manure chosen from the yard, to cover the least-smoked square, 15 to 20 centimetres thick; this square will be No. 1 in the crop rotation, and will be used for vegetables requiring abundant nourishment. The previous year's best-smoked square will receive no manure, and will be assigned to roots and crops that fear fresh manure. Seedlings will be covered with completely decomposed manure. This square will be No. 2 in the crop rotation. Finally, the last square, a little smoked the previous year, will be energetically ashed. It will be number 3 in the rotation, and will be used for dried fruit vegetables. If two squares are set aside for asparagus and artichokes, they will be planted as described for special crops, and will be included in the crop rotation, as previously mentioned. The following year, the rotation will continue, and the product of the demolition of the layers will be used as I have already said. In subsequent years, the vegetable garden will require only the manure needed to make the beds; a little well-consumed manure for plot no. 1, if the beds don't provide enough, and the necessary ash for plot no. 3. If you were afraid of layers - and this would be a great mistake, Madame, especially with the quantities of fertilizer you have at your disposal - you would have to adopt the three-year crop rotation, and carry it out in every respect as I said in the crop rotation chapter. An owner who is short of horse manure, and fears that he won't always be able to find suitable manure to buy, may hesitate to layer; this is a mistake, but as it has no reason to be on a farm, it becomes a fault; nowhere can you layer with more chance of success than on a large farm, where you only have to choose your manures. Let's now look for good-quality varieties for the farmer's vegetable garden, which can find, if necessary, an advantageous placement on the market, and are likely to be consumed by the farm's servants, if the vegetable garden is very large. VARIETIES OF VEGETABLES TO BE GROWN IN THE FARMER'S KITCHEN GARDEN. ROSE GARLIC, for the home. COMMON GARLIC, for the farm. GROS VERT DE LAON, to be grown everywhere, in preference to all others. ASPERGE VIOLETTE D'ULM, the best and earliest. AUBERGINE VIOLETTE LONGUE, for masters' tables only. BETTERATE PETITE ROUGE DE CASTELNAUDARY, for masters. BETTERAVE GROSSE ROUGE ORDINAIRE for the farm. This variety is of good quality, very hardy, and always does well. CAPUCINA PETITE, to be grown for flowers and seed. CARDON DE TOURS, the best and most hardy. CARROT GRELOT, for under-frame cultivation only. CARROT ROUGE COURTE HATIVE DE HOLLANDE, for the master's table. CARROT JAUNE D'ACHICOURT, for the farm. CÉLERI COURT HATIF. The best variety to grow everywhere. CELERI RAVE D'ERFURT, very early, and a valuable resource in winter when vegetables are in short supply. CERFEUIL FRISÉ, for masters. COMMON CHERFEUIL, for the farm. CHICORÉE FINE D'ITALIE, for seasonal crops. CHICORÉE DE MEAUX, for autumn sowing. COEUR-DE-BOEUF GROSS, for spring crops. CHOU DE ST-DENIS, excellent seasonal variety, large, full head. CHOU DE VAUGIRARD, excellent variety, very late, keeps well; medium, very hard head. CHOU DE MILAN HATIF D'ULM, to be grown in small quantities, only for masters' tables; it is the smallest, but also the best, especially for partridges with cabbage. CHOU DE MILAN DES VERTUS, the largest of all savoy cabbages, very good, with a hard, tight head. CHOU-FLEUR DEMI-DUR DE PARIS; very nice variety to grow alone in the farmer's garden. HATIF WHITE CUCUMBER, for cooking. SMALL GREEN CUCUMBER, for making pickles. CRESSON ALÉNOIS FRISÉ, excellent for salad supplies. COMMON SHALLOT. FLANDERS EPINARDS, broad-leafed, very good. ESTRAGON. LONG-LEAVED BEANS, early, very good, and more productive than the others. FRAISIER DE GAILLON, giving excellent strawberries from May to November, without interruption, and having the advantage of not producing runners. STRING BEANS. HARICOT DE SOISSONS, very good, fertile, but not successful everywhere. HARICOT SABRE, the most productive and the best of all beans, it only has the disadvantage of climbing very high: it needs large, strong oars. DWARF BEANS. HOLLAND BEAN, the earliest of all, under frame and in the open ground, not as good as the flageolet, to be grown only for early green beans. WHITE NAIN BEAN WITHOUT PARCHMENT, very good and very productive, excellent for growing in the garden. It provides a lot and avoids the embarrassment of reams. HARICOT DE BAGNOLET. A highly prized variety for green beans. HARICOT FLAGEOLET; the queen of all varieties for eating green and green beans. Can be sown successfully throughout the summer. HARICOT ROUGE D'ORLÉANS, very good variety, very fertile and very productive; the best of the kidney beans. SPRING LETTUCES. LAITUE GOTTE, for spring cultivation. DAUPHINE LETTUCE. Very good variety for second spring sowings. SUMMER LETTUCES. VERSAILLES LETTUCE. TURKISH LETTUCE. PALATINE LETTUCE. BLOOD LETTUCE WITH BLACK SEED. All these varieties are beautiful, good and, above all, hardy. These are the ones that will give the best results without meticulous care. WINTER LETTUCES. MORINE; PETITE CRÊPE; both to be grown under frames and cloches. ROMAINE LETTUCES. Only four varieties to grow, all four very beautiful and good. The first three: MARAICH ROMAINE BLONDE, MARAICH ROMAINE VERTE, MARAICH ROMAINE GRISE, are self-cultivating, pump well and grow huge without needing to be tied. This quality is invaluable, especially on a farm, where labor cannot be avoided. WINTER RED ROMAIN, the hardiest of all, but needs to be tied in order to set. Withstands light frosts. ROND MACHE; a precious lettuce, in that it comes without cultivation; simply sow it in the squares, and you'll have it all winter long. MELON PRESCOT A FOND VERT, for frames and bells; to be grown in the first, second and third seasons. ARKHANGEL MELON for last season. DRY NAVETS. NAVET DE FRENEUSE, for stews. NAVET DE MEAUX, white, long, fairly large, good quality. TENDER TURNIPS. NAVET DES SABLONS, white, excellent quality. NAVET ROSE DU PALATINAT, white, with pink collar, excellent. SEMI-TENDER TURNIPS. NAVET JAUNE D'ECOSSE, good quality, very rustic. FINNISH YELLOW NAVET, excellent, very long-keeping. HATIF WHITE ONION, for masters only. OIGNON BLOND DES VERTUS, very good, long-keeping. OIGNON DE NIORT, very rustic, but not as good as the previous one. OSEILLE DE BELLEVILLE, for sowing in borders. PANAIS ROND DE METZ, preferable to other varieties. PERSIL FRISÉ for borders. PIMPERNELLE, for sowing in borders. POIREAU GROS COURT DE ROUEN, very good, and very rustic. PEAS. HOLLAND MICHAUX PEAS, for early spring sowing. POIS MICHAUX, for autumn and second-season sowing. POIS DE CLAMART, for last season and summer sowings. AUVERGNE PEAS, very fertile, fairly good quality, to be grown on the farm. GROSS GREEN NORMAND PEAS, excellent for eating dry. Dig KIDNEY HATIVE POTATO, for masters. SEGONZAC POTATO, suitable for all uses. HOLLAND LONG YELLOW POTATO, very good. SPANISH MUSHROOM, for masters. LARGE YELLOW LION, for servants, and if necessary for cows. SMALL CHINESE PINK RADISH, for masters. LARGE SUMMER RADISH, for servants. BLACK WINTER RADISH, for the farm. RAIPONCE, to be broadcast in the squares, to provide a carefree salad over winter. SALSIFIS; SCORSONÈRE D'ESPAGNE, earlier. TETRAGON, excellent substitute for spinach, very versatile, high yielding and requires little care. RED HATIVE TOMATO WITH CRISPED LEAVES, the best and most productive. I have only indicated the varieties here. See Special Crops for information on how to care for them and the place they should occupy in crop rotation. FARM VEGETABLE GARDEN. I have just dealt with the rich farmer's vegetable garden, the one intended to supply his own table, and if necessary that of the farm. More often than not, the farm garden is insufficient to provide for the consumption of his numerous staff, so the farmer must devote his garden to his own consumption, and grow the vegetables necessary for his servants on the plain. Vegetable seedlings and nurseries, intended for transplanting on the plain, will be planted in the farmer's kitchen garden, where they will occupy part of plot no. h, if the kitchen garden is subject to four-year crop rotation, or part of plot no. 3, if it is subject to three-year crop rotation. In all cases, a four-year rotation is preferable, especially if you're creating a vegetable garden on a plain. The potting soils provided by the layers make vegetable growing easier and less expensive. Vegetables are almost always in short supply on farms, even though they are essential for hygiene. Nothing is easier than to grow them on the plains, as much as is necessary, because this crop, far from being expensive for the farmer, will help to improve his land and increase his harvest. Only vegetables intended for domestic use should be grown on the plains: hardy, productive varieties. The best plots of land will be chosen for this purpose, and subjected to a six- or ten-year rotation, depending on the crop and the needs of the farm. Vegetable gardens on the plain can be cultivated in two ways: by plough or by hand. If cultivated by plough, the six-year crop rotation is adopted. If cultivated by hand, the ten-year rotation can be adopted. In both cases, all vegetable crops will be grown in rows, so that hoeing can be carried out with a horse hoe, and to avoid a lot of labor if done by hand. SIX-YEAR CROP ROTATION. The vegetable garden on the plain, which should provide inexpensive vegetables and be part of the farm's crop rotation, will be cultivated using agricultural implements. The plough, weeder, roller, harrow and horse hoe will perform three-quarters of the cultivation. Hand hoeing will only be used for tightly packed seedlings such as carrots, onions, etc., etc., etc. This vegetable garden, which should never be watered, will be created in substantial soil, without being too clayey, and with depth above all. In addition, the soil should be deeply ripped to reduce exposure to drought. This can be done with a powerful plough, followed by a digger. First, the ripper plough is ploughed lengthwise, followed by a digger, and then a second ripper is ploughed crosswise. In this way, the soil is broken up and excavated very deeply. The digger then breaks up the clods, and the soil is in the best possible condition. In the first year, we grow cabbages, artichokes, broad beans, potatoes, etc., etc., on a very plentiful supply of fertilizer (9). The second year, without manure: carrots, onions, salsify, turnips, etc., etc. The third year, without manure, but on good ash: peas, beans, lentils, etc. The fourth year, without manure, oats with clover. The fifth year produces excellent clover, and finally, in the sixth year, wheat completes the rotation. This rotation will produce three vegetable harvests, two cereals and one clover, in the best conditions: six harvests maximum; and when this land, cultivated in this way for six years, returns to the farm's rotation, it will be with an enormous increase in value, due to the breaking up, the most copious manuring, and perfect loosening. The farmer will benefit greatly from cultivating all his best pieces in this way, with savings on the one hand, and abundance on the other. TEN-YEAR CROP ROTATION. This rotation will be highly advantageous for farmers who do not have the necessary tools for vegetable cultivation, and for small farmers who have only low-powered plows and not enough garden space to grow the vegetables they need. For this vegetable garden, as for the previous one, we'll choose a piece of good, fairly substantial, not too compact, deep soil. It should be broken up with two spade irons. This is done by the job, at so much per acre. The soil will be very heavily smoked, and vegetables will be grown for the first three years, as in the previous crop rotation. In the fourth year, unfertilized oats and alfalfa will be sown. Under these conditions, the oats will produce an abundant harvest, and the alfalfa, which prefers deep cultivation to abundant fertilization, will produce remarkably rich cuts for five years, especially if care is taken to plaster it and water it from time to time with liquid fertilizer. The small farmer, who almost always lacks the necessary vegetables, will have an abundance of them; the surplus can be sold advantageously at the market, and the superb alfalfa he obtains on his spade-clearing, after the vegetable harvest, will be a real asset for him, in a small farm where, in a hurry to make money, cereal cultivation is often abused, to the detriment of animals which lack fodder. The small farmer will have a great advantage in introducing this method of cultivation to the best parts of his farm. If necessary, the vegetable garden can provide him with a certain quantity of weeded plants, grown with the vegetables, to maintain the animals. His alfalfa plants will enable him to increase the number of animals; and the quantity of fertilizers increasing in proportion, all crops will gain in richness. 9 If the small farmer has a garden insufficient for vegetable production, he will devote it to growing fruit trees and delicate plants, and to raising vegetables that will be transplanted to the plain; With the help of this rotation, the small farm, which lacks vegetables for its workers and fodder and roots for its animals, will find considerable well-being for the former, and a notable increase for the latter; and this improvement will also earn it a high added value on all other crops, as much from the increase in fertilizers as from the many good manures given to the soil. On-site sowing will be carried out with a wheelbarrow seeder on larger farms, and in rows, by hand, on smaller farms. We don't have to look for the finesse of produce in the lowland vegetable garden. Above all, we need very rustic varieties that yield a lot and require little care. Vegetable gardens on the plains will most often be cultivated by women on small farms, so we need to look for vegetable varieties that produce a lot with little care, and whose surplus can find an advantageous placement on the market. VEGETABLE VARIETIES TO BE GROWN ON THE PLAIN. COMMON GARLIC. This crop, grown on plains, can be profitable. Garlic sells well on all markets. 8 LAON GREEN GARLIC, yielding excellent produce and fetching high market prices in slightly clayey soil when the year is not too dry. ASPERGE VIOLETTE D'ULM, to be grown on the plains as a product, but only in dry, light soils, provided there is enough fertilizer. GROSS RED ORDINARY BETTERAVE; very rustic variety, always successful, good to eat and very nutritious for animals. BETTERAVE GLOBE JAUNE; superb, veryrustic variety, does well in mediocre soils, excellent for animals. CARROT D'ACHICOURT; very attractive and good quality. CAROTTE BLANCHE DE BRETEUIL; very large and very good, can be used for cooking and for animals. CARROT BLANCHE A COLLET VERT; very rustic and productive variety, valuable for animals. SHORT HATIF CELERY, to be grown in the garden adjoining the house. WILD CHICORY, to be grown to feed the leaf to animals in summer, and to store the root in the cellar to provide salad in winter. ROUND SCAROLE, excellent variety, very rustic, to be grown in the garden adjoining the house. CABUS. COEUR-DE-BOEUF GROS, a hardy, early variety that grows well on plains. CHOU DE ST-DENIS; good, hardy summer variety. CHOU QUINTAL, enormous, hardy and vigorous, invaluable for the home. CHOU DE VAUGIRARD, medium-sized head, valuable late variety. MILAN CABBAGE. ORDINARY MILAN KALE, very good, large and hardy. CHOU DE MILAN DES VERTUS, the largest of all savoy cabbages, very good and very rustic. CHOU DE BRUXELLES, to be grown on the plain as a product. This variety is very rustic, the leaves provide some animal feed, and the apples sell well on all markets. GREEN CABBAGE. CAVALIER cabbage, rising to a height of two meters; broad leaves, good for making soup, and providing fairly abundant food for cows. CHOU BRANCRU DU POITOU, not as tall as the previous one, but very hearty, excellent and very productive. ECHALOTTE; a good plant to grow for the market, where it is always expensive, especially in the provinces. FEVE A LONGUES COSSES; good, very productive variety. PRINCESSE ROYALE STRAWBERRY; the only variety to be grown on the plains to obtain a silver product, very beautiful, very rustic and early. STRING BEANS. HARICOT DE SOISSONS, very good and very productive. HARICOT SABRE; the best and most fertile of all. DWARF BEANS. HARICOT FLAGEOLET, one of the earliest and the best in green and in grains; it is a good product on the market. HARICOT GROS PIED, white beans, very productive and quite early. RED FLAGEOLET BEANS, very productive, the best of the kidney beans. LETTUCE ROMAINE VERTE MARAICHERE, very large and very rustic. LENTILLE BLONDE, very good winter vegetable, with the advantage of providing very nutritious straw for animals. MACHE RONDE, for broadcasting in other crops, makes an excellent winter salad that requires no care. NAVET RAVE DU LIMOUSIN, good to eat, very rustic and a valuable resource for livestock. NAVET JAUNE D'ECOSSE, the most frost-resistant of all. OIGNON BLOND DES VERTUS, for light soils. OIGNON ROUGE DE NIORT, for more compact soils. Onions can always be grown large. It's one of the best-selling vegetables, but you need to grow big onions: butchers prefer them. Onions sown in rows become enormous. PARSNIP FROM METZ. LARGE LEEK FROM ROUEN. GROS NAIN SUCRÉ, good and very productive. POIS MICHAUX, very fertile and very good. POIS D'AUVERGNE, very fertile and very good. PEAS WITHOUT PARCHMENT HALF-ROM; the best all-round eater to grow. CHICKEN PEAS, for eating mashed or dried. KIDNEY HATIVE POTATOES, the earliest of all, advantageous for the market. SEGONZAC POTATOES, good variety for eating. HOLLAND LONG YELLOW POTATOES, excellent for the market. CHARDON POTATOES, very productive, a little less good than the previous ones, but almost always disease-free. LARGE YELLOW STARCH, excellent for the farm and for livestock. WINTER BLACK RADISH. RAIPONCE, to be broadcast in other crops, for a winter salad that requires no care. SALSIFIS. SCORSONÈRE D'ESPAGNE is the earliest. TETRAGON, excellent for cooking as spinach. See Special Crops for care instructions for each of these varieties. DieESS P COC The presbytery vegetable garden will often vary in cultivation, depending on its size, the importance of the parish and the parish priest's taste for horticultural work. If the parish is large, and the parish priest is an amateur, or better still, if, as in almost all the towns where I've taught in the Oise département, he wants to pass on his horticultural knowledge to his parishioners, he will benefit from buying the horse manure needed to make hot beds, and from subjecting his garden to a four-year rotation, growing the same varieties of vegetables as the owner, for his own personal consumption. In the event of the presbytery's garden extending over a certain area, the walls will be replanted to provide a supply of fruit. The espaliers and a double cordon around the edge of the espalier bed will provide enough. If necessary, the squares can be surrounded by a two-row uni-lateral cordon of pear, apple, cherry, plum trees, etc., but these are the only trees that should be tolerated in the kitchen garden. If there aren't enough walls to supply the house, part of the garden should be used to create a small fruit garden, as described in Arboriculture fruitière. We could also devote a plot of land to growing flowers and a few shrubs, and use the rest as a vegetable garden. If the vegetable garden is large enough, we can grow, in addition to the varieties of vegetables designated for the owner's garden, those I have indicated for the tenant's, farmer's, farm's, etc., etc., gardens, by way of experimentation. When parish priests are willing to devote their leisure time to horticulture, they render important services in towns, and in the countryside, by their wise and enlightened advice to gardeners and farmers. We owe a great deal to the zeal of ecclesiastics for the notable progress that has been made in arboriculture in recent years. They are called upon to render services no less great, by cultivating and introducing into their parishes good varieties of vegetables. Farmers, and even many small-town gardeners, don't know the names of the vegetable varieties they grow; often the variety grown in the country has no name, or is so degenerate that it would be very difficult, not to say impossible, to give it one. And yet, these bad varieties continue to be cultivated, to the great detriment of the grower, simply because no other is known. The day good varieties are introduced, especially early varieties, everyone will be quick to ask for seedlings. It doesn't take four years to extirpate a country's bad vegetables and replace them with good, beautiful varieties, thereby doubling vegetable harvests, which are always insufficient in the countryside. But to achieve this goal, you have to start by growing your own produce, and show the results to your heart's content. Horticulture is like high culture; as soon as something unknown in the country appears, everyone starts laughing, but soon the laughter ceases in the face of the results, and everyone follows the example set. If we were to shy away from the expense of horse manure to make layers, we'd have to adopt the three-year rotation, without layers, even though it's less advantageous. A few melons sent to market will quickly repay the expense of fertilizer, and produce will be much more abundant with the combined resources of layers and composts. In this case, whether the presbytery garden is subject to a four-year rotation with diapers, or a three-year rotation without diapers, it will become a small fruit and vegetable school, from which everyone can draw useful information. But most of the time, the presbytery gardens are large, and the parish offers few resources. In this case, the parish priest, if he is an amateur horticulturist, will still be able to render great services, while finding real well-being in the cultivation of his garden. However small the resources, the first thing to do is to arrange the fertilizers. This is difficult, you may say, with nothing! However, if we look hard enough, we'll still find a way to make enough fertilizer to subject a small garden to a three-year rotation. A wagonload of horse manure, mixed with leaves, would make it possible to make several layers; a warm layer first for the first melons and early seedlings, and then muted layers with leaves mixed with a little manure. This would make it possible to introduce four-year crop rotation, with the immense advantage of layer potting soils. If manure were very scarce, we would have to grow only the Arckangel melon, the hardiest of all, in fine season, almost without bedding and under very poor shelter. I insist on the adoption of a four-year rotation, because layers are the basis of the vegetable garden's fertility, and however modest a parish priest's position may be, he can always buy a wagonload of horse manure, but in this case, fresh inn manure is preferable. Finally, there are very few parishes where there isn't a kind soul who will be quick to offer one, or even two, manure wagons to his parish priest, especially if he is doing horticultural services for the country. Who wouldn't give a carload of manure in exchange for five or six melons? It's a feasible deal, and a win-win situation for both parties. A farmer will gladly give manure in exchange for a plant of a good variety of vegetable. It's an exchange of good practices, and we're glad to see that there's no shortage of them in our beautiful country of France. Every effort should be made to introduce a four-year crop rotation. If the curé is poor in manure, he will restrict the extent of his layers, and increase the mass of composts. The result will be much the same for field crops. It's easy to make a large quantity of compost, by adding garden and house debris to leaves and grasses from ditches, moors or woods, and livening them up with horse dung collected from streets and roads. It's a small job that can be done by the poor, the infirm, the elderly and children, at very low cost. Compost can be made everywhere, and without expense, from grasses, debris and horse dung. As I said earlier, all household water should be used to water the composts. If square n° L, destined for diapers, is sparsely stocked, due to the lack of fresh manure, a large part of the square will be devoted to the cultivation of seeds. The day the parish priest grows good varieties of vegetables, not only his entire parish, but even neighboring communes will ask for seeds: the parish priest's seeds will always be preferred, because if they are well grown and harvested with care, they 10 ASSOLEMENT. will be of the highest quality. The parish priest who cultivates in the interest of his parishioners' well-being will not sell his seeds, but if his financial means are very limited, he can ask for a little manure in exchange. Sowing and raising plants is difficult without potting soil; the more layers there are, the easier and more abundant the raising of seedlings and the harvesting of seeds will be. The devotion of a large number of priests to horticultural interests is well known to me, but for all their good will, many lack the necessary means to apply the science they have acquired; too modest, they content themselves with giving advice which, to be sure, has great influence, but this influence would be doubled if they had the means to do and demonstrate what they advise. In the general interest, I would like the gardens of country parish priests and schoolteachers to be specimens of good cultivation, small schools in which to raise plants of the right varieties, and where to collect seeds in sufficient quantity to propagate them rapidly. I put forward this idea because I know in advance that it will be adopted, if it has not already been adopted by a large number of clergymen and teachers. I will say later what I hope for, and what I have obtained from teachers with the support of prefects devoted to agricultural interests; I return to country parish priests who often have more time than teachers, and who by state as much as by character, are entirely devoted to the interests of their parishioners. Country presbyteries usually have fairly extensive gardens. If the parish priest is a horticulturist, he will render immense services by cultivating the right varieties of fruit and vegetables, and by giving grafts, seedlings and seeds to anyone who asks for them. This is possible, even assuming that the parish priest can afford to spend nothing. What does the parish priest need to create a small fruit garden, and subject his kitchen garden to a four-year rotation? A hundred or so trees of typical varieties, which he can multiply ad infinitum and without any expense whatsoever, by creating a small nursery in his garden; a certain quantity of horse or cow manure, leaves, herbs, two frame panels and a few bells. In almost every village, there is, if not a castle, at least one, if not several, owners' houses, and at least one farmer. What lord or lady of the manor, or even landowner, will not think of offering their parish priest, especially if he is providing horticultural services to his country, not only the manure he needs for his beds, but also the frames and bells he needs to raise the seedlings he will need? Which farmer will not be too happy, at the cost of one or two cartloads of manure, to find, every year, the vegetable plant, especially cabbage, necessary for his harvesters and his numerous staff? All of them will undoubtedly benefit from providing the manure needed to make up the beds of the presbytery, and from finding the seeds and seedlings that their multiplied occupations do not allow them to make. It goes without saying that the parish priest, however poor he may be, will find help and assistance from his parishioners, for the manure he lacks, and even for the shelters intended to cover the beds. He will return these advances a hundredfold to everyone, not to mention the well-being he will bring to the people who are always deprived of the necessary vegetables, and who, with good varieties and more careful cultivation, will not only have harvests more than sufficient for their personal consumption, but also a surplus, with a certain value, to take to market. The poor farmer, with a harvest of vegetables insufficient for his family, will be well off the day this harvest is sufficient for his needs, and rich when this same crop gives him a surplus of only two hundred francs. Two hundred francs in a peasant household is more than ten thousand francs in a city dweller's household. You need to have lived with small-scale farming, to know the amount of work it expends, and the economy with which it lives, to know what a small sum given by an additional crop is worth. Two hundred francs is a fortune; it represents not a certain amount of well-being - the small farmer doesn't give himself, nor his children either - but the possibility of buying a host of indispensable items to improve and increase cultivation. Small farmers are wealthy around Paris and the big cities; they are wealthy because they know how to farm, and possess the capital needed to give the land all it requires; this fortune, or rather this affluence, which is often the envy of city parasites, is acquired at the price of the hardest and most arduous work; it is not uncommon to see small farmers providing themselves, their wives and their children, eighteen to twenty hours of work a day. One member of the family leaves at eleven o'clock in the evening, with a cart, for the market; he spends part of the night unloading and stowing his load at the market, and as soon as he's unloaded, he heads back to his house, and works until evening, just as if he'd spent the night in bed. And the fry who spend their existence in front of wine merchants' counters, discussing the organization of work, covet the honey so painstakingly gathered by these laborious bees! The small farmer in the countryside is generally not very well off, although he takes as much trouble as those living near Paris and the big cities; his position is poor because he doesn't know how to cultivate, and often doesn't know the varieties that would give him twice the yield in half the time. He often lacks the necessary fertilizers and tools, and is denied them by the inadequacy of his harvests. It's this little farmer that I'd like to help with good advice on cultivation, good seeds and good seedlings, and it's on his behalf that I'd like to ask the helpful intervention of the country parish priest, who has great authority over him. The small farmer will be the first worker of public wealth the day good farming principles reach him. He will be the first worker of public wealth, because the day he knows how to cultivate, and has the plant and seeds he needs, the field that yielded two will produce twenty. When this problem is solved, and nothing could be easier, the small farmer will not only have an abundant harvest for himself and his family, but the surplus of this harvest will also give him enough money to increase his livestock, double the amount of fertilizer he uses and make a great profit from meat, butter and milk; and this prosperous result will also double the harvest of the fields, which, thanks to the livestock and a better-understood cultivation, will receive the indispensable manure and manners. The small farmer, placed in these conditions of improvement, while making his fortune, will find on the soil a product equal to the land value. And, while becoming rich, he will enrich his region; and each region, developed in this way, will soon enrich France in its turn. Need I remind you that the whole of northern Europe buys from France whatever fruit and vegetables appear on the market, and that produce is rarer than foreign buyers, who bring us their gold in exchange for the products that our privileged soil provides in abundance, when we take the trouble to cultivate it. Farmers don't cultivate, or cultivate badly, because they haven't been taught to cultivate, and they don't know what they need to cultivate to produce a high yield. But as soon as the light reaches him, we must see how religiously he listens to the few lessons we can give him, and how intelligently he puts them to good use. As proof of what I'm saying, I should mention the few free public lessons I give every year in the village of Hétoménil. Hétoménil is a humble village in the department of Oise, but its mayor is Mr. Vasselle, a wealthy landowner and farmer. Mr. Vasselle, in this age of dissipation and Ruoltz luxury, has set a fine example to the idle rich, by devoting his existence and his great fortune to agricultural interests. The mayor of Hétoménil, who had enough wealth to lead the most luxurious and idle life, preferred to work, improve the soil and breeds of farm animals, and enrich his region. Mr. Vasselle had a splendid château built, straddling a superb landscaped garden and his large farmyard. He lives in this château like a true patriarch; gifted with an immense benevolence, simple and modest like all men of real merit, he spends his life amassing all the agricultural treasures that can contribute to increasing the richness of cultivation, and distributes them with a generosity almost without example today. Mr. Vasselle's château is God's house," say peasants from miles around. It's true, they give a lot because they produce a lot, because the mayor of Hétoménil thought that God had not created man to remain idle, that fortune, far from being a patent for laziness, was a powerful means of doing good, supporting work, enriching his country and his fellow citizens. If one day, dear reader, you would like to see a man loved and esteemed by all, an existence filled with hard work, a beautiful fortune nobly spent, go and visit the vast and beautiful estate of Hétoménil. You'll find the best and most cordial hospitality. Ask the peasants about Mr. Vasselle, and you'll have a fair idea of the popularity a good man can acquire without seeking it, and by the sole influence of his personal worth. Arboriculture was very strong in the Oise region. Mr. Vasselle had put Fruit Growing in the hands of schoolteachers, and a good number of amateurs. Later, he asked me to come and give a lesson in Hétoménil, to complete the study of the book. A large number of parish priests from neighboring cantons attended the lesson. They all took up arboriculture with such enthusiasm that, in less than three years, all the fruit trees were completely transformed. The willow heads disappeared to make way for fruiting branches created under the best conditions. Garlands of fruit have replaced hideous deformities which, in time, would have led to the death of the trees. Thanks to a few lessons that I'm happy to give every year, and to the zeal of the parish priests who repeat these lessons to their parishioners, the abundance of fruit has given way to famine in a large number of communes around Hétoménil. These same clergymen are eagerly awaiting the Potager Moderne, to carry out vegetable cultivation and teach it to their parishioners. Without Mr. Vasselle, gifted to the highest degree with the spirit of progress, and who has since honored me with his benevolent friendship, the village of Hétoménil would never have heard a teacher of arboriculture, nor would the parish priests of the surrounding communes have been able to render the services they so zealously render to their flocks, by repeating lessons that are of the greatest use to them. Comices agricoles provide important services to field crops, which can be easily moved around. Horticultural societies make noble efforts to spread progress, but their action hardly extends beyond the towns: the countryside remains deprived of advice and lessons; and I cannot repeat too often, it is the countryside that has the greatest need of them, because it can make large-scale applications, with great economy, and. from there, significantly increase general production, the day it knows how to go about good cultivation. The countryside has neither the time nor the means to move to follow the progress of the cities; it remains in its village, with only its parish priest and its teacher as resources, who can do a lot when they want to, as has been proved in the Oise department, thanks to the initiative of Mr. Vasselle, and the benevolent intervention of Mr. Léon Chevreau, Prefect of the Oise. I cited the example of Hétoménil, where brilliant results were achieved in a short space of time, thanks to the intervention of the clergy, because I am convinced that the clergy of Oise, so devoted to agricultural interests, will find imitators in several départements. The day when country parish priests want to convert their presbytery garden into a small school of arboriculture and market gardening, they will be doing a great service, and will contribute more than they can at present to increasing general production. They will easily be able to adopt the four-year rotation, even with very limited resources, with the help of the means I have indicated. Finally, if it is not possible for them to obtain the fertilizers and shelters needed for the layers, they should apply the three-year rotation, without layers, and introduce it as previously mentioned. The varieties of vegetables indicated for the owner's garden should be grown in first-order presbyteries; those indicated for the tenant's garden in second-order presbyteries; and finally, those for the farmer's garden and farm in more modest cures. 18 Independently of his personal consumption, the amateur parish priest, especially if he has a large garden, can, in the general interest, experiment with varieties, raise seedlings and grow seeds. The following varieties may be cultivated on a trial basis, in order to introduce those that are most successful in the different climates where they are tested. ARTICHAUT GROS VERT DE LAON, for all northern France and the northern vine-growing region. ARTICHAUT ROUGE, for the southern vine-growing and olive-growing regions. ASPERGE VIOLETTE D'ULM, for all France. CARDON DE TOURS, for France. HOLLAND SHORT RED CARROT. YELLOW CARROT FROM ACHICOURT. RED CARROT FROM FLANDERS. LONG RED CARROT. CELERI PLEIN BLANC. FULL PINK CELERY. CELERI GROS VIOLET DE TOURS, very large and very rustic, especially for hot countries. ERFURT CELERIAC. CABUS. DWARF CABBAGE. LARGE HEART CABBAGE. CABBAGE OF SAINT-DENIS. CHOU D'ALSACE. CABBAGE QUINTAL. BACALAN cabbage, for hot countries. VAUGIRARD CABBAGE. 180 PRESBYTERY VEGETABLE GARDEN. MILAN CABBAGE. DWARF MILAN CABBAGE. PANCALIER DE TOURAINE CABBAGE. KOHLRABI DES VERTUS. BRUSSELS SPROUTS. SEMI-HARD PARIS CAULIFLOWER. HARD CAULIFLOWER. HARICOTS A RAMES. SOISSONS BEAN. HARICOT SABRE. DWARF BEANS. FLAGEOLET BEAN. HARICOT GROS-PIED. HARICOT PLEIN DE LA FLÈCHE. HARICOT ROUGE D'ORLÉANS. DRY NAVETS. FRENEUSE TURNIP. MEAUX TURNIP. LONG YELLOW TURNIP. TENDER TURNIPS. Very early, flat white turnip. TURNIP DES VERTUS. SEMI-TENDER TURNIPS. YELLOW TURNIP FROM SCOTLAND. YELLOW TURNIP FROM FINLAND. BLACK TURNIP FROM ALSACE. See special crops for information on the care to be given to each species, and the place it should occupy in the vegetable garden rotation. SIEUEEG E (OO0 6 AND BOARDING HOUSES. Communities, hospitals and boarding houses have very similar needs. These establishments, especially hospitals and communities, which are able to manufacture large quantities of fertilizer, and most of the time have free labor, would benefit considerably from paying a very capable head gardener. The gardener, with the help of some of the residents, a few elderly people and even women, could easily put the gardens into full production, provide the establishment with everything it needs, and still find a fairly high income from the sale of surplus produce. There are hospitals which, with great resources of fertilizer, extensive walls, vast grounds, and a large workforce free of charge, lack the necessary fruits and vegetables. 41 They buy when they should be selling. This is due to poor crop management and an absolute lack of knowledge of arboriculture and market gardening. More often than not, these crops are managed by unqualified gardeners; fertilizer is expended, labor is expended, and produce is almost nil. We see here, as everywhere, poorly grown crops, badly applied fertilizers, fruit and vegetable varieties that are as infertile as they are late and bad. If we could change all this, and introduce rational cultivation in these gardens, we would obtain an abundant product in food and money, where cultivation has only been an object of expense. I visit all the hospitals in the towns where I teach, and most of their gardens have the disadvantages I have mentioned. This vice is not due to a lack of zeal on the part of the administrators; on the contrary, everywhere they actively seek, and with the greatest devotion, the means to increase the hospital's income. This is due solely to the lack of knowledge of cultivation on the part of administrators, bursars and even gardeners. When a member of the board of trustees is knowledgeable about cultivation, the situation changes dramatically; he or she takes on the special task of directing cultivation, and produce is soon multiplied tenfold. When a hospital or community has a large tract of land enclosed by walls, the first care should be to replant progressively, year by year, all the walls, which will give a high income in fruit, when they are covered with trees bearing first choice and first quality fruit. This is easily achieved at almost no cost by creating a small nursery. Once the house provision has been taken, the surplus will be sold on the town market, or in Paris, by mail order at the market hall, if the fruit does not sell well in the country. There's no shortage of hospital inmates to pack the fruit and make baskets, if need be. (See Arboriculture fruitière for planting methods, tree training, pruning and varieties to plant). Walls alone, well planted, with good varieties of fruit, will provide, if the trees are well cared for, not only the provision of the house, but also a cash product; all the land will be free for cultivation, and if this cultivation is well done, it will also give, independently of the provision of the establishment, a cash surplus, which will cover well beyond the cultivation costs, always low, in a hospital or in a community. Sometimes these establishments have very large plots of land and animals. One or two cows, pigs, poultry and so on. In this case, you need to organize the crops in such a way as to provide for the establishment; feed the animals copiously, and find abundant produce to take to market. The hospital is the home of the poor, and nothing should be neglected to increase its wealth, even if 3 in a small proportion. The benefits of good cultivation may seem small at first, but they increase every year, and become considerable after a while. Hospitals and communities possess a wealth of fertilizer like no other; this mass of fertilizer, which costs nothing, carefully collected and well used, would yield luxuriant harvests, if there were a serious cultivation direction in these homes. Let's suppose a hospital with a hundred boarders, half of whom can do some work. Let's assume that this hospital has three or four cows, a dozen pigs, a sizeable barnyard and ten hectares of land. As always, before starting anything, we'll organize the fertilizer factory. All animal manure, without exception, will be put aside to build up the layers. All the leaves will also be stored to mix with the manures in the manufacture of the layers. A very large liquid fertilizer pit will be set up in the center of two vast platforms. The liquid manure from the cowshed, the urine from the house, all the water from the infirmary and the kitchen, the soap water, the detergents, etc., etc., will be carried to this pit every day, or, simpler and more economical, underground pipes will be laid. Immense compost heaps will be set up on the platforms, with all the herbaceous matter collected in the garden, the detritus from the pharmacy and infirmary, and all the herbaceous matter that can be obtained inexpensively from outside: reeds, marsh grasses, heather, broom, gorse, etc., depending on local resources. These herbaceous substances will be mixed with the plant's own faecal matter. They are easy to transport, by installing mobile pits in the buildings, and in several places in the garden for the workers. A few kilograms of ferric sulfate will neutralize the odor and ensure sanitation. By operating in this way, a hospital or community can fertilize its land better than even the richest farmer can. With such a wealth of fertilizers, anything can be achieved. With the fertilizers made, we will divide our ten hectares as follows: Two hectares will be allocated to the vegetable garden, which will be subject to a four-year rotation with layers, and in which we will grow the varieties of vegetables indicated for the farmer's vegetable garden, and in small quantities, those from the owner's garden for the table of the heads of the house only. The crop rotation will be followed as I indicated above, but with the difference that, with a fairly large number of layers, we will grow fewer early vegetables than in the owner's kitchen garden. These beds will be devoted, for the most part, to seedlings, and to raising the seedlings that will be transplanted permanently into the other crops. 6 Nappies are just as essential in hospital and community gardens as they are in the homeowner's garden. They will be of little use for luxury crops, but they will make it possible to considerably advance all plein-terre produce, with the elite seedlings they will provide. Some of this produce will go to market, with the advantage of earliness, which doubles its value. So, the beds will give us a silver product, independently of the profit from their potting soils, which will further increase the plein-terre harvests by a large proportion, and facilitate the cultivation of medicinal plants, so useful and profitable, in establishments of this kind. The two-hectare kitchen garden will always remain as a kitchen garden; it will be completely cleared, as I have indicated in Chapter IV. If the soil is substantial, a little clayey, we'll create an asparagus plan, of one hectare only, for the needs of the house. We'll plant the Ulm violet asparagus, which is the most beautiful and the earliest. It's a good idea to grow this variety, even if you're only planting one hectare, because this area is more than sufficient for consumption, and the first bunches of asparagus, sold at a high price, will pay for the entire cultivation and beyond. If the soil is light and deep, it will be profitable to grow two hectares of asparagus. The proceeds will pay for the entire crop. The remaining seven hectares will be devoted to a mixed crop of vegetables, most of which will be sold; roots for staff and livestock consumption, and fodder and oats for the animals. The land for this mixed crop will be ploughed, like the farm's vegetable garden, or dug with two spades. The work can be done in one go, or in six or seven years, depending on whether we adopt the six- or seven-year rotation. If the soil is substantial and of good quality, it will be beneficial to adopt the seven-year rotation: First year, after breaking up the soil, with a plow or spade, and with copious manuring: large green Laon artichokes. These artichokes will remain in place for three years, during which they will produce beautiful and abundant products, if we take care to give them good manuring in the second and third years. Most of the artichokes will be sold, and we have our supply in the two hectares of vegetable garden. In the fourth year, the artichokes will be uprooted, and we'll grow in their place, without manuring, as needed, beets for the animals, or potatoes, and even a few roots, such as carrots, turnips and so on. In the fifth year, depending on the local market, onions can be grown without manuring, giving a maximum yield with a simple topdressing. But for this to happen, the onions must sell well in the country, and fetch a high price. In the sixth year, without manure, we sow 9 oats with clover, which gives a remarkable product in straw and grain. And in the seventh year, we harvest excellent clover, especially if we take the trouble to plaster it. In the event that onions have no market in the country, in the fifth year we would grow oats with clover. The result would be In the fifth year, a remarkable oat crop; In the sixth year, a superb clover crop that would be turned over; And finally, in the seventh year, without manuring, and with energetic ashing, you'd get an abundant crop of early peas, followed by a good crop of flageolet beans. There is often great profit in producing a large quantity of peas. It's an expensive vegetable when harvested early, and still fetches a high price when sold to canners. Dutch michaux should be grown for the market, and sickle peas for preserves. The most advantageous onion to grow for speculation is the blond vertus. If the soil were a little too siliceous, and artichoke cultivation would not be advantageous, we would create two hectares of asparagus instead of one, and subject the remaining six hectares to a six-year crop rotation, applied as follows: First year, after clearing with a plough or two spades, with very abundant manuring, leafy vegetables such as cabbages, artichokes, leeks, celery, etc., would be grown. Second year, without manuring, with topdressing: carrots, turnips, salsify, potatoes, etc.Third year, depending on local resources: onions for sale, without manure, and on top of topsoil, or on ashes: early peas and then flageolet beans; or, if green beans are valuable: early beans followed by late peas; Fourth year, without manure, oats with clover; Fifth year, flat clover; Sixth year, without manure and on ashes: early peas and harvest of flageolet beans. These two rotations are applicable to the gardens of hospitals, communities, seminaries, boarding houses, and all establishments with a large enough staff to provide a large quantity of fertilizer at no cost. This fertilizer, most often lost, is a source of wealth for general production, and of particular prosperity for the establishment that produces it. The day the managers of such establishments deign to turn their attention to cultivation, they will produce what they want with such resources. They will sell instead of buying, and will therefore have a very clear profit, while helping to increase the general production which, when abundant, brings health and prosperity to all. The distribution of crops, and the two crop rotations I have just described, will give the following silver results, in establishments where they are applied and well managed. 18 SEVEN-YEAR ROTATION ON TEN HECTARES OF LAND. 1° A two-hectare vegetable garden, providing enough food for one hundred people ... ... ... ... . 2° One hectare of asparagus, of which only the first 100 bunches will be sold at 1 fr. 50 c. ... . e . . . . 3° One hectare of artichokes bears 15,000 plants, let's say three thousand are missing, leaving 12,000 plants, giving an average of one large artichoke and two medium-sized ones, all at a minimum price of 25 centimes per plant. 150 12,000 plants at 25 cent... . . . . 3,000 4° One hectare of beets, potatoes and roots, providing abundant food for cows, pigs, poultry, and even an addition of vegetables for the house. . 5° One hectare of oats, providing straw and grain for livestock... 6° One hectare of excellent clover, providing fodder for the animals... 7° Depending on markets and local resources, either an onion crop followed by a green bean crop, or an early pea crop followed by a late pea crop... . 3,150 1 " M 21 n n n Onions, however cheaply sold, yield 2,500 fr. per hectare. Early peas yield at least 4,000 liters per hectare; 4,000 liters at 30 cent. yield 1,200 fr. The flageolet harvest, sold as green beans, gives a minimum of 1,000 francs per hectare, which, added to the 1,200 fr. for peas, gives a total of 2,200 francs, per hectare; average, for the onion harvest, or 191 " peas and green beans... ... . 2,350 " Total sales... ... . 5,500 "I do not include fruit sales in this sum. The staff and animals are amply supplied with everything; I have not counted the product of the livestock in milk and meat, although this product is still given by our crops which, independently of all these advantages, still bring us, after providing people and animals with everything they need, an income of five thousand five hundred francs in money. It's true that I haven't counted the costs, but neither have I counted the sale of surplus fruit. Consult Arboriculture fruitière, dear reader, and you'll see that the sale of fruit will equal, if not exceed, that of vegetables. Your fertilizers cost you nothing. Labor costs almost nothing. You have to pay a foreman; 10 let's say we give him three thousand francs, which is a lot. The fruit will pay for it, and beyond that, what will you have spent to obtain abundance in everything, and a product of five thousand francs from ten hectares? A little intelligence and knowledge of cultivation, nothing more. You'll object, and I expect you will, that I'm establishing my account on the assumption that I'll have excellent soil to cultivate; now let's see what we'll get from inferior soil, from lighter soil. We have the same fertilizer and labor resources. Artichokes would give sad results in light soil; we'll only grow them in the kitchen garden, for home consumption. We'll replace this crop with asparagus, which loves sand and only fears humidity. Our ten hectares will be divided as follows: Two hectares of vegetable garden, subject to a four-year rotation, which will provide for home consumption. Two hectares of Ulm violet asparagus; and six hectares of mixed vegetable, root, forage and oat crops, in the following rotation: First year, after clearing with a plow or two spades, and with maximum manuring, cabbage and leeks, etc., etc.; Second year, with no plowing, and with maximum manuring, etc.; Second year, without manure and on topsoil, harvest of roots for home and animal consumption; Third year, without manure, harvest of onions 8 on topsoil, or early peas, and runner beans, on ashes; Fourth year, without manure, oats with clover; Fifth year, without manure, plastered clover; Sixth year, without manure and on ashes, harvest of early peas and runner beans. The soil is less suitable for large-scale cultivation, and the less beautiful harvests will deprive us of two head of large livestock, but this same slightly light soil allows us to force the cultivation of vegetables, the most productive of all. Let's estimate the products of this new crop rotation: It gives us annually; 1° On two hectares of vegetable garden, subject to four years of asolement, all the vegetables necessary for the consumption of the house... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . 2° Two hectares of early asparagus. One hectare yields a minimum of 4,000 "n bunches of asparagus at 1 fr . . . . . h.000 " I reserve a whole hectare for the house. 3° One hectare of cabbages and leeks yields at least... ... ... . 1,500 " 4° One hectare of roots for the consumption of the house, people and animals. 5° One hectare of onions, beans and peas for household consumption. 6° One hectare of oats for livestock. . . "To be carried forward. 5,500 " To be carried forward... . 5,500 7° One hectare of trèfte for cattle. 8° One hectare of early peas followed by green beans estimated, given the poverty of the soil. 1,000 " Total sales... ... . 6,500 n We have a higher silver product, but two head of cattle less. This difference, which seems abnormal, can be explained by the introduction of asparagus cultivation, the most productive of all, which will give the best results in poor soil. I cannot repeat too often that there is no such thing as bad soil, only bad growers. France, endowed with the richest and most fertile soil, is divided into strong soils and light soils. Each has its own value, and each can yield a high income when properly cultivated. The first step is to study the soil; the second is to understand the needs of the plants you wish to cultivate, and the third is to know how to modify your crops according to the soil and climate; and then you can repeat that proverb, which acquires greater truth as science replaces routine: as much as man is worth, so much is the land worth. There are many large establishments with a large staff but no animals. They don't have enough fresh manure 19 to build layers, but they do have all the elements they need to make masses of compost, with which they can extract rich products from their land. If they want to produce a lot cheaply, they should adopt a four-year rotation with layers, and in this case, buy the manure needed to make the layers every year. The composts will be used to fertilize the squares under the crop rotation system. However, if the establishment were poor, or did not wish to incur the expense of fertilizers necessary for the creation of a good vegetable garden, and had only one or two hectares of land at its disposal, it could still obtain a high yield by adopting the three-year crop rotation, as indicated above, while creating asparagus plants or artichoke squares, depending on the value of the soil. The product of these crops would be sold in large part, and the squares that produced them would be included in the crop rotation, as I also said. If a house with a large staff had one or two horses assigned to the service of the house, and owned only three hectares of land, and wished to obtain a high yield from it without making layers, it would be easy to harvest the vegetables needed for the house, and the food for the horses, by adopting the six-year mixed crop rotation. In this case, it would be necessary to dispense with the pri8 meurs, mix manure with compost and proceed as follows: 1° Reserve the necessary space to create asparagus and artichoke plantations; 2° Divide into six equal parts all that remains of available land, and plant: First year, with ploughing or spading, and very copious manuring, all the vegetables requiring very abundant food: cabbages, leeks, etc., etc., etc.. Second year, without manuring and on top soil, roots: carrots, turnips, etc. Third year, without manuring and on good ashing, dried fruit vegetables. Fourth year: no manure: oats with clover. Fifth year: plastered clover. Sixth year: wheat. The straw would be used for the horses, and the grain would be sold to reimburse part of the costs. In this way, abundant produce could be obtained at almost no cost. Vegetables sown and transplanted in rows can be cultivated with the plough and horse hoe, when labour is at a premium, and with the help of these tools the land would be brought to a remarkably fertile state in a few years, and this in all parts of the farm. Before concluding what relates to the development of hospital, community or boarding house land, let us say that the crops I have mentioned 8 are only possible on soil that has been cleared of trees, and that above all, a special site must be devoted to the fruit garden, if the walls are not sufficient, and even to the orchard, if one is desired, but never leave trees on the land intended for cultivation. Disuises p CO I said earlier that the small farmer would be the first worker of public wealth the day he knew how to cultivate small crops, and I added that horticultural education, so necessary in the countryside, remained confined to the towns, even when serious teaching existed there. These are undeniable truths; everyone knows them, and unfortunately we have not yet been able to remedy this state of affairs, which we urgently need to put an end to in the interests of rural dwellers and general production. The peasant who owns a few acres of land, and cultivates it with his family, will be the first worker of the public fortune, the day he knows how to cultivate, because he will get from his land an income equal to the land value. The peasant is at least as hard-working as the city-dweller, but he knows no more about his own strength than he does about the wealth of his soil. He knows that certain products are bought at a high price in this or that country, but he doesn't know how to cultivate these products, and attributes the wealth of certain countries solely to the quality of the soil, when, more often than not, he possesses soil of superior quality that he doesn't know how to exploit. England and the whole of northern Europe bring us their cash in exchange for our fruit and vegetables, and even then they only find enough to buy on our markets to meet their needs. The fruit and vegetables taken from abroad are produced in the towns, at a high price, and the selling price still gives a large profit to the grower. The countryside can produce in quantity, almost of equal quality, not only at no cost, but also with a huge advantage for its other crops, for the production of wheat, wine and meat. But the farmer who has the soil and strong arms doesn't know how, and can't go and learn in the cities - it would take too much time and cost too much! He can only learn in his village, on Sundays, or during the long winter evenings. The peasant is the bee of our beautiful country of France, just as the city-dweller is its hornet. He loves the Emperor because his name is the emblem of inner peace; he venerates him because he protects agriculture, and in times of need, he would gladly leave his plough to pick up a gun, if social order were threatened. The peasant gives all his sweat to the land, all his blood to his country, without hope or thought of reward; the feeling of duty, of what is true and just, is the only reason he acts. Who were the most valiant soldiers of order during the continual riots of Louis-Philippe's reign? The peasants of the Paris suburbs! The phalanxes of volunteers who, in 1848, came from all over France to fight anarchy were made up of farmers and peasants. Finally, in our most recent elections, it's worth remembering that all those involved with the land voted as one for the candidates of the Empire. Forgive me, dear reader, for this lengthy digression, but I believe I am doing justice in praising the brave people who produce ceaselessly, and rigorously fulfill their duties as heads of families and citizens, without asking for anything or aspiring to anything, and I make it my duty to ask them for a little horticultural instruction, for which they are so grateful when by chance it reaches them. I am convinced that once the teaching of fruit and vegetable growing has penetrated every commune in France, soil production will have doubled. For France, this will mean a considerable increase in the products it is deprived of, products which bring great well-being, and a notable increase in cash through purchases from abroad. This goal can only be achieved by serious teaching, and numerous examples of good crops and advantageous varieties to cultivate. It's impossible for us to give courses in small localities; their budgets don't allow it, and despite all the dedication we put into it, neither our health nor our purse could suffice to accomplish such a work. I have already mentioned the eagerness of the clergy in the Oise department to repeat my lessons, and to propagate them among their parishioners; a word now about what has been done by primary school teachers. When Mr. Vasselle first called me to Hétoménil to give a lesson in arboriculture, he approached Mr. L. Chevreau, Prefect of the Oise department, with the aim of obtaining permission for primary school teachers to give their pupils the day off to attend my lesson. Mr. L. Chevreau is a horticulture enthusiast, so he granted permission not only for the cantons of Crévecœur, Grandviller and Marseille-le-Petit, neighbors of Hétoménil, but also for the neighboring cantons of Beauvais and Noyon, where lessons were also given. Thanks to this measure, the most brilliant results were obtained in less than three years. The teachers rivaled each other in zeal for study and application, and today they teach their pupils a pruning method whose fruitful results they demonstrate to all. In the meantime, the Prefect of Oise has done me the honor of entrusting me with the horticultural teaching at the Beauvais Normal Agricultural Institute, with a view to turning the future primary school teachers of his department into good horticultural teachers. Allow me to express my deep gratitude to Mr. L. Chevreau for all the kindness he has shown me and for the kind words he addressed to me at the end of my lesson in Hétoménil. The thanks of M. le Préfet de l'Oise, and those of the parish priests of Lihus, Hétoménil and N. D. du Hamel, are the dearest rewards I have received. The schoolteachers' gardens in part of the Oise department offer remarkable specimens of fruit and vegetable growing. These two crops are taught to children who will benefit from them, but this is not yet enough. The results obtained in the teachers' gardens have struck the peasants, who are all the more eager to learn as they have seen what can be achieved with reasoned cultivation. Wouldn't it be possible to set up a basic course in arboriculture and market gardening for men in villages with the most capable teachers? This course would be given by the teacher in the evening, in his classroom, and the practical lessons would be given on Sundays in his garden. This teaching, backed up by practical lessons, and confirmed by the results obtained, would be very widely followed, and would be of immense service. I know that teachers have a lot to do, but I also know their zeal when it comes to being useful to their fellow citizens and their country. These courses could easily be set up with the help of a small subsidy from the département or the commune, in all the places whose teachers have taken our courses. As I said before, farmers have everything they need, but they don't produce because they don't know how to use it. If we teach him in his village, he'll apply it immediately, and every week he'll have a certain amount of produce to take to market. The number of buyers will increase in proportion to production, and the wealth of large-scale cultivation will increase in proportion to that of small-scale cultivation, which provides well-tended soil, fodder and fertilizer. To achieve this humanitarian goal, the teacher's garden must be a real school, where he can show everyone the results obtained by good cultivation, and the superiority of good varieties destined to dethrone bad ones. If the garden is enclosed by walls, the walls should be planted with good varieties of table fruit, leaving in front of them a bed 1 meter 50 centimeters wide, so that a double row of uni-lateral cords can be placed at the edge. These walls will be planted in oblique cordons, or in large shapes according to their height. But, above all, the teacher should, as far as possible, do and teach things that are easy, productive and within everyone's reach. If the garden is enclosed by hedges, plant all the way around. Lay out a 2-metre-wide flowerbed, where you can place vertical or oblique counter-trees, or alternating Gressent palmettes, depending on the layout and size of the planting (see Arboriculture fruitière for planting instructions).) The entire middle of the garden, cleared of trees and overgrowth, would be devoted to growing vegetables, and subjected to the four-year crop rotation, or in the absence of sufficient fertilizer, to the three-year rotation, as described on page 60 ff, after levelling and breaking up the soil, as described in chapter IV. Four-year cropping, with layers, should be preferred in all cases, especially for teachers' gardens, which should serve as a model, and in which a certain quantity of vegetable seedlings will be raised, and seeds grown in large quantities. The seedlings and seeds will more than compensate for the expense of the manure needed to make the diapers. I also insist on the cultivation of melons, which always produce a high yield, because nobody knows how to make them in the country, and we prefer to do without them than to bring them from Paris when we're far away. The day good ones are brought to the country markets - and nothing could be easier - they'll be snatched up immediately. The three-year crop rotation, without layers, should only be introduced when it is impossible to obtain fresh manure. Teachers of horticulture can easily obtain, at almost no cost, the manure they need to make their diapers, and the materials they need to make their composts. First and foremost, he will need to organize his fertilizer factory, a double platform with a liquid fertilizer tank in the center, as described on page 73. The older pupils in the class will be excellent helpers for most of the work in the garden; not only will they assist their teacher, but the application of theory will be of the greatest use to them in their horticultural training. Most of the time, the village mayor is a farmer; the schoolteacher is almost always the town hall secretary, and the good relations that develop between the mayor and the town hall secretary are enough to ensure the latter's supply of fresh manure for the diapers. If the mayor isn't a farmer, there will always be one in the country, and he'll gladly trade seedlings or even melons for a cartload of manure. At worst, nothing is expensive in a village, and the schoolteacher would still benefit from buying one or two carts of fresh horse manure, and mixing it with leaves to make diapers. In that case, he'd give up hot diapers, and make only lukewarm, dull ones. There's no substitute for manure and potting soils from layers, and I can't stress enough that harvesting layers pays two or three times the value of manure while improving it. The schoolteacher's compost and liquid fertilizer factory should operate with all the more activity as his garden should be a model garden, and as he has at hand the first elements of fertility. Depending on the country's res12 sources, it will be easy for him to obtain a certain quantity of herbaceous matter that he can animalize with the fertilizers of his class. All he needs to do is set up a mobile pit for the children, or send them to the compost heap, to obtain a quantity of excellent solid and liquid fertilizer that can easily be disinfected with a few kilograms of iron sulfate, which will further increase the energy of the composts. Above all, the teacher must teach children and farmers how to make fertilizer. Nothing should be wasted at home, and he should set the example: fecal matter, manure, pellets, kitchen scraps, house, classroom and yard sweepings, herbaceous matter, soot, ashes, urine, dishwater, soap water, lye, etc., etc., all should be brought together and used to make fertilizer. We need to visit villages to find out how many fertilizing substances are lost to agriculture, while at the same time harming health, and this in countries where fertilizers are totally lacking. Once the example has been set, it will soon be followed, but it is urgent to show it, as much in the interest of general production as in that of public health. The four-year rotation with layers, or the three-year rotation without layers, will be introduced into the schoolteacher's garden using the same procedures as for the homeowner's garden; he will be able to choose whether to break up the soil in one go, or in three or four years, and even to subject only part of his garden to rotation, if he is unable to plant the whole GARDEN in one year, or if he wishes to retain a few related crops. (See chapter VI.) Schoolteachers' gardens vary in size, but however small they may be, they will benefit greatly from regular rotation. This is the basis of production, and the only way to bring the land quickly to a state of cultivation in all parts of the garden, with both four-year and three-year rotations. Teachers who love horticulture, and there are many of them, will easily find, by following my indications, the means to use their garden, and to profit from it for themselves, for their pupils, and for the inhabitants of their country. It would be difficult to specify which varieties of vegetables should be grown in teachers' gardens. The choice depends on the size of the garden, the position of the teacher, the state of progress in their country, and the resources and future it offers for horticulture. All the varieties of vegetables indicated for the gardens of the owner, tenant, farmer, farm, presbytery, etc. are excellent; the teacher will have to choose among them, according to the extent of his garden, and the state of horticulture in his country, both for his personal consumption, and to found his little vegetable school. Obviously, if his garden is very large, he should refrain from growing pole beans, large pumpkins, monstrous cabbages etc. etc., in short all vegetables that take up a lot of space and cast shade on neighboring crops. In this case, the varieties indicated for the tenant's garden will be excellent. If the teacher's garden is large, if he teaches horticulture to his pupils : whether he is giving a course to the villagers or even just giving them advice, and if the country is very arid, he will have to convert his garden into a fruit and vegetable school, introducing on a trial basis the varieties indicated for the owner's garden if he has gardeners from middle-class houses to guide; those of the farmer's garden and the farm, for the supply of the farmer, the small farmer, and for the market, and finally, as an experiment, those indicated for the presbytery garden, which, like the teacher's garden, is destined to become a garden of public utility, by its good cultivation, as much as by the plants and seeds it must provide in regions where good varieties are unknown. I have written this chapter for teachers in advanced departments who teach and practice horticulture. There are many departments where this science is unknown, and where the teacher is content to grow bad potatoes and beans in his garden. It is often easier to introduce progress in a country where everything is unknown, than in one where half-knowledge and prejudices are real obstacles to logical teaching. In this case, the teacher will benefit greatly from cultivating his own garden. He will have to start with the three-year rotation without layers, and grow the varieties of vegetables indicated for the farm's kitchen garden. His cultivation, as well as his vegetables, will attract the attention of private individuals and small-scale growers sooner than he expects, who will soon be asking him for advice, seedlings and seeds. The first step will be taken that day, and the country will be on the road to progress, thanks to the example set by the teacher. Once the three-year rotation, without layers, and the farm's vegetable varieties are accepted, the teacher will be able to adopt the four-year rotation, with layers, in his garden; his work will be followed with interest, and he will soon have many imitators and fervent followers. What does a schoolteacher risk by trying this? Nothing, less than nothing, since the worst he can do is increase his personal well-being! And, if he succeeds completely, which he undoubtedly will, he will have the immense satisfaction of having done his country a great service, by introducing a new industry, an undeniable source of well-being, as well as an element of prosperity. Time and work devoted to the general interest are never wasted; public opinion, a severe and impartial judge, always rewards us with consideration and general esteem, and makes us quickly forget the bruises produced by the stupid struggles and senseless hatreds of blind people who try to momentarily hinder the progress of good people. I have said what I was fortunate enough to obtain in the department of Oise, through M. Vasselle, with the support of M. le préfet de l'Oise, the sympathies of an enlightened clergy, the devotion of intelligent teachers, zealous landowners and amateurs. because in less than six years, routine will be killed off by science in this department, whose prefect, as enlightened as he is devoted to the interests of small-scale farming, has taken steps to ensure that fruit and vegetable growing is taught in every commune by primary school teachers, and I hope to meet in other countries imitators of Mr. Vasselle. Vasselle; prefects who, like M. L. Chevreau, are faithful interpreters of the Emperor's thinking and his concern for agricultural interests, and who will support their impetus; priests, teachers, landowners and amateurs who, while indulging in a pleasant occupation, will serve the great cause of general production. At almost every station on our railroads, there are plots of land not used by the companies, which they temporarily give up to their employees to create gardens. These gardens, which are more or less well cultivated, offer both the employees, who are sometimes poorly paid, a healthy distraction, and a small profit from the vegetable harvest. So why shouldn't these small gardens also produce everything they're capable of, with the help of reasoned cultivation? This is made all the easier by the fact that they are cultivated by the growers themselves, who are eager to get as much out of them as possible, and that we don't have to fear the foolish vanity of certain gardeners, who are often more ignorant, but who reject any improvement because it hurts their self-esteem. Let's put ourselves for a moment in the shoes of a modest railway employee, paid just enough to eat and clothe himself and his wife, and bring up his children, if they are not too numerous, and to whom the Company gives the enjoyment of eight or ten ares of land. This small, well-cultivated garden will give him, and more, not only the supply of vegetables he needs for the whole year, but also the means to support one or two goats and about twenty rabbits. The milk from the goats, the meat from the rabbits, and all the vegetables are a small fortune in a household that has to count by the penny, and it's very easy to acquire all this, and even a small sum of money, by selling the surplus of certain products, devoting to good cultivation the hours left free by the service. The small station garden will be subject to a regular crop rotation; levelled and broken up like the previous ones, to give an assured product. A three-year rotation, without layers, is preferable for the employee who has only wasted hours to spend on his garden, and at his disposal, the fertilizers he can collect and make without any expense. However, if an employee had a garden of some size, at the gateway to a town that offered some resources, and his wife wanted to look after the garden, he could make quite a lot of money from it, by adopting a four-year rotation, with layers, and devoting his layers exclusively to growing melons. He would benefit greatly, I repeat, even if he had to buy a certain amount of manure. The resources of a railroad employee are very limited, I know, but with a little activity, he will easily remedy the insufficiency of his fortune. Let's suppose that a garden such as the one I've just described is to be subjected to a three-year rotation, without layers. The first thing to do would be to gather and make the necessary fertilizers; nothing is easier than making compost at a railway station, or even at a station where horses are always present, and where there is often a lot of straw, hay, etc., etc., etc., etc. All this will be carefully picked up by the women or children, and thrown as it comes onto the heap, in the process of being made, mixed with garden debris and grasses that can easily be cut in the ditches and along the embankments. A certain quantity of locomotive ashes, mixed with these composts, will increase their energy; household water and urine that can easily be collected will provide the liquid fertilizer needed to make composts. In large railway stations, and in all those of low speed, where horses are constantly brought in and animals are taken on board, it will be easy to collect a very large quantity of excellent manure; enough to set aside the best, to make layers by mixing it with leaves, if the employee wants to grow melons and get a silver product from his garden. At the gateway to the big cities, and with a lot of fertilizer, it would be profitable to introduce a four-year crop rotation, with warm and muted layers only, dedicating these layers to the cultivation of melons. In this case, the varieties of vegetables designated for the tenant's garden should be grown, and any surplus can be sold on the market. Crop rotation will be introduced and practiced in the same way as in the owner's garden. For the gardens of small localities, stations, and even for those of gatekeepers, the three-year rotation will be adopted, without layers, and the varieties of vegetables designated for the farm's kitchen garden will be grown. See Part Two and Part Three, General and Special Crops, for instructions on how to care for the garden and each type of vegetable. Digtige /C The introduction of horticultural work into the army can bring the most fruitful results, for the army itself, and for the countries where cultivation will be carried out by our soldiers. I am devoting a chapter to the vegetable garden in the camps, because I count among my most assiduous listeners generals, senior officers and officers of all classes who, I know in advance, will be doubly happy to guide their soldiers in work which, while creating a salutary distraction and real well-being for them, is destined to bring prosperity to regions where horticulture is unknown. The Châlons camp was established on land that had never been considered for cultivation. The presence of an army corps brought enormous resources of fertilizer, and our soldiers immediately created gardens in this land condemned to infertility. These gardens were created under the direction of officers with a love of horticulture, and as soon as the idea was conceived, thousands of arms were offered. If a local man had been offered all the fertilizer in the camp, on condition that he create a one-acre vegetable garden, he would have replied: "That's impossible; this land has never produced anything! The word impossible has been removed from the French army's dictionary. The army is the heart of France! If you doubt it, observe it! If a fire breaks out, you'll see the last conscript rush into the fire like the heroes of Crimea and Italy, exposing his life twenty times over to snatch the last shred of the peasant's household from the flames, and doing so with a heart and spirit that can only be found in France! If you thank this man, or rather this soldier, for his devotion, he looks at you all astonished and seems to say: has this gentleman lost his mind, to compliment me: it's quite natural, what I've done! This conscript is essentially French, he represents the chivalric type of our country; and, without suspecting it, he is quite tall compared to some of today's rich, who measure each of their steps by the profit it will bring them. For them, homeland and honor are empty words: only one has the power to make their ears perk up: money! In our worst days, when certain parasites in the big cities were saying to all the workers: "You alone are sovereign!

saved our crops that were about to rot in the fields for lack of manpower? The army! The army again, happy to put down the musket for a moment and pick up the scythe! If, as an experienced farmer and deep thinker, you dream of a trial of cultivation designed to enrich your country, you will meet with ardent opposition from ignorance, and coalition from routine. You will often see a beautiful discovery, a generous and profitable thought for the country, untried for lack of arms and the goodwill of the first interested parties to make use of your discovery! Don't be discouraged, and call on the army, which will give you as many brave arms as you want, and with its ardor and zeal will execute, in a few hours, what you wouldn't have obtained from well-informed workers, in a few weeks. If you want to see a happy man, put a soldier to work! He'll do whatever you want without ever risking an observation; he'll obey passively and act with zeal and drive whatever you ask of him! Anything is possible with such helpers. The soldier works like four and sings like six, so happy is he to work. Treat him well, and you'll make a friend out of him, a devoted person you can count on any time! The day the army wants to do some serious farming, it will fertilize the globe! The trial at the Châlons camp is a success, and if the same trial were tried 13 in Algeria, it would have the most brilliant results, not only for the army itself, but also in proving to timid French people that to want is to be able. All it would take would be a few examples of good cultivation by the army to attract to Algeria, not applicants for concessions, but purchasers of land who would come and settle there with their families and workers, and very quickly wrest from the Maltese the monopoly of vegetable cultivation so lucrative in these regions, where everything is at hand: fertile soil in the first place, fertilizers thrown into the sea more often than not, where everything comes together to enrich numerous French families, and where all that's lacking are workers, farmers and horticulturists. The entire valley stretching from the maneuvering field to the Hama nursery is cultivated by Maltese, who in December and January load ships with peas, green beans and artichokes to supply the markets of Paris. If, under another reign, when cultivation was considered madness, the army had seized these rich and vast lands and begun rational cultivation, they would have been sold at the weight of gold to the French, who would have enriched their country. Africa will give France more wealth, through the fertility of its soil, the day it counts workers among its inhabitants, than all the gold mines in California could provide. Some settlers say the trapistes are lucky. The Staoueli establishment is formidable; its wealth is unequalled; its success is due not to chance, but to the four first elements of successful cultivation that the Trapist order brings together, namely: capital, manpower and discipline. I visited the province of Algiers, and travelled through much of France. Everywhere, I've found elements of wealth, even in the poorest regions, elements ignored because the resources of cultivation are unknown. Teach culture to the least fortunate countries, and they will become rich! I consider my teaching a priesthood, because my experience of teaching has shown me that everywhere, and in all classes of society, one meets a good number of people devoted to the interests of their country, and who consider it their duty to repeat our lessons, and to show everyone the example of good culture. I was fortunate enough to find fervent followers among landowners, the clergy and primary school teachers, who, as a result of our lessons, are rendering valuable services in several départements. Today, I appeal to the army, which will also contribute to the great work of horticultural instruction, by setting an example in France and in our colonies. It's enough to do and show results, to immediately find a host of imitators. I'm certain that the army will do the job, firstly because it is commanded by distinguished men who are totally devoted to their country, and secondly because it is made up of generous hearts and valiant arms. Let's imagine that, as at the Châlons camp, an army corps spends a few summer months on chalky soil, and tries to fertilize part of it with its fertilizers. I'm convinced that the creation of vegetable gardens, or rather large-scale vegetable cultivation, would be one of the most useful and profitable ways of making chalk soils suitable for large-scale farming. What is needed in soils of this nature to obtain good harvests of oats, rye and even wheat? Fertilizer in large quantities, nothing more! That, at least, is the opinion of the most experienced farmers in Champagne. It's all about saturating the soil with humus to make it fertile. To achieve this goal, we have at our disposal an army corps, and a considerable quantity of horses, which will provide us with human fertilizer and horse manure at our discretion. In addition, we have as many men as we need to create vast vegetable crops which, by preparing the land to produce cereals and fodder, and by increasing its value tenfold, will provide a quantity of excellent vegetables, which will vary the very uniform ordinary of the soldiers, and will copiously supply the officers' table. This result can easily be achieved by the army, at no other expense than the fertilizers it produces, and the arms of a few willing men, with judicious use of fertilizers and well-calculated crop rotation. Let's start with fertilizer management, depending on whether we adopt a five- or six-year crop rotation. The six-year rotation, with layers, will produce, on plot no. 1, a crop of leafy vegetables such as cabbages, artichokes, etc., etc.; on plot no. 2, a crop of roots, lettuces, etc., etc.; on plot no. 3, a crop of leafy vegetables such as cabbages, artichokes, etc., etc.; on plot no. 4, a crop of lettuces, lettuces, etc., etc., etc, etc.; on plot no. 3, a crop of dried fruit vegetables, peas, beans, etc.; on plot no. 4, bearing the layers, a crop of melons, the plan and the necessary seeds; on plot no. 5, a crop of oats, and on plot no. 6, a crop of clover. The five-year rotation, without layers, will yield three vegetable crops like the previous one, one oat and one clover. The four-year rotation, with layers, will be much preferable, in that the layers provide a considerable quantity of topsoil, the first of all riches in a soil that requires a high addition of humus. A crop rotation in which a twelfth of the layers are used will seem impossible to those with no experience of this type of cultivation. These layers, of course, will not be covered with glass frames, but with canvas frames and economical cloches, under which excellent third-season melons are easily grown. Just give our soldiers this idea, and the layers will soon be assembled and the shelters quickly made, and the officers won't complain about the prodigious quantity of melons that will be harvested in the camp. It's worth repeating here that diapers, far from costing money, are profitable, and that the manure used to make them is better for burial than that which is not decomposed. What's more, the layers provide a considerable quantity of potting soil, which is essential for successful sowing and transplanting, and whose action will be most energetic in chalky soils. Let's assume that we want to fertilize six hectares of chalky soil, which has not yet produced anything, with the resources of a camp and the arms of soldiers, and that we want to subject these six hectares to a six-year crop rotation to speed things up. First of all, we'll organize our fertilizer department to fertilize six hectares at a time, so as to establish our crop rotation in one go, which is possible with large quantities of fertilizer. First, we'll stockpile about fifteen hundred meters of horse manure to build up the layers; if we can get hold of a certain quantity of leaves, a thousand meters will suffice. Then, on an inclined platform equipped with a liquid fertilizer pit (pl. 3, fig. A), we'll make a large quantity of compost with all the debris from the gardens and camps: herbaceous matter, vegetable scraps, savarts, ditch grasses, etc., etc., mixed with faecal matter, all watered with the liquid manure from the stables and the urine. Ashes and soot from the camp will be mixed with composts, cow, pig and poultry manures, and kitchen scraps. 8 Every effort will be made to increase the production of composts and liquid fertilizers, which will be disinfected with iron sulfate as they are produced. Our six hectares are divided into six equal parts of one hectare each, called squares n° 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. Our reserve of horse manure will be used to build the warm layers on half of square n. h. This half of the square will produce melons, early vegetables, seedlings and the planting required for the four hectares of vegetables. The other half of plot no. 4 will produce a crop of pumpkins for human consumption, and if necessary to feed a few cows. These pumpkins, raised on a bed, will be planted when frosts are no longer to be feared, in the middle of a hole filled with a wheelbarrow of manure, covered with 20 centimetres of compost. The following year, pumpkin manure only will be spread over the whole of square n° h, which will also be ashed and watered with liquid fertilizer, and in the second year an early pea crop will be grown, followed by a bean crop. The first year, square n° 2 will receive five hundred cubic meters of the most consumed composts; carrots, onions, turnips and, in the last season, some green beans will be grown. The following year, square 2 will be sown with oats and clover. Plot no. 3 will receive two hundred cubic meters of high-consumption compost and ashes; in the first year, early peas will be grown, followed by a crop of beans. The following year, plot no. 3 will receive 1,000 cubic meters of the most active composts; all vegetables requiring abundant nourishment, such as cabbages, artichokes, leeks, potatoes, salads, etc., etc., will be grown here. The first year, plot no. 1 will receive 1,000 cubic meters of compost, the least consumed, to grow artichokes, cabbages, leeks, potatoes, etc., etc., etc. The following year, square No. 1 will be ploughed up with some of the layer debris, and will produce carrots, turnips, onions, etc., etc... The two squares Nos. 5 and 6 will each receive one hundred cubic meters of compost, and will both be sown with oats; clover will be sown with the oats in square No. 6 only. The following year, layers will be established on plot no. 5, and plot no. 6 will yield good clover. Crop rotation summary: SQUARE No. 1. 1st year. On a thousand meters of compost: cabbages, artichokes, potatoes, leeks, etc., etc. 2nd year. On topsoil: carrots, turnips, onions, lettuce, etc. 3rd year. Without manure: oats with clover. he year. Without manure: clover. 5th year. Layers; early vegetables, seedlings and pumpkins. 6th year. On pumpkin manure, liquid fertilizer and ash; early pea harvest, followed by a bean harvest. SQUARE NO. 2. 1st year. On topsoil: carrots, turnips, onions, lettuce, green beans, etc. 2nd year. No manure: oats with clover. 3rd year. Clover. 1st year. Layers: early vegetables, seedlings and pumpkins. 5th year. With pumpkin manuring and ash: early peas and beans. 6th year. On a thousand meters of compost: cabbages, artichokes, potatoes, lettuces, etc. SQUARE NO. 3. 1st year. On compost and ashes: early peas, followed by a crop of beans. 2nd year. On a thousand meters of compost: artichokes, cabbages, leeks, potatoes, etc. 3rd year. On topsoil: carrots, turnips, onions, lettuce, green beans. he year. No manuring: oats with clover. 5th year. No manure: clover. 6th year. Layers: early vegetables, seedlings and pumpkins. SQUARE No. A. 1st year. Layers: early crops, seedlings, pumpkins. 2nd year. With pumpkin manure, liquid fertilizer and ash: early peas, followed by beans. 3rd year. On a thousand meters of compost: artichokes, cabbages, leeks, potatoes, etc. He year. On topsoil: carrots, turnips, onions, green beans, etc. 5th year. Without manure: oats with clover. 6th year. Clover. SQUARE N° 5. 1st year. On one hundred meters of compost: oats. 2nd year. Layers; early crops, seedlings, pumpkins. 3rd year. With pumpkin manuring and ashing: early peas, followed by beans. he year. On a thousand meters of compost: artichokes, cabbages, leeks, etc. 5th year. On topsoil: carrots, turnips, onions, etc. 6th year. No manuring: forage. SQUARE NO. 6. 1st year. On one hundred meters of compost: oats. 2nd year. No manure: clover. 3rd year. Layers: early vegetables, seedlings, pumpkins. 1st year. With pumpkin manuring and ashing: early peas, followed by beans. 5th year. On a thousand meters of compost: artichokes, cabbages, leeks, etc. 6th year. On topsoil: carrots, turnips, onions, etc. I chose this rotation for the camp vegetable garden to achieve two goals of great importance to me. 1° To use the fertilizers of the camps and the work of the soldiers to provide well-being for the army, from the staff, who will consume the melons and early vegetables, to the last soldier, who will be able to augment his very limited diet with excellent vegetables of all kinds. This well-being will be further enhanced by the presence of a few cows, which will easily live in the camp with the fodder, pumpkins and vegetable scraps, and provide milk and butter every day. This rotation also makes it easy to raise and fatten a number of poultry, while providing the State with a sole of excellent oats every year. 2° To fertilize and develop abandoned land, which has never been used for general production, an obvious way of increasing public wealth and that of the regions where the army will set an example. Far be it from me to pretend that my assolelement is the best of all; it will be modified, and I would probably modify it myself if I were on the spot, from the dual point of view of the army's needs and the added value of the land. I'm setting a milestone today, nothing more, and I'm setting it by appealing to our beautiful and valiant army, because I know that noble minds, happy to second the Emperor's thought, will gather around, and seek with me the solution to the problem I'm posing: material well-being for the army; progress in regions deprived of education, and an increase in public wealth. What expense will a trial entail? Zero! The camp supplies a considerable quantity of fertilizer, some of which is wasted. Compost production alone would be more than enough to bring a good number of hectares into cultivation. What's needed to achieve this goal? The army offers you thousands of hardy men just waiting to take action? Not only does the army offer its arms to the cause of public fortune, but it also contains among its officers elite intelligence which will be happy to contribute to a work of general utility. Nothing is more contagious than example. Tomorrow, let the army produce beautiful crops in lands considered infertile; immediately the peasants who were the first to anathematize these lands will imitate our soldiers, and will seek to obtain the same products there; but for this to happen, the peasant must have seen! The day he has seen, nothing costs him, he does it anyway, and the example set in the most deprived regions is soon followed by fruitful results. Let's not forget that in France, where our soil is so rich, production is not in line with consumption, and that it will hardly be in line with the demands of foreigners who come to take everything away from our most distant markets! If tomorrow, following the example of the army, the lousiest Champagne region produces vegetables in abundance, speculation, always on the lookout, will immediately move to where the production is and quickly exhaust its markets. We have a hundred examples of this, a hundred times we have seen the poorest countries become the richest, the day they produced to satisfy foreign demands. These trials carried out in the camps will cost the State little or nothing. The army provides everything, fertilizer and manpower. It will derive real well-being for itself from its work, and moreover it will give great value to land that had none. I've chosen a six-year rotation, with layers, because after six years of the cultivation I've indicated, the army will derive an unquestionable profit, and the land can easily be given over to cultivation, which will compete for it once it has seen the produce. I admit that the crops only pay for fertilizers and labor, which, far from being a burden, will provide a salutary distraction for our soldiers. I count for nothing the well-being brought to the officers and soldiers by these crops, and at the end of six years the undeniable added value of the land, which has become fertile from the barrenness it was. This added value can be estimated at a minimum of five hundred francs per hectare. If the farmer is reluctant to buy after six years, let the army continue with a second rotation of six more years, at the end of which time, the soil will be saturated with fertilizer and fertilized for many years to come; it will be enough to maintain it to obtain the most abundant products, and its added value will be quoted according to its fertility. I've started with a six-year rotation, with layers, with a mixed rotation of garden and field crops, because I'm looking forward to developing land in the worst areas. My aim is to have them fertilized by the army, which has the fertilizers and the manpower to make them suitable for field cultivation as soon as possible, and to enrich the country through the production of the soil. If I were only consulting the army's interest in vegetable production, I would adopt a four-year rotation for the special cultivation of vegetables, and would encourage our soldiers to always cultivate the same land which, after two rotations, at the end of eight years, would be remarkably fertile. The army would save on fertilizer and manpower, but the State would be deprived of land sales that could yield considerable profits. The four-year crop rotation, with layers, would bring significant savings in fertilizer, because from the second year onwards, the product of the demolition of the layers would be sufficient, with very little compost, to fertilize plot no. 1, to top-dress plot no. 2, and the liquid fertilizer would sufficiently fertilize plot no. 3. Cultivation would be easier, more economical and more productive in the second rotation; but the army would not have to show the unbelievers superb oats, magnificent clovers, and if necessary rich sainfoins, and good alfalfa on soils long condemned. The State, for its part, would be deprived of these harvests and of the ability to sell, at a high profit, land fertilized by six years of cultivation. It seems to me that it would be more profitable for the State to sell land that has been brought into a state of cultivation after six years, and to fertilize other land that will be sold in turn, six years later, with fertilizers and manpower that cost the State nothing. If the complication of the layers seemed too great for a large-scale trial, we could adopt a five-year rotation, without layers. The land would not be brought into cultivation as quickly, but the results would still be highly profitable, and the added value of the soil would be considerable after five years. In this case, you would have to divide the five soles into five equal parts, mix the horse manure with herbaceous matter and debris of all kinds, turn the whole thing two or three times to decompose the manure before burying it, and thus proceed to cultivate five hectares. SQUARE N° 1. - First year: one thousand cubic meters of manure for artichokes, cabbages, leeks, lettuces, potatoes, etc. Second year: simple topdressing for carrots, onions, turnips, lettuces, green beans, etc., etc., etc. Third year: harvest of early peas, followed by beans on ashes and watering with liquid fertilizer. Fourth year, without fertilizer: oats with clover. Fifth year: clover. SQUARE No. 2 would receive, in the first year, a manuring of five hundred meters of highly consumed fertilizer, for carrots, turnips, onions, etc., etc..., the second year, watering with liquid fertilizer and ashing for early peas followed by beans; the third year, without manuring, oats with clover; the fourth, clover; and the fifth, one thousand meters of manure for artichokes, cabbages, leeks, potatoes, lettuces, etc. LE CARRÉ N° 3 will receive, in the first year, two hundred meters of highly consumed fertilizer for early peas followed by beans; in the second year, without manure, oats with clover; in the third, plastered clover; in the fourth, one thousand meters of manure for artichokes, cabbages, etc.; in the fifth, carrots, turnips, onions, etc., on top of topsoil. LE CARRÉ N° h will receive, the first year, one hundred meters of fertilizer, for oats; the second, one thousand meters of manure for artichokes, cabbages, etc.; the third, on topsoil, carrots, turnips, onions, etc.; the fourth, on ashes and liquid fertilizer, early peas, followed by beans, and the fifth, without manure, fodder. SQUARE N° 5 will receive, in the first year, one hundred meters of manure for oats and clover; in the second, clover plaster; in the third, one thousand meters of manure, for artichokes, cabbage, etc.; in the fourth, on soil, carrots, turnips, onions, etc.; in the fifth, on ashes and watered with liquid fertilizer, early peas, followed by beans. If, finally, we wanted to grow only vegetables, without layers, we would have to adopt the three-year crop rotation as described in the chapter on crop rotation. The deprivation of layers leads to the deprivation of topsoil, the greatest resource for vegetable crops, and for rapidly saturating humus in land that is deprived of it. I have just put forward some new ideas that my teaching and farming experience authorize me to publish, in the interests of the army, of the backward regions it is called upon to visit, and of general production, the mother of public prosperity. I am delivering my first ideas to the army, in the hope that they will try them out. No one has forgotten the eminent services rendered by M. marshal, duc d'Isly, has rendered to agriculture; as we know, there are marshals of France, eager to continue the work begun by the illustrious marshal Bugeaud; if this book falls into their hands, and if it can determine them to try a few experiments, the author will have received his dearest reward by contributing, for his modest share, to bringing a little well-being to our valiant soldiers, a little ease to our hard-working peasants, an obolus to the public treasury! Before concluding on the subject of camp vegetable gardens, let us say that the choice of vegetable varieties to be cultivated is of great importance, as the early and esteemed varieties are virtually unknown in countries foreign to the science of horticulture. For the six-year crop rotation and for the five-year rotation, use the varieties indicated for the tenant's, farmer's and farm gardens, choosing the most profitable and hardy. Large-scale cultivation of Argenteuil asparagus at the Châlons camp would produce brilliant results, and would be a real asset to introduce into the country. See part three, special crops, asparagus. See general crops and special crops, first, second and third parts, for the choice of vegetable varieties, the care to be given to each and the place they should occupy in the crop rotation. SayS C CHAPTER IeS OF INSTRUMENTS AND TOOLS TO BE USED. In the interest of homeowners, I thought I should indicate and draw the instruments and tools that are essential for vegetable gardening. In the Paris area, where the rantings of manufacturers who only know about fields what they have seen in books abound, the amateur is exposed to buying impossible tools every day on the merchant's assertion. In certain regions, on the other hand, where horticulture is still in its primitive state, tools are so crudely made that it is almost impossible to use them to cultivate the soil properly. Digiized by The essential tools are : The spade, the first and most useful of all; but the spade capable of good ploughing, wide enough and long enough to move earth, and not a short, thick iron plate, incapable of penetrating even slightly consistent soil, or a child's spade as big as a fire shovel, with which one ploughs to a depth of 20 centimetres, and still, we see in countries where such tools are used, men resting every ten minutes from the fatigue they could have given themselves. The spade (pl. 4, fig. 5) must be well soaked, 32 centimetres long, 23 centimetres wide at the top and 19 centimetres at the bottom. It should be a little hollow in the middle, to penetrate the soil more easily (a, pl. 4, fig. 6), and be fitted with a solid socket (b, same figure), to accommodate a good fresne handle, turned, and ending in a ball on which to rest the right hand (a, pl. 4, fig. 5.) Never buy ready-made spades from an ironmonger; they cost barely a franc and are worth nothing. They should be ordered from a good taillandier; there are some in every country, and they can make excellent tools with the indications and design I've given. In addition, spades, like all tools that fit into an iron socket, should be hot-hammered, to avoid the inconvenience of seeing your men spend half their day lining the handles of their spades with rags or bits of leather, and perforating them with nails, which doesn't prevent the blade from leaving the handle every half-hour. All sharpeners know how to hot-hammer, and so must the craftsman: The point of the handle is trimmed so that it doesn't go all the way into the socket; it is wetted so that it doesn't burn, then the socket is heated almost to red-brown; the handle is inserted into it and forced in by striking two or three blows on a stone with the head, then the whole thing is immediately immersed in cold water to tighten the iron, which expanded when it was hot. A spade handled in this way needs no nail, and can never be dismantled. The length of the handle, including the socket, should be between 95 cm and 1.4 cm, depending on the height of the worker. THE FLAT-TEETEN FORK (pl. A, fig. 7), is very expeditious for ploughing in heavy soil, and indispensable for all ploughing in clumps or near trees. This excellent tool, too little used, does not tire men in heavy soils, never cuts roots in beds where there are fruit trees, and is very useful in the vegetable garden for pulling up roots. THE PIOCHE (pl. 4, fig. 8), indispensable for ripping, is an essential tool with: THE WOODEN SHOVEL (pl. A, fig. 9), iron-tipped at the end (a, same fig.), for scooping up soil in rips, stones and garbage in the garden. THE MUMMING FORK (pl. A, fig. 10), indispensable for loading wheelbarrows and carriages, and raising layers. THE CROCHET (pl. A, fig. 11), very expedient for unloading manure wagons and demolishing layers. THE BINETTE (pl. A, fig. 12), for hoeing between rows. THE SHOOTING RATISSOIRE (pl. A, fig. 13), very convenient for cleaning alleys. PUSHING TOOL (pl. 4, fig. 14), very expedient for hoeing beds. THE HOOK SERFOUETTE (pl. h, fig. 16), a valuable tool for small-scale hoeing and harrowing. THE POINTE SERFOUETTE (pl. A, fig. 17), very convenient for tracing radii, sowing peas and edging. THE SARCLOIR (pl. 4, fig. 18), very expedient for purging beds and flowerbeds of weeds. THE CROSS FORK (pl. 5, fig. 1), excellent for pulverizing clods after ploughing. THE DEGROSSING RAKE (pl. 5, fig. 2), for harrowing beds and raking paths. THE FINE RAKE (pl. 5, fig. 3), for raking after sowing and covering seeds. THE PLANTOIR (pl. 5, fig. 4), a pointed piece of wood bent at the handle for transplanting. LE DÉPLANTOIR (pl. 5, fig. 5), for removing plants with the root ball. THE ROPE, a rope 70 to 80 meters long, about the size of a little finger, fixed at each end to a stake. BROUETTE for carrying manure and other heavy items. WATERERS. Despite all the models that have been invented and produced over the years, the best of all are the antique market gardeners' watering cans with their wide necks, large heads and very fine holes (pl. 5, fig. 6). These tools are essential for good cultivation in the vegetable garden, and can be made inexpensively by a good gardener. There are others, useful for the greenhouse, but I'll refrain from using them, as I don't want to go beyond vegetable growing. Digitized be The following can be used to make layers: 1° Horse, donkey and mule manure; these give the strongest heat, but it doesn't last very long. These manures should be used fresh, i.e. before they have fermented. When horse manure has to be stored to make layers, it should be left to dry out a little before being piled, and care should be taken to place several poles across it from distance to distance, so as to aerate the center and prevent it from fermenting. Horse, donkey and mule manure are particularly suitable for making warm layers. The best manure is that of inns, which receive many whole horses, and save on bedding; 2° Cow manure, whose fermentation is less turbulent than that of horse manure, but lasts longer. Cow manure is excellent for making warm layers, mixed with a little horse manure, and for making soft layers, mixed with leaves and herbaceous matter. 3° Rabbit and pig manure, mixed with grasses for muted diapers only. 4° Wool waste, which ferments very quickly, gives very strong heat, and can become a valuable resource, mixed with leaves, in the absence of fresh manure. 5° Leaves collected from parks and woods. They should be used before fermentation; they should be picked up as soon as they have fallen, left to dry and stored in a sheltered place. The leaves ferment gently and retain their heat for a very long time. They make the best warm layers when mixed with horse manure, in that they retain the heat developed by the manure for a long time. Leaves are also very valuable for warm layers, where they can be used in the proportion of two-thirds with one-third horse manure. 6° Moss can also be used to make layers; it is less active than leaves, but its heat lasts quite a long time, and excellent warm and muted layers can be made with moss and manure; this is very economical in the vicinity of woods. 7° Freshly cut grass clippings and grasses, mixed with a little manure, can also be used to make 14 muted layers on which to grow excellent melons. Finally, with a little intelligence and activity, nothing is easier than making a fairly large number of layers with great economy, and obtaining very satisfactory results. If leaves, moss and even grasses, which cost nothing in the vicinity of the woods, are used in very large proportions in the manufacture of diapers, you'll have to make do with warm, muted diapers, which will produce products just as good as warm diapers, but a month or six weeks later. Of course, this is better than doing without early fruits and melons, which are always a pleasure, especially when they cost nothing. Layers with a high proportion of leaves, moss and grasses provide excellent manure and good quality potting soil, ten times the value of labor for field crops. Whatever the resources of a house in fertilizers, it is always advantageous to make a large quantity of layers. There's almost always a shortage of early vegetables and melons in country homes; we're forced to bring them in from Paris, which is expensive, especially when the cost of shipping and baskets is added on. The garden, I can't repeat enough, must provide all this with its beds, and provide it all the more since beds are the primary cause of fertility in open-ground crops, whose yield is doubled with the manures and potting soils of the beds. If the house is rich in horse and cow manure, and there is the possibility of obtaining a few cars of leaves, the owner has the right to demand all the primeurs possible; the large quantity of layers will provide him with a mass of decomposed manure and topsoil that will also double the product of open-ground crops. If, on the other hand, the house offers few fertilizer resources, you need to redouble your efforts to gather together everything you can economically obtain to make the layers: leaves, moss, scraps of wool from factories, etc., which you can mix with the fertilizer you need, These will produce melons and small early vegetables six weeks later than hot layers, but they will produce them at discretion, and will provide the manure and potting soil scraps that are essential for putting open-ground crops on a sound footing. On the contrary, it's when manure resources are limited that you need to increase the number of beds, by all possible means, instead of giving up, letting everything that can be collected go to waste, and spending the winter by the fire or poaching in the park and woods, as too many gardeners do, on the pretext that they lack manure. These same gardeners bury the little manure they have in the spring, condemning their gardens to infertility through lack of soil and decomposed fertilizers, whereas the park and woods can provide them with excellent ones in superabundant quantities. WARM LAYERS. These are raised from January to March for seedlings, and to raise the first melons. However, if the plants to be raised in these layers are destined to remain there for some time, it is urgent to mix a third of leaves with the fresh horse manure, in order to maintain a more sustained heat. Leaves can be added in the proportion of half to the warm layers when horse manure is in short supply, and excellent results can still be obtained by activating the layers with good stoves. When assembling warm and hot layers, it is urgent to place several parallel lines, to give the stoves more action and to be able to heat them at will with less manure. Here's how to set up hot layers: After calculating how much land you can occupy with the manure you have available, divide the land into parallel planks, 1 m. 20c. wide, to lay one-meter-wide frames, and separate these planks by 50-centimeter paths (pl. 5, fig. 7), then drive stakes at points (a, same figure) at each corner, then place a chalk line on these stakes to set up each layer with great regularity. The horse manure used to make these layers was stored dry in a millstone. The leaves that were collected were also kept dry to prevent them from fermenting. Before carting the manure and leaves to the place where the layers are to be made, the manure must be mixed with the leaves, and the whole must be moistened, i.e. as the manure pile is broken up, mix together the long and the short; that which is consumed with the most straw, divide the dung patches, and mix them with the longest straw; amalgamate the necessary quantity of leaves with this manure, taking care to remove any stones or foreign bodies that may be present, and then water the whole thing in small parts with the head of the watering can, so that everything is evenly moistened. I insist on these details because gardeners, unaccustomed to making layers, neglect this little care, and spend, to make bad layers, twice as much manure as it would take to obtain excellent ones, by going to a little more trouble. When the manure has been mixed with the leaves, and sufficiently watered so that all parts are wet, it is carried to the place where the layers are to be set up, and unloaded in heaps at points (b, same figure), on the site to be occupied by the layers, and not in the alleys, which you spoil while losing a certain quantity of precious fertilizer. Next, manure is taken from each pile in small fonrchées and laid flat on the first plank, taking care to press each fourchée with the back of the fork, so as to d̀ form a very-even bed of manure and above all without cavities. We start at point c and work backwards to the other end at point d. We thus place a bed of manure about 20 cent. thick along the entire length of the layer, then we tread it well with our feet, or rather with our hooves, the only shoe suitable for treading a bed of manure so as to form a homogeneous paste. Pour in a few more watering cans as you tread, and the manure will settle better, ensuring that all parts are sufficiently moistened. However, although it is urgent to wet the manure well to obtain even and sustained fermentation, you must be careful not to drown it, as manure that is too wet rots without giving off heat. When the first bed is well trodden and sufficiently wet, a second is built up in the same way, trodden and wet, then a third and fourth are built up in the same way, taking care to trod and wet each bed, until the layer is about 80 centimetres high. Great care must be taken in assembling the layer. If the manure has been well placed in small bunches and well pressed down with the back of the fork, it will be as even as a driveway, and its sides as straight as a wall. A layer made in this way gives off a lot of heat and retains it for a long time. If, on the other hand, the manure has been thrown carelessly and in large quantities onto the layer, it will be full of cavities, all bumpy, the sides will not be solid; such a layer will give a transient and disordered heat in some places, and will never heat up in others. Plants will both burn and freeze. I insist on these details, which may seem puerile to those who see things too superficially, because experience has shown me that they are the first elements of success, and I know from experience the tendency of many gardeners to neglect the making of layers. They usually have their helpers do it, pouring in the manure by wheelbarrows, by hottées at a time, and shaking it with the fork as if they were making bedding for a horse. This way of operating is deplorable, and cannot produce serious results. When the layer has been raised to the required height, we line it all around with a bit of long manure, folded in half, to hold down the compost (a, pl. 6, fig. 1), cover it with about ten centimetres of compost; we place the boxes and fill them with twelve to fifteen centimetres of compost, mixed with half good soil, then we place the frames which we immediately cover with straw mats to facilitate fermentation. Eight or ten days later, when the layer has begun to catch fire, it's safe to sow or transplant. When the layers start to lose their heat, or the temperature drops significantly, we apply rechauds to them, an operation which consists in filling all the paths separating them with fresh manure, which we wet to make it develop all its heat. More or less manure is added, depending on the temperature and the degree of heat in the layers. During frosts, the paths are filled up to the level of the frames. When the stoves don't need very much heat, you can use horse manure mixed with cow dung and leaves, and after a while give these stoves a new action by handling them and adding a little fresh manure from the stable. This reshuffling, with the addition of a little fresh manure and a few watering cans, is enough to give the layers a new heat that lasts quite a long time. If fresh manure is in short supply and wool waste is available, mix it in the proportion of a quarter with leaves, and you'll obtain very active stoves, while improving the wool waste, which is more suitable for burial after initial fermentation. For the construction of the layers, as for the application of the stoves, a certain intelligence is required on the part of the grower, because here, as in all operations, a fair appreciation on the part of the operator is needed to achieve good results. Let's not forget that gardening is one of the sciences that requires the most intelligence, and is perhaps the most hostile to routine. In the provinces, gardeners are often full of goodwill and intelligence, but they don't know how. It's urgent that the owner guide their first steps in a way that's completely new to them. It won't be long before they get the hang of it, but it's necessary, I repeat, to guide them the first year; the second they'll go their own way. The most important thing is to get them to achieve a result that is unknown to them; the first success animates them with the sacred fire, and the conversion is done more quickly than the owner would have expected, when he has given the benefit of his knowledge to a good and devoted servant who only wants to stay with his master and serve him faithfully. If you run out of manure, you can still make excellent warm layers with the manure used for the hot layers. When they have yielded a harvest, they are demolished, and with the least decomposed manure mixed with new leaves and a little fresh horse manure, excellent warm layers can still be made. HEATED BEDS are made in the same way and with the same care as warm beds, but with the difference that they are made in March, using less active manure, more leaves and moss where leaves are lacking. You can build very good warm layers with cow, pig and rabbit manure, mixed with half leaves or a quarter of leaves and moss, but the whole must be perfectly amalgamated to give good results. A third of horse manure, a third of leaves and a third of moss, well mixed, gives a very good layer on which to grow the best melons, starting only at the end of March or in the first days of April, to harvest them in July. A fifth of wool waste, mixed with two-fifths of leaves and two-fifths of moss, produces much the same result. I give all these means, tried and tested by me for many years, because I want to encourage owners to make layers. The day when a large number of layers made of whatever material have been established, all the gardens that have received them, rich in fertilizers and potting soils, will double their harvest in the open ground. The warm layers will be set up like the hot layers, in beds 1 m, 20 cent. wide, separated by 50 cent. aisles, in which stoves can be placed, In this case, these layers will only be edged at the ridge, like the hot layers. However, if the warm layers are erected late enough to dispense with stoves, in April for example, they should be edged all around from base to top with manure folded in half, to give them greater solidity (pl. 6, fig 2). Then cover them with potting soil mixed with half good, well-purified soil, to a thickness of 20 to 25 cent. All layers, without exception, should be oriented east to west, and the potting mix covering them should slope slightly to the south, to give the sun's rays a better grip. This rule must be observed in all cases, whether the bed is covered with frames or cloches, or even with low-cost shelters. THE SOURDE LAYER is the ultimate expression, the supreme means of artificial cultivation. Those who prefer to heat all winter, waste ten cars of good horse manure, and lose twenty cars of leaves without obtaining a satisfactory product in their garden, will cry impossibility. Let them shout, let us demonstrate the usefulness of deaf layers, and let us act to first obtain products of which we are deprived, and prove to idlers that with good will and a little courage you can get what you want. The muted layers go up at the end of March or in the first days of April, when the frosts are no longer more than accidental. They are laid in parallel trenches, 1 m. 20 cent. wide, 40 cent. deep, and separated by 50 cent. aisles. The soil from the trenches is kept in reserve; some of it will be used to cover the layers, after being mixed with potting soil, or if there is no potting soil, with horse dung, as I mentioned on pages 96 and 97. It doesn't matter which fermentable matter you use, as long as it gives off a little heat when mixed with manure of any kind, and produces potting soil, the vegetable garden's first and indispensable asset. So, with a third of horse or cow manure, mixed with pig and rabbit dung, and two thirds of leaves, mosses, tender stems of broom, gorse, reed heather, or even two thirds of grass clippings or grasses cut in ditches, on paths or pond edges, we'll still make good muted layers on which we can put melons in place, under cloches and even under economic shelters, in the first days of April. These layers will be a precious resource for delicate sowing and transplanting of frost-sensitive plants, tomatoes, cucumbers, etc., etc., and will provide us with assimilable manure and potting soil for open-ground crops. The mixture of manure and herbaceous matter to be used should be as complete as that of horse manure and leaves, for warm and hot layers. The whole mixture should be wetted and transported, mixed and moistened, to the edge of the first trench, at the bottom of which a first 20-centimeter-thick bed should be established with the same care as for the other layers; it should be compacted and wetted as I said above; then a second bed should be added, followed by a third that will be about 20 centimeters above ground level. Only the last bed should be edged, then covered with compost. If the owner is deprived of manure and can only establish muffled beds, he can maintain their warmth for quite a long time by applying a half-heater. In this case, the alleyways are emptied to the depth of the trench as the layers begin to cool, then filled with a mixture of leaves and fresh manure to the height of the potting soil. The fermentation that immediately takes place in this mixture of manure and wet leaves imparts a new warmth to the layers, a warmth that can be further prolonged by handling the stove from time to time, and adding a little fresh, watered manure. You can achieve complete success in the cultivation of pumpkins, cucumbers and even Arckangel melon by making a round hole, one metre in diameter and 40 centimetres deep, and filling it with one third any kind of manure mixed with two thirds leaves, moss or herbaceous matter, well trodden and sufficiently moistened, and covering the whole with 25 centimetres of good soil, mixed with half compost or horse dung. Nothing is easier than making melons in the last hamlet. Soon, I hope, the parish priests and schoolteachers will set an example which, if followed by the peasants, as I have no doubt they will, will not only bring them a certain well-being, but also a notable increase in their open-ground crops, through the addition of fertilizers and soil from the most modest layers. My aim is to produce fertilizer in every possible way! By making 15 fertilizer from layers, no matter how bad they are, mountains of wasted material will first give a highly-remunerative product to the intelligent grower, and will then bring a very-notable share of fertility to large-scale cultivation, the first and only true and indisputable wealth of our beautiful country of France. Chassis boxes should be made of white wood, as described on page 133. The best and most economical frames are those made of iron, which never need repair, never warp, close tightly and cost little more than wooden frames. When double-glazed, they're a piece of furniture you can't see the end of. These heavy, high, pointed cloches, made of waste glass and with no grip, should be banned from the vegetable garden (pl. 6, fig. 3). The inferior quality of the glass makes them darker for plants, and as their shape offers no grip, precious time is wasted removing and replacing them, breaking many of them in the process. The cloche à bouton (pl. 6, fig. 4) should be preferred. It's easier to handle, saves time and breaks less; what's more, the higher-quality glass gives more light to the plants. Finally, if you don't have glass (frames and bells), and can't make hot layers, you can stick to warm, muted layers covered with economic frames and bells as I said on pages 133 and 134, and two months later, obtain the same products as on hot layers covered with glass frames and bells. The glass in the frames and cloches must always be very clear. Light is essential for plants, so give them as much as possible, and avoid daubing them with white, which is very convenient for lazy people, but very harmful to plants. When the sun is too hot, give it some air, and shade with canvas or a bit of straw. For all crops grown under frames and cloches, you should also provide air as often as possible, to fortify the plants. By providing a large amount of air and light, you'll always obtain hardy, well-built and highly fertile plants. With a little intelligence and a lot of hard work, nothing is impossible. The example I've set will be quickly followed. The field is open, and I confidently await the trials and soon the results! LAYING OUT THE BEDS. The aim of cultivation is to: 1° to expose as much of the soil as possible to the influence of atmospheric agents, so that it can disintegrate, and at the same time become impregnated with the gases contained in the atmosphere; 2° to loosen the soil to a certain depth, so that the roots can spread out freely; 3° to make the soil permeable to water and air, so as to keep it fresh, without excess moisture, and to allow oxygen gas to decompose the fertilizers it contains; 4° to destroy weeds, i.e. all plants foreign to the crop, which choke good plants, and absorb the fertilizers intended for them to no avail. The means employed to achieve these various aims in the vegetable garden are: ploughing, harrowing with a hooked fork, and hoeing. Ploughing is a very energetic means of loosening soil, but it needs to be done deeply enough, and in good time, to give all the desired results. Ploughing should be increased in clay soils, which are naturally compact and moist. In such soils, it is urgent to do a rough ploughing in autumn, to expose the clods to the influence of frosts, which pulverize them completely; then, in spring, when the soil is healthy, a second, deeper ploughing is done, making the soil very loose. Compacted soils should not be ploughed when they are very wet. In this case, each spade stroke forms a brick, and you risk making the soil infertile for several years. Strong soils should only be worked when they are healthy, i.e. neither too dry nor too wet. Spring ploughing is sufficient in soils of average consistency and in siliceous soils. But this ploughing must be done in good conditions, and at a sufficient depth, like the second ploughing, the spring ploughing, done in strong soils. Many professional gardeners will shrug their shoulders when they hear us giving them a lesson in ploughing; they know their trade and have done nothing else all their lives, they say. True, but we wouldn't want the work of these practical heroes in our nurseries. Ploughing is generally regarded as a mechanical operation, usually left to day labourers who have no idea what good ploughing is, or when it is done by the gardener, he is too eager to do it properly. Day laborers, especially hard-working peasants, plow the vegetable garden as they would the plains; they remove huge spades of earth and simply turn them over, which produces a large, hard clod and makes the soil impermeable to air and water. This is the worst of all ploughing; twenty energetic harrows are powerless to loosen the soil, when such work is done in strong earth. Gardeners break up the clods, but they use spades so small and so short that the depth of their plowing rarely exceeds twenty centimeters. The surface is even and well loosened, but the ploughing is so shallow that the slightest heat immediately dries out the soil. Plants grow well at first, but as soon as they acquire a certain strength, the roots can no longer find loose soil to spread out on, and vegetation stops for no apparent reason. Ploughing should be done as deeply as possible; the spade should penetrate the soil vertically, to its full height, to give a ploughing depth of at least 30 centimetres. But to do this, you need to use real spades, as I've described them, and not imitation fire shovels. You need to take little soil at a time, about 15 centimetres thick, turn it over and pulverize it well. In this way, you can move just as quickly as you would to remove masses of earth that form huge clods; the worker has less trouble, and ploughs in a way that contributes almost as much as fertilizer to activating vegetation, instead of damaging the earth with twice the effort. A word about fertilizer burial, inherent to ploughing. When ploughing to bury manure, the manure is usually placed at intervals at the bottom of the gauge. This operation has several serious drawbacks. The first is that it only very partially fertilizes the bed or square, where the manure forms small serpents under the soil, as shown in fig. 5, pl. 6. All the space occupied by the white parts receives no fertilizer, and the plants placed on these spaces benefit nothing from the often very abundant manuring. The second disadvantage is no less serious: the manure is buried too deep for the roots to reach. It's only in the second year, when the soil is ploughed and turned over again, that the manure, completely decomposed, is mixed with the soil occupied by the roots. Then it's a "terreautage", nothing more. This is the way to spend huge amounts of fertilizer without achieving the slightest success. We must never forget that plants can't fetch their food like animals, and that this food must be within reach of the roots to encourage their development. When smoking, start by spreading manure evenly over the soil before ploughing, so as to put an equal quantity everywhere, and reserve enough to mix with the soil set aside to plug the gauge. Before starting ploughing, open a fairly wide gauge, as indicated by line A, pl. 6, fig. 6, dig vertically B, same fig.; set the gauge at an angle C, and, after throwing a shovelful of earth over the whole length of the gauge, place a little manure at an angle D, same figure, at a depth of 10 centimetres. In this way, it is impossible for a plant, placed vertically in the ground, not to receive its share of manure, as shown by the straight lines F. I said to place the manure at a depth of 10 centimetres, and here's why: plants, as we know, absorb fertilizers mainly in a liquid state. In part A of figure 7, what will happen to the liquid parts of the fertilizers buried in serpentine form at the bottom of the gauge, at a depth of 30 to 35 centimetres B, same figure? They will be washed away by rainwater or watering in C, where the cabbage roots will never reach, and they will saturate the subsoil with excellent fertilizers without the cabbage D absorbing a single drop. What's more, if it's planted between two mounds of manure, it will only have access to soil that's completely devoid of fertilizer, and even if by chance it's placed immediately above the mound of manure, a few rootlets will scarcely reach it. The manure is wasted, however copious it may be, and the harvest will be virtually nil. Let's move on to part B of the same figure, ploughed and smoked as I've indicated. The cabbage root F, was pricked out in the smoked part, and had it been, even between the intervals E, it is impossible that the root would not have been in full manure immediately. What's more, watering and rainwater completely saturate the E gaps with liquid fertilizer and carry it all the way to the G line, far beyond the root tips. So the whole layer of soil, from H to I, is completely saturated with fertilizer; each rootlet has a large share of it, and cabbage F, abundantly nourished from the day it is planted to the day it is fully grown, will be twice as big as cabbage D, which dying of starvation will take twice as long as its neighbor to form a stunted, hard and bad apple. In addition, cabbage F will still reach double the proportions of cabbage D, with half the expenditure on fertilizers. Whatever little it has, it will benefit from it, while its neighbor will suffer Tantalus' torment. May the reader forgive me for such a long explanation of such a simple thing, but this book is destined to fall into the hands of gardeners, and I have seen so much ploughing done, and so much manure wasted, that my experience obliges me to go into complete detail, so as to be understood by all those who wish to apply and reason. Burying manure is like using sand in the strong soils of the Loire Valley. Farmers use it with good reason, but instead of mixing the sand with the soil or with fertilizer, which would be even better, to divide compact soil and make it permeable, they place the sand on top of the soil. Quite apart from its inefficiency, its white color repels the sun's rays, and a soil that is already naturally cold cannot warm up. The result is an enormous delay in harvesting, whereas a remarkably early harvest could have been obtained by mixing sand with fertilizer and burying it instead of spreading it on the soil. The best things applied incorrectly often produce the opposite results to those expected, and the soil is then blamed. Immediately after ploughing, it is always useful, in compact soils, and even in those of average consistency, to give a good harrowing, with the hooked fork, to break up the clods that have escaped the spade; then give a blow with the roughing rake to remove the stones, and get on with erecting the boards. I said earlier that watering was the most expensive part of vegetable gardening. Later on, I'll explain how to save more than two-thirds of the labor, but however cheap water may be, it shouldn't be wasted any more than manure, because it's often scarce and you always have to keep some at your disposal. We organize our beds in such a way that all the water expended benefits the plants. If the ploughed, harrowed and coarsely raked bed is to be planted with seedlings, we'll use the back of the rake to create a rim of h to 5 centimetres all around, to trap water from watering and rainfall in the bed, and prevent it from running off into the paths (pl. 7, fig. 1). If the bed is to be used for transplanting, make a border all around it, but not as high as 2 to 3 centimetres, and use the spiked trowel to trace as many radii 3 to 4 centimetres deep as there will be rows of plants (A pl. 7, fig. 2). This will force water to infiltrate the rays and thus the roots of the plants, and will greatly increase the effect of watering with the same quantity of water. Seedlings require a certain amount of care if they are to give good results; they are of great importance in the vegetable garden, as the season's harvest depends on their success. The gardener must therefore give them his utmost care, and neglect nothing to ensure their prosperity. The best plant is the one you make yourself; you must never rely on your neighbor to provide you with the plant you need; if the neighbor gives you a plant, it's only after you've taken the best for yourself. When the gardener gives to a friend, it's even worse; his self-esteem is at stake, he's delighted to see his friend fail, and he never fails to give him his worst. There are two ways of sowing: broadcasting and rows. Broadcast sowing can be adopted without inconvenience in the vegetable garden, for onions, carrots, turnips, etc., etc., but never for cabbages, lettuces and all plants that need to be transplanted. In such cases, sowing in rows should be adopted exclusively. Germination cannot take place without water, air and heat. Water softens the seed and makes it swell; air acts chemically on the seed's contents, making it suitable for use as primary food; heat accelerates germination. The soil to be sown must therefore have a certain amount of moisture, easily obtained by deep ploughing and watering; it must be very permeable to air, which is obtained by dividing the soil well, using ploughing, harrowing with a hooked fork, and raking, which facilitates the removal of stones and all foreign bodies. In addition, the soil must be abundantly supplied with assimilable, i.e. fully decomposed, fertilizer to provide the young plants with ample nourishment to help them grow rapidly. Potting soil fulfils this condition completely, which is why it is indispensable in the vegetable garden to ensure the success of seedlings and transplanting of delicate plants. In addition, the temperature must be high enough for germination to take place quickly. Insufficient heat is easily remedied by sowing in layers, under trays or cloches, or in the open ground against walls exposed to the south, under shade. Young plants are very tender, and dread too much sun. In summer, seedlings are planted in the shade. When the bed to be broadcast in spring has been deeply ploughed, harrowed with a hooked fork and raked with a roughing rake, it is raked again with a fine rake to remove stones, clods and any foreign matter; then seed is sown, spreading the seed evenly over the whole bed, and covered with a centimetre of loam from the demolition of the layers. This covering contains a high level of humidity, is highly permeable to air, and provides the young plants with abundant nourishment as soon as germination is complete. Many authors recommend lightly beating the soil with the back of a spade or a board, to help the seed adhere to the soil. Some practitioners even go so far as to trample the soil completely with their hooves before sowing. I consider this practice to be more harmful than useful. Threshing, however light it may be, always tends to make the soil impermeable. I did away with it completely several years ago; my seedlings are very beautiful and have never failed. I've carried out several comparative trials, and always the unthreshed seedlings were more vigorous and better yielding than those that had been threshed. With the exception of radishes and perhaps onions, I consider soil threshing to be completely useless, and even then I could limit its use to radishes only, as for onions, its usefulness is very questionable. A single watering is enough to make the seed adhere to the soil, and I prefer it to threshing. It is very rare for a spring sowing, when the drying north-easterly winds prevail almost continuously, to go without watering for the first few weeks. If the weather is wet, the first rain and even the watering can can replace the bat with advantage. Carrots, onions, turnips, etc. are also sown in rows 15 to 18 centimetres apart. I haven't experimented enough with this type of row sowing to recommend it, but for planting out, i.e. sowing plants intended for transplanting, row sowing offers undeniable advantages. Radii are traced, the distance of which I'll indicate for each species in the special crops, one or two centimetres deep, depending on the size of the seeds. The plant, evenly spaced, is always more vigorous than in broadcast sowing, where the center, over-hasty, withers and suffers greatly from transplanting. In broadcast sowing, only the plants at the edges are well constituted, whereas everything is good in row sowing; and all things being equal, the plant is always hardier and earlier. When the seedling is ready for transplanting, the beds are prepared as described in the previous chapter, and transplanting begins. Before describing this new operation, a word on the deplantatlon of the plant is necessary, as most often it is not deplanted, but pulled out with force, an operation which breaks all the roots, makes recovery more difficult, and greatly delays the harvest. When deplanting seedlings, be careful not to pull them out on the pretext that the soil is not hard and that they won't hold, but plunge the deplanter deep into the soil, and remove the seedlings in large clods, which are then carefully divided, without breaking the roots, and taking care to keep any bits of soil or compost that remain attached. In addition, you should always remove very few plants at a time, transplant them immediately, and never leave them to wither in large quantities in baskets, as is often the case. The only tool that can be used for transplanting is the planter. Many authors have pointed out its shortcomings in long articles, but as they have given us nothing to replace it, and we have found nothing ourselves, we will try to make the best use of it. Care must be taken to make the hole deep enough for the plant's root to enter completely without curling, which is detrimental to the plant's growth and vegetation. Gardeners know this problem, and to avoid it they cut or rather tear the root with their fingers. This very energetic method is too contrary to the laws of vegetation for us to use it. It is simpler and more beneficial for the seedling to make a deeper hole, and fill it with loose soil that is lightly packed down to the bottom with the tip of the planter. A single, essential watering immediately after transplanting is all that's needed to attach the roots to the soil. Under no circumstances should you crush the roots with the planting tool to attach the plant to the soil. Transplanting should always be done in the evening, at sunset or when the weather is dark or rainy, and never in broad daylight when the sun is shining. A plant that wilts will take a long time to recover; ten hours in the dark after transplanting is enough to ensure its recovery. By keeping the soil cool at all times, mulch makes a powerful contribution to the plant's recovery and rapid vegetation. Its use is very limited in gardens due to a lack of layers and composts. Salads, strawberries and tomatoes gain in size, quality and earliness when carefully mulched. The mulching operation consists in covering the soil, before or after transplanting, with a layer of manure from the demolition of layers, or composts, about h centimetres thick. This manure blanket, which is constantly irrigated and rained on, provides a considerable quantity of liquid fertilizer, which saturates the entire layer of soil occupied by the roots, preventing the fertilizer from evaporating and the soil from drying out. With a certain quantity of layers, we have mulch and potting soil at our discretion for all crops. Watering is one of the most important operations in the vegetable garden, and undoubtedly the most expensive. Owners usually take great care in creating a vegetable garden, but rarely think of watering it. The most careful think they've taken care of everything by digging a very deep well, painstakingly providing, at great expense, barely a tenth of the water needed in the middle of a huge garden. They say: The well is good; the gardener will draw water and water, without realizing how much water is needed, how easy it is to draw, or how long it takes to water by hand. The result is the same in all gardens lacking water or the equipment to bring it in and distribute it. As soon as May arrives, the gardener and his assistants are busy pulling on the well rope and carrying the watering cans; that's all they do; it's impossible for them to do anything else, and even then, with such vicious means of action, and an almost complete lack of water, they can't obtain satisfactory produce; they devote all their time, from May to September, to preventing the plants from dying, nothing more. Let's just say that during this period, all crops are neglected, because everything that exists requires water, on pain of death. The landowner must be convinced of this before creating a vegetable garden: water is as necessary as manure, and even more indispensable, for mountains of manure buried in parched soil will have no effect on vegetation, if we cannot introduce into the soil the quantity of water necessary to decompose fertilizers, and dissolve them, so as to make them assimilable, and repair the losses of evaporation through the leaves. The higher the temperature, the greater the evaporation, and the greater the soil's need for watering; if it ceases to be sufficiently moist, nutrition is poor and vegetation languishes. In principle, it's better not to water at all than to do it sparingly. A little water from time to time excites plants without advancing them; copious watering in well-smoked soil determines vegetation that is as prompt as it is vigorous. Water is the most pressing need of plants, especially vegetables, which grow very quickly. 8 Water, even in its pure state, is part of the plant's organization; it gives flexibility to its organs by penetrating them; it maintains the upward movement of the sap by the continuous evaporation of the leaves; finally, it dissolves the nutritive substances contained in the soil, and introduces them into the plants. Without water in the soil, no vegetation is possible; with insufficient water, vegetation languishes. The quantity of water to be distributed in the vegetable garden must be in proportion to the quantity of fertilizer to be applied, if we want to obtain certain results and abundant harvests from very small areas. The first thing to do before setting up a vegetable garden is to make sure you have enough water. (See page 2h.) The best water to use for watering is rainwater, because of its purity and the quantity of air it contains; its dissolving properties enable it to be easily loaded with fertilizing principles. Whenever it is possible to collect rainwater, it will be a precious resource for watering, and should preferably be used to water seedlings and young plants. Although not as good as rainwater, spring and river water are preferable to well water, in that they are less mineral-laden and more aerated. Well water can be used for watering, but it must be drawn off in advance, in order to warm it up, and above all to aerate it, by leaving it exposed to the air and the sun for at least one day. Water intended for watering is all the better for containing a greater quantity of air. When water is laden with putrefactive matter, and no longer contains oxygen, it becomes harmful to vegetation. Pond water, especially when it is crusted, should never be used pure for watering; to do so would be to risk the perishing of plants; it can be used as liquid fertilizer, but spread with three to four times its volume of clean, aerated water. Before turning to watering, a word about hydraulic machines is in order. Until now, the only machines used to raise water have been steam-powered machines, which are expensive, subject to repair and require a skilled operator to operate safely. It was the most perfect of all, and some people tried it out in preference to wind-powered machines, given that when the greatest need for water is felt, there is no wind; the machine remains at rest, while the plants roast on the ground, to operate with the greatest energy in spring and autumn, when the Creator often waters our gardens with too much prodigality. A young mechanic from Blois, M. Samain, has just invented a hydraulic machine of rare perfection; I've seen it in operation, and I can say, without fear of contradiction, that M. Samain's admirable machine will make us abandon all steam and sail engines for raising water. I can do no better here than to cede my place to a friend of mine, Mr. Drion. Drion, a distinguished horticultural enthusiast, and to reproduce part of an article he published in the Journal de Beaugency: "Agriculture is no longer dying of impotence : the country is being reforested, pestilential marshes are being cleaned up, drainage encouraged by protective laws is restoring food fertility to over-wet lands, canals criss-cross the country and give life everywhere, watercourses irrigate meadows everywhere, springs are used for the benefit of the masses, the poor have their share of the benefits like the rich, and all this without the one who owns an abundant river or a powerful spring being able to dispose of it as he pleases. Steam, mechanics and hydrology are creating marvels, giving everyone the water they need: propeller mills, the Mahoudeau system, windmills, the Chauvin system, perfected turbines, feed or drainage pumps, the Letestu system, Leclerc pumps, the atmospheric system, and a hundred other systems compete for the distribution and use of water. Follow regional competitions, horticultural shows, agricultural fairs and all the festivities devoted to the production of the soil, and you'll notice a large number of the most interesting hydraulic systems. But alas! it has to be said that, however perfect each hydraulic invention may seem, it is no less fertile in terms of results than it is in terms of expense and misfortune of all kinds; in the absence of improvement either in the mechanism itself, or in the multiplicity of friction points, the imperfection or near-impossibility of regular lubrication leads to disorganization, breakage and downtime, and worn or broken parts have to be quickly replaced at great expense, and the repairman is not always around; maintenance becomes ruinous, and so ruinous that in some cases, water costs the same as wine; soon, the owner is discouraged and gives up using the system that had smiled on him: when will we come up with a system that's both inexpensive and truly perfected? " "Well, we dare to say, without fear of contradiction, that we have this perfected hydraulic system. It was Mr. Samain, a young mechanic from Blois, inventor of the best known wine press, who was given the task of creating a hydraulic elevating machine, destined for the greatest success, and of creating a marvel which does him infinite honor. "We have seen it, and everyone can see it as we have, and it has been working admirably for over a year at Tavers, without steam, without auxiliary equipment, without a mill of any kind, without the help of any arms, and better still, without any maintenance of any kind: it takes water from a spring at the foot of a hill, transports it nearly six hundred meters away, and supplies, at a rate of eleven liters per minute, three reservoirs placed fifteen meters above sea level. Had it been 50 or 60 meters higher, it would have been easy, with no increase in expense, but 15 meters being the height of the vegetable garden where Mr. Meynard de Franc wanted the water from his spring to be brought, the clever mechanic had to stop there. One of the precious merits of this machine is that it raises the water to an unlimited height, without the height of the water level in any way hindering the regular operation of the device. With this machine, given a sufficient source - God knows how many springs are lost in France - we can create rivers, raise water to the highest apartments, have powerful jets of water in gardens, rocks with cascades without a break in continuity, irrigate meadows, supply mills, factories, towns and the countryside, and there will be no need, as in the use of the water wheel, for the indispensable assistance of three pumps to obtain regular operation; There will never be any irregularity unless it arises from the irregularity of the source exploited. Meynard de Franc's, an equal volume of water at all times, Mr. Samain's hydraulic machine will raise it constantly with perfect regularity and without any wastage. What machine other than Mr. Samain's has ever produced similar results? And if we consider that, once purchased, the Samain machine does not stop working until the height of the waterfall is reduced to Om 20 c., we can consider it to be the near realization of perpetual motion. Its motor is water, and it takes it from the upper reach by itself; it takes one hundred liters of it in a flat sheet-metal box; when the box is full, its own weight lowers it vertically, exerting pressure on a piston which pushes it back into the ascending pipe; At the bottom of its stroke, the box, which has been emptied by the opening of four valves placed underneath and protruding from it, has become light again; a counterweight removes it again, it is reloaded and descends again to empty itself, resuming its to-and-fro motion with chronometric regularity, with an effect that is always certain; we repeat, nothing has yet come close to this perfection; unforeseen expenses are no more to be feared than the hopeless failures of the systems employed to date; let us add that the device is simple, not very apparent, and is so graceful in form and appearance that far from blurring the symmetry of a well-kept garden, it will always be its most attractive ornament. " "The first Samain machine was created at Guignes, in the commune of Tavers (Loiret), on the property of Mr. Meynard de Franc, a member of the Court of Cassation. Let's take a brief look at how and why it was invented. Mr. Meynard de Franc wanted to move his vegetable garden to the top of the hill overlooking his country house; a vegetable garden needs plenty of water, and Mr. Meynard's spring was 600 meters away and 15 meters down. 16 WATERING. low. He called on Mr. Samain to help him fulfill his wishes. After a careful examination of the situation, Samain asked for time to think things over. Two months later, the mechanic had fulfilled the owner's wishes, and brought him under his arm a model to the tenth, a little jewel of a machine which was tested at the salon, and which worked so well, that Mr. Meynard de Franc, seduced, said to Mr. Samain: "Hurry up and build it! Samain: "Hasten to patent this ingenious invention, which should make your fortune and render immense services; but at the same time as you patent it, get to work on making a large-scale model for me; it's my source that gave you the idea, and it's my source that should be honored with the first realization of this hydraulic masterpiece. "We have these details from M. Meynard de Franc, and we couldn't resist paying a tribute of praise and homage to M. Samain, who is unknown to us, and who will forgive us, we hope, the preceding revelations. "The machine was built over a year ago; since then, it has been working without a moment's hesitation. People come from far and wide to see it, and any owner who visits it, with a view to using the spring he owns, goes from Guignes to Mr. Samain, and says: "And I need one too!" After a trip to Tavers, M. Dejean, the director of Le Cirque in Paris, was quick to obtain from M. Samain the second copy of this elevating device, which he had placed on his property in Seine-et-Marne, where it works well and is the admiration of the country. "We could not conclude better than by giving our readers the letter written by Mr. Meynard de Franc, to Mr. Samain. "Monsieur Samain, Paris, March 9, 1864. "I congratulate myself every day on my confidence in you concerning the hydraulic machine, the idea of which you have so happily realized at the Clos de Guignes. "The regularity of its operation, combined with the simplicity of the mechanism, leaves nothing to be desired; for almost a year since it was built, it has caused me no expense, required no supervision, and the three basins it feeds are kept full at this distance of 550 meters, at this height of fifteen, without anyone having to put a hand on them. "It is with the greatest pleasure that I will welcome those who would like to see your ingenious invention for themselves; for you know that my desire to succeed, for myself, was greatly increased by that of a success that would be profitable to you; and I believe I am not mistaken in promising you a complete success. "I renew to you the cordial assurance of my best sentiments, MEYNARD DE FRANC. "To close, let us say that the cost price of the Samain machine is not high, but that it varies according to the distance of the water elevation transport." J. DRION, Membre titulaire de la Société impériale et centrale d'horticulture. 8 I don't have the honor of knowing Mr. Samain in particular, but I have seen the results produced by his machine, and after examining it carefully, I believe I'm doing my readers a real service by telling them about the Samain machine, which I'm sure will be a legitimate success. Once the water has been brought to the vegetable garden's basin(s), it must be distributed to the plants. Watering cans are the simplest method, but also the most expensive, and the least likely to aerate the water. Watering with watering cans is ruinous. If the vegetable garden is a bit large, and you want to harvest something, you need at least two men to water it all day, from June to September, for three months. Two men at 3 francs a day, for three months, costs the sum of 540 francs, and often you need four, not counting the man, or men, who pump the water. If there's a manege, a horse is needed for three months. Watering under these conditions is so costly that many owners who know how to count have given up, preferring to let everything perish during drought years. Faced with the impossibility of watering, I set out to find a means of watering that was as copious as it was economical, and after much research and no less fruitless trials, I settled on the Perreaux pump, which fulfilled my purpose perfectly. 28 This portable pump can be placed at any pond; it is extremely simple and sturdy, it throws water at a distance of around 20 meters, and can be operated by a woman or a child. The Perreaux pump throws enough water to thoroughly wet a vegetable garden in two or three hours. By fitting a swallow's tail to the end of the lance, we obtain a small, very fine rainfall, invaluable for watering, in that the water, divided and thrown to a great height, is charged with oxygen, the first condition for making it dissolving, and giving well or spring water a value almost equal to that which falls from the sky. What's more, watering is much more abundant and inexpensive with an instrument as energetic and easy to operate as watering cans. To distribute twice as much water, all you need is a woman, a child, or a soldier if arms are scarce, who pumps for two or three hours, while the gardener, one of his assistants or a clever servant holds the lance. The very low price of the pump is more than reimbursed the first summer, by the savings in labor, and the garden is watered to perfection, copiously, and with excellent, well-aerated water. Let's also mention that the Perreaux pump can be of great help in the event of fire; and that, for a sum of barely one hundred and fifty francs that this excellent pump costs, there is no owner who would not benefit from having it in his countryside. This pump is suction and treading; it dispenses with the need to draw water; it fetches it easily from a pond, spring or river, to a depth of five meters, and requires barely the strength of a man. It's the best, cheapest and easiest to operate of all the pumps I've examined and tried. For further information, contact M. PERREAUX, 16, rue Monsieur-le-Prince, A PARIS. Whenever the size of the garden allows it, it is always a good idea to water with a pump, using the swallowtail at the end of the nozzle. First of all, you'll save an immense amount of labor, but secondly, watering will be much more profitable for the plants, because : 1° It is much more abundant than with the watering can; 2° The water that is thrown down in a very fine rain at a certain height is loaded with oxygen, and acquires the dissolving properties that it lacked; 3° The water that falls does not beat the earth, never runs to the surface; everything penetrates without loss; h° As the soil is not beaten, it remains permeable to air, and requires half as much hoeing as watering with a sprinkler; 5° The pump makes it easy to sprinkle fruit trees, and even those in beds, during hot spells. When the leaves are scorched by the sun, or covered with dust, a simple sprinkling on the leaves in the evening, after sunset, gives the trees a fresh, spring-like appearance. 18 When the garden is not large enough to make use of a pump, or when the owner does not wish to purchase one, the watering can with its wide head and very fine holes (pl. 5, fig. 6) should be used, to divide the water as much as possible. Watering should always be done in the evening, as it is more profitable, evaporation is less than during the day, and the water penetrates deeper into the soil. Watering in the evening is not an absolute rule; it is undoubtedly more profitable than watering during the day, but it does not follow that you should refrain from watering because you can't do it in the evening. In cultivation and gardening especially, it's not always possible to do things in the best conditions; in that case, you have to do them as well as possible. If there's no time in the evening, water in the morning, and if you can't water everything in the morning, water all day long. Watering by hand takes a long time; you have to wet the soil well and make the water penetrate deeply. I insist on this, because in general, gardeners who don't know much about cultivation would happily water an entire garden with six jugs of water. Almost all vegetable garden plants, with the exception of lettuces, cabbages and cauliflowers, should be watered from the head, not the spout. Spout watering is the worst of all, and should only be used for pom9 med vegetables, those whose leaves fear water. In all other cases, you need to water from the head, i.e. wet the whole bed. Here's why: When plants are watered by the spout, i.e. at the base only, the roots are moistened, but we forget that all the unwatered parts are dry, and as their surface area is much larger than that of the parts wetted by partial watering, they absorb all the local moisture by capillary action in less than an hour, and the plant watered at the base is almost as dry two hours after partial watering as it was before. To water a bed profitably, proceed as follows: Give a little water the first time, enough to moisten the soil, but not too much at a time, so that it doesn't sink to the surface; let this first watering penetrate well, and a quarter of an hour later, give a second one, which penetrates equally well; if the water sinks to the surface, stop, because as soon as the water sinks, it beats the soil and makes it impermeable to water and air. Half an hour later, a third watering is given, more abundant than the previous two, and this time penetrating very deeply into soil already soaked to a certain depth. If the water has been poured in too quickly, and the soil is beaten up, hoe it in with a hook a few hours 8 after watering, and before giving another, which would have no effect on a flat strip with a smooth surface beaten up like a driveway. The water would run off without penetrating the soil, and a certain amount of work, time and money would have been spent watering the paths, while the plants would perish for lack of moisture, to dissolve the fertilizers and speed up the ascent of the sap. I humbly beg my readers' forgiveness for this long dissertation on how to water, which will seem at least useless to some, but teaching experience makes it my duty to produce it. My listeners fall into three categories: the first is made up of intelligent men who are not afraid to put their hand to the work; for these, success is assured. The second is made up of intelligent men who claim to love progress, but don't want to do anything themselves. They come to our classes and applaud our teaching, whose logic seduces them; they applaud in good faith; they bring a more or less intelligent gardener with them, and tell him: apply this. The result is often bad, because the master has not supervised the execution, and often contrary to what we have taught them.

prescribed. Things remain as they are, and the owner has nothing to say to a labourer disguised as a gardener who tells him in a solemn tone: you see sir, the system is worthless. The third group is made up of purely practical men, which in the French language translates as: knowing nothing and willing to learn nothing. These men have often been sent to our courses, somewhat against their will! They say to each other, during all the theoretical lessons: J'avons pas besoin d'écouter ce monsieur qu'a un habit et des gants, mais nous rirons quand y viendra toucher à ste terre! There'll be time enough to look at him and not listen: I'll laugh! These good people base their opinion on a false idea. It's that it's harder to drive a plough, handle a spade, pickaxe or rake than to get a bachelor's degree. That's their belief, and they're mistaken in good faith. Don't believe them to be enemies of progress, they'll embrace it; but when they've seen it! let these restricted intelligences, enemies of study, see results first, and they'll immediately set to work to imitate. The uneducated man's distrust of gentlemen who cultivate can be explained to some extent by the failures of fools who wanted to do everything themselves, to change and upset everything, before they had acquired serious knowledge. The landowner has intelligence; he must work, not at digging and watering, but at acquiring solid knowledge, so as to direct his servants. He who acts in this way cooperates more than he thinks in the prosperity of his country. Do something better than what exists, and you'll soon find imitators, but do it first, and don't tell a man, who is an enemy of study and theory, to apply what he barely understands, and I'd even say, what he doesn't want to understand. This is so true, in fact, that the practitioners I'm talking about are enemies to us for the duration of the theoretical lessons; they come to the first practical lesson to laugh, and with the certainty of making fun of the gentleman who dares to touch the ground! But as soon as they see the gentleman, tool in hand, demonstrating that with half the trouble, they can do a better job, they become serious, listen, watch conscientiously, and come back for the second practical lesson, which they listen to religiously; by the third, they regret not having followed the theoretical lessons with success. If we give a course the following year, the most recalcitrant, in principle, are our most fervent followers, and sometimes our best pupils. Growing crops requires two things: knowledge and manpower. If the owner acquires the knowledge and applies it with the manpower at his disposal, before long France's wealth will have doubled. That's the question. Sine quà, no! Weeding is an operation as important as it is neglected in the vegetable garden; it consists of removing weeds from seedlings, by hand when? the seedlings are very young and tightly packed, and with the weeder when they are stronger. Weeding with the weeder is equivalent to hoeing. In principle, there should never be any weeds or foreign plants in seedlings intended for transplanting, nor in beds sown by broadcasting. In other words, we absolutely forbid this deplorable custom of sowing lettuces in onion and carrot beds. The lettuces grow up in the middle of the main sowing and smother it, producing only deplorable seedlings; they considerably delay the harvest of onions and carrots, only to produce a few mediocre and late salads. As soon as the seedlings are well established, the first weeding is done by hand, i.e. all weeds are pulled out one by one, and care must be taken not to let them become stronger than the seeded plants, under the pretext that the grass is too small or the weather too dry. The weed is never too small to be destroyed; it grows excessively fast when left in the middle of seedlings; this luxuriant vegetation is to the detriment of seeded plants, whose fertilizers it has absorbed, and it soon chokes them with its broad leaves and long roots. There's another serious drawback to waiting this late to weed: part of the root breaks off, and the grass grows back; when the root is pulled out completely, the surrounding plants are almost uprooted and suffer greatly. Drought is an inadmissible excuse for preventing weeding. Just moisten the soil with a few watering cans, and the weeds will pull right out. The first weeding should be carried out as soon as the weeds appear, watering beforehand if the soil is too dry, and afterwards to reattach to the soil the roots that have been shaken. It's a good idea to thin out areas where there are too many plants, by doing the first weeding. As soon as the weeds grow back, weed again, but this time with the weeder, a very convenient and expedient instrument (pl. 4, fig. 18). Weeds can be destroyed and thinned out with the weeder, and hoeing, done very superficially with this instrument, loosens the soil, makes it permeable, and reshoots the plants. 17 It's rare to have to do a third weeding when the first two have been well done, and above all on time. Weeding is inexpensive, and is usually carried out by women; it brings the harvest forward considerably, and increases its quality and quantity enormously. For seedlings in rows and those intended for transplanting, weeding between the rows is done with a weeder; only weeds mixed with the plant are pulled out by hand. Hoeing is done with blade and toothed instruments, with hoes for plants far enough apart, and with hoes of different sizes for transplanting in nurseries, and for plants close together. Hoeing is a very important operation, making a powerful contribution to the success of all crops. It is generally regarded as an operation designed solely to destroy weeds, but this is a profound error. Hoeing makes the soil permeable to air, and keeps it moist. As a result, it has an energetic effect on vegetation, facilitating the decomposition of fertilizers and accelerating the ascent of sap. This is its main purpose, and hoeing is just as effective on vegetation as ploughing. Everything in the vegetable garden that is not mulched must be hoeed very frequently, especially after watering, which beats the soil and forms a hard, dry crust on the surface. 2 This surface crust is highly inaccessible to vegetation, especially in slightly compacted soils. On the one hand, it prevents air from penetrating, and therefore prevents fertilizers from decomposing; on the other, as this hard, dry crust stops evaporation, there is no moisture left on the surface. As soon as the surface crust is broken, air penetrates the soil, and evaporation is re-established, the moisture at the bottom rises to the surface by capillary action, bringing to the roots the freshness they were deprived of. It is impossible to determine the number of hoeings, or when they should be carried out. This depends on the nature of the soil, its consistency and temperature. Clearly, clay soil needs to be hoeed more often than light soil, as it crusts more quickly and is so cohesive that it cracks during drought. Hoeing should be more frequent in all soils: when the temperature is very high, good hoeing is more effective than poor watering, especially if it is badly applied. A small amount of water thrown on suddenly beats the soil without wetting it, and only increases the thickness of the surface crust. Hoeing is essential after watering, because no matter how well administered, it always results in the formation of a crust on the surface of the soil, which must be broken if watering is to be successful. Hoeing with the hoe (pl. 4, fig. 12) is practiced in beds and squares of vegetables planted at great distances, and which receive little water. The hoe is a very expedient instrument, but it is imperfect: it does not penetrate deeply enough and does not loosen the soil sufficiently. The use of the hoe in the vegetable garden should be restricted to potatoes; for all other crops we prefer to use the flail (pl. 4, fig. 16). The serfouette is the most perfect instrument for hoeing in the vegetable garden; the blade is used to cut weeds between two plots of land, then the hook is used to harrow the soil energetically, completely loosening it. The same hook is used to move the soil deeply around the roots, without damaging or even shaking them. You urgently need two hook hoes, a large one for vegetables planted a long way away, and a small one for seedlings in rows, transplants, and all very close plants, requiring all the more hoeing as they are watered more frequently. With the hook, you can hoe a bed in an instant, and it's urgent to do it often, whenever a crust forms on the surface of the soil when it's not mulched. I can't sum up this chapter any better than by saying that hoeing is the scale of production in the vegetable garden, and that without it, fertilizing and watering lose more than half their effectiveness. 9 CROP SUCCESSION AND COUNTER-PLANTING. Crop succession and counter-planting are part of, and divisions of, the crop rotations I have already discussed; they are the art of organizing vegetable seedlings, transplants and nurseries, so as to harvest from each species over a large part of the year. Harvesting little of each kind of vegetable, and never running out, is the goal that can easily be achieved by introducing into the various crop rotations I've mentioned, a succession of vegetables and the counter-plantings I'm about to indicate! Let's start by stating the principle that, from March to November, there should never be an empty bed in the vegetable garden, and that each of these beds should yield, in a single season, at least three harvests on average, if the garden's crops are well managed. To achieve this result, each vegetable species must be constantly sown, and then raised in nurseries, on beds and in the open ground, to immediately fill the gaps left by the harvests. As soon as the harvest is removed, the bed is turned over and immediately planted with the produce from the vegetable nurseries, which are always abundant enough to replace what has just been consumed, and to provide for accidents. You must therefore sow often, and then raise in nurseries of each species, so as to always have good seedlings to put in place, as soon as there is a gap, and replace them in the nursery with younger seedlings. In spring, the beds supply raised seedlings to line the beds, as soon as the temperature allows them to be planted in the ground; they also supply the second and third seedlings, to be planted in the nursery in the ground, and finally, in summer, the ground supports the vegetable seedlings and nursery. What I have said about seedlings in chapter 4, dispenses me from giving further explanations on how to sow, it remains for me to deal with the vegetable nursery, the succession of harvests and counter-planting on layers, and in the open ground. Let's start with layers, which provide us with the first plants for full soil. Vegetable nurseries are planted on warm or hot beds, depending on the plants' need for warmth. As soon as the seedlings are a little strong, we transplant them a few centimetres apart, between the plants in place; then we remove the nursery as soon as it is in the way of the permanent plants, to put it in place in its turn. 3 As I said before, we do warm layers, lukewarm layers and muted layers. All the layers are never done together; we build them up as needed, or when we have manure available. So, I admit we have six hot layers to do. We'll start with two of them, on which we'll sow the first seedlings so that we can raise them in the nursery or put them in place on warm, muted layers, or even in the ground. A fortnight or three weeks later, we'll set up two other warm layers, on which we'll transplant the plants that need the most heat from among those sown first, and sow them again. Finally, a few days later, we'll set up the last two hot layers, and at the same time, a few warm layers to receive : Plants requiring less heat will be placed on the first warm layers and on the warm layers, and between these plants, nursery stock will be transplanted, or vegetables will be counterplanted and harvested on the spot. Later, the number of warm layers will be increased, and the muted layers will be built up to receive, as well as the full soil, raised seedlings. A word about counter-planting is necessary before going any further. It consists in planting other plants, which provide little shade and occupy the soil for only a short time, between plants that have been planted and must be harvested within a certain time. It's a way of doubling harvests without harming production, when the counter-planting is well done and well calculated. This operation is a great help for beds, especially where space must be saved, and where it gives the most brilliant results when skilfully carried out. Counter-planting is also very useful in open-ground cultivation, considerably increasing the yield without additional expense, but it must never be forgotten that the counter-planted vegetable must never harm the permanently planted one, and must be harvested when the latter begins to grow. For example, lettuces can be counter-planted between cauliflowers; a small nursery of cabbages or tomatoes between melons that have just been planted; sorrel, parsley or chervil between cabbages; cauliflower between melons just about to be harvested; white onion between clumps of peas; sorrel between green beans; cauliflower in early carrots, while harvesting, etc., etc. In the open ground, we counterplant: white onions in strawberry plants; lettuces, garlic, leeks between cabbages, etc., etc. I'll describe the counter-planting techniques that can be used for the special crops that make up the third part of this book. Let's get back to layers, seedlings, nurseries, crop successions and the counter-planting to be carried out there. As not all our followers will have at their disposal warm, lukewarm and deaf layers, I will give a few examples for each of these three series of layers, so that they can guide as surely those who possess all three species of layers, as those who will have at their disposal only lukewarm and even deaf layers. WARM LAYERS. 1st example. Around December 15, we sow melons, tomatoes, winter lettuce and a few radishes under a sheet of chassis. The melons are first removed and placed on a new warm layer; the tomatoes are transplanted between the melons; the radishes and part of the lettuce are harvested; between these two harvests, early potatoes are counter-planted, between which a few sorrel plants can still be counter-planted when the radishes and lettuce are removed; then, once the potatoes have been harvested, we plant cucumbers or late melons, between which we insert a few nursery plants for counter-planting, along with cauliflowers towards the end of the melon harvest. 2nd example. Early carrots are sown around the same time, to be harvested in the first days of April; while the carrots are being harvested, early tomatoes are counter-planted with pickling cucumbers, which are then counter-planted with cauliflowers. 3rd example. In January, you plant beans to be eaten green, between which you counterplant a few sorrel plants, or sow a few radishes; once the green beans have been harvested, you plant cauliflowers, counterplanted with cucumbers. Any empty spaces can be filled with a pot of Gaillon strawberries or large strawberries, which are then buried in the potting soil. WARM LAYERS. 1st example. Towards the end of January we plant early peas, between which we sow a few seedlings to be replanted, in a nursery, under another frame; as soon as the peas grow, we counter-plant them with early cauliflowers or tomatoes, or we pull them out to plant melons counter-planted with cauliflowers. 24 C early carrots, counterplanted with cauliflower, counterplanted in turn with cucumber. 3rd example. Around February, we plant early potatoes, between which we sow melons, tomatoes, etc., etc., which we remove to place in a nursery under another frame, as soon as the potatoes grow. After the potatoes, we plant melons, counter-planted with cauliflowers, towards the end of the melon harvest. Pots of strawberries can also be placed in the empty spaces of the warm layers, and some of the 8 plants raised on the warm layers can be transplanted to these layers, just as the warm layers will in turn receive the transplants born on the warm layers. MUTED LAYERS. You can grow more or less the same crops on these layers as on the warm layers, but with the difference that you have to start two months later, and while giving up early crops, you can still obtain very-early produce on these layers, if you compare them with those grown in the open ground. See part 3, Special crops, for more information. As you can see, the layers, even the muted layers when you don't have any others, provide the first seedlings to be planted in the open ground. Our vegetable garden, as you will recall, is subject to a four-year rotation with layers. Plot no. 1, smoked to the max, is for leafy vegetables. Plot no. 2, smoked to the maximum the previous year, and ploughed in the second year, is for roots and vegetables requiring decomposed manure. Square n° 3, smoked to the maximum in the first year, earth-mixed in the second and vigorously ashed in the third, is intended for vegetables with dried fruits, which require little fertilizer and a certain quantity of potash to bear fruit abundantly. Square No. h, having received maximum fertilization in the first year, topdressing in the second and ashing in the third, will be occupied in part by layers, seed-producing plants, a few dried-fruit vegetables and, if necessary, vegetable and flower nurseries, which will be fertilized with compost mixed with the product of the demolition of the first layers. Now that the season has arrived, it's time to sow and plant each of these squares. Let's start with n° 1, smoked to the max. EXAMPLES OF SUCCESSIVE CROPS IN VARIOUS BEDS OF PLOT NO. 1. 1° In early March, bed-sown leeks are transplanted; around mid-June, after the leeks have been harvested, they are ploughed, then celery is planted, which is counter-planted with lettuce. 2° In February, Yorck cabbage is planted, with garlic and shallots; after the cabbage harvest, cauliflower is planted with lettuce. 3° Very light radishes are sown in a plantation of Yorck cabbages; after harvesting the cabbages, cardoons are counter-planted with lettuce. 4° White onions are transplanted in February; after this harvest, savoy cabbages are planted with lettuces. 5° In February, cauliflowers are planted, between which spinach is sown; after the cabbage harvest, leeks are planted, into which a few lamb's lettuces can be sown. 18 EXAMPLES FOR PLOT NO. 2. 1° In February, Gaillon strawberry plants are transplanted, into which white onions are counter-planted. 2° Early carrots are sown in February; after the carrot harvest, lettuces are planted, counter-planted with chicory; after these last two harvests, spinach or lamb's lettuce are sown. 3° In March, we plant green romaine or red lettuce, between which we sow a few radishes; after the lettuce harvest, we plant tomatoes, counter-planted with summer lettuce. 4° In February, onions are sown; in July, lettuces are planted, into which late carrots or turnips are sown. 5° In March, early turnips are sown; after the turnips are harvested, late carrots are planted, followed by a sowing of lamb's lettuce. EXAMPLES FOR PLOT NO. 3. 1° In March, sow early peas with onions, carrots, turnips, etc., etc., for seed. After the peas have been harvested, beans are sown to be eaten green. 2° In April, early beans are sown to be eaten green, counterplanted with vegetables for seed; after the green beans have been harvested, late peas are sown. 3° In March, swamp beans are planted, between which late peas are sown, followed by a final season of green beans. 98 4° In March, lentils are counter-planted with vegetables for seed, followed by a harvest of late peas or beans. SQUARE N° A. This square, destined to become square n° 1 the following year, is intended for beds of all species. If the kitchen garden is very large, you can grow a few peas or beans watered with liquid fertilizer, or forage and a few seeds for poultry. If the kitchen garden is of ordinary size, the entire area not occupied by beds will be devoted to open-ground vegetable nurseries. A word about their organization is essential. Transplanting into a nursery is one of the most profitable operations for most vegetables, in that as soon as they are developed, they are planted at a small but equal distance, in very fertile, heavily fertilized soil, which, because of its small size, can receive all the watering it needs, three or four times a day if necessary. Without a nursery, there's no such thing as a good plant. I know that many gardeners will smile when they read these lines and say: I've never nursed vegetables and I have superb seedlings. I'd be quick to convince these disbelievers by showing them nursery-raised seedlings of the same age, which are much stronger and will produce better and earlier produce than the seedlings that have been set. 8 In most broadcast sowings, the seedling is very close together and therefore etiolated. This plant has spindly roots and poorly formed leaves, with a thin, elongated crown. As soon as such a plant is exposed to the sun, it first loses most of its leaves, its weak roots partly perish, and it always takes some time for it to recover and grow well. Add to this the difficulty, or rather the impossibility, of properly watering weak seedlings placed at great distances, and you'll recognize that we've spent six times as much time and trouble getting bad seedlings to grow again, as it would have taken to create two nurseries. Our seedlings are planted in rows, and our seedlings are never etiolated, with short, thick collars and excellent roots. We unfold it and replant it in the nursery, with all its roots. Here's how to set up the nursery. A plank is ploughed deeply and thoroughly smoked with fertilizer, and a little potting soil is added and mixed with the soil, after ploughing, by harrowing with a hooked fork. Rake out the stones, make ridges around the bed to retain water for watering, and then place stakes; two at each edge of the bed, 10 centimetres from the edge, the middle ones 20 centimetres apart. When all the stakes have been placed, the rope is laid all along the rows at once, and all the gullies into which the seedlings will be planted are dug out with a pointed trowel. Remove the string, and transplant the plants with all the care indicated in the transplanting chapter, 20 centimetres apart and staggered. Water immediately after transplanting, but wet the bed thoroughly with the watering can. When you water transplants at the base, you make a hole with the neck of the watering can, which exposes the root to the air, and the plant takes longer to recover when it does. What's more, watering with the spout only partially wets the soil, and a few moments after watering, the moisture is absorbed by the dry parts. Vegetables transplanted in the nursery do not wilt most of the time, they grow quickly and after a few weeks provide seedlings that no longer fear anything because of their vigor, and which can be planted with certainty of success. Vegetable nurseries also offer the immense advantage of providing double the yield; if the soil is not available for planting, the plant will strengthen in the nursery (cabbages start to fade); only when the plants in the nursery are very strong should they be removed, and replanted in clods using the trowel. In this chapter, I've given a few examples of successive cultivation and counter-planting, for beds and for the open ground; the combinations can be modified ad infinitum according to the importance of the crop, the quantity of species grown, and the rotation introduced into the kitchen garden; in the third part, devoted to special crops, I indicate the cultivation method specific to each species, and the place it should occupy in the kitchen garden rotation and in counter-planting. DiSueed CO AIL. The cultivation of garlic is of little importance; it doesn't deserve a special place in the vegetable garden, so we'll be content to counter-plant it in squares n° 1 and n° 2, with cabbages or strawberries. Garlic needs strong soil, with plenty of smoke, but it fears excess humidity, so it should never be counter-planted in crops that are watered too frequently. It is propagated by cloves, i.e. by separating the cloves and planting them separately. To make sure you never run out of garlic, plant it twice a year: in February and March, for harvesting in July or August, and in October, for harvesting in spring. Garlic does very well in borders; in fact, this is one of the best ways to grow it. Diguized D Cloves are planted 15 centimetres apart, and when the stem is fully developed, a knot is tied to stop the ascent of the sap, and concentrate all its action on the root. When garlic is harvested, as soon as the stem has withered, it should be left in the sun for two or three days before being brought in. ANGELIC. A triennial plant whose stems are used for candying, and whose seeds are used for various liqueurs. Angelica likes moist, very subsoil; it grows vigorously beside streams and fountains. Sow in March and water assiduously until the plant is strong enough to be transplanted. Plant out the following spring, spacing the plants one metre apart. The stems are harvested in the second year, the seed in the third. If you want to grow angelica in beds, plant it in a bed in plot no. 1, staggered 80 centimetres apart in all directions, and water very copiously. ARROCHE. To be grown from seed, in borders in plot no. 1, or in beds in plot no. 2; sow often if you want to have it all year round. Arrowroot can be planted between cabbages, artichokes or cardoons. 18 ARTICHAUTS. This is one of the best vegetables, to be harvested all year round, with a little care, a lot of water, and a well-understood culture. I have recommended the cultivation of a single variety: the green aros artichoke from Laon, as very fertile, and unquestionably the best of all; it is always tender, even when peppered, when it has acquired more than half its development. Artichokes like damp, clayey soil. It should be fertilized copiously in all cases, but the dose of manure and water should be increased as it is planted in lighter soils. There are two ways to grow artichokes: in permanent squares, where they produce good yields for three or four years, and as annuals. The choice between the two depends on the size of the garden, the quantity of artichokes needed, the yield, and the gardener's activity. If the owner has a very large vegetable garden, planted in substantial soil, with plenty of manpower, water and manure, and if artichokes sell well in his locality, it would be to his advantage to create an artichoke patch outside the crop rotation, as I said on page 102. If, on the other hand, the soil is light, and the owner only wants to harvest what he needs for his own consumption, he should adopt an annual crop. We will now describe these 9 two crops. You can experiment with both, and choose the one best suited to the soil and the grower's needs. GROWING ARTICHOKES INDOORS. When creating an artichoke patch intended to remain in place for three or four years, the first thing to do is to plough it in, or rather to break it up with two good spades, i.e. to a depth of around 60 centimetres, even when the vegetable garden has been broken up. A very copious manuring of fresh manure is applied to the soil, and if wool waste or similar is available, it is mixed in with the manure. Stakes are then placed as follows: 60 cm from the edges, and all others 1 m 20 cm apart. Place the chalk line on these stakes, mark the lines with a pointed trowel, and remove the chalk line. Before planting, measure one of the lines to leave a distance of 60 centimetres between each end of the bed and the first artichoke plant, and 1 metre 20 centimetres between the plants. A small stick is driven into each spot where a foot is needed, taking care to place the small sticks in staggered rows. In this way, the artichoke vines are placed 1 meter 20 centimeters apart, in all directions. Once this is done, we proceed with the planting. First, holes of about 30 centimetres are made in the marked places, using a spade or a large trowel. At the bottom of the holes, place a good handful of well-consumed fertilizer, which you mix well with the soil at the bottom, using the trowel; place the eyecup in the middle of the hole, at a depth of 10 to 12 centimetres, Then add a little more soil, followed by manure spread across the entire width of the hole, and cover with soil, taking care to form a basin around the base to force water from watering to seep down to the base of the plant. Artichokes planted as indicated grow vigorously and bear fruit four or five months after planting (pl. 7, fig. 3). Water copiously, immediately after planting, and continue to give a watering can of water to each plant every day, until it sprouts again, and even when there are four or five sprouting leaves. At that point, we only water every two or three days, but we give a watering can to each plant, so as to wet the soil thoroughly. It would be better not to water, and to hoe often rather than half-heartedly. We hoe from time to time to keep the soil in a constant state of permeability. You can counter-plant cabbages, cauliflowers, lettuces, white onions, and sow radishes in artichokes, without harming them in any way, and I'd even go so far as to say that they do very well with these counter-planted vegetables, often and copiously watered, as the entire surface of the soil is kept in a state of humidity that is very beneficial to the artichoke. The counter-planted vegetables must all be removed when the artichoke covers the ground, and shows its first apples. The soil then belongs entirely to the artichoke, and you need to make it produce quickly and a lot. As soon as the first apples appear, hoe vigorously and water every day, even twice a day if the weather is very dry. The beauty, quality and number of artichokes depend on the amount of water you give them. One large and two medium-sized fruits can be harvested from each artichoke stalk. There is often a greater quantity, but in a plant destined to produce for several years, it is advisable to remove them to avoid tiring the plant, and to avoid harming the following year's harvest. As soon as the fruits have been removed, the stem should be cut off as deeply as possible under the ground, and care should be taken not to leave it on the plant or to cut it in half, as it rots on the spot and considerably impairs the development of the eyelets, and consequently the next harvest; sometimes it even leads to the loss of the plant, which rots on the spot. Artichokes are very prone to frost, especially as they are planted in damp, clay soils to produce good quality produce. Preserving the plants over the winter is more laborious than cultivating them all year round. This is the other side of the coin in artichoke cultivation, and it's such a surface area that we've had to look for and experiment with another crop to avoid incessant and very expensive labor. It's true, artichokes are grown like most other crops. We know the dangers to which they are exposed, and we rely on Providence to preserve them. When winters are not harsh, they can often be kept for several years without noticeable damage, but if a harsh season occurs, with prolonged frosts, almost all the plants are destroyed, and there are scarcely enough plants left to repopulate everything that has been frozen; then people cry famine, storm after the harshness of the season, and artichokes are in short supply just about everywhere. Annual cultivation, which is easy in the kitchen garden and possible on the plains, gives us the means to avoid these disasters. We don't want to leave anything to chance, we need an even harvest every year, so let's first look at ways of preserving permanent plantations, then move on to annual cultivation. When you have an artichoke plantation of a certain size, it's easy to preserve it from frost with a little vigilance. Keep an eye on the weather; as long as it remains soft, mild and damp, you can let the artichokes grow, but take care to hoe them from time to time to destroy weeds. This is very important before ridging, because if you ridge in soil overloaded with weeds, these weeds, cut 9 and buried green, ferment and rot, and can, in damp weather, pass on their decomposition to artichokes, which are very prone to rot. As soon as the weather turns dry, and frost is likely, first cut off the largest leaves and butter the stems, i.e., bring the soil back to the base with the hoe, as shown in figure 4, plate 7. I said cut off the largest leaves, i.e. those around the base, and not shave off all the leaves, as is wrongly done in some countries. To deprive the artichoke of all its leaves is to delay the first harvest by more than a month, and reduce it by half. Ridging preserves the crown and the rudiments of the eyelets, and even encourages their development, but is insufficient to protect the plant from the effects of an intense, continuous frost. Ridging is the first preventive operation. It's done as soon as the weather threatens, and as soon as it's done, you need to check the barometer and get ready for the other operations. Prepare decomposed manure or compost, and if frost seems imminent, surround the mounds with it, placing a small wheelbarrowful at each foot (pl. 7, fig. 5). This manure will be buried in the spring; it is all transported; it is a job well done, and it will ensure the preservation of the artichokes, however harsh the winter may be. As soon as the manure is placed, it is urgent, in the event of a severe frost, to place a certain quantity of dry leaves, dried grass or straw between the mounds, to cover all the leaves as soon as the frost becomes severe. Artichokes that have been mounded, smoked and covered with leaves or litter can brave the harshest winters with impunity, but you mustn't forget that artichokes rot very easily, and that every time the thaw comes, you have to uncover them completely, otherwise they will rot under their shelter; if it freezes at night and thaws during the day, and the weather remains dry, you have to cover them in the evening and uncover them in the morning. If you don't uncover as soon as it thaws, you expose yourself to rot. If the thaw is serious, i.e. accompanied by rain, not only should you uncover completely, but you should also loosen the collar a little, so as to expose it to the air. When the weather's dry, you put the shoes back on, and when it's frosty, you cover. It's a never-ending job, requiring constant monitoring throughout the winter. Most of the time, artichokes are like fruit trees, which are sheltered every day. You put in a lot of hard work at the beginning, but by the end of the season you've cooled off, you've sheltered so often that you no longer believe in the danger, and the day you stop, a frost takes everything away. Towards April, when frosts are no longer to be feared, the bedding is removed; the manure covering the mounds is spread evenly over the entire square, the mounds are demolished, and a deep plough is given over to the manure. A fortnight later, around April 15, when the plants are starting to grow well, we remove all the useless shoots from the collar and plant the new ones. But when you want to replant, it's better to wait a fortnight, as the eyelets are better formed, with small roots at the base, and then you choose an elite plant, whose precocity and fertility are assured. Here's how to proceed with carnationing: the plant is completely dethatched all around, and the two largest stems are chosen to keep (only two per plant). If more are left, the harvest is significantly reduced in quantity and quality. All horticultural treatises recommend bursting the eyelets; this has always seemed barbaric to me. The tear produces a wound that always creates a bad scar, and it seemed to me that the harvest should suffer from the numerous tears made to the mother plant. For several years, I carried out comparative trials; in the same square, I eyeballed by splinters, and cut, instead of splintering, over one or two rows. Years of experience have shown me this to be absolutely true. The plants whose eyelets had been cut off were much more vigorous, gave more fruit, more beautiful fruit, and ripened three weeks earlier than those of the splintered plants. As this happened over a period of eight or ten years, I abandoned splinter eyeletting, and I now use and recommend eyeletting with a serpette, to the exclusion of the previous method. This explains the recommendation made in several horticultural treatises: "cut off the torn parts of the eyelets with a serpette, and leave them in the cellar for four or five days before planting, to heal the wound and prevent rotting". I'm far from denying the effectiveness of this method against rot, but I do affirm that a carnation that has withered for four or five days in the cellar, has experienced a fatigue that considerably delays its development when planted; not only does this give rise to less vigorous vegetation, but it also bears fruit later, and gives smaller and less abundant fruit than one that has been detached with the serpette, and replanted immediately. When eyeleting with a scythe, all the weak eyelets are sacrificed and the best ones, those with a thick collar and a good root ball, are carefully removed. It's easy to keep a few small rootlets by cutting them off the mother plant (A, pl. 7, fig. 6); these rootlets contribute powerfully to the vegetation and fruiting of the planted subject, since we are planting a perfect subject, composed of a stem and a root, instead of an imperfect subject, a cutting, composed solely of a stem and deprived of roots. As soon as the eyelet is detached from the mother plant, cut off the large leaves to prevent evaporation (b, pl. 7, fig., 6) and plant it immediately. As soon as the eyelet has been removed, the mother plant is planted again. Water copiously as soon as the apples appear. The same care is applied during the winter, with carnationing every spring and so on for the four years of the artichoke plant's life. I'm not talking about manuring, because it's understood that every year the mounds are covered with manure buried in the spring. If, instead of manure, litter or leaves were used to cover the mounds, manure would have to be applied every year and buried by spring ploughing. ANNUAL ARTICHOKE CULTIVATION. This type of cultivation is far preferable to permanent cultivation: firstly, it avoids all the trouble of wintering, which requires constant supervision; secondly, it produces earlier and later crops with less effort. With annual cultivation, it's easy to grow artichokes almost all year round. In this case, artichokes are grown in the same way as other vegetables. Instead of leaving the artichokes in the ground, buttering them, covering them and uncovering them constantly throughout the winter, at the risk of seeing them freeze or rot, we pull them up at the end of the year, a little before the frosts. From the strongest carnations, those with the largest necks, we select the quantity needed to produce early artichokes, and plant the rest in the vegetable greenhouse. The choice carnations are planted in slightly large pots, and placed in a cold tarpaulin, where, protected by glass, they continue to vegetate slowly; when the season becomes hard, when it freezes, a stove is placed around the tarpaulin, and covered with straw mats. The artichokes, preserved in this way over the winter, are planted out in April, when frosts are no longer to be feared, in plot no. 1 of the vegetable garden. The slow vegetation, contained by the tarpaulin, has favored fruiting, and the apples show up very soon after planting, and sometimes before. Artichokes stored this way over winter produce at least six weeks earlier than those left in the ground. Artichokes can be stored in pots, in an orangery if there is no tarpaulin, and if you have enough frames, you can force them to produce fruit towards the end of winter, by putting a layer on the bottom of the tarpaulin. Artichokes kept in pots over winter are intended solely for early production, and it is best to grow them very quickly, in order to speed up harvesting and clear the soil. We counterplant them with cauliflower; we water very copiously, and as soon as the harvest is done, we pull up all the artichoke stalks, and throw them in the manure to increase the mass of the compost; we also make, in the place they occupied, a harvest of winter cabbages, counterplanted with lettuces, garlic, etc., and we plant them in the compost. Autumn artichokes are planted in the vegetable greenhouse or cellar, using artichoke vines that have been planted, or rather buried, in slightly greasy sand or mixed with soil. Towards the end of March or in the first few days of April, the best eyelets are carefully removed and planted as I indicated above, in vegetable plot no. 1. Only one carnation should be planted per plant, never two, as is too often the case, because when artichokes receive the necessary watering, they form clumps that are too large, which is detrimental to production. All artichokes grown annually should be planted 90 centimetres apart, staggered. Carnations taken from the vegetable greenhouse and planted in spring will bear fruit in August, September and October if they are sufficiently watered; they will begin to produce when artichokes kept in pots have stopped yielding. Often there are several small artichokes left when the frosts approach; we pull up the whole plants, and replant them in a cold tarpaulin, in the vegetable greenhouse or even in the cellar, where they finish ripening, and still give excellent fruit when they come in, and sometimes in the middle of winter. If you want to grow artichokes in winter, and have enough frames to shelter them, nothing could be easier. To do this, plant a special patch of artichokes in plot no. 1 of the vegetable garden; water to ensure a good start, then stop watering for a while to delay the harvest; in a word, manage your artichokes so that they don't show their apples until October; pull up the whole plants and place them under a tarpaulin, either in the vegetable greenhouse or in the cellar, where they will finish growing over winter. The second artichoke planting, made with the eyelets from the vegetable greenhouse, is pulled out as frost approaches; it provides the plants for potting, and the eyelets for the second and third plantings if necessary. Nothing is easier than this type of cultivation, and although it may appear complicated, it is less laborious than growing artichokes indoors, while producing earlier and later fruit almost without interruption throughout the year. What's more, you can be sure of never running out of one of the best and most precious products in the vegetable garden. ASPARAGUS. Asparagus is perhaps the most precious vegetable, and the one that was the most poorly cultivated. Asparagus is always eagerly awaited, it's the first vegetable, it's healthy, excellent, and often recommended for the sick and delicate stomachs. As a result, consumption of this precious vegetable is colossal; Germany, Holland and Belgium cultivate it successfully. Purple asparagus from Holland, the Marchiennes and Ulm varieties, were the most perfect we had, 9 before asparagus cultivation became essentially French, and a French variety, the improved Argenteuil asparagus, dethroned all known varieties. I have previously indicated the Ulm asparagus, and especially recommended it as the earliest and best. Here's how: I began writing this book in 1863, it was due to appear in September, and at that time, I had not grown Argenteuil asparagus, I knew it imperfectly. Delays in the appearance of my book, which only saw the light of day in July 1864, ten months later than the time indicated, enabled me to examine carefully not only the improved Argenteuil asparagus, but also the cultivation of this magnificent variety. After mature and conscientious examination, I adopt, to the exclusion of all other varieties, the improved Argenteuil asparagus, as the largest, perhaps the most fertile, almost as early as the Ulm asparagus, and unquestionably the best. Argenteuil has not only endowed us with a variety of asparagus that surpasses all others, in volume and quality, but also with a cultivation method that is as simple as it is fruitful in results, and which victoriously dethrones all the timid trials of the past. When properly cultivated, the improved Argenteuil asparagus measures 8 to 10 centimetres in circumference, is 35 centimetres long and is so tender that it can be eaten at least halfway through a length of 18 centimetres. It's a French conquest, a novelty without rival. This asparagus is neither green nor purple, but variegated. Every year, the Société impériale et centrale d'horticulture, whose rulings are the law, awards first prize to M. Lhérault-Salbœuf, Argenteuil's most distinguished asparagus grower. M. l'Empereur appointed this intelligent and hard-working grower as his table supplier. I said earlier that progress in arboriculture and vegetable cultivation would contribute mightily to the increase of public wealth; that when these two sciences were spread throughout France, and popularized by primary school teachers in every village, the fortune of France would be doubled. The asparagus crops of Argenteuil are a striking example of what I've been saying. I'll step aside to let Mr. J. Drion, a distinguished amateur horticulturist, whose friend I have the honor of being, and who is making the most praiseworthy and disinterested efforts to popularize the cultivation of improved asparagus in the Orléanais and Sologne regions: "But no sooner had our railways extended their networks, than every spring the capital's market halls were clogged with asparagus, quite mediocre, arriving by the wagonload from all the départements and even from abroad. The Parisian, a tireless practitioner of the science of Berchoux and Brillat-Savarin, set about analyzing the specific qualities of each species, with his distinctive sure-footedness of palate. He compared them, as a fine connoisseur that he is; then, all things considered: the shape of some, the ease of cooking of the little green ones, sometimes bitter; the pleasing appearance of the Hollandaise, sometimes lacking in taste; the appropriation of the sauce appropriate to each kind; he decreed, and this decree has the force of law on all the tables of Europe : that first prize went to Ghent asparagus, second to Vendôme asparagus, third to Châteauroux asparagus, fourth to Besançon asparagus. Asparagus from Ulm, Marchiennes and Holland, with their appetizing shape and color, but weak taste, received a mere second place. The asparagus from Orleans, green, bitter, thin, grown in vineyards, and therefore poorly cultivated, was placed last. The asparagus from the outskirts of Paris remained: Epinay, Saint-Ouen, Pantin, Sartrouville, Montesson and Argenteuil, judged equal in merit, were not ranked; their merit, however great, was recognized as perfectible. The farmers of these communes were told: "You have exceptional soil and the privilege of the best fertilizers; as you can produce bigger and better, we're only giving you an honorable mention, we're only awarding you an encouragement prize. You can become the kings of asparagus; work hard, and we'll let you know! "Argenteuil took the decision seriously, and got to work. Several of its growers, led by M. Lhérault-Salbœuf, have devoted themselves with intelligence and perseverance to the improvement of asparagus cultivation; they have carried out five or six methods of cultivation at the same time, and kept a daily record of the results; crop rotation, sowing, fertilization, choice of location, preparation of the land, ploughing of all kinds, they have neglected nothing; Six years later, the Argenteuil growers had truly become the kings of asparagus; they had created the third breed that led them to fortune. " Mr. Lhérault-Salbœuf wasn't rich then; today he has a very respectable fortune, one that many notaries would be content with, and he owes it to Argenteuil asparagus. Not only has Argenteuil's monstrous asparagus made Mr. Lhérault's fortune, it has also made that of all the surrounding communes. Faced with such conclusive results, imitators have been numerous; improved asparagus crops now occupy more than five leagues of land. England and Russia have set up trading posts wherever improved asparagus is grown. The grower never comes to the market; he doesn't even bother to sell his produce. Russian and English agents wait for him when he returns from the fields, climb into his car and, most of the time, make the price themselves, so afraid are they of seeing these magnificent products, unique in the world, slip through their fingers. 16 I have cited these facts as an example to follow, and to make the masses appreciate what importing a lucrative crop into a country is worth. Improved asparagus has enriched all those who have cultivated it, and the number is great; now let's count the added value of the soil, occupied by these crops, and we'll see that the soil is worth ten times what it was fifteen years ago. Not only are the farmers rich, but they have also enriched the landowners. France finds millions every year, paid for by Russia and England. May the reader forgive me these lengthy details, but as I am dedicated to the teaching of horticulture, my efforts are aimed at enlightening backward populations, and getting them to adopt crops that would make their country's fortune. I have cited these facts, such as the honorable mention given to the ancient asparagus of Argenteuil, preferable to that of Ulm and Marchiennes, to prove that when stimulated, a little hard work can produce immense results, for oneself, for one's fellow citizens, and for one's country. May the example of Argenteuil be followed by many horticultural societies in not lavishing their medals too lavishly; the same results will be obtained wherever these societies are content to encourage first efforts and reward serious results handsomely. The cultivation of improved asparagus is a source of wealth for all countries willing to undertake it. This crop is as new eight leagues from Paris as the asparagus variety, better known to the 49- ASPERGES. The English and Russians know more about it than the French, for these gentlemen barely leave a few bunches for the Paris market, and even then, they are not the most beautiful. I shall therefore deal with this crop from two points of view: that of the owner's garden, and that of speculation. Let's begin by stating the principle that we must absolutely abandon the old method of growing asparagus in deep pits, which are very expensive to build up, and in which mounds of manure were buried, all of which wasted. We also absolutely prohibit the annual replanting of soil, which has to be covered with racks and prepared with great expense, a method of cultivation that is as ruinous for the owner as it is contrary to the vegetation of the asparagus. In a word, it's time to make a clean break with the past, to frankly abandon our erring and groping ways and boldly embrace the path of progress. Owners who follow the cultivation methods we've outlined to the letter, without changing a thing, will be sure to harvest an abundance of monstrous asparagus within the timeframe we've indicated. This is addressed to all landowners, even those who have dug pits for twenty years, buried stones, fascines and half their manure in them, if not all, without ever having succeeded in harvesting a passable asparagus crop. I'd like to respond in advance to an objection that will be raised many times: My soil is not that of Argenteuil! To which I reply: the first improved asparagus I saw were planted by Mr. J. Drion on his Beaugençy estate. They were planted in the worst conditions; their volume and quality equal, if not exceed, those of asparagus harvested on the Argenteuil plain. I found the same results in the poor soils of Sologne, and in twenty other places, and it was after having observed these equal results in all soils, with the same variety of asparagus, and with the same cultivation, that I went to Argenteuil to study asparagus cultivation in depth, before writing the lines that follow. I did more, delaying the appearance of this book by over a month, to see asparagus crops in full production. That said, I'll leave the field open for those who don't want to convert, and I'll start with the sowing: ASPARAGUS SOWING. Towards the end of March, a bed is ploughed deeply, and abundant manure of half-decomposed fertilizer is applied. The bed is then set up with edges all around to retain water for watering, then stakes are placed at each end, 25 or 30 centimetres apart; a chalk line is placed and furrows four centimetres deep are traced with a pointed trowel. Once this has been done, remove the string; put the potting soil in a basket and sow it about a centimetre thick at the bottom of the furrows. The seeds are then sown three centimetres apart in the furrows, covered with about a centimetre of potting soil, and finally covered with pure horse dung, well crushed with the fingers. When the weather is dry, water often until the plants emerge. Watering over the horse dung dissolves all the soluble parts, saturating the entire layer of soil to be occupied by the roots with assimilable fertilizer. Any weeds are pulled out by hand, if they are present before the plant has emerged. As soon as the plant has emerged, we lightly hoe it with the weeder, and hand-pull any weeds growing between the plants. Water from time to time, if the weather is dry; when the plant has reached a height of about ten centimetres, hoe more vigorously, and cover the soil with fresh dung, well crushed with the hands, into which we mix a few handfuls of plaster or ash if plaster is not available, but plaster is better. The following spring, this plant is good to put in place, especially if you've given it all the care I've indicated, and even if some of this care had been lacking, it would still be good to plant; it would be a little less strong, but better for sure than two- and three-year-old plants, as we have the bad habit of using them. Asparagus claws are very fragile; they don't suffer from replanting in the first year, when the roots are underdeveloped, but in the second year, a large part of them are broken off, causing a noticeable delay in vegetation. If you want to force asparagus under a frame, leave a claw every 50 centimetres, plough, taking care not to damage them, and cover with half-decomposed manure. These claws can be pulled out the following year and replanted under a frame. Asparagus can be sown in plot no. 1, or better still, in plot no. 4, where a bed can be prepared for the purpose. PLANTING IN THE VEGETABLE GARDEN. Asparagus requires a soft, chalky soil, lighter than strong, and above all free of humidity; it likes chalky soil, and needs a considerable amount of humus. With enough fertilizer and the addition of some form of limestone, asparagus can be grown in any soil, provided it is healthy. There isn't a vegetable garden, however clayey, where you can't grow an asparagus plant. In this case, you need to amend the soil, and whatever amendment you give it, it will always be less expensive than planting in deep pits, draining the bottom, and spending mountains of manure in pure waste. If the soil is very compact, very moist, and retains stagnant water in the lower layers, the asparagus plant will have to be drained, but this is an exceptional case that does not occur 8 once in a hundred times. When the soil is strong and clayey, an amendment is sufficient; depending on the compactness of the soil, sand mixed with crushed plaster, old lime mortar, lime or, failing all that, ashes from wood, lime kilns, factories and even locomotives are spread evenly over the entire surface, if you're near a railway line and have nothing else to hand. I'm a great believer in locomotive ashes, because you can get them in large quantities for next to nothing, and experience has shown me that they work very energetically in clay and siliceous soils, which are essentially lacking in limestone. When the soil to be planted is very compact, it is useful to give it a rough ploughing before the frosts; we leave it like this throughout the winter, and in spring, we spread the amendment, which we amalgamate well with the soil, taking care to extract the stones and break up the clods, by carrying out a ploughing with two spade-irons; a few days later, we also spread abundant manure, which we bury by another ploughing. These three ploughings are only necessary on very strong, very clayey soils. In medium-consistency soils, and in soils containing sufficient limestone, manure is spread evenly over the soil, and ploughed in with a single ploughing operation using two spade-irons, once the soil is healthy. In siliceous soils where asparagus gives very good results, a single ploughing is also necessary in spring, to bury the fertilizer, which should be supplemented with limestone or ashes. Once the land to be planted has been levelled, ploughed, smoked and cleared of stones, stakes are placed at a distance of 1 meter 20 centimeters, the distance at which the lines of asparagus will be planted, oriented from east to west. Instead of making beds containing two and sometimes three rows of asparagus, planted 40 to 60 centimetres apart, we'll make a single row every 120 centimetres, and plant the asparagus stalks at the same distance along the whole length of the row, taking care to plant the following rows staggered, so as to have a distance of 1 metre 20 centimetres, in all directions, between the stalks. This planting method will seem exaggerated to those accustomed to planting asparagus at 40 centimetres. One metre twenty centimetres is the desired and tested distance for Argenteuil asparagus, which is six or eight times larger than green asparagus, and four times more productive. If you plant closer, you risk losing a lot in terms of volume and quantity of asparagus. When the stakes are placed 1 meter 20 centimeters apart, a stake is driven in on each side, 20 centimeters from the middle one, giving a 40-centimeter-wide line when the string is laid. Small trenches, 1h centimetres deep and 40 centimetres wide, are opened to plant the claws, with the extracted soil thrown back to the right and left (pl. 8, fig. 1). Once the trenches have been opened, a little half-consumed manure is placed at the bottom (A, pl. 8, fig. 2), and two or three handfuls of the same fertilizer are set aside, every 1 meter 20 centimeters, where each asparagus claw is to be planted. Once this is done, proceed with planting. Use your hands to form a small mound of earth in the middle of the trench, in the place where the claw is to be planted (B, same fig.). Place it on top of the mound, carefully spreading the roots all around (C, same fig.); cover the roots with 2 or 3 centimetres of soil, taking care to ensure that it adheres well to the root tips (D, same fig.); then, using your hand, distribute your supply of fertilizer all around the perimeter of the soil-covered roots (E, same fig.). and finish the operation by covering everything with soil as shown in line F. The neck of the claw should not be covered by more than ten centimetres of soil (G, same fig.). As soon as planting is complete, a small stick (H, same fig.) is placed next to the planted claw, to identify its position and avoid injuring it by hoeing. When the weather is dry, it's a good idea to mulch the entire surface of the pits. A few weeks later, the asparagus starts to grow; all it needs throughout the summer is a few hoeings to destroy weeds, and two or three waterings with liquid fertilizer if the season is very dry. Towards the end of October, cut the stems in half, so as to easily recognize the place of the claw; dig up the crown so as to leave only a 6-centimeter covering of soil (A, pl. 8, fig. 3); then spread manure all around the perimeter occupied by the roots, avoiding putting any on the crown (B, same figure), and leave the plants in this way throughout the winter. Asparagus fears neither cold nor frost, but it does obey the imperative need felt by the roots of all plants to be in contact with the air. The roots of asparagus that are too deeply buried are constantly coming up to breathe, as the Argenteuil growers say. In other words, the roots buried too deeply, and therefore removed from contact with the air, rot, and new ones form on top of the old ones, to the great detriment of the plant's vigor. So we say that asparagus goes up, give it air during winter and it will stop going up. This is a fact recognized by asparagus growers and confirmed by years of experience. This method of cultivation is diametrically opposed to everything that has been done up until now. The plant was asphyxiated every year; the Argenteuil growers give it air, without which no plant can exist. The old methods have never produced an asparagus comparable to those of Argenteuil. The Argenteuil culture produces only monstrous asparagus, twice as many at half the cost as the old methods. It's a fait accompli in all its brutality. I'll let the creators of Argenteul asparagus and its cultivation speak for themselves: "The asparagus claw comes up in winter when it's too overgrown; it uses its resting time to fortify its roots, it acquires new strength, but it needs air, and it's to get enough of it that it spends part of its strength coming up. Remove the thickness of the layer of soil that covers it, and it will breathe easily and will no longer move; don't let it try to move during the vegetation period, and take it for granted that it will only occupy itself with throwing its jets outwards, because then these jets are so many respiratory organs that it will obstinately multiply as you remove them. If, like us, this statement leaves you incredulous, do as we have done, observe, and your conviction will soon equal ours." When we have dethatched and smoked as I have just indicated, towards the end of October, we are careful not to cover the manure with soil, for fear of preventing the asparagus from breathing. It's only around March 15th that we cover the manure, which the winter rains have largely dissolved; the roots are saturated with fertilizer, so we bring the soil over each claw, marked by the stems (C, pl. 8, fig. 3), which have been intentionally kept to a length of 30 to hO centimetres, and a mound of earth 25 to 30 centimetres high is formed around them; this well loosened earth, exposed all winter to the action of the frosts, gives easy passage to the asparagus, which will soon sprout. The first year, we covered the collar of the claws with only 10 centimeters of soil; the second year, when we won't yet be harvesting asparagus, we dethatch, smoke at the end of October and rethatch in March with only 15 centimeters of soil. In the third year, when we start to cut the biggest asparagus plants, we'll use the same autumn methods, and cut them to a height of 30 centimetres, and so on every year for as long as the asparagus plant lasts. The way in which asparagus is harvested is of great importance in terms of volume and quantity. You have to abandon the ancient knife that was plunged deep into the earth, and with which you often cut two beautiful invisible asparagus plants, to harvest one visible one, as big as a pencil. It's urgent to cut asparagus as it emerges from the claw. Here's why: if you leave part of the asparagus stalk on the claw, as is always the case when you cut underground with old-fashioned knives, the remaining section lives for two weeks, during which time it absorbs sap from the roots, to the detriment of the newborn asparagus. As soon as the asparagus emerges from the ground, it is removed by scooping out the mound, and cut cleanly (A, pl. 8, fig. 4) at its birth with a small serpette, then the earth is lifted. In this way, you never cut two asparagus shoots at a time, and there are no sections left on the roots. What's more, the soil, which is stirred every day, acquires a softness that further encourages asparagus development. If you follow all the above instructions to the letter, you'll unerringly obtain a large quantity of monstrous asparagus in all soils, and this in the third year, by planting one-year-old claws, which you can buy to avoid the one-year delay caused by sowing. But there is an urgent need for improved asparagus from Argenteuil. PLANTING ON THE PLAINS. Growing asparagus on the plain is the same as in the kitchen garden; it differs only in the preparation of the soil, to which greater care is taken. Asparagus is only planted on the plains for speculative purposes; the first condition is to choose a suitable soil, which can be prepared without adding too costly amendments. To do this, choose a medium-consistency soil, or a greasy calcareous sand, free of stones. At a pinch, a good ploughing could be followed by scarifying, but for an operation of this importance, it's better to plough with a spade. This ploughing is followed by a good manuring, then the lines are drawn at 1 meter instead of 1 meter 20 c., and the claws are also planted at a distance of one meter. Planting is done in the same way as in the vegetable garden, with the difference that the pits are made with a hoe and only the bottom is fertilized. All mounding and ripping procedures are the same. To make the most of the land before the asparagus starts producing, you can counter-plant the intervals between the rows in the vegetable garden with early cabbages, tomatoes, beans and dwarf peas, a few very light seedlings of early carrots or turnips, but in the latter case you should never sow closer than 25 c. to the edge of the pits, and put nothing between the asparagus plants. Only plant between the rows. FORCED ASPARAGUS. In our asparagus seedling, we kept a claw every 50 centimeters to provide us with a plant for forcing. With this two-year-old plant, we will grow green asparagus in winter, known in Paris as asperges aux petits pois, and with a one-year-old plant, white asparagus: these are two different crops; we will describe them both. GREEN ASPARAGUS. Green asparagus can be obtained in fifteen or twenty days in a greenhouse, and can therefore be grown at will throughout the winter, provided there is a good supply of claws. We build up a layer 60 to 80 centimetres thick, capable of providing 20 to 25 degrees of warmth; we cover with a few centimetres of potting soil, place the boxes, and wait a few days. When the layer has caught its first fire, we cover it with claws 18 of asparagus, laid side by side, then, using our fingers, we pour potting soil between the roots, and cover them with about four centimetres of potting soil. Maintain humidity with light sprinklings; if the temperature is cold, apply heaters more or less actively as needed, but in such a way as to obtain a temperature of 20 degrees under the frames. Cover at night with one or more mats, depending on how cold it is. When the asparagus start to grow, we take advantage of the sun to give them a little air in the middle of the day, when it's not freezing. We cut the asparagus as we go along, and if cultivation is well managed, they will produce for about two months. Claws that have produced green asparagus are no longer good for anything, so pull them out after harvesting and throw them in the manure. WHITE ASPARAGUS. The planting of asparagus to be forced is the same as that of asparagus in squares, with one-year-old claws planted with all the care indicated above, but with the difference that instead of establishing lines 1 meter 20 centimeters apart, and plant the asparagus at 1 metre 20 centimetres apart, form beds 1 metre 30 centimetres wide, separated by aisles 80 centimetres apart, and plant two lines of claws in this bed 1 metre 30 centimetres wide; each line will be placed 42 centimetres from the edge, and the claws will be planted 60 centimetres apart on the lines. Treat asparagus as you would vegetable garden asparagus for the first two years; force the third year, but as you can't force asparagus every year without damaging its life, take care to plant twice the quantity needed, so as to force only half and let the other half rest for a year. Asparagus is not harvested from resting plants, but left to grow untouched, and their vigor is further enhanced by removing the seeds as soon as they have formed. We start forcing asparagus in December and January; thirty days is enough to obtain produce. The asparagus is mounded with potting soil, the boxes are placed, filled with fresh horse manure, and the frames put in place. Next, the aisles separating the beds are emptied to a depth of around 50 centimetres, and filled with warm manure, well trodden and watered, right up to the top of the trunk. The stoves are reshuffled from time to time, and fresh manure is added when necessary. Finally, they are governed so as to maintain a constant temperature of 15 to 20 degrees under the frames. As soon as the first asparagus appear, remove all the manure placed in the trunk, and double the covers with straw mats during the night, so as to maintain the same temperature under the frames until the end of the harvest. There's no need to ventilate white asparagus; all care is taken to maintain an even temperature under the frames. When the harvest is over, the stoves are removed, but the frames are left on the chests for a few days, to prevent the asparagus from immediately moving from the temperature of the heated frames to that of the atmosphere. Air is breathed in every day, covered only at night, and the boxes and frames are removed when frosts are no longer to be feared. If the asparagus cultivation method I have described at length frightens some owners who are too attached to old customs, let them keep their old plants, and try only a line of 10 or 12 feet grown as I have indicated. Once they've seen the results, they won't hesitate to create a plant using the Argenteuil method. AUBERGINE. Eggplants are not widely grown in northern and central France, and can only produce passable fruit on bedding. It is sown under a frame in February, then transplanted very close to the nursery, on a slightly cooler bed, and then transplanted again, at a greater distance, on an even cooler bed. These transplants are necessary to make the roots branch out and strengthen the plant. Towards the end of April, the plant is placed on a dull bed and covered with cloches. Eggplant requires frequent watering. To speed up fruit production, eggplant should be pruned in the same way as melons. The main stem is cut back to two or three eyes at most, to allow arms to develop. The flowers appear on the branches of the arms, so pinch them off on the seventh or eighth eye, to force the branches to develop. Independently of this care, we remove all new stems growing on the root collar. When the fruits are well formed, we pinch at two nodes above, and ruthlessly remove all new shoots, to concentrate the action of the sap on the fruits, so that they acquire remarkable volume, and ripen faster. 4 BETTERAVE. Table beet is grown in very small quantities in the kitchen garden. It doesn't deserve a special place, but can be counter-planted in garden plot no. 1, with cabbages or in an autumn artichoke patch. Castelnaudary beet is preferable for salads. Sow around March 15 on a worn layer, and replant when the roots are well formed. If you wanted to harvest beet for animals, nothing could be easier, and without any expense. The yellow Globe variety is preferable for this purpose; around March 15th, sow on a worn layer, like the previous one; using this method, you obtain excellent plants, which you counter-plant: 1° Between the rows of the asparagus patch; 2° Between the various cabbage, artichoke and cardoon crops in patch no. 1; 3° In patch no. 2, between strawberry plants, lettuces, etc., etc.; 4° Finally, in the rows of the asparagus patch, sow on a worn layer, like the previous one, and counter-plant when the roots are well formed, etc.; 4° Finally, in plot no. 3, counter-planted in green beans, where it will still produce quite satisfactory products for the animals. Beet does not deserve the honors of a special crop in the vegetable garden, but nevertheless in a house where there are cows and pigs, a clever gardener can give a certain quantity of beet counter-planted in several squares. It's a crop that yields a product without requiring a penny of expense. CAPUCIN. The small variety should be grown, as it has the advantage of being able to do without supports. A bed of nasturtiums is useful in the vegetable garden to decorate salads with flowers, and to harvest green seeds for preserving. Sow in the ground, around mid-March, in a bed in plot no. 3, in staggered clumps, 40 centimetres apart in all directions. A bed of nasturtiums produces flowers and seeds in sufficient quantity. CARDONS. An excellent vegetable for winter storage. Sow in pots, under a frame and on a warm bed in April; when the plant has acquired a certain strength, and no longer has anything to fear from grubs or curculio, place it in plot no. 1, one meter apart in a staggered row. Cardoon requires a lot of water and abundant feeding. It can be counter-planted in May in a bed of Yorck cabbages; if the cabbages are good to harvest at the same time as the cardoons can be put in place, we benefit from waiting a few days; when the early cabbages are removed, we plough, plant the cardoons, and counter-plant them with cauliflowers, which have time to give their harvest before the cardoons have invaded all the space intended for them. These two crops combine all the better as they both require a lot of water. Around September, the strongest cardoon stalks are bleached, but this should only be done as and when necessary, as stuffed cardoons soon rot, especially in wet weather. When the stalks are strong enough to be blanched, first tie them loosely with three or four straw ties; then wrap the whole stalk with long straw, securing it with three or four new ties. Twenty or twenty-five days at most after this operation, the cardoons are ready to eat. They are blanched as needed, and towards the end of the season, before the frosts, any plants that have not been blanched are pulled out and planted in the cellar or vegetable greenhouse, where they blanch naturally without being stuffed, and provide a vegetable that is a pleasure to find for part of the winter. Cardoon is very easy to grow; if necessary, sow it in the open ground in April, and it still gives good results. CARROT. This is an indispensable vegetable in the kitchen, and one that should never be lacking; with a little care, you can avoid those unfortunate carrots, hard as wood and with no flavor whatsoever, that are still so often found as soon as you leave Paris. I've said that the short red carrot from Holland provides new carrots all year round; it's the best, the most tender, the one that should be grown to the exclusion of all others, in the homeowner's garden. The first seedlings of this excellent variety are sown in March, and the last in September. Towards the end of February or in the first few days of March, a bed in plot no. 2 is ploughed deeply; a border is laid around the bed to retain water for watering, and the soil is vigorously harrowed with a hooked fork to break up any clods; the seed is then broadcast, and the seed is harrowed with a roughing rake, followed by a final stroke with a fine rake to remove stones and foreign bodies. Finish the operation by covering the whole bed with about two centimetres of manure from the demolition of the layers, almost in the form of compost. If the weather is dry and sunny, water every day until emergence, and even afterwards if the drought persists. A sown bed must never dry out, and a young seedling must be watered copiously until it has acquired a certain strength. The success of the harvest depends on how well the seedling is raised: if it has suffered in the beginning, the harvest will be poor. The layer of manure that covers the seedling protects it from drought; this is one of the purposes it must fulfil, but the main purpose is to be dissolved by watering and rainfall, and to provide the young roots with abundant nourishment; if moisture is lacking, the manure is not dissolved, and the main purpose is missed. It goes without saying that lettuce should never be sown in carrot beds, as this produces bad lettuce plants and considerably harms the carrot harvest. As soon as the carrots are well established, weed them as described in the chapter on weeding; thin out any areas that are too thick, and if necessary, transplant carefully into empty areas. If cultivation has been carried out correctly, the first carrots will be harvested at the end of April and the first days of May. As soon as the whole crop has reached a good size, the leaves are cut off and everything is pulled off with a flat-tine fork; the crop is put into the vegetable greenhouse, the bed is turned over, and turnips are sown on top. The carrots from the first field sowings always arrive at the end of the harvest of carrots grown under frames. You could even save yourself the trouble of sowing early carrots, as late sowings can replace them. Short red Dutch carrots are sown successively until September. Sow in June after an early turnip or salad crop, in July and August after an onion crop, and in September after salads or tomatoes. September sowings can dispense with frame cultivation, and here's how. As frost approaches, carrots are a third to half their size; the vegetable greenhouse is well stocked with May, June and July seedlings; September seedlings are kept in the ground throughout the winter, to provide for the last needs. This is done by covering the whole bed with straw during hard frosts, and in spring we have excellent new carrots, which we pull up and bury in sand, in the cellar or in the vegetable greenhouse, and this harvest only costs the trouble of preventing the carrots from freezing by covering them with straw. September sowings are often preferable to those grown in frames, as the carrots are almost as tender, but much tastier. The bell carrot is the only carrot that should be grown in a frame. Square no. h, which is used for beds, seeds, vegetable nurseries and flower breeding, can also be used for carrot seedlings, once the first flowers have been removed or after a vegetable nursery has been pulled out. This can be a valuable resource in a house with a large staff of servants and animals. The first 16 are sown with Achicourt carrots, the second with white carrots with green collars. If the gardener is intelligent and hard-working, if he takes good advantage of his crop rotation, if he counter-plant well, and if he doesn't lack water and manure, he will easily find the food for a head of large livestock, without any expense, and without harming the production of vegetables, in a slightly extended kitchen garden. When carrots are brought in for storage in the cellar or vegetable greenhouse, cut off all the leaves near the collar, lay them on a bed of sand; cover with sand, replace with a bed of carrots, and so on. Carrots laid down and buried in sand grow very little. Remove the leaves as soon as they appear. CELERY. There are two kinds of celery to grow in the vegetable garden: celery, whose leaves are eaten as salads, and celeriac, whose root is edible. (See varieties for the various vegetable gardens, owner's, tenant's, etc.). Celery requires a lot of fertilizer and a lot of water: it is planted in plot no. 1 of the vegetable garden. To grow celery for most of the season, sow in rows, in layers, from January to March; as soon as the plant is a little strong, transplant it into a nursery on a less warm layer, and finally, as soon as frosts are no longer a threat, counterplant it in Yorck cabbage, in 8 first-season cauliflowers, or in an artichoke patch. We continue sowing in the open ground from April onwards, and establish nurseries in the open ground, in plot no. 1, or in plot no. 4, in a bed smoked for the purpose! On beds, as in the open ground, we always sow in rows, in order to have a better-formed plant. Planting in a nursery, in a well-smoked and copiously watered bed, is the best way to ensure that the seedling comes into its own. Transplanting prevents the stem from developing too much, and encourages the formation of the plant. Transplanting is done in the nursery, in rows 25 to 30 centimetres apart, with the plants staggered 20 centimetres apart. The purpose of this operation is not only to encourage the development of the plant and make it grow, but also to preserve the celery for some time, without delaying the harvest in any way, if there is no free soil on which to plant it immediately. First-, second- and third-season celery is tied with two or three straw ties to blanch it. Celery planted in early cabbage is removed as needed. When you want to keep celery throughout the winter, or blanch it on the spot to preserve all its qualities, here's how it's done: This celery is counter-planted in early savoy cabbage, to be harvested in September; the far-sighted gardener should always have a few beds of Ulm cabbage, good for harvesting at the opening of the hunting season, to eat the old partridges. As soon as these cabbages have been removed, the celery planted in them is milled to a height of 25 to 30 centimetres, after tying it with two or three straw ties; it is then completely blanched by filling the spaces between the rows with straw; when it freezes, a straw blanket is added over the leaves, to protect them from the frost to which celery is very sensitive. The cover is made thicker or thinner, depending on the temperature, and is lifted every day to remove the necessary number of plants. Celery root, grown solely for its tubers, requires a different type of cultivation. It is sown in the open ground in April, transplanted in a nursery at the end of May or in the first days of June, then planted out in July in the vegetable garden's No. 1 plot, in 25 to 30-centimetre-deep pits; the pits are 60 centimetres apart, and the celery stalks are spaced 25 centimetres apart. The soil extracted from the pits is kept in reserve on the right and left sides, to be used later to refill the pits and butter the celery. Celery root requires a lot of water. When planted in pits, you fill them with water once or twice a day, depending on the temperature. As the plants develop, they are replanted with the soil from the pits, and towards the end of the season, the celery is ridged, bringing the soil from between the 20 CELERY. rows to the foot of the plants. This last mounding greatly encourages tuber development. Celery root is left in the ground until the first frosts, at which time it is dug up and buried in the cellar or vegetable greenhouse, to be consumed throughout the winter, when this little-known and little-cultivated vegetable is often a precious resource. CERFEUIL. A far-sighted gardener should never let chervil go to waste. Nothing could be easier: sow little and often, from March to September, in the open ground, and during part of the winter, in a greenhouse. In spring, sow in plot no. 1 until April, between cabbages, cauliflowers, artichokes etc., etc., a few at a time, and repeat every two weeks. From April to June, seedlings are sown in square no. 2; and from July to September in squares no. 3 and h. The latter seedlings set seed less easily; they can be sheltered from the first frosts with litter or straw mats. During the winter, chervil is sown between melons, tomatoes, etc., under a frame. MUSHROOMS. Mushroom cultivation is not essential in towns, where markets provide large quantities of mushrooms with every guarantee, 16 but it does become essential when you're far from the main population centers, since in such cases you often have to resort to mushrooms harvested from meadows, and this has often led to fatal accidents. Cultivated mushrooms are never poisonous. Nothing is easier than to bring them, with a little care, into a cellar or vegetable greenhouse. The success of this crop lies in the choice and preparation of the manure. The best of all manures for making mushrooms is donkey manure, but only manure from donkeys fed on hay, not green plants, in which case the manure is worthless; in second place comes mule manure, and in third horse manure. It goes without saying that all manures intended for use in mushroom production must come from dry-fed animals; that these manures must be used pure, without any mixture of foreign bodies: hay, plant detritus, etc. Horse manure is the most suitable for mushroom production. Horse manure, the most commonly used, requires special selection for this purpose. Manure from luxury horses is too strawy; farmyard manure is often mixed with other types of manure; the best is inn manure, where only whole horses are received, and where, as bedding is spared, the manure is free of long straw: the straw it contains, broken up and trampled on by the horses, disintegrates very easily. It takes about two to three truckloads of pure manure to build a mushroom bed. You start by placing the manure in beds, in the open air, taking care to mix it well as if making a layer, and to moisten it enough to develop fermentation. A fortnight later, the manure is reshuffled, treaded and moistened again if it is too dry, so that it begins to decompose completely. A third reworking is sometimes necessary, when certain parts are still tough. Manure is best used when it no longer gives off much heat, when it is in the process of decomposing into what gardeners call "fat butter"; in other words, when it has acquired a uniform brown color, when the straw breaks at the slightest touch, and when it is neither too dry nor too wet, which is easily recognized by pressing it into the hand, where it should retain its given shape, remaining moist and unctuous, but without letting any water escape. It takes some experience to recognize when manure is right to use, but I repeat, that's where success lies, and if it fails, it will be because the manure was mixed with grass or hay, or was used too dry or too wet, too cold or too hot. To enlighten those who lack practice, to be used successfully, manure must have thrown off its fire, while still retaining some heat, but a very gentle heat. When the manure is well prepared

either in a cellar, or in the vegetable greenhouse, 3 it doesn't matter, as long as the chosen spot is of equal temperature, and is deprived of air and light; if necessary, the openings are blocked to obtain these conditions. In the chosen spot, a humpback-shaped layer is then built up, about 80 centimetres wide at the base and 20 centimetres at the top. The manure is placed in beds as for the other layers, treaded as you go, and watered if necessary. Leave the bed for a few days; if the manure has been well prepared, and the bed well raised, it will give off 15 to 20 degrees of heat after seven or eight days. Now is the time to plant it, i.e. to introduce the mushroom spawn. If you don't have mushroom spawn at hand, you can buy some from a seed merchant. Holes are made five to six centimetres wide on both sides of the bed. Two rows are usually made: the first 30 centimetres from the ground, with the holes about 35 centimetres apart; the second 35 centimetres from the first, with the holes staggered at 35 centimetres. A piece of spawn is inserted into each of these holes to a depth of four or five centimetres, and immediately covered with the extracted manure. The spawn is packed down well with the hand, so that it adheres to the layer on all sides, and we wait another eight or ten days. At the end of this time, the white is well set, i.e. it has gained the layer, and is reproduced in all its extent. Then finish the operation by covering the entire layer with dry earth containing half plaster or lime mortar, all well amalgamated together. This covering, about three centimetres thick, is applied with the back of a shovel. If the layer is too dry, it should be lightly drenched from time to time with a very fine-headed watering can. Moisten, but do not wet; moisture is necessary for the development of the fungus, but water destroys it. It takes a little experience to apply the right amount of water, in the right proportions. Six weeks later, production begins, and is sustained for four or five months when the bed is well made and cared for. People who have not yet grown mushrooms should not be discouraged if they do not succeed the first time. Most of the time, their failure will come from nothing at all; for this type of cultivation, a little experience is needed, and this experience can only be acquired through practice. There are various ways of making mushroom spawn: I'll refrain from describing them, as mushroom cultivation is a very secondary activity in the kitchen garden. In addition, a certain amount of experience is needed to make good blanc de champignon, and the owner who grows only for his own consumption will benefit from buying it; he will have the double advantage of saving money, and the certainty of having good blanc. CHICORICE. Chicory deserves a large place in the vegetable garden; it makes a good salad all year round, and an excellent vegetable when cooked. We grow three types of chicory: Wild chicory, which is useful for animals in summer, and produces an etiolated salad called capuchin beard in winter; curly chicory, for eating in salads and for cooking; and lastly, escarole, for salads and also for cooking, either on its own or mixed with chicory. WILD CHICORY. I said earlier that an intelligent gardener should provide animals with inexpensive fodder in a large vegetable garden. Wild chicory, whose roots alone can be used to make capuchin beard at the start of winter, will give us a certain quantity of leaves throughout the summer, which are excellent for poultry, rabbits and even cows. We sow wild chicory in borders in squares n° 3 and n° h, around the month of March; we make several leaf cuts during the summer, and towards the end of October, we pull up the roots with a fork, without breaking them, which we lay down in the cellar, on a bed of soil that is neither too dry nor too wet, placing the collar outside, and the pivot of the roots in the center of the layer of soil; cover with a bed of soil ten to 15 centimetres thick; place another bed of roots, and so on up to a height of about one metre (pl. 9, fig. 1). If the soil is too dry, the plant is lightly hoed, and a few days later, the leaves begin to appear yellow and very tender. Harvest as they grow. Capuchin beard is far from being a sought-after salad, especially for the landowner who can obtain curly endive and lettuces all winter long under his frames, but it becomes a precious resource in the countryside where lettuce is in short supply all winter long, and the farmer will not be indifferent to harvesting leaves for the animals in summer, and a very healthy salad in winter, without any expense whatsoever, which will only cost him the trouble of lowering a few roots and three or four barrows of soil to the cellar. CURLY ENDIVE AND ESCAROLE. As their cultivation is exactly the same, I combine these two species in terms of cultivation care, noting however that scarole, being less tender than chicory, should be grown in smaller quantities, and always in the open ground, whereas curly endive should be grown in beds, under frames and cloches, so as to be available in all seasons. There can never be too much chicory in a vegetable garden; what isn't eaten as salad is cooked as a vegetable. The gardener who manages his crops well must have plenty of chicory at all times of the year. This is easy to do, with the right counter-planting and the care I'm about to describe. The first chicory seedlings are sown indoors, in December and January; fine Italian chicory 9,357 is the best variety for growing indoors and under cloches, and even in the open ground, except for the last open-ground seedlings, when Meaux chicory gives very good results. Chicory sown indoors has the disadvantage of rising quickly, which can easily be avoided by transplanting two or three times in the nursery before planting. As soon as the seedling has four leaves, it is removed and transplanted into a nursery at a distance of h or 5 centimetres, between other crops, under a cooler frame. A fortnight or three weeks later, the seedling is removed again and transplanted under a colder frame, and sometimes even a third transplant, always on a more temperate bed. These successive transplantings have the effect of momentarily suspending the plant's overactive vegetation, and preparing it for harvesting. When the plant is strong enough, it is placed under a frame on a colder bed. Chicory can be planted under a frame between harvests. Seedlings sown in February under a frame are also raised in a nursery under a frame, but placed on a warm layer under a bell. The frames are covered with straw mats, and the cloches with bedding, and air is supplied whenever the temperature permits. Sow under frames every two weeks, from December to March, to ensure a constant supply. Chicory requires a lot of water, and it's only by watering copiously that it becomes tender; when it has acquired a certain strength, it is tied with a straw tie to whiten the heart, and as soon as it is tied, it is watered only at the foot, with the neck of the watering can. If you wet the leaves after binding, the salad will rot. Chicory is sown in the ground from mid-April to mid-September. In a pinch, you could thin out the plant and wait until it's strong enough to be transplanted, but it's better to put it in a nursery, as it's less likely to bolt, especially during the summer when it's been transplanted. Chicory seed needs to be very lightly covered for good emergence. Sow in rows, and cover with a little top soil. In May, the good seedling can be counter-planted in plot no. 2, between early lettuces. Once the early carrots have been harvested, the bed can be turned over, mulched and planted in its entirety with chicory, staggered at 30 or 35 centimetres in all directions. The bed is edged to retain water from watering, and mulched before transplanting. During June and July, chicory beds can be established in plot no. 3, after a harvest of peas or green beans. Good mulching and frequent watering are enough to obtain very fine chicory, which almost never rises in plot no. 3 during the hottest weather. You can counter-plant chicory with other lettuces, or sow lamb's lettuce in the bed for the off-season. The last sowings, at the end of August and September, provide chicory for part of the winter. Those planted in September are good for binding in October, planted in rows 40 centimetres apart and staggered 35 centimetres apart. As soon as the chicories have been bound, they are lightly ridged to protect them from the cold, watering is stopped and, when it rains, they are covered with straw mats to prevent rotting. Excellent chicory can be kept for a long time using this simple procedure. If frost threatens, cover at night with bedding. Chicory, like all other lettuces, should only be tied when thoroughly dry, and in dry weather. August and September seedlings can be transplanted under cloche, with five chicory plants per cloche; they are left in the air as long as the temperature allows, covered as soon as it gets cold, and if necessary covered with straw, at night and even during the day, if frost is felt. In this way, chicory can be harvested for part of the winter. Another way of keeping chicory for a long time is to transplant it at the end of the season, side by side in a cold frame, i.e. without a layer, and simply in potting soil. Cover with straw mats during the night, and if the cold becomes intense, surround the box with manure. In this way, with little effort and no expense, you obtain chicory, the heart of which can be eaten as a salad, and the head of which is good for cooking. To save on winter supplies under frames, cloches and bedding, it's always wise to have a certain quantity of chicory bound and almost ready to harvest towards the end of the season. We pull out the best ones, and replant them side by side in the vegetable greenhouse or cellar, where they complete their growth. A good supply harvested in this way lasts for a long time, and spares a great deal of effort in the cultivation of cloches and frames. For this, as for everything else, the gardener needs to organize his crops well, direct them with intelligence, and look after them constantly. CABBAGE. The cultivation of cabbage is very important, not in the owner's vegetable garden, but in those of tenants, farmers, schoolteachers, communities, stations and camps, where cabbage is a precious resource. I'm going to divide cabbages into five distinct classes, and choose the most suitable varieties for each of the gardens I've mentioned. These five divisions are: 1° Smooth-leaf cabbages; 2° Curly-leaf savoy cabbages; 3° Evergreen cabbages; 4° Root cabbages; 5° Cauliflowers. The main varieties of cabbage are : Yorck, cœur de bœuf, cabus blanc, Saint-Denis, Alsace. Quintal, Vaugirard, red cabbages, etc., etc. 8 Sow cabbages in the following order: Yorck and cœur de bœuf, second half of August and first days of September. They are transplanted to the nursery in October, to be planted again in March and April. All other cabbage varieties can be sown from the second half of July to the second half of August, and in March and April for later cabbages. The best varieties of savoy cabbage are: Ulm cabbage, Milan short, Milan des Vertus, Brussels sprouts, etc., etc... Savoy cabbages are not as large as cabbages, but they are more delicate, have no large ribs, and do not smell musky. The smallest and earliest of all, the Ulm cabbage is especially recommended for its good quality, as much as for its earliness. Savoy cabbages are sown from March to May, and transplanted to the nursery in April and June. Savoy cabbages tolerate the first frosts very well, which soften them and make them taste better. Cabbages, on the other hand, fear the cold, and must be harvested before frosts, which inevitably destroy them. Green cabbages are much appreciated in western France; they are used to make purgative soups and are a precious resource for animals. The most productive variety is the Poitou cabbage. They are sown in March and April, and in July and August, to produce the first crops in autumn and spring. In the second 21 year, the harvest of leaves is considerable, and becomes a precious product for animals when you have a garden of a certain size. Root cabbages are cultivated more for animals than as edible plants; the main varieties are: kohlrabi, Turnep cabbage, Rutabaga, etc. Root cabbage is sown in June and July, between other crops, and provides a good winter supply of roots that are excellent for animals. This plant is highly frost-resistant, and is harvested as and when needed. Kohlrabi can be sown with advantage in plot no. 1, after two cabbage harvests; after early potatoes, cardoons, etc.; and as a catch crop, when the land has already amply paid its rent with one, two or three harvests. Cauliflower is widely cultivated in the kitchen garden: there are several varieties, of which the main ones are: tender or Salomon, hard and semi-hard, and finally, in my opinion, the most recommendable variety, semi-hard Paris cauliflower. Since cauliflower must be harvested in all seasons in a well-tended vegetable garden, it requires special cultivation, which we'll come back to after dealing with the other varieties. In general, cabbages like humidity; they need substantial, abundantly smoked soil, and copious watering. They should be planted in plot 1 of the vegetable garden. Cabbage seedlings planted in the open ground should be placed in the shade, in rows, in deeply ploughed soil, abundantly smoked with decomposed cow manure, which is the best for cabbages. Cabbage plants should also be watered copiously. The surface of the soil must never be dry: one or two waterings a day are necessary until emergence, and when the seedling emerges from the ground, it must be watered two or three times a day, if the weather is dry, until it is ready to go into the nursery. All these special seedlings can be sown in plot no. 4, in carefully prepared soil. Readers should not be alarmed by the precautions to be taken to raise good seedlings, as nothing is easier or takes up less space. From five to eight hundred first-rate cabbage plants can be grown on one square metre. In principle, all cabbages and cauliflowers should be transplanted in nurseries. These nurseries are created in plot no. 4, in deeply ploughed beds that have been smoked as much as possible. The beds are edged to retain water from watering; the rows are set at 25 or 30 centimetres, and the plants are transplanted in staggered rows 20 centimetres apart. The nursery offers the following advantages: 1° Replanting as soon as the seedling has four leaves tires the plant and prepares it to bolt, by halting vegetation a little; 2° Seedlings placed at equal distances vegetate equally, acquire the same vigor and bolt in the nursery, which cannot happen in seedlings where they are in too much of a hurry; 3° Seedlings that do not suffer in the nursery can be left there until the soil is available; It can be removed in clods with the de-planter, and this second de-planting also helps to increase the size of the head; 4° Cabbage nurseries occupying a very small space offer the advantage of easily providing all the necessary fertilizer, and the most copious watering, the only means to be used to infallibly obtain elite seedlings; 5° Nurseries also offer the advantage of multiplying harvests, by giving half-raised seedlings which immediately replace the harvest removed. The nursery is the key to production, when it is properly understood: not only are the products of the vegetable garden doubled, but plantings are also made only with elite seedlings. Spring cabbages, especially Yorck cabbages, often go to seed without budding. We pull them out and replant them a few hours later, in the same place, to tire them out and prevent them from going to seed. Sometimes, in hot, humid springs, almost all the early cabbages go to seed, and the harvest is lost. This inconvenience rarely occurs with cabbages grown in nurseries and planted out in spring. Yorck cabbages can be counter-planted in salads, 10 in second-season artichokes, in plot no. 1, and in plot no. 2, between strawberry plants. The other cabbages, sown in July and August, March and April, with the care I've just indicated, are also transplanted in the nursery and set out, counter-planted in square no. 1, between early cabbages, spring cauliflowers, early potatoes, or after a harvest of first-season artichokes. Savoy cabbages are preferable for spring sowing, as their quality is far superior to that of cabbages. Ulm cabbage can be sown on a bed, under a bell and under a frame, in February, transplanted in a nursery in March or April, in the open ground, and three months later you'll have a perfectly heady cabbage of superior quality. The other varieties of Savoy cabbage are successively sown in the open ground, and transplanted into the nursery as I have indicated, to replace the crops removed in plot no. 4. Cabbages are planted at different distances, depending on the proportions they need to reach. Yorck, oxheart and Ulm cabbages can be planted staggered at 50 centimetres in all directions; cabbages at 70 to 80 centimetres in all directions, depending on their size; quintals should be planted at 90 centimetres and even at one metre; Milans at a distance of 60 to 70 centimetres, depending on their size. General rule: avoid planting cabbages too close together, as they tend to grow too high. Brussels sprouts should be planted at a distance of around 70 centimetres, after having been raised in a nursery, like all other cabbages. If you want small, hard apples that don't burst, take care to remove the leaves in whose axils they are born, as soon as they have formed. When the leaves are left on, the apples burst, become very thick, and remain hollow; they are not presentable in this state. Brussels sprout seed harvested in France is worthless. You have to buy them in Belgium to be sure of getting good products. Let's not forget that cabbages in general need a lot of water, and that it's urgent to water them copiously, if you want to get good and beautiful cabbages quickly. As soon as the head forms, water it at the base, using the neck of the watering can, and avoid wetting the head. What I've said about kale and root cabbage doesn't need to be repeated here. Let us say, however, that if the vegetable garden is very large, and the house has animals, these two plants will provide a valuable resource for them during the winter, by transplanting the former and sowing the latter in square No. A, in all the beds that will have been devoted to vegetable nurseries and flower breeding. Root cabbage can also be sown very lightly, in July, in plot no. 1, between winter cabbages, cardoons, etc., etc. I said that cauliflowers should be harvested almost all year round in the vegetable garden. For this purpose, we sow them at different times: 1° On beds and under frames, during winter, for harvesting in spring and summer. 2° In the open ground, during the summer, for harvesting in autumn; 3° On a bed and under a bell, in autumn, for harvesting during part of the winter. In the second half of January and the first half of February, cauliflowers are sown on beds and under trays. As soon as the first two leaves have formed, transplant to a cooler bed at 6 centimetres, and transplant again, but a little further away, to a cooler bed between permanent plants. Towards the end of March or in the first few days of April, this plant is placed in the ground to produce cauliflowers towards the end of May or in the first fortnight of June. For the first few days, we shelter the plants at night with straw mats, placed on stakes driven around the bed, and joined together with a spur. Sow again in March, on a warm bed; transplant a first time in a nursery on a worn bed, then transplant again in April, in the open ground, to counter-plant in salads, late artichokes or early cabbages, to obtain cauliflowers in July and August. Towards the end of April and in the course of May, cauliflowers are sown in the open ground, in the shade; they are also transplanted into nurseries in the open ground, like head cabbages, but with the difference that transplanting takes place twice. The first nursery is planted as follows: rows 15 cm apart, staggered plants 8 cm apart. When the cabbages touch each other, they are transplanted a second time: rows 30 centimetres apart, plants staggered 20 centimetres apart. Replanting cauliflower is one of the first keys to success. When the plant has been well raised in the nursery, success is guaranteed. A lot of manure, a little bit of water and a huge amount of water is the best recipe for magnificent cauliflowers. Let's also say that cauliflowers don't like soils that are too clayey; a crumbly, slightly light soil suits them better than clay. If your garden is very clayey, you should always choose the loosest beds for planting; in this case, you'll get excellent results by mixing a little sand and ash with the fertilizer. In June, sow cauliflowers in the open ground; transplant to nurseries in the open ground, taking care to water two or three times a day, if the weather is hot and dry; then counter-plant into melons, on used beds, in August. With copious watering, magnificent cauliflowers can be obtained in September, October and even November. When the melon beds, and some of the beds in plot no. 1, are well stocked with late cauliflowers, you can keep them for a very long time, by doing the following when the frosts are approaching: pull out all those with ripe apples, cut off the core and the largest leaves, and hang them upside down in the vegetable greenhouse, where they will keep for a long time. When cauliflowers are stored in this way, they lose a certain amount of their vegetable water through evaporation. When you want to eat them, it's useful to cut out the core and soak them in water for a day, taking care not to wet the apple. Any plants whose apples have not fully developed are removed in clods and planted side by side in potting soil under a cold frame. Water carefully, without wetting the leaves or shoots, to ensure a good start. Cover at night with straw mats; provide air during the day, and you'll still get passable cauliflowers for part of the winter. When it freezes, we surround the trunk of the frame with a manure stove. The last cauliflower seedlings are sown in September, either on a used bed or in the ground. Transplant to a nursery, in the open ground, under a cloche, in a sheltered spot. Towards the end of October, a second transplant is made in a nursery on an old layer and under a frame. If the season is fine, we can risk a certain quantity of seedlings, under cloche, in the open ground, in a warm and sheltered place. Take care to cover the cloches well, and surround them with bedding when it's freezing, and give them air whenever the temperature permits. As frost approaches, warmers are placed around the boxes. This well-cared-for plant is good for setting out in November and December. It is counter-planted on layers and under chassis between chicory or seedlings that are to be removed shortly. Six cauliflowers are placed per frame panel, and again counter-planted with lettuce or nursery plants. Air is given as often as possible; then, as the cauliflowers grow, we raise the boxes, placing bricks or even straw plugs underneath, and taking care to plug all openings when it's cold. Cauliflowers treated in this way can be harvested from April to May. Growing cauliflower is not difficult, but it does require care. Nursery transplanting is the first step to success. Cauliflower requires a great deal of water, and I can confirm that most of the failures in this crop are due to sparing watering. You need to water a lot until the apples have formed; then you water again, but less abundantly, and only with the spout, so as not to wet either the apples or the leaves. Care should also be taken to cover the apples with fresh leaves; when left exposed to light, they turn green and are never tightly packed. Cauliflowers should only be planted in square No. 1 of the vegetable garden, and in layers, if you want to obtain beautiful produce. Several authors recommend growing tender, semi-hard and hard cauliflower. Tender cauliflowers don't hold their heads well, while hard cauliflowers are hopelessly slow to peel. The semi-hard variety does well everywhere, especially the demi-dur de Paris, whose cultivation I have no hesitation in recommending exclusively. CIBOULE. To be planted as a border plant in plot no. 2; propagated by sprouting cloves planted in spring and autumn. CIVETTE. To be planted in borders in plot no. 2; multiplies by root splinters and is planted in spring. CUCUMBER. Cucumbers can be grown in three ways: under a frame, under a cloche, or in the open air, depending on when you want to harvest them. Early cucumbers are sown under a frame towards the end of January, and transplanted to a nursery on another layer as soon as they can be transplanted. They are shaded in the sun with light-colored cloths, and covered at night with straw mats. About three weeks later, they are placed on warm layers, four feet per frame panel, and buried up to the cotyledons to give them more vigor. The con14 combre is sensitive to the cold, and needs to be well covered at night; as with all sashes, we double or triple the cover with straw mats, depending on the temperature, and provide air whenever the weather permits. When the main stem has four or five leaves, it is cut with a grafting tool or a serpette on the first two leaves to obtain two lateral branches, which are pinched off at three or four leaves. It's a good idea to mulch the entire bed when making the first cut. The new branches are pinched off at three to five eyes. Eight to ten fruits are kept per plant; the best are chosen, the surrounding ones are removed, and the fruit is pinched at two leaves above. Once you've chosen the ten cucumbers you want to keep, pinch off any branches that are growing too long, and any new shoots, to concentrate all the sap's action on the fruit. This method produces cucumbers in May and June. To grow cucumbers under a cloche, sow towards the end of March under a frame, then plant in April under a cloche. Air is provided whenever weather permits, and the cloches are carefully covered at night, if necessary with bedding. Air is essential for plants, so it's a good idea to gradually get them used to air and light, and to uncover them completely as soon as they can stand the sun. Prune in the same way as under glass, but lengthen the pruning by one or two eyes, depending on the plant's vigor. Bell cucumbers produce from June to August. To grow in the open air, make a hole 40 centimetres deep and 50 centimetres in diameter, fill it with manure, cover it with 20 centimetres of compost and sow it in May in the open air. Prune as indicated, and cucumbers are produced in August and September. Gherkin cucumbers are grown in the open ground, as I've just indicated, with only the pruning differing. The main stem is trimmed to three leaves to obtain three lateral branches, which are left to elongate at will; they are carefully laid out on mulch, so that they do not intertwine. Gherkins are removed every day, which should never be overlooked, as by the next day they are too large to be used. All cucumbers require copious watering. WATERCRESS. Watercress has been cultivated in tubs three-quarters filled with soil and covered with water. This requires infinite care, and despite all the effort, it is very difficult to prevent the water from rotting and imparting its foul odor to the cress. It is better to abstain than to obtain such a product. Watercress is easy to grow with a little running water. Dig a pit one meter fifty centimeters wide and forty centimeters9 deep, in a place where a stream or river water can pass through. The bottom of the pit is smoked with cow manure, and cress is ploughed and transplanted in rows 20 centimetres apart, with the feet staggered at 15 centimetres. It is useful to secure each plant with a small wooden hook to prevent water from uprooting it. After transplanting, let about 10 to 12 centimetres of water come into the pit, and adjust the gutters so that it runs slowly but continuously. A few weeks later, the cress starts to grow, and is harvested as needed. CRESS ALÉNOIS. Watercress is prized for its pungent flavor; it makes an excellent seasoning, but has the disadvantage of going to seed very quickly. It should be sown every two weeks or three weeks at the most, to ensure a continuous supply. It can be sown as a border plant in plot no. 4, so that it doesn't go to seed as quickly, and in slightly shaded areas. SHALLOT. Shallots multiply by shattering cloves, the smallest being the best and most fertile; they can be planted in borders or beds, 15 centimeters apart in plot no. 2; they can also be counter-planted in the same plot, in strawberry beds. Shallots are pulled off as soon as the leaf has wilted; they are left to dry for three or four days in the sun in an alley, and then put in a dry attic, where they can be stored until the next harvest. SPINACH. Although it is a vegetable of more than secondary importance, it is useful to grow a few beds of it in the vegetable garden, as a variation to bring in vegetables, and as a resource when the garden is poor. Spinach requires well-smoked soil, and fairly copious watering; the greatest disadvantage of this vegetable is that it goes to seed very quickly; you have to sow it every three weeks to always have some. The sorrel-leaf variety is the least prone to bolting, which is why I adopt it for all vegetable gardens. Spinach can be sown from March to September; as a secondary crop, it can be sown in clumps in plot no. 1, between cabbages, cauliflowers, artichokes, cardoons, etc.; and in plot no. 2, in beds, after a harvest of carrots or onions. Sow in rows 30 cm apart. July and August seedlings are less likely to bolt, especially in plot no. 2, and can be cut several times; if you want to have spinach in winter, you can sow it in autumn on a cold bed and under a frame. When the spinach has been affected by frost, soak it in cold water and leave it to cool slowly in a room. It will come back to life perfectly and can be eaten without any problems. Spinach loves water and requires frequent watering. ESTRAGON. This aromatic plant is much sought-after for seasoning, and is propagated by planting in August, 30 centimeters apart, in borders in plot no. 3. As frost approaches, we cover the stumps with a little decomposed manure to protect them from frost damage. If you want to have tarragon over the winter, nothing could be easier: in the autumn, you unfold a few plants and replant them under a frame, on warm or lukewarm beds, as required. BOG BEANS. Beans can be grown as an early crop under a frame, but they have one serious drawback, which is why they should not be grown at all: they are invaded by so many aphids that it is very difficult, not to say impossible, to get rid of them. If you want to harvest broad beans early, sow them in a greenhouse in January, and plant them in the ground in early March. A plank is laid out in plot no. 3, in which furrows are made 35 to 40 centimetres apart and around 15 centimetres18 metres deep. The beans are planted in staggered rows 25 centimetres apart. Cover at night with bedding when frost is feared. When the plant is well established and has grown a little, hoe it vigorously and fill in the furrows; the plants thus re-planted acquire greater vigor. You can sow a few very light radishes while hoeing; you water quite copiously, and as soon as the beans flower, you pinch the end of the stem to concentrate all the action of the sap on the fruit. If the beans are harvested in dresses, i.e. when they are a quarter of their size, cut them off at the base as soon as they have been harvested, cover them with a blanket of well-consumed manure and water copiously for five or six days, so that the sprays still produce a crop; but to obtain this result, the beans must be picked very early, all together, and at a quarter of their size; if they are left too long, the stalks no longer grow back. Beans are sown in the open ground from February to May, in plot no. 3, in clumps, staggered 30 centimetres apart in all directions. Two or three beans are placed in bunches; the bunches are dug with a serfouette or hoe, the seed is sown, the holes are half-filled, and when the beans are well established, they are completely covered by hoeing. Water often, and pinch off the main stem as soon as they flower. Second-season beans can be sown as a counter-plant between clumps of early green beans. STRAWBERRIES. Strawberries are an excellent, healthy fruit that can easily be harvested all year round with a little care. We'll divide strawberry plants into two species: the large ones, which bear fruit only once in spring, and the small four-season ones, which bear fruit all year round. These are two distinct crops in the vegetable garden. Let's start by saying that when you want to propagate any variety of strawberry plant, you must do so by sowing, not by dripping. Seedlings are robust and vigorous, and produce superb fruit, whereas plants grown from runners lack vigor, are not very fertile, and are always exposed to varying degrees of degeneration. Excellent strawberry seed is available from all conscientious seed merchants. If you want to harvest it yourself, choose the best strawberries and let them ripen completely on the ground. Crush them in water, wash them several times and extract the seed. Let it dry a little, mix it with half the soil and sow. Strawberry sowing presents a number of difficulties: for the seed to germinate properly, it must 2 be sown in light, constantly moist soil, and the seedbed must be exposed to plenty of heat, while remaining shaded. The essential combination of all these conditions has caused almost all inexperienced gardeners to fail when sowing strawberry plants. Good strawberry plants can only be obtained by sowing, so I had to find a simple and easy way to get the seeds to germinate, to popularize sowing and make it easy for everyone. Nothing could be simpler or easier, without heather soil, frames, layers or cloches. Here's how it's done: In June and July, during the hottest weather, we plough deeply a one or two-metre section of bed in square No. 4; when the soil has been well divided by the ploughing, the clods well broken up, and when it is completely loose, we put about ten centimetres of top soil on the spot to be sown, which we mix well with the soil by means of a good harrowing with a hook. Sow a very light strawberry seed, and mix it with half the soil; then throw in a few very distant radish seeds among the strawberry seed, and cover the whole with about a millimetre of potting soil, well crumbled with the fingers. Water two, three or even four times a day if necessary, using a very fine-headed watering can to avoid beating the soil. The most important thing is to keep the soil constantly moist. Four or five days later, the radishes emerge; their broad leaves soon cover the soil, and a few days later the strawberry plants emerge shaded by the radish leaves. As soon as the strawberry plants have two well-formed leaves, the radishes are thinned out a little, and gradually removed as the strawberry plants gain strength, and three weeks later the sown spot is covered with the finest strawberry plants. Never stop watering, at least once a day, until the seedlings are ready to go into the nursery. In plot no. h, prepare a bed which is firmly earthen as for sowing, and make a rim to retain water from watering. The strawberry plants are carefully unfolded to preserve all their roots, and transplanted in staggered rows at 10 cm intervals in all directions. Water copiously every day, lightly hoeing with a weeder, and six weeks or two months later you have an excellent strawberry plant, with abundant roots, an indispensable condition for obtaining good produce. Strawberry plants require soft, medium-consistency soil, smoked over from the previous year; they shy away from fresh fertilizers and require constant humidity to produce abundant, beautiful produce. It should be planted in plot no. 2, in well-mulched beds, and not in borders, as is often the case, where it gives almost negative results, because it is almost always bare and constantly deprived of water. I've mentioned several varieties of large strawberries in the various vegetable gardens of the owner, tenant, etc. Each person will choose the varieties that suit his or her garden. Everyone will choose the varieties that suit their garden. As a perpetual strawberry, I choose, to the exclusion of all others, the Gaillon variety, which is excellent, very fertile, bearing from May until the frosts, and having the precious advantage of not producing runners. Runners are the scourge of the strawberry plant; not only do they produce bad seedlings, but they also exhaust the mother plant, damaging the production, quality and volume of the fruit. They should be removed as and when they are produced in all well-tended strawberry crops. Large, single-bearing strawberries should be removed immediately after harvesting. They cannot occupy the land all year and produce so little. Here's how it's done: Towards the end of August or in the first days of September, when the hot weather has passed and the rains are beginning to fall, select beds in vegetable garden plot no. 1 that have already produced at least two harvests; High ledges are built up to retain rainwater and watering water; a thick mulch made with manure from the demolition of the beds is laid down, and the strawberry plants from the nurseries are transplanted, staggered at 40 centimetres in all directions, and the rows at the edges at 20 centimetres from the path. For perfect transplanting, it's best to remove the clumps of strawberry plants; place them carefully in a basket; spread the mulch at each place occupied by a strawberry plant; make a hole with the trowel, plant in a clump, adjust the mulch, and water copiously after planting. To make the most of the land, leeks can be planted between the strawberry plants. Water copiously whenever the weather is dry, and destroy runners as soon as they appear. The following year, this bed of strawberry plants will form part of plot no. 2; the vigorous, well-rooted strawberry plants will produce an abundant harvest; immediately afterwards, they will be uprooted, and late carrots sown in the beds they occupied. Some of the strawberry plants that have been pulled out will be kept, to line the following year's beds in August, and to be potted for over-wintering strawberries. Here's how it's done: we split the strawberry plants in two to select the youngest stems; they must have a thick collar, as they are the most fertile. The stems you wish to keep are cut off with a serpette, taking care to remove them with part of the root, and they are transplanted in the nursery in a bed in square n° A, 25 centimetres apart in all directions, with the care indicated above. In August or September, set out in square n° 1, as we have said, and reserve your supply of seedlings for forcing. If there is a warm greenhouse, the strawberry plants are planted in pots and placed under a cold frame or in the orangery as frost approaches, to be placed in the warm greenhouse in January. If you don't have a greenhouse, you can force them into a warm bed under a frame, by burying the pots in potting soil on the bed. Warm layers are sufficient to force strawberry plants; they only require a heat of about 15 degrees, which is maintained with the help of stoves. Give them air whenever the weather permits, cover them carefully at night with mats, and water them at a temperature of 15 degrees whenever necessary. It is urgent to remove runners under frames, as in open ground, as soon as they appear. Gaillon strawberry plants, which produce throughout the year, will remain in place for two years, after which they will be pulled out and new beds created. However well cared for a strawberry crop may be, the fruit degenerates and production diminishes in the third year. Second-year Gaillon strawberry plants are a valuable winter resource when you have a temperate greenhouse. The most vigorous plants are selected and potted in October; when they are well established, pots of strawberry plants are attached to the greenhouse walls with wire, and strawberries are harvested continuously throughout the winter, with no trouble other than watering the pots. If you don't have a greenhouse, you can remove the strawberry plugs and line two or three panels with frames, then heat as I've indicated for large strawberries. Gaillon strawberries are planted in plot no. 1, from August 25 to September 15. Soil preparation and planting are the same as for large strawberries, with the difference that the distance between plants is only 30 centimetres. Gaillon strawberry plants, which produce continuously, require more fertilizer than the others, and some special care to sustain their production for two consecutive years. In the spring following planting, a layer of potting soil about three centimetres thick is spread over the mulch placed in September at the time of planting, then a new mulch is applied after energetic hoeing with the tines of a serfouette. In the second year, at the same time, the strawberry bed is placed in plot no. 2; in spring, it is given a new top dressing and mulch. Before hoeing and topdressing, the strawberry plants should be cleaned at least once a year, i.e. all dry leaves and dead stems should be carefully removed. If strawberry plants are only cleaned once a year, it's a good idea to do so before replanting. Strawberry plants always have a tendency to heave, and when the crown is above ground, it becomes infertile if it is not resodded. Don't forget, either, that the strawberry plant requires a lot of water; if we want its production to be sustained, we need to water it constantly; we can water the flowers without any inconvenience; this doesn't prevent the fruit from knotting, and tenderizes the strawberries. This cultivation requires care, but is well rewarded by an abundant harvest. You need to have grown strawberries in good conditions to get an idea of their production. GIRAUMON. Giraumon is excellent and easy to grow in the home garden; its very sweet fruits make very good soups. Sow in warm soil under a greenhouse in March, and transplant to a cooler soil in the nursery as soon as the first two leaves appear. Around April 15, plant out on deaf soil at a distance of 1 m 50 cm, and shelter at night with clocles or straw mats, as long as frosts are to be feared. Water copiously throughout the plant's growth, and double the watering once the fruit has formed. Let the main stem grow to a length of 1 meter 20 centimeters, taking care to make the stems run straight and alternately to the right and left, to allow the lateral branches to spread freely (pl. 9. fig. 2). Pinch the main stem to a length of 1 meter 20 centimeters, to allow the lateral branches to develop, on which the meshes (female flowers) soon appear. When the fruit is the size of a large apple, select two or three of the finest per plant, and remove all the others. Never keep two fruits on the same branch, and as soon as the fruit is well tied, cut the branch carrying it two leaves above, to encourage its development22 by giving it more sap. Care is taken to ensure that the shoots do not grow too long, and they are pinched off when they become too long, in order to concentrate all the sap's action on the fruit. Giraumons are harvested around August and September, and can be stored until March on dry straw in a humidity-free cellar. BEANS. The cultivation of beans is of great importance in the vegetable garden; this crop must provide green beans for most of the year, fresh beans at different times of the year, and finally, a supply of dry beans for the winter. I have indicated the best varieties to grow for each of the vegetable gardens in the first part of this book (consult them to make your choice). Beans like soft, cool, not too compact soil; they hate new manures; ash makes them bear fruit abundantly. They are best planted in plot no. 3 in the vegetable garden. Beans are not difficult to grow, but horticultural literature has been so full of claims that they are easy to grow, that most of the time we think we don't need to give them the care they need, and we get pitiful results, even when we don't run out of beans. Beans are grown in three distinct divisions: green beans and 18-grain beans, early green beans, on beds and in frames; green beans, and 18-grain beans, in the open ground. Green beans can be grown quite easily, on a bed and under a frame, for most of the winter. The most important thing is to avoid the humidity that causes them to rot. This is avoided by providing air as often as possible, and by keeping the windows of the frames constantly clear, so as to let in bright light. The Dutch dwarf bean is the only bean that should be used for forcing. They are sown from December to March on a warm bed, and as soon as the first two leaves have formed, they are transplanted to a slightly cooler bed, between other plants, to be planted on a special bed three weeks later. Transplanting into a nursery is quite important: beans transplanted twice grow fewer leaves, and fruit more quickly and more abundantly than those sown in situ. A 50-centimeter-thick layer of soil, capable of providing 20 to 25 degrees of heat, is sufficient for planting beans. As the temperature drops, heaters are added and the number of mats increased to cover the beans at night. Four rows of beans are placed under the frames, 20 centimetres from the edges and 30 centimetres apart; they are traced out in rays, and the beans are staggered on the rows, at a distance of about 15 centimetres. Air is supplied whenever the temperature permits, and this is important to avoid humidity. To this end, we remove all very large leaves; we water lightly, very carefully, and as much as possible, during the day, and before giving air. The beans are harvested as they form, and towards the end of the harvest cauliflowers can be counter-planted in them. Green beans are obtained by the same process, and with the same variety, the Dutch dwarf. When you don't want to have a large early crop, it's easy to obtain very-early green beans without a great deal of care. Sow on a warm, worn-out bed, i.e. one that has been in use for a long time and has given off most of its heat, towards the end of February; transplant onto a warm bed, and then place on a deaf bed around April 10. You can also sow on warm soil in March, prick out on deaf soil and plant out in the first days of May. Finally, if you don't have a lot of bedding, or if you don't have a frame, you can still get fairly early green beans by sowing them in March in pots that you hang in the orangery, or even better, in a temperate greenhouse, transplanting them into other pots in April and planting them out in the open ground in May. Wherever you have a few frames, a greenhouse, an orangery, or even a greenhouse where light penetrates, it's easy, with a little effort and a lot of good will, to obtain excellent seedlings, which considerably advance the harvest, compared with seedlings planted in the ground. As beans are very sensitive to frost, they can hardly be sown in the open ground before the second half of April, or if sown earlier, they should be planted in beds and covered at night with straw mats. I've said that beans like fresh soil, but without excess moisture. Consequently, for all dwarf beans, we'll sow in the open ground as follows: In moist, clay soils, we'll line up furrows five to six centimetres deep and 30 centimetres apart, using a pointed trowel; at the bottom of these furrows, we'll sow a bean every ten centimetres or so, and cover with only two centimetres of soil; when the bean is buried too deeply, it rots and doesn't sprout. When the beans have four leaves, in dry weather and in the middle of the day, we give them a vigorous hoeing, uniting the soil and filling the furrows completely. In this way, the beans become more vigorous and productive. When ashing, an operation which greatly increases the harvest, the ash is spread along the furrows over a width of 20 centimetres, when the beans are sown and covered, and left on the ground until the first hoeing, when it is buried. Be careful not to scatter the ash before sowing, or to bring the seed into contact with it, as its causticity would prevent germination. I also recommend hoeing only in dry weather, and in the middle of the day, because hoeing when the bean leaves are wet with rain or dew causes rust, and the harvest is significantly reduced. I exclusively recommend row planting in wet soils, because it allows air to circulate between the rows, and the beans are less likely to rot. Experience, moreover, has amply demonstrated that sowing in rows produces twice as much as sowing in bunches in damp soils. In addition, the more clayey the soil, the greater the amount of ashing required. In light soils, on the other hand, beans are sown in bunches, five to six centimetres deep, and staggered at 30 centimetres in all directions. The clumps are made stronger or weaker, depending on the consistency of the soil. For Flageolet, which we'll be growing the most, five beans are placed in medium-consistency soil, and seven, eight or even ten in siliceous soil. The main aim is to cover the entire surface of the bed with leaves, to prevent the soil from drying out. Pockets are sown in the same way as rows; the seeds are covered with two centimeters of soil, then ashed and hoeed as for row sowing, when the beans have four leaves. A second, and sometimes a third hoeing is necessary for bush beans, especially if you water them, which is essential if the weather is dry, at sowing time, to ensure emergence, and when the beans are forming, to make them grow and harvest them tender. When you devote a few bean beds to green bean production, you must pick as the beans form, picking anyway, even if it means selling or giving away if you have too many, but never letting the beans form. This destroys the green bean crop, while producing a pitiful bean product. One of two things is true: you make planks to harvest green or beans, one or the other, but never both, otherwise the product will be reduced by more than two-thirds. Planks destined for green bean production must be constantly picked, the more you pick the more you harvest; those destined for bean production, on the other hand, must remain intact. The first pods formed are the most vigorous, and their production is assured; if they are removed, those that follow produce few, stunted, poorly nourished beans. Green beans are easily obtained by sowing flageolet beans, the only variety that does well in all seasons, from April to September. By sowing late, you never risk more than a few handfuls of beans, as the soil in which you sow them has more than paid for itself with previous harvests. A little trouble is well rewarded when the product succeeds, and we can add that it will always come to a good end, whenever the beans are protected from the first frosts, with frames, simply placed on the boards. Runner beans are sown in the open ground only, like bush beans: in rows in clay soils, and in bunches in siliceous soils, but with the difference that the bunches are made less strong. Four beans per bunch is enough for Soissons, and two or three at most for Sabres. As soon as four leaves have formed, hoe as for the previous varieties, and row. Sabre beans, which are very vigorous and fertile, require two-meter oars. LETTUCE. Lettuce likes soft soil, a little substantial but not too compact; it needs a fair amount of fertilizer to become beautiful and grow rapidly, but it fears fertilizers that are too fresh, which make it rise and prevent it from peeling. Lettuce, like most lettuces, belongs in vegetable plot 2, where it grows to enormous proportions without ever climbing. Lettuce loves water; it needs plenty of it to grow fast and stay tender. For this reason, when growing lettuce in the open ground, it is essential to mulch the beds well, to conserve soil moisture and provide abundant nourishment, by dissolving the nutrients contained in the mulch, 8 through watering, and introducing them into a layer of soil already saturated with humus, from the decomposition of the maximum amount of manure ploughed in the previous year. Growing lettuce is simple: the most important thing is to get a good plant, which is easy with row sowing; to remove it well, with all its roots, and above all to transplant it well. When the neck of the lettuce has been squeezed by the trowel, or by compact soil hardened by watering, it comes up poorly and gives only pitiful results. This crop will always be successful in the open ground, when the manuring is not too recent, and when the bed is well mulched, sufficiently watered, and the soil is kept very loose all around the crown. We will divide the cultivation of lettuces into three parts: the first covers spring lettuces, the second summer lettuces, and the third winter lettuces. See the various gardens of the owner, tenant, etc., etc., for the choice of varieties. Gotte lettuce is excellent for producing early spring lettuces, and especially for cultivation under cloches and under frames. It can be sown in rows, around the second half of October, on a worn layer, or broadcast, under a bell, in potting soil. When sowing under a bell or in the open ground, choose a warm, sheltered spot, plow fairly deeply, and put about 10 centimeters of potting soil on top of the soil. When the lettuces have two well-formed leaves, they are carefully unfolded to avoid breaking the roots, and transplanted into a nursery four or five centimetres apart, under a cold frame, or under a cloche, in the open ground, covered with compost, as for sowing. They are sheltered at night, when it's freezing, and given air during the day when the temperature permits, and as often as possible to strengthen the plant. Around mid-January, the lettuces are placed in beds, under frames or cloches. Make a layer 40 to 50 centimeters thick and 1.35 meters wide. Cover with about 15 centimetres of potting soil, and lay the boxes, or three rows of cloches, depending on what is available. Under the frame, draw five rows 27 to 28 centimeters apart, and plant the lettuces in staggered rows 20 centimeters apart. Give them air as often as possible, and cover them at night with straw mats. When it's very cold, we apply a stove to the bed. Under a bell, lettuces are planted in triangles, three to a bell. Air is provided, and they are carefully covered at night with bedding and straw mats, depending on the intensity of the cold. Lettuces planted in January can be harvested in March. They can be counter-planted on beds and under trays in various crops. Several varieties of spring lettuce can be sown in January and February on beds and under frames, transplanted in a nursery on a cooler bed, and planted out in the open ground around April 15. These lettuces can be counter-planted in all the crops in plot no. 2, or made into special beds. All varieties of summer lettuce can be sown in rows 15 to 20 centimetres apart in the ground, from April to July. However, a special seedbed should be sown in plot no. h, on a piece of board covered with potting soil which is mixed with the surface of the soil, and never sown in onion or carrot beds. When the plant is strong, it is removed with a trowel, leaving the roots as free as possible for planting. Seedlings are planted every three weeks or so, so you never run out of lettuce. Summer lettuces don't need to be transplanted in a nursery; they are removed from the seedbed to be planted out, but it's urgent to have elite seedlings, which can only be obtained with seedbeds, potting soil and copious, frequent watering. In plot no. 2, plant beds 1 m 20 cm wide, with a rim to hold water for watering; mulch the whole bed with manure from the demolition of the beds, or from the compost heap; then place four stakes at each end of the bed, 30 centimetres apart, and the two at the edge, 15 centimetres from the alley; place the chalk line on these stakes; and you have four rows on which to stagger the lettuces, 35 centimetres apart. You spread the mulch a little with your fingers to transplant the lettuce, and as soon as you have done this, you bring it closer to the collar, and hold it together with your hand. Lettuce can be counter-planted in a bed of romaine or chicory, and the lettuce in turn can be counter-planted with other lettuces. Growing winter lettuces requires care to ensure good results. The variety par excellence is the petite crêpe or petite noire, the only one that can complete its vegetation without being given air, and because of this particularity, this lettuce requires special cultivation, which we will describe below: The first season of petite noire lettuce is sown in September, under a bell, in the open ground covered with potting soil, or what is preferable, on an old, worn layer. As this plant doesn't need to breathe, we proceed as follows for sowing: we take a bell and press it firmly onto the potting soil, so that the edge of the bell enters the loose potting soil by one or two centimetres; in this way, we mark the location of two or three bells, depending on the quantity we want to sow. Broadcast the seed, not too thickly and evenly, in the place where the bells are to be placed; cover the seed with potting soil, and replace the bells in the marks made so that they enter the potting soil, and the air doesn't penetrate underneath. As soon as two leaves are well formed, but two leaves without counting the seminal leaves, the plant is removed with the greatest care to avoid breaking the roots, and placed under cloches, in the open ground, covered with potting soil, or on a cold bed, in a nursery at a distance of h or 5 centimetres. The cloches are hermetically sealed by pressing them into the potting soil, for transplanting in the nursery as for sowing. Water lightly, if necessary, and shade with straw, or better still with canvas when the sun is too persistent. Around mid-October, we plant permanently, on a deaf layer or on a warm, worn layer, under frames or cloches. When planting under a frame, take care to fill the boxes with potting soil, so as to leave a gap of only 15 cm between the potting soil and the frames. If a larger gap is left, the lettuces will bolt, pump badly or not at all. Remove the clods and place them in a staggered pattern under the frame, 20 centimetres apart in all directions. I'm insisting on transplanting in clods because this is the first element of success, and I'm aware of the tendency of gardeners to neglect small-scale care, which is the only way to obtain great results. If the temperature drops appreciably, we give the bed a warmer and shade it with the sun, without giving air, so that the lettuces can vegetate constantly, at an average temperature and in a calculated light environment. Cover at night with straw mats to prevent frost. In the event of a lack of chassis, crepe or little black lettuce can be grown under cloches, 23 and even under economic frames, on muted or cold layers. All you need to do is prevent frost; a simple stove provides the heat needed to bring the harvest to fruition. But I can't stress it enough: it's only with constant, intelligent care that success can be achieved. Not too much heat, avoiding frost, and keeping the plants in an average state of light and warmth, you're sure to succeed. When planting under cloches, place four lettuces per cloche, and three rows of cloches on a bed one meter 35 wide. The bed is covered at night with bedding and straw mats, and shaded during the day, without providing air. Heaters are applied as needed. Pancake or little black lettuce, sown in September and raised under cloches in a nursery, is good for planting from November to January, depending on its strength. Passion lettuce also makes an excellent winter salad. Sow it in late August or early September, in the open ground, covered with potting soil; transplant it in the nursery, in the open ground, in a warm, sheltered spot, where it can overwinter, taking care to cover it during cold nights with litter that is removed as soon as it stops freezing. You can plant them in the ground, in a warm, sheltered spot, taking care to cover them with straw mats during cold nights and days. This produces good lettuces around Holy Week, when winter is not very harsh. If it's possible to plant under a frame or under a cloche, on a warm layer, success is assured. If you don't have enough frame and cloche equipment to grow winter lettuces, you can replace them with lettuce for cutting. Nothing is easier than to obtain this lettuce without the slightest expense, and it is a delight in winter. We sow gotte lettuce or small crepe seed in the open, on a bed, and under a frame, between other crops, and we cut it to eat it as soon as it has four leaves. ROMANS. Romaine is grown in the same way as lettuce; it is sown under frames and cloches; it can be transplanted in nurseries under frames and cloches, and counter-planted in early crops. Romaine varieties grown as early vegetables all need air to thrive. Summer cultivation in the open ground is the same as for lettuces, in which they can be counter-planted without inconvenience. Winter red romaine can be sown in the garden, transplanted in the nursery or in the garden, and planted in autumn or spring, also in the garden, where it produces excellent spring salads. This variety, the hardiest of all, tolerates frosts well, although it is advisable to cover with bedding or straw mats during severe frosts. Romaine is less esteemed than lettuce, so we will only admit it as a very secondary crop, in the owner's garden where we will counter-plant it, as a catch crop in plot no. 2, with chicory, lettuce, tomatoes, etc., etc. (See various vegetable gardens, part 1, for varieties to grow. LENTILS. Lentils are generally little grown in the kitchen garden, and wrongly so, for they provide a fairly good dry vegetable for winter, and valuable fodder, the most nutritious of all, for animals. There are advantages to growing it in extensive vegetable gardens, especially those of tenants, farmers, communities and camps. Blond lentils are the preferred variety. It is sown in rows, 30 centimeters apart, around April, in plot no. 3 of the vegetable garden. One ashing after sowing, and two hoeing operations during the course of its vegetation, is all it takes to produce a good dry vegetable for winter, and excellent fodder for animals. When lentils begin to ripen, they can be counter-planted with green beans, and after this second harvest, a good crop of turnips can still be obtained. If you have cows, you can sow lentils in rows, only 15 cm apart, in plot no. 4, around April or May 8, and mow them for fodder in June. After that, there's still time to grow an excellent crop of buckwheat for poultry. MACHE. An excellent little lettuce, offering a valuable winter resource, especially in gardens where there are no layers, frames or cloches. Lamb's lettuce is the lettuce of the small farmer and of the peasant during the winter; it is easy to obtain during the entire period when lettuce is in short supply, by sowing it very lightly, broadcast, among the crops of squares n° 2 and n° 3, during the months of August and September, to harvest in December, January, and even February, when the winter is mild. The seed is broadcast and buried with a rake. From the end of September to October 15th, lamb's lettuce is sown in beds, which are covered with litter during frosts, so as to be able to harvest this excellent salad during the most rigorous cold weather. The bedding is then lifted and cut as needed. Lamb's lettuce can be sown in squares no. 2 and no. 3, in the latest harvests of chicory, lettuce, romaine and green beans, in tomatoes, etc., etc. MELON. Melon cultivation is possible everywhere, and by everyone, but the difficulties have been exaggerated to such an extent, and pruning methods have been invented and propagated that renfer14 mant combinations, that gardeners of mediocre intelligence have given up on them, and homeowners, weary of continual failure, no longer want to see them in their gardens. Nothing, however, is easier than obtaining a large quantity of melons, at low cost and in a very small space. We'll divide melon cultivation into three series: the first includes early-season melons grown in frames and on hot beds; the second, in-season melons grown on warm beds and under cloches; the third, late-season melons grown on deaf beds, under cloches or under economic shelter. I told the owner's vegetable garden that to be sure of obtaining excellent melons, it was necessary to stick to no more than three varieties (see pages 119 et seq.). 1° Le petit prescot, for the early season; 2° Le cantaloup à fond vert, for the late season; 3° Le melon d'Arkangel, for the late season. Let's start with early melons: sow on a warm bed, under a frame, in the first days of January. If you want a good plant, sow only one seed at a time, and never two in the same hole. Melons don't like to be replanted, and the slightest disorganization in their roots will lead to their death. This is why we recommend sowing it in pots, which is pointless unless the plant is destined to travel. The roots are often hindered in pots, as they 8 grow all around them, and the melon suffers when placed in potting soil; it is preferable to sow it directly on the bed, and remove it as a clod, using the trowel, to place it. Sow on the bed, making a small hole with your finger, placing a single seed per hole, and sowing in staggered rows, 20 cm apart in all directions. Cover carefully at night, and even during the day when it's cold, with one or more mats, depending on the temperature. It's vital to keep the windows of the frames very clear, and free from humidity, which melons fear greatly. When the melons are up, we keep the bed at a temperature of 25 to 30 degrees Celsius, which is easy to do by placing active stoves right up to the frames, handling them and adding a little fresh manure when they lose heat. Whenever the temperature permits, you can provide a little air by half-opening the frame on the side facing away from the wind. Air and light are indispensable to plants; that's why I've banned daubing windows and bells with white paint; it's true that this protects plants from sunburn, but all you get is a stunted, etiolated plant that can't stand replanting, and gives pitiful fruit when it does. It's urgent to get melons used to air and light from birth, if you want to obtain remarkable products. When the sun is too hot, shade them with canvas or a bit of straw, and let them breathe, but you need to shade as little as possible if you want to get the best melons. The gardener must always be on the lookout for the weather, looking after his trays, opening them when the sun is shining, and closing them as soon as the sun disappears or it gets cold. When the melons have four well-developed leaves, not counting the cotyledons, they are pruned for the first time. The main stem is cut off with a grafting tool or pruning knife on the first two leaves. I said cut, and cut with a very sharp instrument, not pinch with the fingers. The cut heals in a few days, whereas the pinch, which crushes the very tender, very watery stem, results, if not in death, at least in very prolonged suffering, highly detrimental to the volume and quality of the fruit. As soon as the amputation has been made, the wound is cauterized with a little wood ash. I have already mentioned the need to keep the windows of the frames very clear and free from humidity; this is especially important during the first pruning. If there is any water vapour inside the panes, they must be wiped dry, otherwise the melons could go bad. As soon as the melons have been pruned, they are placed in warm layers. These layers are given a height of around 80 centimetres; they are topped up with 20 to 25 centimetres of potting soil, mixed with half good soil, the boxes and frames are laid, and when the layer has caught fire, which takes about eight days, the melons are placed on these new layers. The two lateral stems then begin to develop; the clod melons are carefully removed with the trowel, and placed on the new layer, in two rows 40 centimetres from the edges of the box, with the stalks planted at around 70 centimetres apart. Once planted, water very lightly, not on the root collar, but on the edge of the rootball to weld it to the potting soil of the frame. When replanting melons, you should bury them right up to the cotyledons, to give them new roots and vigor. After watering, cover the trays with straw mats for two days to ensure recovery, then cover only at night, and during the day when it's freezing. Give them as much air and light as possible, whenever the temperature permits. Once the melons have become accustomed to air and light early on, it's a good idea to remove the frames completely when the sun is shining, from midday to 2.5 a.m., especially during flowering. Fruit tied in the open air is always more beautiful and tastier. As soon as the temperature eases a little, and the humidity of the atmosphere is no longer to be feared, and before the two arms that develop in the axils of the two leaves on which we have pruned are too long, we carefully mulch the whole inside of the frame, to keep the soil moist. Spread out the arms, one on the right, the other on the left, so that they don't become entangled, and let them extend freely until the eighth or ninth eye (A, pl. 9, fig. 4), to pinch them off on the sixth or seventh leaf. A few days later, branches develop in the leaf axils (B, same figure); on these new branches appear the meshes (female flowers); several fruits are left to knot, and when they have reached the volume of a walnut, one is chosen on each arm, two eyes are pruned above (C, same figure), and all the others are removed, by pruning the branches to two or three eyes (D, same figure). The purpose of this pruning is to concentrate all the sap's action on the fruit, and in just a few days it grows noticeably. This very simple pruning method is within everyone's reach, and experience has shown that it produces fruit that is much more beautiful, fuller and better nourished than that obtained by continuous mutilation. Once the fruit has been pruned and selected, all that remains to be done is to remove any yellowing leaves, and to cut back any shoots that grow too long and threaten to burst out of the frame. To obtain the most beautiful melons, choose those tied close to the main branch and on the first branches (C, same figure), but never keep those that sometimes tie at the collar (F, same figure), as they always come off badly. The volume and quality of the fruit can be further increased by applying highly active fertilizers near the root tips as soon as the fruit has been selected. Remove the mulch, carefully remove the roots without exposing them, and spread fresh horse manure, crumbled with the fingers, or pigeon or chicken droppings, mixed with potting soil, over the space occupied by the roots. Cover this manure with potting soil, and replace the mulch immediately. It's dangerous to over-water melons, especially at the base, as it often causes cankers at the crown. However, a certain amount of humidity must be maintained in the potting soil, especially once the fruit has formed. Water with the spout all around the stem, but never on the crown. When the weather is very dry, it's a good idea to slightly wet the leaves with a very fine-headed watering can, but to water the roots and leaves, it's urgent to use only water at the temperature of the frames. When the water is cold, the melons seize up, suffer greatly and rarely produce good fruit. When the melons have reached the volume of an apple, we cut small boards of about 20 centimetres square, and place one under each melon, so that its weight doesn't cause it to sink into the mulch, and so that it can ripen evenly all around. When you take the trouble to turn the melons a little on the board as they approach maturity, it's hard to find the side that was touching the layer. Early melons require assiduous care and close monitoring. The most important thing is to prevent them from getting cold, which is difficult for them to recover from; you must constantly observe the weather, and choose the right moments to give them air. Once you've got the hang of running frames, you'll rarely fail. Seasonal melons present far fewer difficulties; they are easy to grow for all gardeners, even the uninitiated. Sow in March on a warm bed, and if necessary on a lukewarm bed; raise the plant as for early melons, and prune before setting. Establish a warm layer about 80 centimetres wide; remove the rootball melons in the second half of April and set them in the middle of the layer, 60 centimetres apart. Water lightly, place a cloche on each plant, shade for two days to ensure recovery, then provide air whenever the temperature permits, and cover at night with bedding. The bells are cleaned every time they become dirty, to let the light in, and the steam that forms inside in the morning is carefully wiped away. A few days later, the whole layer is carefully strawed; the arms are evenly spread out, one in front, the other behind (pl. 9, fig. 5), to avoid confusion. During the day, as long as the sun isn't too hot, the bell is placed on three small racks, to provide both air and warmth. In the evening, the bell is laid flat on the mulch to protect it from the cool of the night, as long as the stem of the melon can fit underneath; when it exceeds the diameter of the bell, it is placed on the first notch of the racks, i.e. a centimetre above the ground, to avoid crushing the arms. When the sun is blazing, the bells are removed completely, as long as it's still shining, and replaced when it's gone. In-season melons are pruned in the same way as early melons, but as they are more vigorous, both arms are pruned on the seventh or eighth eye, to encourage fruiting. We prune two eyes above the fruit, place boards under the melons, and remove any shoots that are too vigorous, as I said earlier. The most important thing is to protect them from hail and heavy rains, which is something you don't have to worry about when growing under a frame. Hail wreaks frightening havoc on melons; ten minutes of hail are enough to destroy the most beautiful melon field. When the weather is stormy, you should always have a supply of mats next to the melon beds, to cover them as soon as the hail falls, and before if you can, as each grain of hail produces a black spot that almost always causes the fruit and leaf, as well as the stem, to decompose. Continuous rainfall is also to be feared, as excess humidity causes cankers to form on the crown, and destroys the plant in a short space of time. As soon as a canker appears, it should be converted into a wound; remove all the diseased part with a sharp instrument, and cauterize the wound with a little powdered plaster. When it rains for several days in a row, or even for a whole day, we keep the bell on the rack above the melon stalk. When you want to bring a melon forward, you put a bell on it at night, and during the day you hang it over the racks when the sun isn't too hot. Melons, while requiring a great deal of heat, are quite prone to sunburn. It's a good idea to keep them shaded by the leaves for as long as they grow, as this is the best way to get them looking good. Sunburn is still to be feared after a few days of stormy, dark weather, followed by great heat and scorching sun. In such cases, if the melons are too big to remain hidden under the leaves, the sunny side should be covered with a cabbage leaf. Melons are easy to grow on a sour layer, under cloche, and even under economic shelter. You can get melons as good this way as on warm and hot beds, under frames and cloches, but later. This is the back-season crop, for melons ripening in August and September. Two excellent varieties can be grown under these conditions: 1° The green cantaloupe, provided it is not sown later than April; 2° The Arkangel melon, the hardiest of all varieties, which can be sown as late as May. Late-season melons can be grown in two ways: sown in trays or under cloches, for transplanting on deaf soil, or sown in the field. Choose one of the two growing methods, depending on your resources and your wealth of manure and shelter. I said earlier that I hoped to see the cultivation of melons soon introduced in the humblest village, and successfully carried out by parish priests, schoolteachers and peasants alike. Nothing could be easier, if you only cultivate late-season melons. I have also said that the introduction of this crop would be most profitable, not only because of the pleasure or profit it would give by itself, but also because of the wealth of fertilizer it would inevitably create. The most seemingly insignificant cause sometimes produces the greatest effects. The day that the use of diapers, however bad they may be, becomes popular, a multitude of valuable substances for agriculture, lost almost everywhere, will be carefully collected. They will be collected because the farmer, necessarily thrifty, will find in their use a slight profit in the sale of a few melons. The detritus of the diapers will produce a host of vegetables that will also bring the farmer a small profit in money and a notable well-being in his household. The field cultivated with vegetables, smoked to the maximum with the diaper debris, and the herbaceous matter, gathered everywhere, will produce wheat that will make the farmer rich, and then clover and alfalfa that will pay ten times the rent of the land, in milk, butter and lard. Ten melons taken to market will make the farmer a small fortune. It's not the value of the ten melons that will greatly increase his nest-egg, but it's the prospect of a minimal sum that will have made him carefully collect all the fertilizing substances he had let go to waste until now, and the fertilizer factory established at first on a small scale, growing every day, will soon provide him with vegetables, bread, milk, butter, and meat, without his suspecting it. This farmer has been told a hundred times: The manure from your cows is lost in the streets of your village, to the great detriment of your fertilizers; the grasses from your ditches, the reeds from your pond, the broom and gorse from your woods, mixed with your manure, and the manure you let go to waste, would double the mass of your fertilizers, and considerably increase your harvest. The farmer remained deaf to this advice, because he was convinced that he had the best wheat and fodder in his region, and saw in the fertilizer factory only an expense of time and effort, with no profit. He didn't believe, and he doesn't believe in the value of fertilizer. Say to this man: Collect all these fertilizing substances, make a layer of them to raise melons, which you'll sell at a high price on the market, he won't believe you. But if he sees a dozen melons, worth two francs each, on a bed in the presbytery or schoolteacher's garden, he'll go to a hundred francs of trouble to try to do the same, and without suspecting it, he'll carry out the program designed to lead him to affluence; he'll increase public wealth, through the manufacture of fertilizers, and bring the soil to the highest degree of power and fertility. Let's get back to late-season melons. You can sow green cantaloupe in the second half of March, on a warm bed made with one third cow manure and two thirds leaves or moss, under cloches or canvas frames. The melons are then sown and raised as described for early and seasonal crops. They are planted on a muted bed towards the end of April or in the early days of May, when they have undergone their first pruning. At this time, a layer can be built up with a quarter of cow manure, mixed with three-quarters of herbaceous matter, and even with herbs alone, provided they are used fresh. In the absence of glass bells, you can use economy bells (see page 134), and still obtain excellent melons. 8 If you don't want to go to the trouble of making a bed, you can raise excellent melon plants by covering a pile of manure with fifteen to twenty centimetres of light soil, mixed with a third of horse dung, and sheltering the plant with cloches or canvas-covered frames. I give you all these simple means, because they are within everyone's reach, and it's always preferable to raise the plant and transplant it. Care should be taken to establish the mounded beds, intended to receive the melons permanently. Since melons are sensitive to humidity, it is important, especially when simplifying cultivation, to place them as much as possible on an elevation, never in a hollow, where they would inevitably wilt. Take into account the settling of the materials used to build up the layer, and raise it accordingly. If you don't want to go to the trouble of raising seedlings by the means I've just indicated, you can still obtain melons by sowing the Arkangel variety in situ, towards the end of April or in the first days of May. A layer of cow or horse manure and three quarters of any kind of grass is placed on top of 20 centimetres of good soil, mixed with a third of horse dung, and two seeds are sown together every 60 centimetres. Shelter with glass bells, or if these are not available, with economy bells. When the seedlings have risen, the strongest is kept and the weakest is uprooted or, better still, cut between two plots of land to avoid shaking the root of the one kept. The first pruning is applied when the first four leaves are well formed, but as this plant has been sown in place, and will not be re-shoed when replanted, it is carefully unshovelled before pruning, and the whole area occupied by the roots is covered with fresh horse dung, well crushed with the fingers, and the melons are re-shoed with the soil from the layer, up to the cotyledons, to give them more vigor. Pruning and care for late-season melons are exactly the same as for in-season melons. Shelters are less effective, but as the season is milder, you can achieve more or less the same result six weeks later, by taking the same precautions. Willingness is power! Anyone who seriously wants to try will succeed, and will obtain very good melons with the worst of all layers, and will also have a certain quantity of potting soil which will be a resource, the richness of which he does not suspect, for seedlings and open-ground crops. TURNIPS. Turnips require medium-consistency, slightly substantial soil and fully decomposed fertilizers. It belongs in plot no. 2 for seasonal seedlings, and in plot no. A for early seedlings. Seasonal turnips are usually sown in plot no. 2 from June 15 to the end of August, staggering the sowing period so as to harvest constantly. Early turnips are sown in plot no. 4, from March 15 to May 15. These seedlings often succeed in soil with little or no smoke, using slightly old seed and sowing only tender turnips. The turnip of virtues is the most successful, and still sometimes goes to seed when sown before June. Turnips are sown in beds, on the fly; as the seed is very small, it is a good idea to mix it with a third or half of the soil to avoid sowing too thickly. After sowing, cover the bed with a little compost, weed and thin out as soon as the turnips have emerged. All turnips sown in summer require frequent watering; when they lack water due to the heat, they go to seed without forming roots. (See various vegetable gardens, part 1 for choice of varieties.) Turnips can be sown in plot no. 2, after a harvest of early carrots, lettuces, etc., etc., and in plot no. h, before growing buckwheat. ONION. The onion likes a slightly substantial soil, rather light than strong, and above all fears fresh manure. As a result, we'll grow it in plot no. 2 of the vegetable garden, where it will give the best results. 08 Onions can be grown in two ways: by sowing in the field, or by transplanting. All seasonal varieties can be sown on the spot; transplanting is used only for white onions; however, it can be very useful when you want to obtain very large onions, which are often invaluable on farms, in communities, and so on. The early white onion is sown fairly lightly, in beds, around August 15, for transplanting in October, and in the first days of September, for transplanting in spring. This sowing can be done in plot no. 2, in a lettuce bed. Onions fear frost, so it's a good idea to cover them with bedding over winter. In October, the white onion is countersown in the strawberry beds just planted in plot no. 1, which in spring will become plot no. 2. When the white onion is transplanted in spring, it is counter-planted in plot no. 2, between the strawberry plants and the lettuces. White onions, sown in August and transplanted in October, are good for eating in May, when preserved onions are worthless. Early white onions are invaluable for pickling, like gherkins, but they are not so good for preserving.

strong, and very tender. For this purpose, it is sown in March, broadcast in a bed, and very thickly to harvest it small. When you need a fairly large quantity of very large onions, you sow the pale red onion in May, in a bed, and excessively thick, in square no. 2. Sowing is tight enough to produce onions barely the size of a hazelnut. These onions are ripe in September; we pull them out, and when they are dry, we store them in the attic to transplant them in February or March of the following year, in plot no. 2. Transplanting is done in rows 15 cm apart, with onions planted 10 cm apart. Monstrous onions are harvested around July. All in-season varieties - blond virtues, flat yellow, etc. - can be broadcast in February and March. Better in February, the harvest is made a little earlier; land cleared in July can still give two harvests before the end of the season. I've already said that threshing is not necessary for onions. Sow on ploughing that has been in place for three weeks or a month, and the soil will be sufficiently firm, and the crop the best it can be. Onion beds need to be watered several times, so before sowing, create a border around the beds to retain water from watering; then sow, and cover the seed with a centimetre of top soil. Water until emergence if the weather is dry, and weed as soon as weeds appear. Water from time to time to keep the soil fresh, until the onions have acquired a certain strength; weed a second time, and even a third time if necessary, and suspend watering, which, if too frequent, would prevent the onions from turning. When the onions are well turned and fully developed, cut off the stems as they emerge; don't cut them off, but bruise them and lay them down with the back of a rake to hasten the bulb's ripening; when you don't have many onions, you can twist the stems by hand, but the back of a rake is more expedient. As soon as the stems are completely wilted, the onions are pulled out. Always choose very dry weather for this operation. Leave them in an alley exposed to the sun for four or five days, then put them in a very dry attic, and when the cold approaches, cover them with straw to keep them from freezing. You can sow early carrots followed by lamb's lettuce, after the first onions have been harvested, or three harvests of lettuces, using counter-planting. ONION. When a large quantity of sorrel is needed, sow Bellevièlle sorrel in borders from March to June, in squares no. 3 and no. h. This is the most productive sorrel, but it is acidic, especially in summer. A sorrel border sown in spring yields several cuttings during the season. Successive sowings can be made up to July to ensure year-round availability. Blistered-leaf sorrel is much preferable for the home garden: it is less acidic. It can be propagated by splitting off plants and planting them in the borders of plot no. 3. Don't cut this sorrel like the previous one, but pick it leaf by leaf, if you don't want to greatly reduce the harvest. Sorrel is indispensable for cooking, and you need to have it all year round; nothing could be easier: just pull up a few clumps as winter approaches, and plant them in the corners of the frames, between other plants, where they give leaves all winter long. PANAIS. Parsnips can only ever be grown on a very small scale, but it is useful to have some in the kitchen garden. Like carrots, parsnips are sown in beds in plot no. 2, in February for harvesting in July or August, and in July for harvesting at the end of the season, according to need. Weed, thin and water as needed, as with other broadcast seedlings. Three crops of lettuce can be grown after summer parsnips, and winter parsnips can be sown after a crop of onions. Parsnips do not fear frost, and July seedlings can be kept in the ground throughout the winter without any inconvenience. PATATO. The potato is not as good as the potato, but as it is more difficult to grow in our climate, and as it is a vegetable belonging to the do8 maine of fantasy, it is a good idea to have a few plants in the vegetable garden. I attach too little importance to the potato to grow it as an early crop, and clutter up the frames with it, so we'll be content to grow it on a deaf bed, and harvest it around August. In April, potatoes are planted in warm soil. As soon as they have produced shoots eight to ten centimetres long, they are removed with a small piece of the tuber, and planted permanently, in the middle of a deaf layer, at a distance of 60 centimetres. Cover with cloches, and shade for a few days to ensure recovery. Ventilate whenever the temperature permits, and replace the bells at night, as long as frosts are to be feared; the potato is very sensitive to them. Watering is useful, but only moderately. Potatoes don't like excess humidity, so only wet them thoroughly during hot spells. When frost is no longer an issue, remove the cloches completely. Tubers can be harvested as they form, if desired. This is easily done by digging into the bed with your fingers; they are detached when ripe, and the root is immediately covered. The whole crop is harvested in September. Potatoes are quite difficult to preserve; they are very sensitive to cold, and rot when 24 9 bruised. It should be harvested with as much care as the most delicate fruits, and stored in a warm, dry place, buried in ash or heather soil, completely dry, bed by bed, and placed far enough apart so that they do not touch. PARSLEY. Parsley is a must in any well-kept garden. Sow it in the borders of squares no. 2 and no. 3 in spring and August, so that it is always in full bloom. Sow parsley in pots in August for winter supply. The pots are completely buried in the ground, and as frost approaches, they are moved into the orangery, or if there is no orangery, into a cold frame. With twenty pots of parsley, there's never a shortage during the winter. When the cold becomes severe, bury two pots in the compost of a warm layer, and replace them with two others when the parsley has grown enough to be picked. CHILI. Chillies ripen only imperfectly in the vineyards. Its main use is for preserving before ripening. It is sown on a warm bed under a frame in February or March, for transplanting to nurseries under a frame as soon as the plant has four or five leaves, and for setting out on a warm or 18-deaf bed in May. The Spanish sweet pepper is the variety that ripens best in France. It can be counter-planted on a melon bed, or between cucumbers. PIMPRENELLE. PIMPRENELLE is sometimes used in the kitchen, as a vegetable. It's a poor plant for the vegetable garden, but a precious fodder for animals. The burnet comes from everywhere, and succeeds everywhere. It is usually sown in the borders, in March, in squares n° 3 and n° h, for kitchen use, but when there are a certain number of animals in the house, and the vegetable garden is large, it is worth growing it as fodder. In this case, sow in February, in square no. h, in rows 30 centimetres apart. The soil can be turned over and a buckwheat plant sown, which will provide abundant seed for poultry, especially if it is vigorously ashy. If there are a certain number of animals, we surround the whole square n° 3 with borders of burnet, and we keep them for two years, to destroy them when the square in which we sowed becomes n° 1, then we resow the borders of square n° 3, for two years, and so on. LEEK. Leeks require substantial, slightly clayey soil; they like slightly decom8 posed fertilizers. We sow it at two times of the year to make two seasons, which is enough to ensure that we never run out. Leeks are sown in March and July, in plot no. 2. The March seedlings are transplanted when the plant has grown to the size of a feather pipe. The root tips and largest leaves are cut off and transplanted in beds, or counterplanted in other crops. To obtain very white leeks, transplant at a depth of 10 or 12 centimetres. When you need a large quantity of leeks, you transplant in beds in plot no. 2, after a harvest of lettuces or large strawberries: the bed is ploughed deeply, with edges to retain water from watering; stakes are placed 20 centimetres apart and 10 centimetres from the edges. Place the string on these stakes, and trace the lines with the spiked trowel. Stagger the leeks on these lines, 10 centimetres apart. Hoe often and water copiously. Leeks planted in rows in May can be harvested in summer and autumn. If you don't need to use a large quantity of leeks, you can counter-plant them in squares n° 1 and n° 2. In square n° 1, between cauliflowers, autumn artichokes etc., etc., etc. In square 2, between strawberry plants, lettuces etc., etc. July seedlings are planted in September, in beds, in plot no. 1, for harvesting in winter and spring, or are counter-planted in plot no. 1, in strawberry beds, between last-season cabbages etc., etc. PEAS. Peas are an excellent vegetable. It should be given a large place in the vegetable garden, and harvested as long as possible. Peas like light, medium-consistency soils; they do poorly in clay soils, but do best in new, fertilizer-free soils. Fresh fertilizers are harmful to it, and it grows huge stalks without producing grain. Peas, like all pulses, need a certain amount of potash to bear fruit abundantly, and give pitiful results when sown two years in a row in the same bed. It needs new soil, or at least soil that hasn't produced peas for two years. Many authors have claimed that the law of alternation should not be respected for vegetables, except for peas, which reduce their production by more than half when sown two years in a row in the same bed. The excuse given for violating the first of nature's laws was the amount of fertilizer buried in the garden. All vegetables seemed to agree with this error, but only the pea protested. It is indisputable that many vegetables 18 produce fairly satisfactory yields when grown for several years in succession on the same bed, but it is at least as indisputable that these vegetables produce almost double the yield when they are grown only every three or four years on the same bed. This, at least, is what our experience of vegetable rotation has shown us over the last ten years. A hardy species will tolerate a poor crop, but if given a good one, it will produce twice as much. It was experience gained through observation that led us to adopt a four-year rotation, with layers, and, thanks to this rotation, the right distribution of fertilizers, and respect for the law of alternation, we obtain double produce without further expense. You never know where to put peas in a garden that is not subject to rotation. In our kitchen garden, we'll grow them in plot no. 3, where they'll find soil that is no longer loaded with fertilizer, has been resting for three years from pea production, and is abundantly ashed, the last condition for obtaining large quantities of good-quality grain. We'll be growing just one variety under a frame: the very-dwarf pea under a frame; early cultivation differs essentially from that in the open ground, and we'll be giving it the honors of primacy. In November, we sow very young peas on a warm layer under a frame, in rows 15 centimeters apart, with the peas side by side in the furrow. Cover at night with straw mats, and provide air whenever possible. In the first fortnight of December, peas are unfolded and transplanted by two or three feet together, on a warm bed under a frame, in rows 15 to 18 centimetres apart, with the clumps staggered at 10 centimetres on the rows. The practice of transplanting is excellent for peas, especially for frame peas. Transplanted peas grow less stemmed and bear fruit more quickly than those sown in the field. As soon as transplanting is complete, spread a little wood ash between the rows. Cover with straw mats for two days, to help the plants take root. As soon as it is well established, we bury the ash by lightly hoeing with a weeder; we give as much air and light as the temperature allows, and we control the stoves so as to regularly obtain a heat of 15 to 18 degrees under the frames. When the peas have formed three or at most four flower stages, we pinch the main stem to stop it elongating and concentrate the action of the sap on the knotted fruit. We turn up the heat on the stoves a little, and a few days later we start picking peas. Chassis peas should only be grown when far from Paris, where in December, January and February, peas harvested in Algiers are sold at low prices. According to an ancient custom, peas are sown in sheltered beds on St Catherine's Day, November 25. These peas are quite early, it's true, but even greater earliness can be obtained, with less trouble, by sowing under a frame and transplanting in the open ground. For this purpose, we sow the very dense Dutch dwarf, in rows 15 centimeters apart, on a warm bed and under a frame, in January or February, to be planted out in the open ground in April. Choose a bed against a south-facing wall; plough well; place stakes 25 centimetres apart at each end of the bed; lay down the chalk line, and after tracing the lines with a pointed trowel, transplant the peas in staggered rows, 25 centimetres apart. We shelter them from the sun with straw mats for two days to ensure a good start, then spread ash between the lines and lightly hoe it in. Four or five stems are placed in each hole. Water very sparingly to avoid damaging fruiting, and cover at night with straw mats if frost is to be feared. When there are four stages of flowers, pinch off the main stem to stop vegetation and make the fruit grow, and harvest as you go along. Peas grown in this way require little more care than those sown at St Catherine's Day, and ripen a month earlier. I admit to growing in clumps only for early peas that will be transplanted. For all open-ground crops, without exception, we will adopt row sowing, which gives triple the results of clump sowing. The Michaud de Hollande pea produces its first pods almost at the same time as the Ste-Catherine peas, if sown early. This is the pea par excellence, in terms of quality, earliness and fertility: there can never be too many in the vegetable garden. The Michaud de Hollande pea, sown in February, bears fruit at the same time as the Ste-Catherine peas, when properly cultivated. It is sown in square no. 3, in rows at least one metre apart, but in a single row dug with a spiked trowel, at the bottom of which it is sown very thickly (pl. 10, fig. 1). I insist because people who don't usually sow peas in rows never want to sow them thick enough, and place the rows far enough apart. The distance between rows is one meter for Michaud de Hollande; one meter 10 cent. for Ruelle and Michaux peas, and one meter 20 cent. for Clamart. No less seed should be planted than is available (fig. 1, pl. 10). Furrows should be five to six centimetres deep, and oriented north to south. As soon as the seed is sown, it is covered, taking care to break up the clods; then a rough rake is used to remove the largest stones, and a layer of ash is spread over all the lines, about 30 centimetres wide, one centimetre thick on the line and five millimetres on the edges. The fine rake is used to attach the ash to the soil, without burying it, and to remove any foreign matter. When the peas have risen well, i.e. when they are about three centimetres high, we give them a vigorous hoeing, amalgamating the ash left on the surface with the soil. When the peas are twelve to fifteen centimetres high, hoe them a second time and row them in. It's very important to row on time, and, I repeat, the peas must not be more than 15 centimetres high, or the harvest will be significantly reduced. To row the peas, don't use twisted, branched branches, but straight, unbranched sticks. Two rows of oars are placed at each row of peas, and the oars are driven into the ground as follows: one row of rods at a distance of twenty-five centimetres, driven firmly into the ground, inclined to the same side (A, pl. 10, fig. 3). A second row of rods is then placed, driven in the opposite direction to the first (B, same figure), and crossed at points C, for added strength. The rods thus laid form a very solid trellis with regular lozanges. Two lines of trellis are constructed for each line of peas, one on each side, leaving a spacing of 25 to 28 centimetres between the two lines (pl. 10, fig. A). The line of peas is trapped between two trellises; the tendrils cling to the oars on either side, and when the peas are large, they form a hedge as straight and strong as a well-stocked and carefully mown thorn hedge (pl. 10, fig. 5). Paddles should be set at the following heights: 1 m for Michaud de Hollande; 1 m 20 cent. for Ruelle, Michaux and Clamart peas. All rods must be driven in so as to be at the same height, and to form a regular trellis. This method of rowing peas requires more wood, and also much more time than the one commonly used: this is undeniable, but wood and labor, even if they cost five times what they are worth, the owner will still benefit immensely from rowing as we indicate. You can row rows of peas with ten or twelve bundles of oars, and one or two days' work for the woman; the expense is almost nil, the garden will be much more regular and you'll get the following benefits: 1° A harvest at least twenty times greater than that of peas sown in bunches, or in rows that are too tightly packed and poorly rowed. This is easy to understand: our spaced rows, aerated and evenly lit on both sides, are remarkably fertile, whereas the pods can't form in the shade, in the middle of the clutter we see all too often in gardens; 2° An enormous time saving when picking the peas. All the pods hang outside on either side, so you don't have to look for them, just pick them. It's much quicker to pick a large basket 3 of peas on our rows than a handful in our seedbeds, and even picking this handful means breaking a large number of stems. The time saved in harvesting far exceeds that used in rowing; 3° Harvesting more than a fortnight earlier. This precocity is due to light, which is the most powerful agent of fruiting. Earliness is always very profitable if the crop is sold, and even if it is consumed, as it allows you to harvest one more crop in the year, while giving yourself the satisfaction of primacy. I recommend the pea cultivation I have indicated, to the exclusion of all others; both for the owner and for the speculator, since the yield is so much higher than that obtained by other cultivation methods. It's easy to convince yourself of this by making a comparative test. The landowner who sows in bunches, and devotes two ares to this crop, should continue it on one are, cultivating the other as I have indicated, and should take into account the time spent on each of the crops and their yields. This is the best way to cut short all objections, and reverse vicious habits in favor of a fruitful crop. When peas have formed five or six tiers of flowers, they are pinched off, i.e. the end of the main stem is removed. This operation is of great importance; it hastens the harvest and considerably favors the development of the fruits, by concentrating all the action of the sap on them. Nothing is lost by pinching; on the contrary, a few flowers are removed from the end of the stem, but these flowers, which would only have produced a few bad pods containing two or three seeds, would have delayed the ripening of the lower pods by more than a fortnight, and would have hindered their development. Once the peas have been pinched, all that's left to do is to hoe them from time to time, to destroy the grass growing between the rows, and to pick them as they ripen. It's urgent to sow peas often, every fortnight or three weeks, so as never to run out. Once you've picked four rows of peas, you're ready to pull them out. So you have to sow a few at a time, but very often, so you never run out. Michaud de Hollande, Ruelle and Michaux peas are sown from February to May, and Clamart from April to July. When harvesting peas for seed, be careful not to do so from a crop that has already been picked. The first pods provide the best seed, and by letting the last pods ripen, you only obtain waste seed that is prone to degeneration. What's more, you have to tie up one or two beds for a long time to harvest one liter of peas, and it would be better to buy it than to deprive yourself of a harvest. When you want to harvest seed, you make a special sowing in square n° A; you pinch early, and let everything dry without picking anything, it's the only way to get good seed. 25 POTATOES. Potatoes are extremely easy to grow, both as an early and seasonal crop. They are an indispensable vegetable, and you should never be short of them. It is therefore necessary to grow early varieties in trays and in the open ground, and then in the open ground a few good seasonal varieties chosen from the various kitchen gardens of the owner, tenant, etc., etc. The early Kidney or Marjolin potato is an excellent early variety, which benefits from being grown as an early crop, both indoors and outdoors. It is planted on a warm bed from December to February. Four rows are planted per frame panel, staggered 32-35 cm apart. In the early stages, we counter-plant with various nursery vegetables. Warmth of 15 to 20 degrees is maintained under the trays, with the help of stoves; air is given whenever the weather permits, the soil is covered at night with straw mats, and watered moderately to keep the layer moist. Potatoes are harvested as they come up, by digging at the base, and immediately covered with potting soil. If you have a temperate greenhouse at your disposal, plant a few potatoes in large pots and place them in the greenhouse. This is the easiest growing method, requiring only a few waterings. Harvesting is done in the same 8 way, as the tubers develop, by carefully digging at the base. You can still obtain very early potatoes with Kidney, by planting it in the open ground in plot no. 1, in the second half of February. To save time, germinate the potatoes under a frame, or, even simpler, in a warm place, in a greenhouse, or even in the gardener's bedroom. Four rows of holes, 25 to 30 centimetres deep, are made in each board, staggered 50 centimetres apart in all directions. The sprouted potatoes are placed at the bottom of the holes; they are covered with five to six centimetres of soil, and a small reserve of bedding is placed in the alleys to cover them in case of frost. When the potatoes are well established, we give them a vigorous hoeing, filling the holes completely, hoeing them from time to time, and harvesting them in the first days of June. We grow the seasonal varieties in squares in plot no. 1. We plant in March in holes staggered 70 centimetres apart in all directions. The plant is hoeed several times and lightly ridged to encourage tuber development. Potatoes can be counter-planted with garlic, leeks, etc., in the first period of their vegetation, and with winter cabbage in the last. 8 PUMPKIN. Pumpkins are sown on a warm bed in March, to be transplanted in a nursery between other plants in April. Alternatively, they could be sown on a dull bed and covered with cloches, or, if precocity is not a priority, they could be sown on a warm bed in April and transplanted in May; Whether the seedling is transplanted onto a warm bed and placed in a frame, or sown a month later, it cannot be placed under cover before May. They can still be sown in April, but with a cloche or at least a flowerpot for shelter. Pumpkins are sensitive to the cold, but once frosts are no longer a threat, they can be grown in the ground. Around May, round holes 50 centimetres deep and one metre in diameter are dug about two metres apart. These are filled with well-tilled and sufficiently watered manure, covered with 20 to 25 centimetres of good soil mixed with loam, and the pumpkins are planted in clods in the center of these small layers. When pumpkins are planted before May 15, it's a good idea to shelter them at night with a glass bell, an economy bell, or at least an upside-down flowerpot, to protect them from the white frosts that destroy them. When planted, they should be sheltered for at least two days to ensure a good start. 16 Pumpkins require a great deal of water; you must not spare watering if you want them to grow early and in good volume. The more you water it, the fatter and tastier it becomes; pumpkins don't mind two or even three thorough waterings when the season is dry. Pruning a pumpkin is very simple. The main stem is allowed to grow to a length of 1.5 meters for the large yellow pumpkin, and 1 meter for the Spanish pumpkin. Pinch to develop the branches on which the meshes (female flowers) appear. If you want monstrous pumpkins, leave only one fruit on the large yellow, or two if you don't want monsters. You can leave two or even three on the more delicate but much smaller Spanish pumpkin. Once the fruit is set, choose the best-formed and most advantageously placed to preserve them, and sacrifice all the others. The fruit-bearing branch is pruned two eyes above the pumpkin, so that it can benefit from the full action of the sap, and care is taken to ensure that no new branches develop that are too vigorous. If they do, remove them. Water copiously, but not excessively, until the fruit has formed, then increase watering as soon as it has, as the plant can never have too much water. There's a very simple way for everyone to increase fruit volume considerably, and that's to pickle the stem 50 centimetres above the fruit's attachment. Make a hole 25 centimetres wide, 50 centimetres long and 30 centimetres deep. Put about 15 centimetres of consumed manure in the bottom; cover with a centimetre of earth, on which you fix the pumpkin branch with two hooks, and cover completely with earth. A few days later, the buried part of the branch has sprouted roots, and this new root system gives the fruit all its sap, considerably increasing its volume. Marcotage makes it possible to keep one more fruit per plant, thanks to the root systems created. Pumpkins can be counter-planted with a few lettuces, if done in small quantities. But in vegetable gardens where an entire square is planted with pumpkins, they can be sown with green beans and harvested before the pumpkins have invaded the field. This harvest costs nothing, but should be removed as soon as it gets in the way of the pumpkins. RADISHES. We sow radishes all year round on beds, and in the ground, a little at a time and very often, so as never to run out. But as we only need a very small quantity of radishes at a time, we only sow them in counter-planting, on beds and in the ground, i.e. between other harvests. Layered radishes are sown in December, January and February, between lettuces, melons, cauliflowers, etc.; from March to August, in the garden, 9 in plot no. 1, between cabbages, artichokes, etc., etc. Radishes require a lot of water; they should be watered at least twice a day in summer to keep them tender and not too pungent. When sowing radishes in the ground, it's a good idea to beat the soil a little with the back of the spade; they are always rounder and better formed when the soil has been lightly beaten. RAVE. Cultivation is the same as for radishes. RAIPONCE. An excellent small salad, invaluable for those lacking layers and frames, in that it is harvested in the open ground during winter. Ruiponce is broadcast in square 2, in lettuce beds, as a counter-planting, and in special beds around June. The very fine seed should be mixed with twenty times its volume of soil, so as to sow fairly lightly. Cover the seed with a little top soil, and water assiduously until emergence. We start by harvesting the raiponces that have been sown in counter-planting, and keep those that have been sown in beds for harvesting at frost time. All you have to do is cover the beds with litter as soon as it freezes. Lift the cover, and harvest as needed. 3 Riponce is little cultivated, and wrongly so, as it is a precious resource for tenants, farmers, teachers and small landowners. RHUBARB. Rhubarb can be propagated by sowing it in seedbeds or in the ground, in rows, around March, or by splitting it off. Transplant to nurseries at a distance of 50 centimetres in all directions, whether the plant comes from seed or from cuttings. Hoe and water thoroughly throughout the summer. The following spring, place the plants in square No. 1, staggered one metre apart in all directions. Water often and thoroughly. Harvesting of the petioles begins in summer and continues the following year. SALSIFIS. Sow salsify and scorzonera in squares 2 and 3, in rows 25 to 30 centimeters apart, around March, to harvest the roots in autumn and winter. A little watering to ensure that the young plant emerges and grows well, and occasional hoeing to loosen the soil, is all that salsify needs. They can be left to overwinter in the ground without suffering, as they don't freeze. If you want to eat them over winter, it's a good idea to pull them up at frost time and store them in the cellar, or cover a few beds with bedding so you can pull them up when it freezes. 18 MI Aromatic plant essential for cooking. It is sown in spring, in borders, in plot no. 3 or plot no. h. We use it green throughout the summer, and pull it up in autumn to dry it and keep it all winter. Dried savory retains its aroma. THYM. To be grown in borders in squares 3 and 4, by splinters of plants, planted in spring. TOMATO. The tomato is one of the best condiments we have; its use has become more popular in recent years, thanks to advances in horticulture; its yield exceeds that of the potato. Nothing is easier than growing tomatoes in the open ground; early cultivation, under frames, is more difficult, but nevertheless accessible to gardeners of very average strength. To obtain early tomatoes, we sow in December and January, on a warm bed and under a frame, then transplant to a nursery on a slightly cooler bed, and even transplant to a nursery at a greater distance, on a third bed, before planting. These successive transplantings are intended to prevent the plant from growing too many leaves and to hasten fruiting; they are necessary, especially for tomatoes destined to ripen under chassis, as they always have a great tendency to grow too vigorously. Around February, tomatoes grown in nurseries under warm conditions are counter-planted with first-season green beans or other crops soon to be removed. Four tomato plants are planted under each panel. They are covered at night with straw mats, given air during the day whenever the temperature permits, and watered with care. The tomato plants are planted on two branches attached horizontally to small stakes or, more simply, to transverse wires. As soon as the two reserved branches are full of flowers, pinch off the ends and remove any new shoots that appear. As soon as they start to turn red, remove all the leaves covering them to speed up ripening. Tomatoes can be harvested in the first days of April. Tomatoes can also be harvested very early, by planting them at the edge of the in-season melon beds, on the north side; they provide shelter for the melons, keep insects away with their smell, and bear fruit well before tomatoes planted in the ground. Stakes one metre high are placed every two metres, and this one-metre height is divided into three. The stakes are linked together by three wires twisted around each stake, arranged as follows: the first 30 centimetres from the ground; the second 30 centimetres from the first, and the third 30 centimetres from the second (pl. 10, fig. 6). These wires are hand-tightened as much as possible, and a tomato plant is planted every 80 centimetres along the fence. As they grow, we tie the tomatoes to the wires, like a vine, taking care to leave a certain distance between the branches, and to remove any that might obstruct the light. As soon as a certain quantity of fruit has set, all the branches on the wires are severely pinched, without exception, and all new shoots are ruthlessly removed. We water very copiously when the fruits are well formed, and remove the leaves when they start to turn red. This palisade shelters the melons from the northern gales, and is literally covered with tomatoes by July. Tomatoes are only planted in the open air in May, when frosts are no longer to be feared, or if they are planted in April, they are sheltered at night with a bell until May. For open-ground cultivation, three wires are also laid on stakes, with the rows 1 metre apart, and the tomatoes are staggered at 80 centimetres, around May 15. Water copiously for recovery, suspending watering a little at flowering time and doubling it when the fruit has reached the size of a hazelnut. Pruning is the same as above, and must be carried out energetically if you want to harvest a lot, i.e. spend all the sap on the fruits by removing all the new shoots, and bring forward their ripening by exposing them to the action of the sun's rays, i.e. by cutting off all the leaves that shade them as soon as the fruits have reached their full size. A certain amount of green fruit always remains on field tomatoes as frost approaches. Pick them carefully, and place them on dry straw in a room where it won't freeze. Tomatoes are planted in square No. 2, and when a special bed is made, it is carefully mulched; tomatoes can be counter-planted with lettuces. You can also counter-plant salad beds already mulched with tomatoes. TRUFFLES. I won't go into the subject of truffle cultivation, since the means of reproduction are not yet known. What I have said about Etampes truffles has stirred up the whole Périgourdine community, and given rise to a host of articles to which I have not wished to reply, as I have other things to do than to write slogans in favor of the Périgourdins. The town of Etampes supplies excellent truffles, and harvests considerable quantities every year; moreover, Etampes produces truffes à la reine, a variety much appreciated by gourmets. These are the facts in all their brutality. Everyone can verify them by passing through Etampes, and this is my only answer to the Périgourdins: Périgord truffles have lost none of their value, because Etampes produces excellent ones. Why deny it? DISEESCQO There's no medal that doesn't have its reverse side; gardening has its own; they are numerous, that's undeniable; but we mustn't exaggerate them. I would be failing in my self-imposed mission if, after indicating all the means of action, and pointing out the successes that are easy to achieve, I were to pass over the setbacks in silence. But before we get discouraged and repeat in chorus with the unintelligent and mediocrely hard-working masses: we're out of luck! or the soil is worthless! let's look for the cause of most of these failures. Let's start with those of large-scale cultivation. Alas! how many stars we have seen spinning! Why? because most of the time, highly intelligent men with a certain amount of capital, but who knew nothing about cultivation and didn't want to take the trouble to study it, threw themselves like madmen into clearing land, and spent their fortune and their intelligence on it. These men forgot that cultivation is a science, that it is necessary not only to know, but also to know how to do it; they unfortunately ruined themselves, and the irrefutable setbacks and obvious failures that have befallen so many families. Does this mean that large-scale cultivation is bad speculation? Obviously not, since the operations begun by these agricultural madmen, and continued by farmers, have produced the most brilliant results, and created more fortunes than they have ruined! Back to the vegetable garden! I've said that it's not just a question of knowing how to do things, but also of knowing how to do them. Most of the time, we fail at the easiest things, because we don't know how to do them, and we know even less how to do them. There's a very simple remedy to this state of affairs, and that's to learn; it's easy with a little intelligence, a lot of goodwill, and putting all false pride aside. You can't blame a man for not knowing something he wasn't able to learn; you can only pity him for not having been able to learn, especially when he's intelligent. Having said that, let's look at the causes of the main setbacks in vegetable growing, and try to avoid them. We have to constantly fear, and constantly fight, three causes of ruin for the plants we cultivate: 1° Atmospheric influences; 2° Diseases; 3° Insects. Humidity, frost, wind and storms are all enemies to be dreaded, but by fighting them with perseverance and energy, we manage to ward off their disastrous effects. Humidity is particularly pernicious for crops grown in trays and cloches; in the absence of sunlight, it causes plants to rot. That's when you need to redouble your efforts: carefully wipe the inside of glass panes and cloches, give as much air as possible to evaporate it, and make sure that no clutter forms under shelters; in other words, that plants don't get tangled up together; that they lack neither air nor light. Frost destroys everything if you can't fight it and let it surprise you. As early as October, you should prepare all your blankets, mats, litter, etc., to be used at the first sign of frost: when wild ducks and geese pass in flocks, heading from north-east to south-west, it's a sure sign of frost a few days later, just as their passage from south-west to north-east is a sure sign of thaw; thick, continuous fog almost always precedes frost: When, at the onset of winter, the wind stays to the north-east, the weather clears, and the stars shine brightly, we can expect a hard, continuous frost. We must be ready to cover everything as soon as these conditions appear; we must uncover with the same eagerness, as soon as the thaw comes, but keeping the shelters within reach if there is a recurrence of cold. Violent winds also cause great damage. You have to anticipate them, tie everything down and secure everything to avoid their ravages. When the wind is very still and uncertain, and the sunset is very red, it's a sign of a storm. Thunderstorms also cause great damage, as they are often accompanied by hailstorms and sometimes hail. You need to prepare everything when you see it coming: close the frames, take down the bells, and keep straw mats ready to cover melons and seedlings in case of hail. Diseases affecting vegetable plants can sometimes wreak havoc. In principle, however, diseases only affect weak plants that lack food and are placed in poor conditions. We never see diseased plants in the Paris marshes, which are typical of vegetable cultivation. When vegetables are cultivated in a more rational way, provided with the right fertilizers, and the soil is given the necessary care, diseases will disappear, as they are most often only an effect of poor cultivation. The same cannot be said of insects, which sometimes suddenly invade our crops and wreak havoc. Spider mites cause serious damage to seedlings, particularly carrots. They pierce the stem, usually killing the young plants. They can be destroyed by spreading ash or quicklime in the pathways, and at the same time drenching the seedlings with a decoction of soot or a solution of black soap. Caterpillars of all families cause great havoc, especially in cabbage plantations. They can be destroyed fairly quickly by spraying the affected plants with a black soap solution. A mixture of water, oil and ammonia would achieve a more rapid result, but the oil clogs the leaf stomata and impedes vegetation, whereas the black soap stimulates it. Courtillères cause real havoc in beds and seedlings. They are very difficult to destroy, but some can be killed by pouring soap water into their holes, or by pouring a few drops of oil and water over them. Ants are rare in well-watered vegetable gardens, as they fear excess humidity. When an ant-hole is discovered, it should be dug out with a pickaxe and boiling water poured over it. Slugs are formidable enemies, eating everything. You can destroy some of them by spreading ash around the boards they visit. They can also be hunted early in the morning, when there are plenty of them, but when there are many, and the garden is walled, the easiest thing to do is to get two or three hedgehogs and let them roam free. In just a few days, they'll devour all the slugs, without ever touching the plants. The flea beetle is very damaging to cabbage seedlings, which it sometimes destroys. When infested, we sacrifice the seedling to destroy them, by covering it with fine, dry grass and setting fire to it. Aphids are easily destroyed with two or three syringes of black soap water. White grubs are the scourge of the vegetable garden, and unfortunately we have no effective means of destroying them, as it is impossible to reach them underground. Their ravages will only diminish appreciably when the beetles are properly controlled, as is the case in some départements. They mainly attack the roots of strawberry and salad plants; as soon as you see one of these plants wilting, you dig around it and kill the worms. When there is a large quantity of worms in a bed, it is worth sacrificing the harvest and ploughing it very deeply, as this destroys many of them. In any case, it's always a good idea to have a few tame ducks, which you can train to eat the worms when you're ploughing. Nothing is simpler than training ducks to do this. All you need is for them not to be wild, and to follow you when you need them, which is easy if you throw them a bit of bread. As soon as they see soil moving, they'll place themselves in front of the ploughmen, and not a worm will escape them. When ducks have been to the plough once or twice, you only have to show them a spade to take them a league away; they follow with the greatest alacrity, place themselves in front of the ploughmen and never leave the top of the gauge, so impatiently are they waiting for the shovelful of earth that will provide them with a worm. I've noticed that in vegetable gardens with regular crop rotation, square No. 3, the ashy one, is always less attacked by grubs. The causticised ash keeps them away, if it doesn't destroy them. Another excellent measure is to have your chickens weed your gardens. Leave them free in the vegetable garden for part of the winter, when there's nothing to eat, as they're almost as fond of greenery as they are of insects. Or, better still, have 2-metre-square racks made, and when there are a lot of insects, park them with the racks, like sheep, in the most infested part, after removing the crop and giving it a light ploughing. Ten hens devour more insects in an hour than a man can destroy in a year. Small chickens are also excellent caterpillar destroyers for part of the summer. From birth until they are six weeks or two months old, they don't scratch, or not enough to do any damage. So when a cabbage patch is lost to caterpillars, it's difficult to destroy them because you only have the resource of picking them up by hand. Take a hen with her chicks; place the hen under a chicken cage in the middle of the square, leaving an opening big enough for the little chickens to get in and out. The chicks will spend their whole day eating caterpillars, and will refuse any other food as long as they can find it. The cage is changed every day, and when it has gone all the way round the square, it is purged of caterpillars. SUMMARY OF WORK IN THE VEGETABLE GARDEN, SORTED BY MONTH. The horticultural year really begins in August. This is the time when all seasonal crops are planted, and when work begins on those for the following winter, spring and summer. In August, there's still time to collect enough manure and leaves to build up the layers, and to make enough compost to start a regular crop rotation the following spring, with or without layers, and thus considerably increase the production of the vegetable garden. The summary of work I have given here is intended to remind the gardener of the main tasks to be carried out each month of the year, and to make it easier for the owner to direct and supervise this work: AUGUST. All outdoor plants are watered according to their needs; the loose soil, 14 in all crops, is maintained by frequent hoeing. Weeds resulting from hoeing are collected and mixed with the compost heaps in the factory. In August, we sow early white onions for transplanting in October; Yorck and oxheart cabbages for nurseries in September and October; short red Dutch carrots for harvesting before the frosts; leeks for counter-planting in spring; salsify, spinach, turnips and lamb's lettuce for winter, and passion lettuce for late winter. The last plantings of celery, chicory, etc. are made in the open ground. Beans are sown to eat green, and sometimes green beans, if the late season is mild. This is also the month to visit the borders, and replant them if they are in poor condition. Layers are no longer in use; the last melons are harvested, into which cauliflowers have been counter-planted. Unnecessary layers are demolished, and their products mixed into the compost mass. SEPTEMBER. Now that the heat is over and watering has subsided a little, it's time to activate all the field crops and prepare for winter and the following year. Early carrots, turnips, spinach and lamb's lettuce are still sown in the open ground. The previous month's seedlings are transplanted into nurseries. 8 Cauliflower, Yorck cabbage, gotte lettuce, chicory for winter and spring, and leeks for transplanting are also sown. Celery is being ridged, cardoons are being stuffed for blanching, and strawberry plants are being planted. We keep a few old beds on which to transplant lettuces sown in the open ground, and carefully collect all the manure needed to build up the beds as winter approaches. We grind the horse manure and mix the others with the composts. OCTOBER. Everything that can be removed is gradually brought in. Field harvests yield a quantity of leaves and herbaceous matter that are carefully collected to increase the mass of the composts. Never lose sight of the vegetable garden's rotation, and constantly think about what manure and leaves are needed for the beds, what composts are needed for plot no. 1, what potting soil is needed for plot no. 2, and what ashes are needed for plot no. 3. The month of October provides plenty of fertilizer, and nothing should be wasted. We are still sowing lamb's lettuce, spinach, chervil and radishes. All seedlings from the previous two months are transplanted into nurseries. We demolish the useless layers, those that have lost all their heat; some of the manure from these layers, that which has not been excessively consumed, is mixed with the herbaceous matter; the most decomposed is piled 9 separately to make new compost for the layers, and the old compost from the layers is reserved for the composting of square no. 2. Transplanting is carried out on muted layers that have produced melons, chicory, crepe lettuce, romaine, cauliflower, etc. We also sow on muted beds and under cloches: gottes, small black and romaine lettuces, to harvest during the winter. On rainy days, we repair all our shelter equipment, so as not to be surprised by frosts. We also start collecting leaves, and pile them up for diapers and composts. NOVEMBER. All shelters, frames, cloches and straw mats must be in good condition. We must have a certain quantity of bedding ready to cover field crops at the first threat of frost. Asparagus stalks are cut to a height of 40 centimeters, to mark the place of the base, and the mound made in spring is cut down to leave only 10 centimeters of soil on the crown, so that the asparagus can breathe. Carefully cut off any remaining artichoke stems, remove the largest leaves and start buttering. Artichokes grown annually are pulled out and returned to the cellar or vegetable greenhouse. All that's left to do is harvest and bring in the field crops, and protect what's left from frost. 3 Collect leaves in the garden, the park and even the woods, and stock up on broom, gorse and heather to mix into compost. In the woods, you'll also find very fine, fairly long grass that has dried on the ground and is excellent for making litter. Pond and ditch curings and pond grasses are also collected, as well as as ashes from lime kilns, factories, locomotives, etc. All of this should be done while the plants are growing. All this should be done while the field crops are resting; this resting time is used to activate the fertilizer factory. We can start smoking as much as we can a few planks of plot no. h, which will become no. 1 the following year, and put in Yorck and beefheart cabbages. We start to build up a few warm layers to sow peas and beans to eat green, and to set out lettuces, chicory, cauliflower, etc., between which we can place a few tufts of sorrel. As new layers are built up, the old ones are demolished, and the manure from them is distributed as we have indicated. Keep an active watch, and observe the weather more than ever; increase straw mat coverings at night, and apply stoves if frost is felt. DECEMBER. The fertilizer factory should be working as hard as possible, as it does during the whole of time 26, when field crops take up very little space, in order to meet the needs of spring. When the weather is mild, we uncover the artichokes and plow all the free beds. If it's freezing, on the other hand, manure is hauled in to clear the beds, and once everything has been transported, it is buried as soon as the thaw sets in. If the frost persists, we increase our supplies of leaves, broom, gorse and moss, which we fetch from the woods, and we cover whatever remains in the ground. When the weather is mild, early cabbages can be planted in square No. 1. Layering requires a great deal of activity in this month. New warm layers are put up for sowing melons, tomatoes, etc., and a few warm layers for sowing carrots and radishes, and putting peas, beans, etc. into place. We apply stoves wherever needed, depending on the temperature; we cover the frames at night with straw mats, and the bells with litter. If it snows, cover all the layers with straw mats and bedding, and carefully remove any snow remaining on and around the layers as soon as it has stopped falling. Air is given whenever the weather permits, in full sun, and when the thermometer is above zero. If some plants, poorly covered at night, are affected by frost, we must be careful not to uncover them; on the contrary, we double-cover them to let them thaw slowly, in the shade, which is the only way to preserve them. JANUARY. The manure for plot no. 1, the compost for plot no. 2, and the ashes for plot no. 3 should be transported to the site, so that we can take advantage of the mild weather to deep-till the fertilizer for plot no. 1; plow plot no. 2, and throw the compost into the beds as needed after plowing; plot no. 3 should also be plowed and ashed in January, or by February 10 at the latest. The soil is cleared of the last crops left in the ground or under the bedding; artichokes are kept in good condition; asparagus is smoked under cover, without being replanted, and if the weather is mild, early cabbages are planted, which can be counter-planted with leeks. In January, we increase the number of warm and hot layers, to set out melons, and nursery all early seedlings. Air is provided when the weather is mild; stoves and blankets are increased when it's freezing. Asparagus is heated; cucumbers, melons, tomatoes, chicory, etc., etc., are sown under frames. We also sow cauliflower, broad beans, beans, etc., etc., for transplanting in nurseries. Early carrots are sown, early potatoes are planted, and strawberry plants are started. Finally, we organize all the winter crops; we raise the seedlings that will be planted in the open ground two months later, we sow and counter-plant lettuces in the middle of all this, so that we never run out of them. FEBRUARY. We take advantage of the fine weather to sow onions, carrots, leeks, parsnips, etc., etc., in the open ground, in plot no. 2. Spinach can be sown between the early cabbages. The first peas and broad beans are sown in plot 3. The beds still require continuous care throughout February. All the plants sown in warm layers and transplanted in trays are placed in warm layers. Melons, cucumbers, tomatoes, cauliflower, savoy cabbage, celery, lettuces, chicory, romaine, radishes, etc., etc., are constantly sown and transplanted under glass. Air is provided as often as possible, shelter is provided at night, and the layers are kept warm with stoves. MARCH. Work in the open ground resumes in full swing. Carrots, onions, radishes, lettuces, sorrel, spinach, second-season peas, lentils, etc., etc., are sown in the open ground. All plants that can withstand full soil are planted: cabbages, lettuces, etc., and counter-planted as described in the general and special crops section. Strawberries, shallots, garlic, civet, all roots for seed, etc., etc., etc., are planted. 8 The beds require a fair amount of supervision in March; frost is hardly to be feared any more, but in exchange the sun gains strength, and sunburn is to be feared, especially when the plants, raised under glass, have not had all the air and light it was possible to give them. Shade is needed for the first few days, to gradually accustom the plants to very bright light. Melons, cucumbers, etc. are planted on warm, muted beds, and anything that can do without shelter is transplanted into the ground. APRIL. Asparagus is given a good ploughing, and mounded as I have indicated. We demolish the mounds of permanent artichokes, and spread the manure that covered them; we plow deeply and grommet at the same time. Artichokes kept in pots for annual cultivation are planted in plot no. 1, as are those kept in the cellar for the second season. All transplants grown under glass are planted in the open ground; cabbages, lettuces, etc. begin to be sown in the open ground. Pot-raised beans are transplanted, and all the bean varieties you want to grow are sown in the open ground. Layers no longer need heaters, as the sun takes their place; tender plants need to be shaded, and well covered at night. Various vegetables are still sown on the beds, to be transplanted in nurseries or in the open ground. MAY. The first harvests begin; they are immediately replaced by new seedlings and new plantings, so as to have everything throughout the summer. All harvests must be counter-planted to increase yields. We hoe, weed and water as needed. The fertilizer factory, depleted by the spring crops, must also be kept in mind. We demolish the first layers to mix the product with herbaceous debris from the vegetable garden. Carrots, turnips, cabbages, lettuces, romaine, chicory, cardoons, etc., etc., continue to be sown; nurseries are created to counter-plant and replace, as and when necessary, all that is removed. We sow beans to eat green, especially flageolets. The beds are easy to manage; air is given as often as possible; even the frames and bells are completely removed, and covered in the evening and at night. JUNE. We continue sowing in the open ground, so as never to run out of produce. We sow little and often everything, so as to always have well-stocked nurseries to fill the gaps which are frequent at this time of year, when the vegetable garden is in full production. Water as needed. The beds have produced the first melons, and we counter-plant them with cauliflowers, or replace them with other plants. JULY. The harvest is in full swing. Removed crops are replaced by nursery produce. Unnecessary layers are demolished to provide fertilizer for the mass, and everything that can be harvested before the frosts is sown. Clamart peas and beans can still be sown for harvesting in the late season. Cucumbers and melons are counter-planted with cauliflowers. END. Diuee ( 3 BEESGE COOgle FIRST PART. WHAT IS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... WHAT SHOULD BE... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... POTGARDEN CREATION, soil, situation, exposure. ... . PLAN OF POTAGE, extent, fences, distributions. SOIL PREPARATION, levelling, amending and ridging ... ... ... ... . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ASSOLEMENTS, fertilizer distribution, layers ... ... . OWNER'S POTAGE, fertilizer . . . . . . .... Liquid fertilizers ... ... ................. Manure ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . Composts ....................................................... Four-year crop rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sale of vegetables . . . . . . . .......... 15 21 37 49 60 72 73 75 76 81 82 Organization of rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 Vegetable varieties to grow in the owner's garden ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 103 TENANT'S GARDEN, fertilization, rotation, organization, varieties of vegetables to grow . . . . . . . . . . . . 128 FARMER'S KITCHEN GARDEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 Farm garden. . . . ...............185 PRESBYTERY POTAGER. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165 COMMUNITY, HOSPITAL AND BOARDING HOUSE KITCHEN GARDEN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181 PRIMARY SCHOOLTEACHER'S GARDEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198 STATION GARDEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211 CAMP GARDEN. . . . . . . . . . . .... 215 Otallized D, PART TWO. - GENERAL CULTIVATION. INSTRUMENTS AND TOOLS TO BE USED . . . . . . . . . . 235 LAYERS, FRAMES AND BELLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240 PLOWING, MANURE BURIAL, BOARD STRAIGHTENING ... . , . . .. . . . . ... . . . . . . .. 256 SOWING, TRANSPLANTING, TOPDRESSING AND MULCHING ... ... ... . 264 WATERING ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 270 WEEDING ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 288 Binning ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 290 CROP SUCCESSION, COUNTER-PLANTING ... ... . 293 PART THREE. - SPECIAL CROPS. Garlic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 306 Angelica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ....... 307 Arrochoke ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 307 Artichokes....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 308 Asparagus.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 320 Aubergine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 340 Beetroot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 341 Carrot . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . ..... 344 Celery... . . . . . . . . ... ... . . . . . . . .. 347 Chervil.........................350 Mushrooms........ . . . . . . . . . .. . . 350 Chicory... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 384 Cabbage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 360 Chives ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . 371 Civet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 371 Cucumber ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 371 Cress ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 373 Shallots ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 374 Spinach ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 375 Tarragon............ . . . . . . . . . . . ... 376 Beans. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 376 Strawberries ........................... .... 378 Giraumon... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 385 SIREEGU (OOQ Beans. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 386 Lettuce ... ... ... ... ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392 Romaine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 399. Lentils . . . . . . .... ...... ...... 400 Lamb's lettuce. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 401 Melon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 401 Turnips... ... ... ... ... ... .... ........ 415 Onions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... . 416 Sorrel ... ... ... ... ... .............. 419 Parsnips ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 420 Potato ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 420 Parsley ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... 422 Chili pepper... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 422 Pimprenelle... . . . . . . . . . . . . ....... 423 Leek. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423 Peas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 425 Potatoes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 434 Pumpkin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 436 Radish .............................. . 438 Rave. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 439 Rapunzel ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 439 Salsify ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 440 Savory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 441 Thyme.... . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 441 Tomatoes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 441 Truffles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 444 PART FOUR. Failure ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 446 Humidity, frost, wind, fog ... ... ... ... .... 448 Disease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 449 Insects......................... 480 Summary of work. . . . . . .. ........... 453 Orléans, imp. lithog. et stéréotyp. CHENU, rue Croix-de-Bois, 21. SEUEESD COOgle -- DIEO E COOgle 4 oemis 7 Legende A Paches B Cout à Gum c Coux du jau o ctable e Daison ou Cout 6 Sette 2 n Sette a Le t Dignes en Joittets 0e doubleꝯ 2e Aofietgés stout laal centta te Ustecge Ro uc la ~b Potadet Tottet QUeGooble DIRECOD GOOgle utteee 70t ba.- CdLte D'otuget baCatte FIn R. 1 atte attee a liet liet avec cotdon double haliat avee cotdon do~bl 2 clatnnoftmes (Oége. DIEESSE GOOgle 4 4 ~0 - - 4 - 2.2 2- Y. 2 - & - DIRESOS GOOgle 2 - EL I4 S RELO LLR EQO DitEe COOgle ---:---- * - 1- I 4 A " 1 CLL I ---------- ----- Mo COO8 9 11 Na M 4 L Seo CiOO8le -. ---- - .-.. -------------.. DigtedpeOoe 8 BEES GOOgle 8 20 Certt246 ~ Dieese p CIO0 1 2 X 3. 9 2 8 - size 9~ 2 LS 2 1 4 ~ Lo o Mi 11 E - * 3 *8 2e 174 4 2 SEUESOE GOOgle 10 2 toicue "e d-matccoa LLICIHEL RERIA MEMATENSIS taradorardumera SIEs Google TRAITÉ COMPLET DE LA CULTURE, DE LA TAILLE ET DE LA RESTAURATION DES ARBRES FRUITIERS DE TOUTES ESPÈCES Omurage iltorique et exentiellement praliqe APPROVED AND ENCOURACED BY MR. LE BINISTRE DE L'AQHICULTUREET COUROXNE PAR LA SOCIÉTE (MPÉRIALE ET CENTRALE DE FRINCE PAR GRESSENT Professeur d'Arboriculiure à riststut agricole de l'Oise, Membre titulaire de la Sociéte impériale et centrale de France, et de plusieurs Sociétés sarantes, Inspecteur du Service des Plantations de la ville d'Orisans, chargé du Cours d'Arboriculture fondé par la ville d'Orleuns et par le dcvartement du Loiret; de l'enseignement d'Horticulturs à l'Ecols mumieipatsupérieure; des Cultures arborescentes de l'Hopitat d'Oricans chardez de Cours des villes d'Orléans, Beauvais, Étampes, Benugency" Noyon, etc.., etc. i volume de aso pages et 1Di fgures, e franes. PAR LE MEME: LE COURS ÉLIMINTAIRE D'ABBORICULTURE Ouvrage approuvé et encouragé par S. E. M. LE MINISTRE DE L'AGRICULTURE, le CONSEIL GENÉRAL DU LOmREr, et recommandé par M. LE PRErET DE L'OISE pour la FOR- MATION DES BIBLIOTHÈQUES COMMUNALES. i volume de iso pages, 1 fr. 50 c., franco, par la poste COURS D'AGRICULTURE PRATIQUE PROFESSÉ PAR M. GAUCHERON. Professor of Agricultural Chemistry at the Comice d'Gcleans - 3 Volumes, 3 francs. Published by A. GOIN, 82, rue des Ecoles, Paris. Orléans. - Imp., lith. et stéréotypie GuENU, rue Croix-de Bois DERESOP (OOgle DEEG E COOgle -4 O O