I maraf̂chère ordinary and forced (2nd ed.)/ by). Curé,.... 1918. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is digital reproduction of works in the public domain from BnF collections. Their reuse falls within the scope of the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: -The non-commercial reuse of this content or in the context of an academic or scientific publication is free of charge, provided that the legislation in force is respected, and in particular that the source of the content is mentioned as follows: "Source gallica.bnf.fr /Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF ". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates income: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the general code of public property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are -reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. Reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 7/ To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation. commercialeobnf.fl. MA PRATIQUE DE LA CULTURE MARAICHÈRE ORDINAIRE 4 FORCÉE PAR J. CURÉ Secrétaire du Syndicat dez Maraichers de la Région parisienne DEUXIÈME ÉDITION PARIS LIBRAIRIE AGRICOLE DE LA MAISON RUSTIOUE 16. Rux Jacon, 26 (: r° arr.) Ma joration 4 Source gallica.bnf.fr / Bibllothèque natlonale et universitaire de Strasboure DVNE T8 ACHICU 0 LITET 2 MA PRATIQUE DE LA CULTURE MARAICHÈRE ORDINAIRE ET FORCÉE AUA 14-5 Reproduction and translation rights reserved for all countries, including Suè̈de and Norway. TYPOGRAPHIE FIRMIN-DIDOT ET Cie. - MESNIL (EURE), DE LA CULTURE MARAICHERE ORDINAIRE ET FORCÉE PAR J. CURÉ SECRÉTAIRE DU SYNDICAT DES MARAICHERS DE LA RÉGION PARIS LIBRAIRIE AGRICOLE DE LA MAISON RUSTIQUE 26, RUE JACOB, 26 1918 gorle a Suasboure PREFACE.................................................. Pages. CHAPTER ONE. The land. - Choice of land. Soil preparation. Fertilizers. Amendments................... CHAPTER II. Layers. - Preparation of manure; stacking - Location of layers, preparation of layers. - Layers for melons. - Humidity of layers. - Changing layers. - Turning the layers....................................... IX I CHAPTER III. Seed selection......................... 19 CHAPTER IV. Tools. - Glass frames. Chests. Doormats. Garden bells............................... CHAPTER V. Small tools and miscellaneous accessories. - Watering equipment. Spades. Hoods. Loaders. Baskets and baskets. Miscellaneous utensils. Chassis or rack wedges. Forks. Bell wedges......................... 27 39 CHAPTER VI. Work schedule...................... 49 Août........... 49 ¡ Décembre........ 96 ¡ Avril....... 176 Septembre..... 60 octobre........ 69 Janvier.......... 101 Mai........ 197 Février.......... 114 Juin....... 210 Novembre..... 84! Mars............. 132 1 Juillet..... 220 CHAPTER VII. Mushroom cultivation. - Choice of location. Manure preparation. Assembly and larding of stacks. Open-air cultivation. Renewing the spawn. Diseases....................................225 CHAPTER VIII. Insects harmful to vegetable plants and their diseases........................................ 287 mencement of the seventeenth century, said that the gardener is "the goldsmith of the earth". He added that the main object of his "mastery" is to know exactly when to sow his various crops, so as to obtain beautiful produce throughout the year. Intensive vegetable cultivation, i.e. that which can be carried out in gardens where fertilizers and water are available, differs from ordinary kitchen garden cultivation in that it must be a successive, uninterrupted cultivation throughout the year, in which several different vegetables are often planted together on the same plot. The first treatise on vegetable gardening written in French that we have been able to find was published in 1393, under the signature "Un bourgeois de Paris"; in fact, it appears to have been written or dictated by a skilled practitioner. The author sets out the various vegetable crops in the chronological order in which they should be grown. Claude Mollet, Louis XIII's famous gardener, did the same in his treatise, which was not published until 1700 by his son André Mollet. The progress made in gardening since the publication of the treatise mentioned above can be seen in this work. In the book we are publishing, we shall be following much the same path as our eminent predecessors. We will deal with the cultivation of all the main vegetables, salads and fruit-vegetables, which require special care, either in forced or ordinary cultivation; the time of sowing, the cultural care to be given to plants during the course of their evolution, the means of conserving them during the winter, etc. Like the authors of the two books we have just quoted, we have adopted a chronological order, which we find has the advantage of sparing the gardener lengthy research, and reminding him, at all times of the year, of the care his crops require, and we have taken as our starting point the month of August, when the seeds are sown that will give rise to the first new vegetables in spring. We have endeavored to maintain a logical link between the work of the various periods, and have summarized it in a Table of Contents, which will enable the reader to easily follow the progress of a given crop. We have devoted a special chapter to X days, a veritable industry in the suburbs of Paris, and to the progress that science promises to make in this crop, which is still only based on routine, especially as regards mycelium selection. Indeed, science is always progressing, and the technical processes themselves are constantly being perfected. Many improvements have been made in the art of vegetable gardening since Claude Mollet, and even since La Quintinie, the great initiator of forced cultivation of fruit and vegetables, up to the present day. The part of this book that deals with forced cultivation is aimed above all at amateur gardeners, who have at their disposal the equipment and elements needed to establish such cultivation, and also at provincial gardeners, who will no doubt be able to practice it on a smaller scale. We hope that the part dealing with the ordinary cultivation of vegetables will be of service to rural populations, for whom such cultivation can provide an appreciable supplement to their resources, almost at no cost. Our goal would be achieved, and our conscience satisfied, if we had been able to contribute to increasing the well-being of our fellow citizens, to the best of our ability, by adding a stone to the edifice on which so many generations have worked before us. J. CURÉ. XI ORDINARY AND FORCED CHAPTER ONE THE LAND Choice of land. - The ancient farmers whose work we have recalled recommended careful selection of suitable soil for vegetable growing, "especially," they said, "in the wettest part of the property". Today, thanks to our ability to obtain water in abundance almost anywhere, vegetable gardens can be set up in any desired location; nevertheless, it is preferable that the land be well exposed, that is, that it receive as little shade as possible, and that it be sufficiently far from buildings and tall trees. The more air the garden has, the better the vegetables will grow, and the less likely they will be to be eaten by all kinds of insects. Soil preparation. - When it comes to soil preparation, all specialists agree. The soil should be ploughed deeply with a spade, loosened up as much as possible, and all clods broken up. Then, the soil should be laid out in planks of varying dimensions, depending on the size of the farm; however, when using frames, the planks should be as wide as the frames themselves, and as long as the number of frames to be placed next to each other. Specialists who have many frames set up their squares for three frames, or a multiple of three, because chests are generally made to support three. However, chests are made for two or even one sash. The paths between the planks or rows of chassis should be no wider than Om, 30 to Om, 35, in order to use as much of the land as possible. When the paths have been laid out, the clods on the surface of the soil are broken up with a fork, and the remaining clods are raked into the path, so that the surface of the board is flat and the path is a little higher than the board, as it will always settle down from being trodden on; when the path is lower than the board, water from watering runs off it, to the detriment of the roots of the plants in the middle of the board. Parisian market-gardeners, who rent their land at a very high price, do away with every other path for open-ground cultivation, and thus combine into a single bed two rows 1.35 m wide, plus the path of Om.30. When frames are not used, the beds are set up in the width and length deemed appropriate. Depending on the layout of the property, the beds should be laid out in the direction that will give the best relief to the vegetable garden, but when chassis are used, we recommend that they be laid out preferably in a north-west to south-east direction, so that the early crops grown under them benefit as much as possible from the sun's rays over the entire surface of the chassis. Fertilizing. - For good vegetable growing, you need to give the soil plenty of fertilizer. The intensive cultivation practiced by market gardeners can only be carried out under this condition, but it should be added that all fertilizers are good. Growers in the Paris suburbs, who supply the capital with a large proportion of the large vegetables consumed there, almost all use gadoues from the big city to fertilize their land, and achieve excellent results with this fertilizer, which costs them very little. As Parisian market gardeners only grow early vegetables and salads, most of them only use compost, of which they have sufficient quantities at their disposal, as a result of the decomposition of the manure that makes up their beds. Before the Revolution, in the days of the master's office, the gardening jurors would visit the gardens to ensure that no slurry, or even pig manure, was being used as fertilizer for vegetables; a police decree prohibited such fertilizers, alleging that they could cause contagious diseases. Today, these prohibitions no longer exist. We believe that all fertilizers are good for growing large vegetables; slurry can only be discussed from the point of view of the unbearable odor it spreads when deposited too close to dwellings, but from a cultural point of view, its effectiveness cannot be disputed. As for the dangers of pig manure, this was a legend from the Middle Ages, which has completely disappeared, like so many others. So we say to people in the countryside who grow vegetables for their own consumption, and especially to women, who are responsible for the household chores of all working people: "Make a compost with sweepings from the house and yard, ashes, poultry droppings and garden detritus; water it with your household water, and you'll get a very good fertilizer. Mud from roads and paths, dry or green leaves and decomposing plants will make another no less excellent fertilizer. Dry matter buried for some time will also be very good. All this can be used in the vegetable garden as fertilizer, and will increase production. Everything is transformed, and nothing should be lost. Don't we see, around big cities, sewage water purifying itself in the soil and producing an admirable crop of vegetables? And it's certainly not these vegetables that cause disease. The agronomists who have dealt with chemical fertilizers have only given us a few fertilizer formulas for the large vegetables that belong to the field of agriculture; however, for some time now, this question has been under study for horticulture in general. Hopefully, scientists will be able to provide us with fertilizer formulas for specific plants, taking into account, as always, the elements contained in the soil in which they are grown. Armed with this information, practitioners will be able, as in agriculture, to give their soil the elements it lacks when they have only manure or composts at their disposal, and, more often than not, in insufficient quantities. The judicious use of chemical fertilizers for vegetable growing would be of immense benefit to people living far from major centers, who have neither sludge nor sewage at their disposal, and who pay too high a price for fertilizers. Crop rotation. - As in agriculture, crop rotation plays a certain role in vegetable growing. Specialists, who can hardly practice it, are astonished to see their crops fail after a certain number of years, despite the amount of fertilizer they give their land. This is precisely where we believe that chemical fertilizers will be of service to growers, by giving the soil the element that the same crop renewed over a certain period of time takes away from it, and which it does not find in sufficient quantity in manure. It has even been claimed that the root residues of plants always grown in the same soil "poison" that soil. This is a scientific question that belongs to the realm of horticultural chemistry, and one that we cannot deal with here; it will be part of the teaching of future generations, but routine has shown us that there is some truth in this saying. All amateur gardeners who grow a certain number of plants should therefore establish a rotation in their crops; where, for example, onions are grown one year, cabbages are planted the next. The same goes for other plants, varying crops as much as possible. If you have trays and are going to grow melons, you'll need to pass them through the entire vegetable garden one after the other; these plants rest the soil and fertilize it with the muted layer created for their cultivation. The following year's harvest from this soil will always be fruitful, whatever the vegetables. Melon is the alfalfa of horticulture. If there are layers in the establishment, the potting soil left over each year will be used to top up spring seedlings. Manure preparation. Layering - For a layer to heat up well and give even heat over its entire surface, it is very important that it is well "mounted". To make good layers, especially in autumn, when gentle heat is needed, and at the start of winter, when stronger, more persistent heat is required, it is useful to have, as far as possible, manure that has been piled up during the summer and has, so to speak, re-dried. To obtain well-dried manure, the heap is made very narrow and fairly high. Market gardeners even finish it off with a roof, just like the stacks of fodder and cereals that farmers put up in the fields. Horse manure in particular, placed in this way, does not rot or lose much of its caloric value, and when used in autumn and winter, once shaken, reworked and mixed with fresh manure from the cowshed, it produces the effect of charcoal mixed with embers, rekindling and giving the layer a slow, persistent warmth. 1. i.e. well made. These piles of manure, set aside during the summer by Parisian practitioners who use a lot of them, require certain precautions. If, for example, "soft" manures are mixed with "straw" manures, it often happens, in August or September, that the pile catches fire as a result of fermentation; the manure thus burns "à l'étouffée". But if combustion reaches a point in contact with the air, the manure ignites immediately. There isn't a year in which such accidents don't occur in the Paris suburbs, and to extinguish the fire, it's absolutely essential to remove all the manure, flooding it with water as you go along, because with each forkful removed, the flames flare up again. This is to demonstrate the amount of caloric energy contained in this dried-up manure. If only fresh manure is used to build layers in autumn or at the start of winter, it gives a shot of fire that tenderizes plants too much at the beginning of their growth, and cools down too quickly afterwards, especially if the winter is rainy or snowy. This is no longer the case for the layers formed at the end of February and in March; at this time of year, the ambient heat gradually replaces the heat in the layer, drying it out, and as the manure decomposes, the heat is renewed by the action of the sun. Even for these layers, particularly those established for early melon cultivation, it is necessary to water the layer copiously when it is set up, so that it does not dry out due to the effect of fermentation combined with the action of the sun. These layers, thus raised, give off a heat that sometimes reaches 70 or 80 degrees; in these conditions, you need to wait a week or so before sowing or planting. Practitioners call this "letting the layer fire". In addition to manure in general, and horse manure in particular, which is used to build up the beds, purely vegetable substances can also be used, with leaves at the top of the list, with the exception, according to some authors, of Plane tree leaves, which undergo little fermentation, are very slow to decompose, and produce only dry, tough compost of no cultivation value. When we want to build up layers with leaves, we need to collect them as soon as they fall, in healthy weather, as much as possible, so that they retain the maximum of their fermentative properties. They are placed in strong, tightly packed, domed millstones, to prevent water from penetrating; in a way, they replace dry manure when none is available. In horticulture, as in agriculture, you have to take advantage of everything. You can also use moss, collected in dry weather, in autumn. However, we always recommend mixing fresh manure with mosses or leaves, as this provides the "embers" to rekindle the other fermentable materials. Laying out the beds - First of all, we need to know where to lay out the beds. To establish early crops, you need good exposure to the sun, and no shade at all if possible. When creating a vegetable garden for this purpose, the rows of frames should be oriented, as far as possible, in a south-east to north-west direction. We prefer this direction to that of I. north to noon, or east to west, to cut off strong winds when giving air and to let the sun shine on the whole surface of the frame for as long as possible. Layers should also be placed in a well-ventilated area, to avoid sunburn when spring arrives. The sheltered locations will be used to establish the first outdoor crops following those in the layers. To avoid labor costs, the beds should be set up in the most suitable location, as close as possible to where the deposits of manure, leaves or moss are to be used to build them up. Layering. - When starting to build up a square of layers, first prepare the place where the first layer will be placed; mark out on the ground, with stakes, the area it will occupy; establish a line or "chain" of dry manure, leaves or moss, depending on what you have available, and, next to or above it, another line of fresh manure. The layer is then built up by superimposing a bed of one and a bed of the other, but never horizontally, so that the layer is well bonded and forms, so to speak, a single block. To do this, create a gauge so that the bottom of the layer is always further forward than the top, so that the manure beds are placed at an angle throughout its thickness. The manure must be stirred well, so that no more or less compact "cakes" remain; the dung must be evenly distributed throughout the surface of the layer, so that the heat rises evenly throughout. Parisian market gardeners make their layers 1m.65 wide, i.e. 1m.35 for the frame or the three rows of bells that will be placed on top, and Om, 30 for the path; but amateurs can give the path up to Om, 60, since it takes a lot of practice to work in narrow paths. The length is calculated according to the number of frames or bells to be placed on it. Practitioners generally make squares of fifteen frames per line. The thickness of the layer will vary according to the season and the crop to be grown. The thickest layers are generally made in December and January. For this thickness, which is difficult to specify, it is necessary to adjust to the quality of the materials used. For example, a layer made only with good horse manure, both dry and fresh, may give more heat, being half as thick, as another layer made with leaves and fresh straw manure. Even so, we can give some approximate indications based on good horse manure, taking into account the different crops we'll be growing and the season we'll be working in. The layers to be made in October for growing lettuces should be no more than om, 20 thick, with at least two-thirds dry manure, especially if the soil is wet. At this time of year, these plants don't need much heat; they need to be dried out, and as these layers are always turned over, the manure continues to decompose when it is turned over again. In November, the thickness of the layer should already be increased, with both dry and fresh manure. From December 1st onwards, the layers used to plant lettuces and sow the first carrots should be the thickest of the year; when good manure is available, they can be as thick as Om,30 or Om,35; a higher proportion of fresh manure is needed, and to prevent them from drying out at this thickness, given the heat they give off, it is useful for the dry manure to be brought in eight or fifteen days in advance, to be loosened, so that it can moisten a little before the layer is put up. The same applies to unturned cloche beds, because in the cultivation of Carrots and Romaines, if the bed dries out again, you won't get good produce. As the sun gets stronger, the thickness of the layers is reduced. When a layer has been built up as described above, it is "stomped" so that it has the same consistency throughout, then levelled by adding manure to the weakest parts to make it absolutely flat. Water if the manure is still too dry. If it's a stretcher bed, we immediately place the boxes on top, lining them up with a chalk line, then load the bed. In autumn, it's best to load with potting soil if available; during winter, especially in February, you can load with soil. Some plants, such as Turnips and Melons, even prefer soil to compost. The thickness of the soil or potting mix also varies with the different crops grown on the bed. Thus, in autumn and even later, when growing Lettuce alone, a thickness of Om, 20 is sufficient; when growing Carrots, Turnips or Romaines, it should be increased to at least Om, 30. Generally speaking, when a layer of lettuce is turned over in autumn or winter, 1. to reconstitute a layer of carrot or a layer of Romaine, soil is brought in and mixed with the compost to give the desired thickness. This is a very good procedure, especially if the soil is not too clayey and crumbles well. When it comes to building up the square of layers, here's how it's done. Beforehand, the soil is lifted in "chains", i.e. by long millstones, across the square. Experience soon shows how much potting soil is needed. For a layer width occupied by three panels, the chain should be 1 metre wide at the base and should be shaped like a roof so that water slides over it without penetrating it, thus allowing the compost to dry out if it gets too wet. In addition, in winter, the entire surface of the soil on which the layers will be placed is covered with dry manure, to prevent frost from penetrating the soil. The soil in place of the second layer is used to load the first, and so on. The pathway between the rows of trunks remains empty, and as the layer cools, it is filled as much as possible with dry manure. As the layer cools down, it is filled as much as possible with dry manure. This manure, thanks to the heat of the layer and the draining of the frames it receives, gradually moistens and heats up, so that it serves as a stove for the layer itself. The first layer of the square should be Om, 30 wider than the others, to form the acot; along the length, om, 30 is also reserved at each end of the square to form the acots. These are built up in manure to the height of the frames, so that the whole square of layers is surrounded by these acots; under these conditions, the frames at the ends of the square heat up as much as those in the middle; this is an important point, especially for practitioners, who remove all the plants at once. To make bell layers, we'll start with the procedure used by the old market gardeners, when they abandoned the folding layers (La Quintinie system). The layer loaded with a good thickness of compost, even mixed with soil, was edged on each side and at the ends with a piece of board, fitted with a handle, called a "bordoir", so that the thickness of the compost was equal everywhere, and then adjusted with a fork. The path, which remained clear exactly as if there had been chests, had to be filled with manure, progressively as in the stretcher beds, and whenever the need arose. Whenever a path had to be reloaded, it had to be done with manure only, so that the intense heat of the layers was not intercepted. We've known market gardeners, the grandsons of the old masters of the 17th century, who proceeded in this way and attached exaggerated importance to ensuring that there was not the slightest trace of soil in the path. It has always seemed to us that this was nothing more than a sense of self-esteem, going back to the traditions of the old masters and handed down to them by their fathers. Today's market gardeners, when they make a square of cloche layers, fill the entire surface with potting soil. Then they adjust the layers, rake the clods into the path, exactly as they would on a square of soil, then sow, if necessary, and cloche afterwards. Provided the layer is sufficient, the plants placed on it do just as well as with the old method, but as the path always deepens a little as you walk on it, it should be kept full of dry manure, for the reasons we'll explain when we talk about growing Romaine in layers in March. Melon beds. - Market gardeners call them "trenches", because only a more or less narrow part of the soil is dug to make them. First-season trenches are as wide as the trunk, and only the pathway is not dug; this is where the melons are most likely to seek their nourishment when they become strong. Practitioners can see when the roots of the plants reach the pathway; the vegetation immediately becomes more luxuriant. As the weather gets warmer, the width of the trenches is reduced, so that the last ones, made around May 20, are barely Om 30 to Om 35 wide by Om 20 to Om 25 thick. At this time of year, some varieties of melon can be grown almost without a bed; but in cold soils, it is always preferable to make a small one, to make it easier for the plants to take root. This is a matter of judgement on the part of the grower, depending on the weather, the climate and the nature of the soil. The amount of soil to be placed on these layers should not exceed Om, 10 to Om, 12 in thickness. The roots of these plants run almost level with the ground in the mulch itself and, as we have already said, seek their nourishment in the surrounding soil; nevertheless, for their growth to be rapid, it is necessary that this soil be kept sufficiently warm, otherwise the plants will yellow and perish. When you have a square of these layers to make, here's how you proceed. Open the first trench, and transport the soil to the other end of the square, i.e. where you will finish. Once the first layer has been established, the second trench is opened to load the first layer with soil, and so on. Layer moisture. - We have said that the thickness of the layer and the amount of potting soil or loam should vary according to the crops to be planted. The same applies to the degree of humidity. For example: the first layers, made in October, are Om, 20 thick, as much as possible in dry manure, since at this time there is always enough natural humidity to wet them, especially given their thinness. As winter progresses, the thickness of the layers is increased. The thickest layers are applied from November to January 15. For layers where Carrots or Turnips are to be sown, as well as for layers with Romaine bells, the manure should always be unctuous and in full decomposition; if it were to dry out again, we wouldn't get a good result from the point of view of the beauty of the produce. The amount of potting soil also varies with the crop. When only Lettuce is to be planted, om, 20 thickness is sufficient. For Carrots, Turnips and Romaine bell layers, at least Om,30 is required. Changing layers. - Some specialists today change their square of layers every two or three years; this is a method we also recommend to amateurs who don't always work at the earliest possible hour. Here's how it's done: about half the amount of potting soil needed for the new layers is transported and mixed with soil taken from the new site, which has been ploughed and raised in a "chain". Another part of the soil remaining from the previous year's layers is used to top up the vegetable garden crops, and the surplus is buried on site. In this way, you have a well-amended and rested soil, on which you can grow any crop under the most advantageous conditions. This soil, impregnated with the manure juice deposited in previous years, is more fertile than any other fertilizer. Manner of turning over the layers. - In professional terms, "turning over a layer" is the work that consists in reworking the entire layer and adding fresh manure to reconstitute it once again, so that new crops can be sown and planted. Among Parisian practitioners, layers are turned, in some cases, up to three times. Here's how it's done: we remove the frames and trunks that are placed on the first layer, we remove the soil that fills it and we transfer it to the other end of the square, as was said for the "trenches" at Melons, so that only the manure that makes up the layer remains. This manure is pulled up with a fork, starting from the side where the fork ended. The manure thus pulled up across the entire width of the layer is placed back in a "chain", and care is taken to mix the manure on the path with that in the middle, since the former is always wetter than the latter. Once the chain of old manure has been built up, a chain of fresh manure is brought in and placed on top of the first, and the layer is reassembled in the same way as the first. The second row of frames is also removed, and its trunks are placed back on the first, which is loaded with the compost from the second, and so on. It's preferable to build the square of layers in full, rather than with masonry tarpaulins, as manure ferments better in contact with the air than when its action is not felt. It's also better to establish it on the surface of the ground than to bury it deeply, as was the practice in the past, especially in clay soils where water runs off with difficulty. In this case, during wet winters, the bed is submerged and this removes a lot of heat, which is detrimental to plant growth. Once the vegetable garden has been set up, as we've just explained, it needs to be seeded. If you sow seeds of degenerate plants, or of varieties that don't like the environment in which they're placed, no matter how well you grow them, you'll never get anything but poor results. This observation applies particularly to the forced cultivation of vegetables, because for this type of cultivation it is not enough to have healthy seeds taken from vigorous plants; it is also necessary to choose certain varieties that lend themselves better than others to forced cultivation. All growers' efforts must therefore be directed towards obtaining well-selected varieties; they must seek out those best suited to the soil they cultivate and the climate in which they find themselves. One variety of plant will grow vigorously in a given soil, while in another it will vegetate with great difficulty. Parisian market gardeners - we say this to their credit, because it's a point recognized by all specialists, and even by seed merchants - achieve perfection in the selection of the plants they grow. To achieve this result, it is first necessary to have a good knowledge of the type of plant being cultivated, in order to choose seed-bearing plants in such a way as to maintain the variety being harvested in its primitive type, or to make it more or less early, to "shrink" or "enlarge" it, to "tenderize" or "harden" it. Onions. - To select Onion seedbeds, a small square of Onions is left to ripen, and when they are fully ripe, they are pulled out and the best chosen as seedbeds. If you want to keep the variety as it is, you'll take as types the smallest Onions, which ripen first, along with medium-sized and larger ones, which ripen last. If you want to make the variety earlier, take only the first to ripen, which are also the smallest. If you want to make the variety fatter, take only the largest and last to ripen, but they will come later. When fully ripe, these onions are placed in a healthy location for winter storage, and replanted in spring. They then go to seed as soon as they grow, and the result is a much purer seed than that which would be harvested from onions that go to seed in the first year. Onion seed retains its germinative capacity for three or four years, but it is preferable to always sow the seed that is harvested the year before sowing. Cabbage. - To maintain or modify varieties, cabbage seedbeds should be chosen according to the same principles as for Onion, except for Cauliflower, whose seed should be harvested from plants that "go up" in the first year, i.e. whose stems elongate, flower and produce seed. Cabbages in general are surprisingly easy to produce, which is why the old-timers used to say: "Sow cabbages, and there will be Raves; sow Raves, and there will be Cabbages". When you've chosen your types, as we've said for the Onion, and the apple is ready to burst, you cut it crosswise as low as possible; you remove the hard leaves that remain around the core, and the eyelets immediately start growing again (the ancients used to say that the plant "rejected"); so that in autumn, for spring-grown varieties, four or five small apples as big as a fist have sometimes grown back. During the summer, we pull up the cabbages to gather them all together in the same spot, so as to better protect them from frost during the winter, and keep them away from other cabbage varieties, cauliflowers, kohlrabi, Brussels sprouts and rutabagas, which, coming into flower at the same time, could, through the influence of their pollen carried by the wind or insects, cause them to degenerate. When seed cabbages flower and the pods begin to form, they must be protected, by syringing with nicotined water, from the white aphid which sometimes comes in such abundance that it destroys everything! Cabbage seeds harvested when fully ripe have a germination period of seven or eight years, but it is always preferable not to wait until this extreme period before harvesting new ones, as the 1. see the chapter on vegetable plant diseases for care instructions. young seed is always more vigorous. For cabbages to be sown in autumn, if the seed harvested the same year is used, sow a few days later, so that the young plants do not go to seed before peeling. Cauliflower. - Cauliflowers are harvested in the same year from the "flower" of the plant itself, which will go to seed if left to grow. The same care is taken when choosing seed-bearing plants as for onions; by choosing the first ones to "take" the apple, we "tenderize" them; by choosing the last ones, we obtain the opposite result. Turnips and carrots should also be harvested from seedbeds that ripened the previous autumn and were replanted in spring, as we said for Onions, and with the same care. Radishes are treated in the same way; only, this plant grows so fast, that when sown at the end of winter, they have time to reach the normal size at which they are eaten, and can then be selected with the same art as the previous plants, and planted in beds. In this way, they produce their seeds in the same year. All these seeds germinate over several years. Sorrel, too, must be carefully selected if it is to remain beautiful and not revert to its primitive state. In autumn, the best clumps in the square are selected, pulled out and replanted together, and the following summer, the seed is harvested from this selection. Celery is also harvested from plants that have reached maturity in autumn, are kept over winter and go to seed the following spring. New varieties are obtained through long and careful selection. It takes perseverance to select from year to year to establish the variety you want. All cultivated plants have a tendency to revert to their primitive state. Celery seeds have a germination period of eight to ten years. Salad seeds require no more care than a good choice of rootstock. The plants remain in place to continue their development, and when the seed is ripe, it is harvested. For Lettuce and Romaine seeds, market gardeners harvest only for their own use, pinching the seed when it's ready to drop. Curly endive and Scarole are left to dry out. Then they are pulled up, placed in a dry place and beaten for harvesting. It's good to know that the longer these seeds remain attached to the plant that produced them, the longer they germinate. As the seeds age to a certain point, they still free the plant, but grow less vigorously than the young ones. For a good crop, therefore, it's best not to use seeds from the same year, but from the previous year. These various salad seeds have a germination period of several years, depending on the care taken in harvesting them; the same applies to all seeds. For leeks, nothing is easier than harvesting good seed, since planting them in May means they can be left until the following May, when they set seed. It can be made shorter or longer by choosing shorter or longer seedbeds. The seed has roughly the same germinative capacity as that of the Onion. Cardoons can be stored over winter, but they must not be allowed to soften with too much covering. Just keep them from freezing. They go to seed in spring. Here's how market gardeners harvest this seed. They cut the cardoon in autumn above ground level; in spring, the heart develops and goes to seed. Treated in this way, the same Cardoon plant can produce seeds for a number of years. Garlic and shallot can also be harvested for seed, but this care is unnecessary. In fact, planting bulbs of these plants in spring produces seeds much more quickly than sowing them. The same applies to Tarragon and Civet. Once you've got one plant, you'll have more the following year, as these plants sucker very easily. The same can be said of Artichoke. This plant suckers very quickly, and all the eyelets that are detached from the mother plant and replanted in spring already yield heads by the end of summer. For all Cucurbitaceae: Melons, Cucumbers, Gherkins, Pumpkins, Squash, etc., it's simply a matter of choosing the most beautiful types of fruit and extracting the seed when they are ripe. As with many other vegetables, the soil in which they are grown has a major influence on the quality of the product. A certain variety of melon, grown in a certain soil, sometimes resembles the same variety grown in another soil only in special respects, known only to practitioners. Tomatoes and eggplants also carry their seeds inside the fruit; you only need to let them ripen properly to extract the seed, which is then dried and put into bags. These plants, especially the first, come in a number of varieties obtained by hybridization and selection. Thus we have the Currant Tomato, the Cherry Tomato, the Apple Tomato, the Pear Tomato and so on. But these varieties are only good for amateurs, more for their originality than for their usefulness. However, these varieties have given rise to new ones. The Cherry Tomato, for example, has grown in size from year to year, thanks to selection. Today, it's a beautiful tomato that has taken its place in everyday trade. We won't mention potatoes. While everyone knows how to reproduce them, only specialists, or a few amateurs, sow seedlings to obtain new varieties. But the number of these varieties is already so great, and the difference between one variety and another often so insignificant, that little attention is paid to them. If chance itself can produce new varieties that are sometimes good, all the more reason to hope for better ones when hybridization is prepared by competent men. By hybridization, or by the selection of seed-bearing plants, specialists have also succeeded in establishing a number of distinct varieties of Beans and Peas. As for the selection of Asparagus plants, we'll have the opportunity to describe this in detail in the January issue. This presentation has made it clear to the reader that 3 specialists do not generally collect their seeds from plants that go to seed in the first year. Exceptions to this rule are the seeds of most lettuces: Lettuce, Romaine, Chicory and Scarolea; those of Cauliflower and Cucurbitaceae: Melons, Cucumbers, Pumpkins, etc. All these seeds are harvested in such a way as to better fix the cultivated varieties. Even so, all these plants can differ enormously depending on the soil in which they are grown. Experience has shown us, through seeds we have harvested ourselves, the great difference there can sometimes be between plants grown in one soil and those grown in another. If we hadn't done the selection and harvesting ourselves, we'd have doubted whether all the seeds came from the same plant. It's true that in cultivation, nothing is absolute or well-defined; as many soils, as many different cases; nevertheless, if the variety grows more or less vigorously, becoming in some soils twice as voluminous as in others, it nonetheless retains its other distinctive characteristics. Glazed frames. - Frames can be of any size; those used by market gardeners in Paris are 1.30 m wide by 1.35 m high; this is a measurement established by tacit agreement between manufacturers, since they have been making this equipment; for private individuals, the size is less important, but a suitable one must be adopted, in order to be able to establish any kind of cultivation. Frames can be made entirely of wood, preferably oak, which is less sensitive to humidity than white wood; however, some manufacturers build them in pitchpin, which isn't bad either, or even in ordinary fir, but these frames don't last as long as their predecessors. Hobbyists can use the cheapest wood they can find, or build their own, if they find it to their advantage. Parisian market gardeners, who use at least a million frames, prefer models with an oak frame, except for the bottom, which must be made of iron, as it is much more prone to deterioration, receiving all the water that runs off the frame. The rods supporting the glass are made of iron, which is more solid and shades the plants underneath less than wooden slats, which are naturally wider. In Paris, horticulture generally uses frames with four rows of glass panes, and glass of the appropriate dimensions is commercially available, known as "frame glass"; but for amateurs this is less important than for specialists. Glazing starts at the top. The second pane crosses the first by a centimetre, and so on with the others. Each 1.35 m row of glass comprises three panes, plus a half-tile at the bottom, called the "base"; this is the one most likely to break, since it has nothing to guarantee it, bearing directly on the wooden or iron frame. Once the panes have been installed, they are puttied in exactly the same way as domestic windows. Before glazing, if the frame is made of wood, it will have been given a coat of paint, or, if it's iron, a coat of minium. Once the putty has been applied, a second coat of paint must be applied, even over the putty, to ensure its preservation and facilitate water drainage. Specialists paint their frames every year, preferably in a grayish-white, as this equipment is used for certain crops, such as melons, until June. If they were painted black, they would over-concentrate the sun's rays, which could harden or burn the plants. As we know, white has the property of reflecting heat. The industry also supplies double frames, forming a two-slope tarpaulin, which can often be very useful; however, they are rarely used by Parisian specialists, because they are more difficult to move and the work that needs to be done underneath them is less practical. This system is perhaps not to be despised by amateurs; it's a question of appreciation. Cof̂fres. - Chests that support vegetable growing frames are usually built to support three frames; they must be portable, CE Fig. 1. - Mobile chest. as they frequently have to be changed places; it is therefore necessary that they are not too heavy. They are most often made: the boards, in fir (those behind are generally Om, 25 wide and those in front Om, 22), and the heads or ends in oak, Om, 18 wide for the end of the squares, and half in the interior, so as not to make holes in the crops. These chests have bars between each frame to support them. These bars come in a variety of designs. The simplest are made of wood, from Om,05 to 0m,06 thick and of the same width, with a dovetail that fits into a notch cut in the boards; this is the old system used by Pari2.° sian market gardeners. Others, also made of wood and of the same size, have iron hooks adapted to the board, either above or below, by means of three screws. The latter are more solid. In this system, the iron fitted underneath must be brought up to the end of the bar at right angles through its entire thickness, to then form the hook. But the best of all, which are widely used now that iron is cheap, are made of T-iron, bent at each end to form the hook, and the T-iron underneath bent close to the board inside the box to form a stop point. Boxes are either nailed or sliding. The former are still the best choice for growers who don't use them very much; those known as "sliding" are preferred by large specialists, because they are easier to store. In slide-in boxes, instead of the boards being nailed in after the feet adjoining the heads (as all systems must have feet nailed in after the heads), they are fixed in place by means of two pegs passing through the boards in a notch made for this purpose. At the end of the pegs, there's a hole through which an iron rod is passed, holding the board tightly against the head, at just the same height as the head, so that there's no gap between the box and the frame. The legs of the trunks should, as far as possible, be made of oak and be about Om,10 to Om, 12 thick and Om, 30 to Om, 35 long; those behind the frames or at the top should always be a little longer than those in front, to facilitate the slope and drain of the frame. Two wooden cleats are nailed into the bottom plank on the outside, extending beyond the trunk by the thickness of the sash, so that when the sash is raised even to its greatest height, it is stopped and does not risk sliding down the path. Today's specialists use iron cleats that hook onto the board, in a small notch of their thickness, so that there is no air between the chassis and the trunk. The best box, from our point of view, is the so-called sliding box: the back and front boards are made of fir, the first being Om,25 wide and the second om,22; the heads are made of oak, those at the ends of the squares being Om,18 wide and those in the middle half as wide, the feet also made of oak, the bars of iron in one piece, and the cleats in the same way. Doormats. - For a very long time, even before they had frames and bells, Parisian market gardeners had been using doormats. In the smallest vegetable garden, it is useful to have a few of these, either to protect plants from spring and autumn frosts, or to make it easier for certain plants to recover during hot spells, and so on. We therefore believe it is useful to indicate how to make them, as all gardeners need to know how to make their own doormats. Parisian market gardeners, having, as we said, uniform equipment, make them all the same size, 1.35 m wide by 2 m long. They have a frame or "loom" of this size, bearing on each of its long sides three pegs or nails, one in the middle and one on each side, at equal distance; a rope is tied to each of these nails by one end, and, by means of a slip knot made at the other end, it is stretched as tightly as possible, leaving a hanging end which will be knotted, as we shall see later. Rye straw is then laid over these ropes, half thick on one side and half thick on the other, so that the straw mat has an even thickness throughout; the quantity needed is about 5 kilogr. of straw per straw mat, but they can be made thicker or thinner, depending on the crops to be secured. If you make them thicker, as their weight requires greater solidity, you'll need to sew four rows instead of three on the dimensions we've indicated. Once the doormat has been stretched, all that's left to do is sew it in place. To do this, wind string around a small piece of wood or spool, Om.15 long, hollowed out in the middle and forming a head at each end; tie the end of this string with the one used to make the slipknot to tighten the mat. With one hand, you hold this spool; with the other hand, you grasp a pinch of straw, and pass the string over and then under the stretched string; at this point, the thumb of the hand holding the straw grasps the string and passes the spool back underneath to form a mesh, or knot, in which the pinch of straw is caught. All that's left to do is pull on the spool to tighten the mesh, while the thumb of the other hand flattens it strongly. Continue in this way to the end of the frame, and tie the last stitch tightly with the stretched string, so that the mat doesn't become unstuck. Stitches should be no more than Om.02 wide, and care should be taken to flatten them with the thumb, if you want a strong, well-built doormat. Always start sewing with the middle row; this way, if the doormat is not evenly stretched, you can even it out as you sew. As the stitches are all the same, the thickness is necessarily the same everywhere. It's the hand that takes the pinch of straw that establishes this regularity; straw is added or removed from one side or the other, as required. Once the first row has been sewn, take care to pull the straw underneath so that it is as straight as on top; simply pass your hand through it from place to place to smooth it out. The finished straw mat is unhooked from the side on which the slip knots were made; the other end is then untied and tied firmly with the end of the string used to sew it; finally, the protruding ears are cut off with shears. The result is a clean, solid, even mat. Specialists who use a lot of doormats soak them in a copper sulfate bath to prolong their shelf life. To do this, they set up a wooden or cement basin into which they pour 3 or 4 kilogr. of copper sulfate per hectoliter of water, and soak a certain number of doormats at a time, depending on the size of the basin. Leave them in the bath for a while, so that the straw and twine are well impregnated, then let them dry. Many amateur vegetable gardeners buy their straw mats ready-made and even sulfated, and it's easier when you don't use large quantities. Nevertheless, it is useful for gardeners to know how to make their own doormats, and this is taught at the École nationale d'horticulture de Versailles. Garden bells. - This equipment, so widely used today by Parisian market gardeners, has hardly been known in our country until La Quintinie, who brought together in the King's kitchen garden at Versailles all the improvements made at that time in the art of gardening. However, Olivier de Serres, who lived in Montpellier, spoke of it a century earlier. Glass bells came to us from Italy, where the glass industry had made more rapid progress than in France. Before this material was known, the gardens of the great were equipped with verrines, a kind of tiny greenhouse, mounted in iron with small glass panes, which had the disadvantage of being very expensive. The first bells, as depicted by Olivier de Serres, and even up to the beginning of the 19th century, were made of leaded glass, and were very small in size; this author says they were a foot in diameter and a foot high. We have had occasion to see some dating from the end of the eighteenth century, which were more or less the same. At the beginning of the 19th century, around 1820, Parisian market gardeners began growing Romaine under cloches, and were led to enlarge them in width and height. There was also an improvement in the manufacture of glass; at first, cloches were made of clear glass; they were very hot, as the top cap of the cloche, being quite thick, made the glass magnifying. There were also bells with a handle at the top; this model was good for amateurs, but impractical for specialists. Experience has shown that a further refinement in glass manufacture is required, by giving it a slight blue tint and reducing the thickness of the bonnet. Today, the best garden bells are those made in Lorraine; they must be Om, 41 to Om, 42 in diameter and Om, 35 to om, 36 in height; their weight is two and a half kilograms. These are the first choice for establishing all the crops usually grown under cloche. Bought in bulk, by the hundred, they cost O fr. 85 to 0 fr. 90 each. This material is very fragile, as you might expect, and requires a great deal of care. To transport them, practitioners place them in packs of three; they are first placed on their side, and a finger is passed Fig. 2. - Cloche maraîchère. between the bells, so that they don't squeeze, otherwise they burst immediately. For some time now, we've been making bell-holders: a frame with a small platform on each side, on which we place two packs of bells placed as described above. In this way, the workman can carry four packs, which is just about enough for the strength of one man. Boards fitted with bells for cultivation generally contain three rows of bells; this is the usual width of market-garden frames. They should be placed in a chessboard pattern, not touching each other; to facilitate work and avoid breakage, there should be, on average, a centimetre and a half of space between them in all directions. In the past, gardeners used to put straw between their bells when storing them. This method has been abandoned, however, as it has a serious drawback: if the straw gets wet, it causes the bells to burst. Nowadays, the procedure is as follows: the bells are placed upright on solid ground; if necessary, straw is spread underneath, or dry manure, which is even better, as no grass grows. A small wooden wedge is placed on the bonnet of the bell, so that the second one doesn't squeeze the first, and so on; up to ten are placed per pack. For inexperienced workers, it's a good idea to make sure that the bells turn on the wedges, which indicates that the one just placed is not squeezing the previous one; specialists can tell immediately, just by placing the bell on the wedge, whether there's a danger of breakage. The bundles are arranged in rows, in a checkerboard pattern, exactly as for cultivation, and to protect them from hail, large straw is spread over the top and sides, or old straw mats when available. In winter, when changing crops, avoid leaving cloches in bundles on their sides, because if you're surprised by frost, you can be sure that when the thaw comes, any that touch the ground will come unstuck in that place, especially if there's a little water inside. Despite the fragility of this material, Parisian market gardeners, who use large quantities, handle it with great dexterity. The bells need to be washed inside every year. This operation is generally carried out in November, when there is no longer any fear that the sun's rays will 1. the number of cloches used by these specialists can be estimated at five or six million. cause the young plants underneath to wither. Here's how it's done: take a handful of rye straw, cut to the height of the bells, and bind it down the middle, so that the two ends form a broom: grasp the bell with one hand by the side, dip it in a tub of water, and with the other hand rub it internally with the straw, turning it as you go, guided by the hand holding it. When it's thoroughly cleaned, it's quickly swirled in water to rinse, and when it's removed it's as clean as new. The exterior is always sufficiently washed by the rains and humidity of winter; however, when bells have been bleached to soften the sun's rays, if too much fat has been put on with the Spanish white and it is still partially adhering at the time of washing, it must be removed by hand, since in winter nothing must be left to obstruct the sun's rays. This is another job that market gardeners do with a speed that is astonishing to the layman. In the old days, when labor was cheaper, market gardeners used to mend their bells. It's still done when they're only cracked, but you don't waste much time bringing back the pieces. But here's how it's done. You spread ceruse on the broken part, and glue the detached piece back onto the bell; then you take small pieces of round or square glass, cut for the purpose; you coat them with ceruse on one side, and place them on the Om joint, 05 roughly side by side. Once this operation has been completed, the bell is placed in a dry place, and two or three months later, when the ceruse is completely dry, it becomes as solid as before; more often than not, it's the commodity bells that last the longest, because they're handled more carefully than the others. When you break a bell with your hands, it's rare not to cut yourself; that's reason enough for the worker to take all the necessary precautions. Watering equipment. - To grow vegetables in a small garden, for the personal use of the person who enjoys it, the tools are quite rudimentary: a spade, a rake, an iron fork and watering cans are all you need. If necessary, a wheelbarrow can be used to bring in fertilizer or transport the soil. The most important condition for this type of cultivation is to have water available, either by occupying a marshy spot where the soil is cool enough not to need watering, or by locating near a stream from which water can be drawn. In other circumstances, you need a well to draw the water you need. If you don't have water at your disposal, vegetable growing in the strict sense loses its title and becomes nothing more than field cultivation, the results of which are subject to the fluctuations of the weather. In vegetable gardens that are better constituted and larger than ordinary small gardens, it is necessary to have, from place to place, barrels or basins where the water arrives via underground pipes. In large houses, schools and specialist establishments, the water is raised to a certain height by means of a hydraulic ram or pump of some kind, in order to obtain enough pressure for watering by means of a jet. With this system, taps are placed in the vegetable garden, at equal distances from each other; these taps must be fitted with a screw thread, onto which the rubber hose used for watering fits. This hose has a copper elbow at its end, fitted with a nut to tighten the tap screw, and a nozzle with a jet-breaker, or a watering can head, so that watering can be carried out as required. To avoid damaging the plants with this hose, it is made to follow the paths. To do this, an iron rod is pricked into the ground at the edge of the path. This rod is surrounded by a wooden or metal roller, which greatly assists the operator in guiding the hose. On the trail, between two planks, he must water one on his way to the site, and the other on his way back. The rubber hose must be flexible enough to bend across the width of the path without cutting off the water; moreover, if the pressure is strong enough, it forces the hose to round out. As for the means of raising the water, they are as numerous as they are varied. In the Revue horticole of 1899 and 1900, Mr. Ringelmann reviewed a large number of them. Their use naturally depends on the location and size of the farm. The last type of watering we have just mentioned is used only by specialists and in large houses. However, where the water is not too deep, or around towns where you have water at home, those with a small pleasure garden and vegetable patch can raise it and water using this system, which is rather entertaining than tiring. With a small, lightweight hose, a woman or child can do the job. On larger estates, a horse, a mule or, even easier nowadays, a petroleum engine with the necessary power, move a pump to raise the water to the desired height. The latter device can be used anywhere and operated by anyone, after a few lessons from the fitter. For the pressure watering system, we use a rubber hose that must be very flexible, from Om, 30 to Om, 35 in diameter and of the length required to reach all parts of the vegetable garden. Hobbyists can have much smaller ones, to make them easier to handle. We've already said that to water with this hose, you need to have wooden, or preferably copper, rollers in an iron rod pricked into the ground at the corner of the path where you're watering. Some of these are double, i.e. two iron rods, connected by a third transverse one, which is flush with the ground when the first two are driven in, and also fitted with a roller, like the previous ones. The rubber hose passed through this device, whether pulled from one side or the other, cannot damage plants at the corners of the boards. In the case of small amateur hoses, which are not very heavy to drive, a piece of wood stuck to the corner of the board is enough to prevent the hose from damaging the crop. To keep the rubber hose in good condition when not in use, it must be carefully rolled up so that it does not bend. For this purpose, market gardeners have a sort of small winch, Om.50 in diameter by as long. Spades. - Industry now supplies spades that are much lighter and better made than those used in the past, and a well-made spade is lighter and penetrates the soil better; the worker who uses it Fig. 3. - French flat spade. struggles less and produces more and better work than with those used by our ancestors. American forks and rakes are used everywhere, and everyone recognizes their superiority over the old tools, especially for their lightness. We leave the choice of tools to the specialists, who generally know them well, and amateurs will soon be able to appreciate their qualities or defects by using them. Hoods. - The "hottereau" and the hood are preferable to the wheelbarrow in small vegetable gardens; it's easier to get into the squares and especially where there are layers, since manure constantly has to be carried to fill the paths. Equipped with one of these utensils, the gardener can, with a certain amount of care, deposit the manure in small heaps on the frames or bells, so that all that's left to do is to spread it, by hand rather than with a fork, in this fragile material. Loader. - This is a tripod fitted with two horns, or a piece of curved iron, at the height needed to place the hottereau, without having to stand or stoop. Today's industry supplies well-built, not too heavy and, above all, solid iron ones. In large establishments and schools, Decauville narrow-gauge and portable railroads are increasingly replacing these small accessories. Nevertheless, apart from heavy-duty work, the "hottereau" will still be needed for a long time to come, especially in diaper beds. This is the utensil most often used by Parisian market gardeners to transport their manure, potting soil and vegetables. To collect certain vegetables, such as lettuce, chicory, escarole, radish, spinach, lamb's lettuce, etc., and transport them to Les Halles for sale, they generally use mannes of various sizes; the manne is a round, slightly flared basket; the largest are Om, 80 high, Om, 60 wide at the top and Om, 40 at the bottom. Baskets and baskets. - In other countries, baskets of different shapes are used; those used by gardeners in Dijon, our native France, are called "benatons"; they also come in all sizes. These utensils are also used by winegrowers to collect their harvests; like mannes, they are easy to stack when empty. Square packing baskets would be more convenient than all these utensils for loading and transporting the produce of Parisian market gardeners, but they would have to be splayed to enable them to be stacked like the previous ones, given that once the sale is over, in the morning at the halles, they have to be put away until the next day, and this storage would be very expensive if they were not stacked; the same goes for taking them home. The worker who drives the car usually brings back some manure, to avoid having to make another trip during the day, which is getting longer and longer, given the remoteness of the capital's market-gardening establishments. However, there's no doubt that this is the type of basket that will be used in the future, when the market gardeners are even further away. They will just have to be built in such a way as to fit one inside the other. Various utensils. - Parisian market gardeners also use other utensils: the turnip-planting frame, which we'll describe later, and the bell holder. They also use stretchers to transport the frames, and many have wheelbarrows to bring vegetables in from the marsh to the shed. In the past, there were handles, trays, calais, maniveaux etc.; all these small basketry utensils are disappearing day by day, as the trade changes its habits, awaiting the moment when almost everything will be sold by weight, according to the quality of the products. Rack and pinion wedges. - The rack is used to give air to the frames: it must be well-conditioned for this purpose, as its very shape indicates the progression of the air to be given to the plants under the frames and on the layers. If you don't give enough air, the plant "wilts", remains too tender and produces nothing good; on the contrary, if you give too much all at once, or in too many stages, it wilts, hardens and still produces nothing good. It is therefore in the making of the rack, as we shall describe, that we will find the progression of air that we must give to the plants, taking into account, at all times, the temperature, the state of the plant, etc. The rack is a simple piece of oak, Om,05 thick by Om,10 wide and Om,25 long; at Om,15 a notch is made in the wood, large enough to place the frame on. When you start to give air to very tender plants, you place the rack on the trunk, in its thinnest part; this is what practitioners call "giving air on the flat"; a few days later, when the plant has become accustomed to this new temperature, we place it on the thickest part, which is called "giving air on the side"; later, the rack is placed upright on the trunk and the frame placed in the notch we described above; we say: This is called "giving air on the notch"; finally, on the top of the rack, it's called "giving the big air". It is also necessary to give air sometimes from the top of the frame and sometimes from the bottom, so that the plants on one side or the other can get used to the outside temperature; this is called "changing the air". If you have a square of frames, the same racks are used in each path; so, for example, if the air is at the top of the frame and you want to put it at the bottom, you remove the air from the first row, and the racks in the second row are used for the first, and so on; only those in the first row will be transported to the last, if you don't have any extra for this one. When you start to give air, you must take care 3. that it is not on the windward side, as the plants will immediately wither. If it comes from the end of the square, the air from the first frame is placed at the opposite angle, so that the head of the square is closed; this is called "closing the air". All these little details play a big part in obtaining a regular and profitable crop. Once the plants have been exposed to the fresh air for a week or so, both above and below, you can remove the frames without fear: they can withstand the ambient temperature without risk of deterioration, unless, as often happens in late spring, there is a late frost. It's up to the gardener to decide what to do, if he doesn't want to lose all the fruit of his labor in a single night. There is nothing positive or absolute about this type of cultivation. Forks. - The small pieces of wood used by market gardeners to give air to bells are called forks. These little pieces of wood are pointed at one end so that they can sink into the ground; they should be about Om, 30 long by Om, 05 wide. They are usually made from laths or old barrel staves. A notch is made at Om, 15, then a second Om, 05 higher; as they are sunk into the earth by Om, 10, this makes Om, 05, then Om, 10 and finally Om, 15 of air height, which is given to the bells, and this gradually, as we said for the frames. Practitioners say: "put the air on the first notch", "on the second notch", etc.., In the first two cases, the very shape of this utensil in the ground protects the bells from gales; this is no longer the case when the air is at the top, as happens especially with melons; sometimes hurricanes overturn and break the bells, and what is even more dreadful are the whirlwinds that carry them away, often to great heights, and cause great damage. With the fork firmly planted in the ground, and the bell caught in the notch, it takes a good gust of wind to remove the bell, because the wind has to tear the fork away. The reader will therefore realize that, like the rack for the chassis, the manufacture of the fork also plays a major role in the cultivation of bells. Bell wedges. - These are simply small pieces of wood, 5 centimeters square by Om, 01 thick, used to pack the bells when they are no longer needed, leaving a gap between them, as we said when dealing with this material. CuI TIT AUGUST SOWING AND CULTURAL CARE It's during this month that we start sowing the vegetables that will provide the first harvests of spring. Let's take a look at them in turn. White onions. - There are many varieties of onion, differing greatly in size and color. The best-known and most widespread is the Ognon jaune des Vertus, which is sown on the spot in whole fields; but its cultivation is not sufficiently profitable, given the time it takes to occupy the land, for it to be grown by market gardeners in the suburbs of Paris. Only the Ognon blanc hauif de-Paris (fig. 4) is specially cultivated in the marshes of Paris, and it is this variety that we will focus on here. Ognon blanc hátif de Parïs is sown in nurseries around August 20th; sown before the 15th of that month, it risks going to seed instead of "turning", i.e. forming its bulbs. It's best to choose a marsh that has only been in cultivation for a few years. In old marshes, it is often impossible to obtain Onion seedlings; they "melt" as soon as they are raised, and nothing remains of them. Sow the seeds thickly in a well-tilled bed. If the soil is light, the Fig. 4 - Early white Paris onion. soil is ploughed in after ploughing, and then levelled out. As soon as the seedling has been sown, water it to facilitate emergence, then bury the seed by harrowing with a fork; press the seedling down again with your feet; even out the surface with a rake, and finally top-dress, spreading a 2-centimeter layer of rich loam evenly over the whole surface; the loam from the first melon layers is excellent for this. Finally, give the plant a generous watering. If the weather is very dry, as is often the case at this time of year, water frequently enough to produce a regular emergence; but once the onion is well established, water less, so that it firms up and remains healthy. 1. i.e. compacted with the feet. 2. operation which consists in flattening the surface of the soil by removing the clods. Spinach. - Spinach is also sown around August 20 for winter and early spring consumption; it starts to set seed in May. The most popular variety for this season is Dutch spinach, with round leaves and seeds. Sow in the field, broadcast and clear; one liter of seed should be enough for two acres of land. The soil should not be ploughed deeply, as spinach roots like to "cling" to firm subsoil. The seedbed is harrowed with a fork, plumbed with the feet, levelled with a rake, then covered with a short manure mulch. Under these conditions, emergence takes place after six to seven days. If the weather is dry, the soil should be kept moist by frequent light wetting. Weeding should be done by hand, unless the seed is sown in rays, in which case the hoe can be used. Spinach sown in autumn for winter consumption should not be cut, but picked by hand, leaf by leaf. Choose the largest leaves, those around the edge of each plant, and leave the smallest, those in the heart. In this way, you can pick every fortnight in the same place. Picking under these conditions lasts until the spinach goes to seed, i.e. towards the end of May. Lamb's lettuce. - This plant, commonly known as "doucette" in many countries, is indigenous. It grows wild almost everywhere in our climate, so it can only be grown in the vicinity of large cities. Parisian market gardeners have long been growing a well-selected variety called Mâche ronde; grain merchants even list a number of sub-varieties in their catalogs. Around Paris, hundreds of hectares of this lettuce are grown in autumn. Cultivation is extremely simple. Mâches are sown from August 8; the first plants are ready to eat by October 15. They are usually sown in other crops, such as chicory, scarole, cauliflower and various other cabbages. It is preferable to sow in hard soil rather than in newly tilled ground. Once the seed has been broadcast, the soil is lightly harrowed and compacted. The surface of the soil must then be kept continually fresh so that the seed germinates and rises, otherwise it "cotitates", i.e. the germ formed dries out, and the plant does not rise. To get good Mâches, don't sow too thickly, but it's better to err on the side of too much than too little, given the difficulty of germination at this time of year. As for amateurs, they sow a bed of Lamb's lettuce around August 15, fairly thickly, and as it grows they thin it out, always removing the largest; in this way they have enough to eat throughout the winter until April. Mâches should be watered frequently to protect them from insects, especially spiders, which can destroy them completely. Cabbage. - Cabbage is one of the most diverse types of vegetable in terms of shape and appearance. It is perhaps the oldest cultivated vegetable. Natural variations or selection have given rise to several quite distinct races of the primitive cabbage. In head cabbage, the foliage has developed the most, but without the stem rising, so that the leaves are tightly interlocked, capping each other to form very hard, tight "apples". In cauliflower, on the other hand, the inflorescence has developed considerably, but suddenly aborts, so that it remains shapeless and compact, giving the white, barely grainy "heads" we know. In Brussels sprouts, it's the trunk that's particularly developed, the eyes it bears giving rise to small edible buds. In Kohlrabi, it's the trunk that has developed again, but it bulges considerably at one point. In Turnip cabbage, it's the root; in Forage cabbage, it's both the foliage and the trunk. Head cabbages themselves are divided into two very different races. One has smooth, glaucous-green leaves: Cabbage; the other has more or less blistered, dark-green leaves: Savoy. In general, the cabbage varieties, which are slower to sprout and go to seed, are grown for spring and summer. Savoy cabbages, with their looser heads, are grown in spring, and will bolt very quickly under the influence of heat. The varieties of cabbage that are best grown for spring consumption, because their foliage is hardy, are the head cabbages with more or less long leaves, known as oxheart and York cabbages. Beefheart cabbages (fig. 5) include large and small cabbages. The variety grown by Parisian market gardeners is a large Chou cœur de bœuf that closely resembles those sold in the seed trade as Chou cœur de bœuf Fig. 5 - Chou cœur de bœuf. moyen de la Halle and Chou très hátif d'Étampes (fig. 6). Fig. 6 - Very early cabbage from Étampes. In the Paris climate, cabbage is sown at the end of August and the first days of September. This date is very strict; however, in cold, clayey soils, sowing can start as early as August 25; but Parisian market gardeners, cultivating very fertile soils, often lightened by the quantity of potting soil they use, never sow before August 30. Sown earlier, cabbages set seed before forming their apples. We particularly recommend this crop to anyone with a vegetable garden. Along with white onions, beef cabbage is the first new, fresh vegetable to arrive in spring. We even start to eat the leaves as soon as the apples start to form; we also eat the few cabbages that happen to go to seed at the beginning of April. They are still superior in taste and flavor to those that have spent the winter in gauge. Lettuces and Romaines - A first "season" of Lettuces and Romaines can be sown at the end of summer, and without layers. This first season is sown under cloches, cold, i.e. without layers, at the end of August. To do this, the ground where the seed is to be sown is carefully ploughed, top-dressed to a thickness of 2 to 3 centimetres, and the surface is compacted with the flat of a spade or with a board. You then take a bell and, as you lay it down, imprint its perimeter on the soil. Repeat this procedure as many times as there are bells in the seedbed, and sow into each of the circles thus traced. Cover the seed with a light layer of fine compost. If the sun is too hot, the bells can be covered with straw mats, but as soon as the seeds have sprouted, the bells must be uncovered and blanched. Doormats should be left on the bells only during very hot weather, and the bells should be uncovered as soon as the sun has lost its strength, as plants deprived of light will elongate and wither. We feel we should say a few words, once and for all, about the quantity of seeds that 1. For this type of cultivation, cloches are to be preferred to trays; the plants have more daylight and wither less. If you sow too thickly, you compromise harvest success from the outset. Experienced growers know how to judge the quantity of seeds needed for a bell by feel alone; we'll show those who aren't used to it how to dose this quantity. For seedlings sown at the end of August, each bell should cover no more than four to five hundred seeds; in September, seven to eight hundred; in October, twelve to fourteen hundred, as at this time the plants are less likely to overheat. These figures are calculated on the assumption that transplanting will be done when the plants have only their two cotyledons; if they were to be left longer under the bell, they would have to be sown much less thickly. By this time of year, the plants have developed their cotyledons, and are ready to be transplanted, also under a bell, at a rate of 24 to 30 per bell. To do this properly, start with a row of four, then two rows of five, then four, then three, making a total of 24. If you want to transplant 30 plants per bell, tighten the rows so as to make a row of six plants in the middle. Fig. 7 - Black-seeded Gotte lettuce. The variety of lettuce to be grown cold in autumn is the black-seeded Gotte lettuce (fig. 7). We have never come across another variety so well suited to forced cultivation. The main varieties of Romaine grown commercially are: 1° flat Romaine with cloches, in the first season, under cloches; 2° grey Romaine, also grown under cloches in the first season, and which we recommend to amateurs; it is then used for counterplanting between the cloches and the first plantations in the open ground. Other varieties, which are not suitable for the trade, can satisfy the taste of connoisseurs, such as Ballon Romaines, Royale d'été and Royale d'hiver, Alphange, Brune Anglais, etc. Their cultivation is no different from that of other varieties. Their cultivation is in no way different from that of the preceding varieties. The green Romaine, so widely used in the past for cultivation under cloches or cold frames, has almost disappeared from professional cultivation, as it does not have the same market value as the first mentioned above; however, it is even hardier than them, and in certain cold climates would perhaps be even preferable in forced cultivation. Romaine is grown in the same way as Lettuce; in summer, it requires the same care, and even more water. MISCELLANEOUS OUTDOOR SOWING During August, a number of vegetables continue to be sown outdoors, notably the latest Radishes and Black Radishes, and dwarf varieties of Beans intended to be eaten "in needles". These beans can be sown outdoors in beds facing south; but these late sowings are often surprised by the first frosts of October, and the slightest frost kills the beans; certain precautions must therefore be taken, which we will indicate in due course. Carrots can continue to be sown, preferably in racks. This is more convenient for weeding, as you can destroy the grass between the rays with a small hoe, and all that's left to do is remove the weeds in the carrots by hand. We recommend sowing too thickly rather than too thinly, and then thinning out as necessary. This is the surest way to obtain a good harvest. Turnips can be sown as late as September. At the end of August, and in the first part of September, Chervil is sown for winter and early spring consumption. Chervil is sown as a broadcast crop with lamb's lettuce or spinach, and is thus available throughout the autumn and winter, until May, when it sets seed. The stalks are cut off with a knife, as and when needed, so as not to interfere with the other plants among which it is sown. Leeks are sown by Parisian market gardeners at the same time as white onions and under the same conditions; transplanted at the end of September, they set seed as early as May. This crop can only be grown by gardeners in the vicinity of large cities, where they can sell their produce quickly. MISCELLANEOUS WORK Cabbages sown in the nursery in June are planted out at the beginning of August. They are planted flush with the heart, and bound! immediately1 "Bound" means to press the root of the plant against the soil with the planting tool. diately. A few waterings should be given during the month. Caterpillars and flea beetles should be kept at bay. Broccoli can also be planted in place, about a quarter as thick as cauliflower, and then watered as needed until late summer or even early autumn. At the same time, you can plant Scarole, or sow Lamb's lettuce or spinach. The last Chicory and Scarole sown in the open ground in the month of

July will be planted in August. At this time of year, it's always wise to plant eight days earlier rather than later, as the first frosts often surprise us before the plants have fully emerged. Dandelions can now be planted out in rows, 20 to 25 centimetres apart. In the Paris climate, the first kale plants for spring consumption are sown at the end of September. There are a great many varieties of cauliflower, but they can be divided into three classes: tender, semi-hard and hard. In spring, you can plant anything; the soft ones become thinner and less thick, and are good for eating first; then come the semi-hard ones, and finally the hard ones, which don't flake until July. From this time onwards, we see tender cauliflowers again, which should be grown preferably in summer, as the heat always hardens them sufficiently. However, specialists working for the trade often grow half-hard cauliflowers for the summer, because they are more "full-bodied", but in hot years, such as 1899, market gardeners don't get good plants with these varieties. We advise amateurs to plant tender varieties for the summer. In autumn, demidurs do very well, and can be grown by anyone. Hard-bodied cauliflowers can also be grown in autumn, but should not be planted too late, so that they have time to "grow legs and wood". These cauliflowers take longer to peel, and only the first frosts in November can start them. Cultivation of the "hard" varieties had no other purpose than to provide cauliflowers for consumption at the beginning of winter; it is increasingly abandoned by Parisian market gardeners, because of the competition they face at this time from cauliflowers from Brittany, on the ocean coast, where frost is rare. Throughout the winter, Algeria ships them to France and other countries. We have seen some very fine plantations around Algiers, but they were poorly cared for, especially in terms of covering. Provence sends its produce after Algeria; it immediately precedes the first market garden produce from Paris. All these cauliflowers from different countries are far from being as carefully cultivated as those grown by Parisian market gardeners, and even by growers in the Saint-Germain area, who also grow them as a special crop in autumn. As Olivier de Serres predicted three centuries ago, this cultivation is expanding day by day, covering hundreds of hectares on the plains. There is no doubt that, with a few practical notions, the inhabitants of our countryside could establish it in the autumn, at least for their own consumption, and thus obtain a well-being unknown to them until now. For the first plants to be obtained in spring, and which are planted on a bed, sowing is done at the end of September in the cold, on soil or compost, either under a bell or in a frame. Care should be taken to aerate the seedlings sufficiently to keep them firm and stocky. Then transplant to the nursery. The cauliflowers that follow the first-season cauliflowers are sown at the same time as the first-season cauliflowers, but are planted in cold lettuce or 4 Romaine under chassis. This is exactly the same as for the first season. The last of these seedlings are planted in the open ground in March in Lettuce; if they are planted in Romaine, their place must be left free, so that Romaine does not suffocate them. The same seedling provides three successive cauliflower seasons: the first on a bed in February, the second on a cold frame at the beginning of March, and the third in the ground at the end of March. Romaine. - Romaines can continue to be grown cold under cloches, as we said in August, until the first days of September; the young plants are transplanted and planted out at the beginning of October. This Romaine season follows on from the last outdoor season. During the first days of the month, we continue sowing oxheart cabbage (see August). Lamb's lettuce (see August) can also be sown until September 15. However, when sowing at this time, it sometimes happens that the seeds, not being sufficiently watered, don't germinate immediately; some only germinate at the end of October, when the soil becomes cooler and wetter. In this case, the plants don't have time to develop, but they still go to seed at the same time as the others, so the harvest is very compromised and may no longer be profitable. Around September 15, lettuces are sown for the first layering season. Sowing and transplanting are carried out in the same way as in August. However, it is preferable at this time to transplant a little lighter; no more than 24 lettuces should be planted per bell, if you want to obtain a nice stocky plant. At the end of the month, lettuces will be sown on top of the first layers of carrots planted at the beginning of December. Turnips can be sown until September 15th, but at this late season, as with carrots, extra-early varieties should be sown. As with pink radishes and carrots, these are generally the rounder varieties, which start to turn as soon as the plant has a few leaves, and can be eaten from then on. Radishes can still be sown on the coast, sheltered from the north wind. Finally, chervil can be sown until September 15 for winter and early spring consumption. Do not sow later, as the plant will not be strong enough to withstand heavy frosts. PLANTATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS WORK The hátif de Paris white onion, sown in August, is being transplanted this month. Amateurs can let it grow in place, thinning it out continuously, but specialists pull it out from September 15 to transplant it in beds. The plant is prepared as follows: the seedling is lifted with a spade, flat, at some depth below the roots; it is then easy to pull it out without damaging it. We take the seedlings one by one, discarding those that are not well formed; we make a handful by arranging them in the hand in such a way that all the bulbs are at the same level, then we cut the roots at about 1 1/2 centimetres from the bulb and shorten the leaves by a few centimetres; the plant should be about 10 centimetres long. Carefully place the handful in a basket, leaving all the bulbs at the same level, so as to pick up the onions in the same way when planting. When you've prepared all you can plant in a day, dip the basket in water long enough for the roots to soak in; this gives them stiffness, and facilitates planting and recovery. This is the procedure used by growers for all the plants they plant in warm weather, even when it's raining. If the onions are not to be planted until the day after they have been dug up, they should be covered with a board on which a heavy weight is placed, so that the plants remain upright; otherwise they will wriggle, which hinders planting and compromises recovery. Let's say once and for all that onions of all varieties should not be sunk more than 2 centimetres into the ground; if they are sunk deeper, they won't turn properly. Very early varieties of Onion are planted very thickly by specialists; they are spaced barely 3 or 4 centimetres apart. If we waited until these onions had reached their maximum size, the soil would be completely covered; but we sell them as soon as they turn. It's in this state that they fetch the highest prices, and you have the advantage of being able to dispose of the land to establish other crops. The next larger varieties are planted a little lighter. But for amateurs whose gardens are not as fertile as the land we're talking about, planting in rows is preferable. Southern France sends white onion to Paris from March onwards. In Algiers, we saw some as early as January. Lettuces and Romaines, sown under cloches at the end of August, are transplanted as soon as they have two leaves, also under cloches, at a rate of thirty per cloche. Beef heart cabbages, sown at the end of August, are transplanted to the nursery towards the end of September. Care should be taken to reject all those whose hearts are not well constituted and those that are degenerate, which can already be distinguished by their "emballement", i.e. the fact that their leaves take on larger dimensions than the others. People with no experience of this type of cultivation would be inclined to believe that these are the most beautiful cabbages; in reality, they are the ones you shouldn't keep, because they only develop leaves and don't form apples. Dandelions sown in July are also transplanted at the beginning of September. Transplanting is done 20 centimetres apart, in freshly tilled soil. It goes without saying that this soil should always be well fertilized. Once the planting is done, it is bounded, then given a few light 1. i.e. those which have a tendency to take on characters different from those which make up the chosen variety. 4. basinages, to facilitate recovery. When transplanted, these plants already have the strength and volume of those harvested in the wild, and when treated in this way, they develop rapidly. For the amateur cultivation we indicate in June, we thin out the seedlings around September 15th, taking the most beautiful plants to be transplanted, for example on the south coast; these will be kept to be blanched at the end of winter and the beginning of spring, while the others will be eaten in autumn and winter, always thinning out and removing the most beautiful as we go along. With this simple procedure, you'll have beautiful Dandelions to eat from the end of September to the end of April, and the crop costs next to nothing, since it occupies the land when you can't put anything else on it. Blond celery, sown at the beginning of May, should be covered with straw a few days before being cut, for blanching. Lovers should cover it only as they eat it. Tomatoes should be leafed out in September, when the sun is weakening, but only part of the leaves should be removed, otherwise the last fruits will not ripen. The leaves should not be completely removed until late September or early October, when all the fruit has fully developed. When tomatoes are plentiful, it's a good idea to preserve them for winter. In a small book by M. Baudry, chef-jardinier at the Aude farm-school, on tomato cultivation in the South of France, we found up to eight recipes for preparing these preserves. In practice, it's mainly tomato sauce that is preserved in middle-class homes; the process is extremely simple and can be found in all cookery manuals. We simply wanted to draw attention here to the services rendered by this preservative, which has so many uses. Strawberry. Forced cultivation. - Forced cultivation of the strawberry plant is now widespread. Like all forced cultivation, it requires special care and attention to ensure that the plants are properly trained. To raise plants for forcing, first proceed in the same way as for nursery cultivation (see April); the flowers are removed from the mother plants, so that the runners can develop in the spring, and by July, if the soil is suitable for the plant, we already have rooted nets. At this time, we pull them out to transplant them in the nursery. By the end of September or the beginning of October, we have some very beautiful plants. Some specialists, as soon as they have marked the nets they want to take, and in particular the first net, place a bucket full of good soil in the ground under the net, before it has taken root. They apply the net firmly to the soil, pressing it in very lightly, then water. When the time comes to plant the strawberry plants in pots for forced cultivation, you'll have ready-made plants that you don't need to transplant. In either of these ways, we've obtained strawberry plants that are already forming attractive clumps. These are placed in 16-centimeter diameter pots, with one clump per pot. These pots are placed in boxes, touch by touch; each box holds 56. The frames are placed on top when the frosts come. In the course of this month, a few more plantings are made, in the ground or on beds. White onions can be planted in the ground until the end of October. After All Saints' Day, however, frosts may prevent them from recovering, so it's best to wait until the end of February. But onions planted at the end of September and beginning of October are always ahead of those planted in spring, especially in dry, light soils. Beef heart cabbage continues to be transplanted in the nursery, as indicated for September. We can start planting them out at the end of October in regions where early frosts are feared. First-season lettuces, sown in cold cloches in August, are planted out at the end of September or in the first days of October, four to a cloche, always in cold conditions. To carry out this work, prepare rows 1.35 m wide, well ploughed and upright; arrange the bells in three rows in a chessboard pattern, but not in ados for this season, as the sun is still sufficiently warm for this procedure not to be necessary. Lettuces can be planted in this way right up to October 15th; however, specialists prefer to plant in small layers at this time of year, as the plants come up more quickly and are often more beautiful. At the beginning of the month, we continue to sow lettuces to be planted on beds. For the transplanting of these seedlings, we recommend the use of ados (see below), as the sun will have lost its strength by this time, and the soil will drain less well. These lettuces can be harvested in late January or early February, depending on the severity of the winter. Finally, from October 10th to 20th, we sow the last lettuces that will be forced, especially on the bell beds, and whose cultivation is combined with that of Romaine. They are planted from the beginning of January to the end of February, and generally eaten from March 15 to April 15. The black-seeded gotte variety is chosen for sowing. Varieties such as white Passion, red Passion, lazy blonde, lazy brown and Palatine lettuces are sown at the end of October and planted outdoors at the end of February and in March. White-seeded gotte lettuces can also be planted in well-sheltered coastal areas; this variety grows even faster than the previous ones, and is especially recommended for sandy soils that are not too cold. The first season of Romaines, sown in cold cloches at the beginning of September and transplanted as we have said, is planted out in the first days of October, at a rate of one plant per cloche, if you want to have good yields. It follows on from the last seasons of Romaines grown in the open air. The first cauliflowers sown under cloche or cold frame at the end of September should be transplanted to the nursery under the same conditions, at a rate of 24 per cloche and 250 to 300 per frame. Care should be taken to give them sufficient air, so that they remain stocky and do not become too tender. The same applies to Lettuces and Romaines, which should be given as much air as the season allows, with the exception of black-seeded Gotte lettuce, which should be given as little air as possible. Forced crops are often damaged by a terrible disease: miller's disease (Peronospora gangliiformis). This disease, similar to downy mildew, can only be effectively combated by preventive treatment. We therefore recommend sulphating the soil, before sowing, transplanting or planting, with a mixture of 4 to 5 kilograms of copper sulphate and the same amount of commercial potash per 100 liters of water. This mixture has given us good results. Lamb's lettuce - Italian or Regency lamb's lettuce is sown outdoors in October. This selected variety, which grows later than round Lamb's lettuce, rises more easily thanks to the humidity of this season; it should be sown a little lighter, to form beautiful, strong clumps in April. Parisian market gardeners used to grow a lot of it to sell at that time, but nowadays a lot of lettuces from the south of France arrive in April; on the other hand, growers in the suburbs have developed their crops of Capuchin Beard, Witloof, White Dandelion, etc., so that the cultivation of Italian Lamb's lettuce, which has become too unremunerative, has been almost totally abandoned by practitioners. Asparagus. - Asparagus shoots destined for forcing into green asparagus should be harvested in autumn before the frosts, or during the winter when it doesn't freeze. For this, choose two- or three-year-old asparagus shoots. For this cultivation, Asparagus claws are placed touch and go on a good layer, with a few centimetres of compost on top, or heated with a thermosiphon; but when these Asparagus claws have developed all their eyelets, they are good to destroy afterwards. Sorrel needs to be terracotta-packed in autumn, so that you can continue to pick it as long as it doesn't freeze. Artichokes can also be grommeted at this time to form new plantations; this procedure is described by M. G. Legros! At the end of September - or better still, in our opinion, in October, since in September there is often still fruit on the vine in the Paris climate - we detach medium-sized eyelets with a good heel, and immediately put them out of the sun. Take pots about 12 centimetres in diameter, and fill with good, clean soil, rather strong than too light. After cleaning and peeling the leaves and crown, plant one eyecup per pot, burying only the heel. Water at the base, avoiding wetting the leaves, then place the pots in a slightly shady spot and continue 1. In the March issue, we describe another carnationing method, which involves watering "drop by drop" until the plant is fully established. At the end of October, we place the pots in stretcher boxes, and if the weather turns bad, snowing or freezing, we put the stretchers on top. These Artichokes are good to put up towards the end of March. This procedure brings the harvest forward considerably, as the plants treated in this way are as advanced, and sometimes more so, than older plantations which have suffered more or less from the rigors of winter. In southern countries, on the Mediterranean coast for example, and in Algeria, notably at Maison-Carrée, where we have seen some very fine artichoke crops, everything is simplified: the eyelets are removed from the mother plants at the end of summer, when vegetation is at rest, planted in September as soon as the first rains fall, and the harvest begins the following January. But this is not the case in our country, where some winters lose almost all artichoke plantations. This is where the method recommended by M. Legros, and also by the late Professor Hardy, comes into its own. Plants placed in frames, secured by acots around the boxes and mats over the frames, easily withstand the rigors of winter. As for mature artichokes, you need to take the necessary measures to protect them as soon as the cold approaches. Once harvested, the flowering stems are cut off flush with the ground, along with the tips of the longest leaves. The remaining leaves are tied together to form the hearts. We plough between the rows and mound the plants, bringing the soil all around to 20 or 25 centimetres above the collar, taking care not to let any soil penetrate into the heart of the plants. 3 heart of the plant. This opening should be reinforced during severe frosts. In some regions, the artichoke is destroyed in winter by a rodent, the vole. You can get rid of them by spreading flour mixed with a third of arsenic, or wheat prâliné in the same mixture; you can also place large terracotta pots in different places, sunk to ground level and half-filled with water; voles that fall into these traps cannot get out and are drowned. Beans. - Dwarf varieties of beans sown in August must be protected from the first frosts, which would destroy them. A lath is prepared above the plants, and when a frost arrives, simply place straw mats on the lath. These first frosts don't usually last more than a few nights, and it's rare that they aren't followed by a period of mild weather, which can last from a month to six weeks. The precaution we've outlined, which costs next to nothing, is therefore sufficient to protect the plant, and ensures that green beans of superior quality to canned beans will be available until late autumn. In the early days of October, Radishes can still be sown in coastal areas, sheltered from the north wind; but these last sowings often only come to fruition with the help of trays, which are only put in place when it freezes. As long as it doesn't freeze, it's best to leave Radishes in the air. BLANCHING OF VARIOUS VEGETABLES Capuchin Beard. - In October, we start to pull up wild Chicory to bleach it and turn it into Capuchin Beard. Once the roots have been removed, they are grown in dark, poorly ventilated cellars. Specialists make a good layer of warm manure and place the bunches of Chicory touch by touch, upright and straight, after stripping them of all their old leaves. After about twenty days, these roots have grown narrow, very white leaves 25 to 30 centimetres long, making an excellent salad. As soon as the roots have developed all their eyelets, they are removed and new ones put in, turning over the layers if they are no longer warm enough. This process continues throughout the winter. This type of cultivation is used on a large scale in the suburbs of Paris. At the École nationale d'horticulture de Versailles, part of the underside of the terraces forming the Potager du Roi has been appropriated to demonstrate this cultivation to students. There is an improved variety of wild chicory. The leaves of this variety are similar in appearance to those of certain green summer lettuces, which are rarely grown. This improved chicory is less bitter than the wild variety, but its yield is not very high. It is grown in large quantities only by a few provincial market gardeners, but can be found in many amateur gardens. Endive or Witloof. - For some time now, we've been blanching a variety of Chicory with a large root or "coffee", of the Brussels race, known as Endive or Witloof 1. It's also known as Chicorée pommée de Bruxelles. Instead of giving long, thin, etiolated and disheveled leaves 1. from the Flemish woit, white, and loof, leaf. like Capuchin Beard, it produces true full apples, relatively tight, elongated, from Om, 10 to Om,15 in length. It is not only an excellent salad, but also a very good cooked vegetable that can be served in a variety of ways, especially in juice. As with ordinary wild chicory, you can force the roots to grow all winter and into spring. Here's the procedure described by Mr. G. Delachevalerie: "From the end of October or in November, we start to pluck part of the roots to force them; we can do this every winter month, so as to have them until spring. To do this, dig a bed Om.50 deep by 1m.30 wide and a length to be determined according to the quantity of roots you want to force out. After draining the subsoil, place a layer of fine soil about twenty centimetres thick, and plant the Chicory roots 3 or 4 centimetres apart, after cutting off the leaves near the collar and shortening the root tips of those that are too long, so as to make them all equal; then add soil between all the roots, with the upper part or collar about 20 centimetres below the edge of the trench, and after consolidating them well, cover them with about 20 centimetres of fine sandy or sifted soil, so as to fill the trench completely. A layer of hot manure, about Om.30 high, is then applied. After a month, these roots will have produced tender, pale-yellow, crisp, slightly bitter apples with a very fine flavor. "The apples are harvested before they reach the height of the manure, while they are still 2 or 3 centimetres from it, because if they were allowed to reach that height, their tips would turn brown and could spoil. "To obtain this vegetable throughout the winter, you successively put hot manure on the part of the layer you want to force. If the weather turns to rain, we cover the manure with obliquely inclined boards, so as to reject the water outside the layer. A month later, we start harvesting chicory apples. When harvesting, care must be taken to detach the apples with a small part of the root collar, so that the lower leaves cannot detach from the apple during transport to market. Endive cultivation has grown enormously in recent years. It's a highly recommended crop for rural dwellers. Cardoon. - Cardoon is also blanched. Start by pulling it all the way up, using a rope attached to a stick planted in the ground, as this plant has sharp prickles. When you've gone all the way round, you tighten the rope, so that the cardoon is upright and its heart enclosed. We then bind it with one or two straw ties, depending on its strength and height. After a while, the heart softens and is ready to eat. If you want to keep it later, you wait until the end of October to raise it as we've just said, and surround it with large straw, which you tie to keep it at the same height as the cardoon. Under these conditions, it can withstand light frosts. There are several varieties of Cardoon. Cardon d'Espagne, which is not very thorny, has the disadvantage of hollow ribs and is not suitable for winter storage. The Cardon de Tours (fig. 8), much more cultivated in our countries, has full ribs and can be overwintered. It is stockier and tastier than the previous variety. In Geneva, we saw a variety called Cardon de Plainpalais, which has a very white heart and bears a strong resemblance to Céleri Chemin or Céleri doré. STRAWBERRY FORCING During the first days of October, we continue to prepare strawberry plants in pots for forcing, as described above. When the time comes to force these plants, from the end of the month onwards, a good layer is established and the pots are buried in soil or potting compost, at a rate of 25 or 26 per panel. If you have a thermosiphon heating system, the pots are placed under the same conditions in the heated tarpaulins. Either way, as long as the necessary heat is available, all that remains is to give the appropriate care to all the plants treated in this way: give them air when Fig. 9. - Fraise Dr Morère. the weather permits, protect them from frost by covering the frames with mats, and by establishing acots around the boxes or tarpaulins. Like all fruit-bearing plants, plants should be kept as close as possible to the glass. The most successful varieties for forcing, or at least those most commonly used for this purpose, are the following: Dr Morère (fig. 9), Marguerite (fig. 10), Général Chanzy, ViesFig. 10. - Strawberry Marguerite. de Thury. These are generally very hardy, large-fruited varieties. We can also force four-season varieties, but their yield is not high enough to make this crop lucrative, given the costs involved. VEGETABLES TO BE INTAKEN Beets need to be brought in before the frosts; they can be stored in cellars or silos to last through the winter and even into spring. Tomatoes - The last tomatoes will also be brought in. Professional growers stop producing flowers after four bunches, but amateurs can let fruit set later, and ripen them under cover. When October arrives, and the first frosts are to be feared, the remaining fruits are picked and placed on straw under a frame, in a greenhouse, or in some other sheltered place where they can receive the sun's rays. Those that have begun to yellow finish ripening under these conditions, and can be harvested until November. Some authors recommend another method, which we think is very practical. When the plants are still full of fruit and have reached their normal size, or at least when there is no longer any hope that they will grow, and the cool nights and continuous rainfall of autumn take away the hope of complete ripening, the tomato plants are pulled up; then the fruit-bearing stems are laid horizontally on a bed of very dry straw, under a frame or in a greenhouse. In this way, the fruit, if not fully ripe, at least acquires a certain finesse and taste similar to those whose ripening has been encouraged by the sun's rays. We think this is a very good method, especially for amateur growers, and will enable them to eat tomatoes very late in the season. CONFECTION DES ADOS Here's how to make ados: A strip of land 2 meters wide is ploughed deeply to establish a line of three rows 5. of bells placed in a chessboard pattern, which will take about. 1m,35 of this width. By ploughing, we lower the part on the south side by about Om,15, and this earth is transferred to the north side, giving a slope of Om,30 (fig. 11); this is the slope that has always 70....... 730 - Fig. 11. - Ados. been judged the most advantageous. The rear part of the ados is consolidated by beating it with a shovel and straightening its edge with a chalk line. Rake it, earth it and bell it, just as if the ground were flat. The bottom row of bells is at ordinary ground level, and the earth excavated from the pathway alone raises the other two rows; it follows that the pathway alone is dug out, and serves as a sewer for the ados. If you have several ados to make next to each other, it is always preferable to increase the distance between them, so that one does not cast a shadow on the other. Transplanting young plants, when they have only two or three leaves, should always be done with the finger; this is the surest way to do a good job. The same applies to spring transplanting; market gardeners do it all by finger pricking. It's not uncommon for them to spend days on their knees doing this work. It's the most practical position for getting the job done quickly. The last lettuces sown in the second half of October are transplanted under cloches. The cloches are lifted to give air when the weather is mild, but they have to be pulled down when frost arrives. If it's a bit frosty, we cover the bells with straw mats; but if we're afraid of very cold weather, this isn't enough, so we have to fill in the gaps between the bells and the edge of the paths with dry manure, chopped straw or any other similar material we have on hand; This is done up to a third of the height of the bell, then progressively more if the frost becomes more severe, but without ever covering the top of the bell, so that the plants always have a little light. The important thing is not to let the frost penetrate the soil, because if it does, the plants will melt at some point in their growth, sooner or later, depending on how deeply they have been affected. Plants affected by frost in this way are said to suffer from "red neck"; the neck of these plants takes on a reddish hue. As soon as the thaw arrives, the stuffing must be removed, and we start airing again when the weather permits. It sometimes happens that, despite all these precautions, the floor of the teenager is frozen. If the frost has penetrated only slightly, the plants may not develop a red collar; they may just wilt, and can be made to "come back" when the thaw comes; only in this case, they must be uncovered carefully and little by little, as the slightest sunburn will damage them. Romaines require much the same care as lettuces, with the only difference being that they are generally given more air. To make their plants even firmer, while avoiding giving them so much air, Parisian market gardeners practice "reinforcement" as follows: after transplanting Romaines at a rate of 30 or 36 per bell, without giving these young plants any air, they prepare new ados in November, before the big frosts, and transplant these plants once again, in the nursery, at a rate of 10, 14 or 19 per bell. This is one way of obtaining very stocky, firm plants. What's more, these Romaines, which are already a few centimetres high, are sunk right down to the first leaves, burying the crown and making the plant more resistant to severe frosts. So, unless winters are very harsh, it's very rare to see red collars on plants treated in this way. They are only given air when they have softened again. Often, even the first season, which is planted on cloches, doesn't need air. Air will only be needed when the plants appear too tender, and especially for the following seasons, which will be used for counter-planting on cloches. From the beginning of November, you can prepare the cloches for Romaines in winter. For this, you need good layers, and, just as for lettuce and Romaine plants, when it gets very cold, you need to fill in with dry manure between the bells and on the paths, and sometimes cover with several straw mats. Under each bell, we simply plant a Romaine, a grey variety for market gardening, and three Lettuces, a gotte variety with black seeds (see fig. 12). Once the harvest has been Fig.12. - Planting a Romaine and three Lettuces under a bell. harvested, the layer is turned over to plant another season's supply of the same plants. There is a variety of Romaine, called Romaine plate à cloches, with which no Lettuces should be planted, as this variety, to become beautiful, must first spread out like a Scarole to meet the edge of the cloche; the leaves then climb up the glass and come to meet on top, pressing against each other - what people in the trade call "coiffer". Cauliflowers grown in cold conditions, under cloches or frames, must be protected by mats against heavy frosts. If very cold weather is forecast, make sure to place mats around the frames or cloches to prevent frost from penetrating deep into the soil. Hard cauliflowers planted in July, when well covered, can easily withstand five or six degrees of cold. Curly Chicory and Winter Scarole should only be tied up in the event of a hard frost. However, towards the beginning of November, frosts often occur which, if left unchecked, can cause serious damage. In this case, if you want to keep Scarole throughout the winter, you need to protect it from these first frosts by covering it, in order to tie it as late as possible, as by this time it is hardly growing at all, and sometimes, after these little frosts have passed, you can keep it in place untied until the end of December and later. Once it's bound, we pull it out and put it in a cellar, but not in a heap; we plant the Scaroles in the sand, one next to the other, or put them in a silo under the same conditions. The latter method is even preferable, because as soon as it freezes, you cover the Scarole with dry manure or dry straw, which you remove after the thaw, and the lettuce continues to whiten as it gradually grows, but in these conditions it is less likely to rot and you can keep a better eye on it. Treated in this way, it can be stored throughout the winter. This crop used to be grown on a large scale in the suburbs of Paris, but shipments of chicory and scarole from the south of France have almost completely abandoned it. Nevertheless, this inexpensive way of preserving lettuces throughout the winter is highly recommended for amateurs and gardeners in small towns where produce from the south of France is not available. And let's not forget that Scarole, blanched in silos, is superior in tenderness and taste to Scarole from the south of France. Leeks for winter consumption will also be harvested before the frosts and stored in cellars, so that they will be available until spring. You can continue to pick sorrel as long as it doesn't freeze. Enthusiasts who want to have it all winter long place a box and cover it with a frame. If you want to keep tarragon fresh through the winter (as it can be stored in dried bunches), you can transport good, stubby, root-ball plants under a frame in a well-exposed spot. In the past, Parisian market gardeners used to force Tarragon under the same conditions as Asparagus, but today this cultivation has been completely abandoned. Hard Celery, grown for winter, can withstand a few degrees of cold; but in November, when heavy frosts are expected, it's a good idea to pull them out and bury them. To do this, we open a trench at the bottom of which we place the Celery plants in rows, spaced 15 centimetres apart; thus preserved, they can withstand fairly severe cold. Finally, when the severe winter frosts arrive, we bury the Celery completely and cover it with dry manure or chaff. This way, you can eat them all winter long, as long as the frost doesn't penetrate the soil. As soon as the frost has thawed, Celery should be uncovered to reduce the risk of rotting. Celeriac. - Celeriac can be stored under the same conditions, but should only be covered to about half the length of the leaves, never all the way to the top. To prevent the heart from freezing, it should be covered with litter or dry manure, but only at the time of severe frosts, and as soon as the thaw occurs, care should be taken to uncover the celeriac and remove dead leaves to prevent rotting. Cardoon. - In the early days of November, you can continue to raise cardoons as described in the previous month; but if the weather turns cold, it's a good idea to wrap them in straw. Finally, when the big frosts arrive, the Cardons should be pulled up and stored in a cellar or silo. In both cases, as far as possible, they should be stored upright. They can be stored this way for most of the winter. Cabbages. - Large varieties of cabbage, such as Milan gros des Vertus, Milan de Pontoise and Milan de Norvège, require special care if they are to be kept over winter. In large-scale cultivation, when heavy frosts are forecast, these cabbages are placed on the ground without being removed; while the stem, held between the two tines of a fork, is inclined towards the ground, this stem and the bottom of the head are covered with soil taken from the sides, taking care that the head always faces north, as the alternating thawing and refreezing is much more damaging to plants than the frost itself. In home cultivation, the procedure is different, especially if less hardy varieties are grown. In a healthy spot, and in front of a north-facing wall, dig a small trench 15 cm deep, parallel to the wall, and transport the cabbages, laying them side by side, with the head always inclined towards the north. The stem and the top of the collar are covered with earth, which is removed at the next gauge and lined in the same way. In very cold weather, this shelter is reinforced by covering the cabbages with straw mats, dry straw, litter, in short, whatever is available. In this way, they can be eaten even during the most severe frosts, without having to be uprooted in advance. Broccoli is pulled up before the big frosts, and replanted very close together, deep enough to bury the whole stem right down to the leaves. During the frosts, they are covered with straw, and in spring the apples develop. In the past, market gardeners devoted all their skill to preserving cauliflowers for most of the winter, but today cauliflowers from various countries are received in large cities, and this crop has been abandoned. Raves should be harvested before the coldest weather, and placed in a silo or in a frost-free place. Lamb's lettuce should be protected from severe frosts with straw or straw mats. Artichokes. - Artichoke plants should also be protected from frost when the thermometer falls below -5°; to do this, dry leaves, litter or manure as dry as possible should be packed around the plants, leaving only the tips of the leaves. These should also be covered if the cold persists. Whenever the frost stops, take care to remove these covers, and put them back on when it starts again. As for eye artichokes, continue to give them the care indicated in the previous month. Cauliflowers. - Chassis and cloches of cauliflowers sown in September should be covered with straw mats during very cold weather; care should also be taken to make acots so that frost does not penetrate deep into the soil. Dandelions should be covered with a large layer of mulch. We continue to give Wild Chicory and Witloof the care we described last month. In October, we described how to force strawberry plants, an operation that can be started or continued in November. Strawberry plants potted for forcing, and placed in boxes, will be covered with frames during frosts, so that there is no interruption in vegetation. Cabbage planting Cabbage planting begins in November, sometimes even at the end of October in regions where early frosts are to be feared. Rays are dug 20 to 25 centimetres apart, and the plants are planted right to the heart. They are spaced 50 to 60 centimetres apart in the row, and arranged in a chessboard pattern. A good precaution to take when planting cabbages is to face south on the right-hand side; this way, the ditch left by the planting cut, which should be filled in as much as possible, is exposed to the south, and any snow or ice that may accumulate there melts more quickly. Cabbages planted at this time can be eaten as early as May in light soils, especially if early varieties are chosen. There are a few selections of cabbage that are very early, notably the one market gardeners call Chou pommé de Paris. Some twenty or thirty years ago, we saw them being brought to Les Halles as early as April 15th or 20th. But since then, as the south of France has been sending increasingly large consignments to Paris, we have gradually had to abandon the cultivation of these small forms of cabbage and adopt larger, later varieties to follow in the footsteps of the Choux du Midi. You have to be with the times, and keep up with the times. However, this only applies to specialists who supply the big city markets. Early varieties are still recommended for hobby growers and certain non-commercial operations. Cabbages can be planted throughout the winter when it doesn't freeze, but when they are caught by heavy frosts before they have recovered, they are thrown to the ground, like onions. It is therefore preferable, for amateurs who have not planted in November, to wait until February 15th before proceeding with this operation. Growing cabbage requires well-smoked soil; before ploughing, it is therefore necessary to bury a good manure; any compost you have at your disposal will be good; gadoues in particular are excellent. Market gardeners often smoke their soil with vegetable detritus, to which they mix manure. This fertilizer is only good for cabbages; if it were used for salads, it would produce "cast iron". Once the fertilizer has been spread on the soil, a good, i.e. deep, ploughing is done to bury it well; then the bed is raked and the rays made. SOWING Carrots are first sown at the end of November, in good beds. 30 or 36 black-seeded gotte lettuces are planted on top of the carrot seedlings in each bed. Some gardeners sow round, very red varieties of radish at the same time. In this case, we'd advise you not to broadcast the seeds, but to wait until the lettuces have been planted, and then pinch the radish seeds into the holes between the lettuces. In this way, each pinch containing twelve to fifteen seeds, the Radishes all form well, they do not harm either the Carrot or the Lettuce, and the harvest is abundant. Other growers plant clumps of spinach seedlings that have been sown in a frame on a bed in a nursery three weeks or a month earlier. These various crops always delay carrots a little, but are highly recommended for provincial gardeners and hobbyists alike. The very short chássis carrot, also known as Carotte grelot, because of its particular shape, is especially suitable for these seedlings; it is the earliest variety, and for this reason, the most widespread in market gardening. It "turns" easily, and can be eaten when it's as big as a marble. If you want to grow new spinach at the end of winter, as we've just said, sow it in a nursery, around November 15, in a small layer under a frame. Sow very thickly. Flanders and English varieties with very green foliage are chosen for this season. They are hardier and more resistant to severe frosts than spinach with broad, blond-green leaves. Peas, like potatoes, are more suited to agriculture than horticulture. Specialists in the greater Paris suburbs, who cultivate for table supply, start sowing as early as November, and continue throughout the winter, weather permitting. They sow not too thickly, in rows spaced 40 to 50 centimeters apart, hoeing as often as necessary, and reseeding the plants. The first peas from these crops are harvested in the first half of June. In the past, Parisian market gardeners used to force this crop, but never on layers, simply under cold frames. Today, as with potatoes, Algeria and the South of France flood the big city markets in winter and spring. On the other hand, the industry is ar4. That is to say, its root bulges and rounds. rived to preserve these vegetables in their green state, and to supply them during the winter and spring almost as good as the new ones, so that forced cultivation has become unnecessary. The Romaine cloche layers, which are no longer to be returned, will be made from December 15 onwards. Their produce will be delivered for consumption at the end of February and the beginning of March, depending on the severity of the winter. A very good system of cultivation consists in sowing Carrots on all these layers, while planting under each bell a gray Romaine and three black-seeded Lettuces gotte, as we said above. Radishes can also be sown, but very lightly (see November). Lettuces sown at the beginning of October can also be planted on these first layers. These lettuces will be harvested at the beginning of February. As we said last month, we continue to sow Peas and Spinach, to protect Celery and Cardoons from frost, to cover Artichokes when it freezes and uncover them when the temperature rises, and to blanch Dandelion, Wild Chicory and Witloof. Cabbages that have not been transplanted in November, and which will be left in place until February, should be protected against severe frosts. To do this, cover them with a little straw or very dry manure, but never with fresh manure. This should be done lightly, so as not to soften the plant too much; only the heart and collar should be protected. Specialists, when they have to plant only in spring (when their land is not free in autumn, for example), "deepen" their plants, i.e. pull them out and press them in at heart level in the nursery; under these conditions, unless you have an extremely harsh winter, which is fortunately quite rare in our climate, you can be fairly sure of obtaining beautiful plants in spring; even if the leaves are all frozen, the heart and crown remain intact. As for late cabbages sown in June, which have their apples half-formed by the end of November, they are much more resistant to heavy frosts than those with well-formed, hard apples. If the cold is not excessive, the heads finish growing and take on a beautiful appearance. During the winter, when the stems are too bare of outer leaves, which frosts cause to fall off, it is useful to butter them up a little by bringing the soil around the stems. This can be done when the soil has dried out a little, after a few fine days. Carrots sown in August and September should be protected from damage. Cover them with straw, preferably 10 to 15 centimetres thick. To stock up on carrots during severe frosts, simply move this cover. It is reinforced when the thermometer falls. If winter is mild, and during periods of relaxation, it's best to leave the carrots in the open air. For the other crops of the month, and for the forcing of Strawberry plants, we will continue to proceed as previously indicated. 6 Tomatoes. - In the days when tomatoes were not yet sent to Paris from the Midi, market gardeners grew them as early crops. They sowed them in December or January, in strong layers, transplanted them in the same way, and planted them in layers under a frame; when there was no longer any fear of frost, they were removed and palletized. But this type of cultivation, like that of beans, potatoes, etc., is no longer lucrative enough to be done by Parisian practitioners, and even individuals living near big cities have more advantage in buying early tomatoes on the market than in growing them in their own gardens. The fresh fruit obtained during the winter is obviously superior in quality to preserved fruit, but its cost price is much higher than that of preserved tomatoes or early tomatoes shipped from warmer Fig. 13 - Tomato Chemin. countries, so it can only be an amateur's fantasy. As for cultivation, it differs little from that of spring. If the plants are given the warmth and air necessary for normal vegetation, good fruit will be obtained. In forced cultivation, however, there is a risk of "coulure", caused by excess humidity and lack of sunlight. To promote fertilization, some authors recommend the use of sulfur sprinkled on the leaves, but avoid doing so in full sun. Sulfur is also an excellent preventive remedy against cryptogamic diseases. Experiments carried out by practitioners have shown that certain varieties, such as the Chemin tomato (fig. 13) and the dwarf hâtive de pleine terre (fig. 14), are E ponele. Etresbouro Fig. 14 - Very early field tomato. much less prone to coulure than others, such as Perfection Tomato, Large Smooth Tomato, Ponderosa Tomato and Mikado Tomato. We therefore prefer the former for forced cultivation. The variety used for forced cultivation, which was very lucrative in the first half of the 19th century, was the hátive dwarf tomato. Curly chicory. - In the 18th century, curly chicory was only cultivated in autumn, when it could grow without any artificial means. Parisian market gardeners invented its early cultivation. Around 1791, Stainville, a market gardener established on avenue des Veuves (now avenue de l'Alma), began growing them. The secret of growing chicory before its normal season is to raise the plant properly. The seeds must be sown on a warm bed, so that germination takes place within twenty-four hours. Some growers sow their seeds on this layer without even covering them with potting soil; the heat under the frame, covered with several mats, must be sufficient to germinate the seeds in this short space of time. However, it takes a great deal of experience to achieve this result without the seeds burning. We have seen cases where the seeds were not completely burnt, and germination took place one or two days later; in this case, only the collar is burnt, and the stem becomes unable to elongate; the Chicory would end up rotting on the spot without going to seed. A plant in these conditions grows much more slowly; Chicory has no leaves and grows all heart. It then requires 6. more water than that which grows naturally. This is an old practitioner's remark that we make in passing. The first seedlings are sown around January 15th and planted out towards the end of February or the beginning of March. For cultivation on beds, we choose Chicorée fine parisienne (fig. 15). As soon as the Fig. 15 - Chicorée fine parisienne. seeds have germinated, the mats should be removed to give the young plants some daylight, so that they can turn green, but care must be taken to prevent them from hardening too much under the action of the sun's rays; to achieve this, shade them by spreading mulch over the frame. Eight days after sowing, another layer is prepared, and when it is ready, i.e. after a week or so, the three-leaf seedlings are transplanted, at a rate of 400 to 500 per panel. This crop has always been quite profitable over the last century; it has been particularly well grown by market gardeners in the 15th arrondissement of Paris, where it was a specialty. Cabbage. - If, in January, the cabbages are found to be frozen, a warm layer is immediately prepared and a new seedling is sown on this layer, under a frame. These new seedlings are transplanted onto another layer, and care must be taken to give them air to firm up. In this way, planting can be done towards the end of March or the beginning of April. But this costly way of raising plants should only be used when absolutely necessary, so as not to leave the land unused, as the Cabbages thus obtained are less beautiful and the harvest comes later. Melons. - The first melons grown in and around Paris are sown at the end of January and delivered for consumption in May. To grow this early crop, you need a bed and a hot-water or thermosiphon heating system; however, even today, very few market gardeners use this system. This crop is as difficult to grow out of season as it is easy to grow in the normal season. Melon is sown on a good bed, heated by thermosiphon or steam. When the plant has two leaves, it is replanted, two or three to a frame, on another new layer, also artificially heated. At this time of year, the greatest difficulty is to green the plant and give it the consistency it needs to develop and produce fruit; to do this, it must be given daylight. The earlier you grow melon, the more you need to choose small varieties, which are less likely to ripen "tender", i.e. before they have fully developed. Fruits that ripen tender are of much poorer quality; they can be recognized by their lack of marked slices; the rind is smooth, and the stalk does not tend to detach from the fruit; they also have less weight, for equal volume, than those that have ripened to perfection. Cucumbers. - Cucumbers grow exactly like melons, but are less delicate and require more water. FORCED CULTIVATION OF ASPARAGUS White and green asparagus are available on the market. White asparagus, with its pinkish or purplish tip, is produced first by a kind of forced cultivation, then by ordinary cultivation. Green asparagus is the result of a special system of forced cultivation, then, in full season, it is the product of the simplest cultivation, which consists in letting it grow without buttering it. White asparagus. - Forced cultivation of white asparagus is a time-consuming process, occupying the land for a number of years. During part of our youth, we saw this crop being grown in establishments where it was well established, and later undertook it on our own account. Experience has shown us some improvements that could be made in the rearing of the plant. As for cultivation itself, our fathers, fifty years ago, were already practicing it to perfection. Raising the plant. - Here's how to raise a seedling. When the asparagus emerges from the ground, we select the most beautiful plants, those with the best stems, ending in a beautiful, easily-colored tip; we only collect seeds from plants selected in this way. The seed is sown on January 15th, in a good layer, under a frame, in sufficient quantity for a second selection. When the young asparagus plants are a few centimetres long, they are transplanted to a nursery on another layer, still under a frame, at a rate of 400 plants in each panel, taking care to always select the most beautiful. These plants are treated in the usual way, covered at night to protect them from frosts, aerated as much as the weather allows, and progressively towards the end of winter, to be able to troubleshoot when frosts are no longer a concern. Planting takes place in July (see this month), and forcing can be carried out two years after planting. Forcing. - The procedure for forcing asparagus is much the same as that described by La Quintinie. A space of Om.65 was left between the rows of trunks and in the tips. The paths are dug to almost the same depth, after ploughing. The soil is spread in the trunks all the way to the top, to butter the asparagus, taking care to break up the clods, so that the soil is well loosened, because when an asparagus grows and encounters a clod, it twists and loses its value, no longer being suitable for trimming, even if it is large. With the asparagus mounded, the next step is to grow it in any season, whatever the weather. The paths just dug are filled with good, hot horse manure from the stable, preferably manure from horses well fed on oats, because it contains more nitrogen. Mix it in the same way as if you were building a layer. Once the paths have been filled, place the frames over the asparagus and cover them with one or more mats. After ten days or so, the manure has fermented and settled. New manure is brought in and mixed with the previous one, shuffling everything together. This operation is repeated every 10 or 12 days, depending on the weather and the season, so as to maintain the same temperature throughout the harvest period, which lasts from six weeks to two months. When the heat is allowed to diminish, the asparagus "rusts", as happens at the height of the season when there is cold rain. This accident takes away much of its flavor and beauty, and consequently its value. The cost of manure and labor involved in this type of cultivation, if it is to be successful and remunerative, is obvious. Asparagus is also heated using the thermosiphon, but we haven't had the time to study this process in depth, as we were obliged to give up our profession too early for health reasons. We're inclined to think that when we stop digging the paths, the plants will take more nourishment from them. What's more, with the thermosiphon, we won't have to fear the chill that inevitably occurs when we turn over the trails. But there will be other things to take care of: you'll need to bring in potting soil or soil to butter the asparagus, and take it away after harvesting. As thermosiphon heating produces a drier heat than that released by manure, it will no doubt be necessary to water the plants near the pipes from time to time. All in all, there's a study to be made here, and practice will soon show which system is the most advantageous. We doubt that the forced cultivation of asparagus, which is so costly, will be able to withstand the competition that products from the south of France will increasingly provide. The day specialists go to grow asparagus in Algeria, on the Mediterranean coast, they will be able to ship it for most of the winter. We ate some wild in this country in winter; incidentally, it was much more bitter than that grown in France. We did not see any cultivated asparagus on the Algiers markets, which are nevertheless well stocked with all indigenous products. Picking. - This operation requires a great deal of care, especially at the beginning, when the eyelets are almost all growing together from the claw. You have to dig into the earth with your hand and take great care when picking, so as not to break the ones that are in the ground, and which you uncover while digging. When you reach the claw, you "peel" the asparagus you want to pick by pressing on it with your finger; it's a long, painstaking job. As soon as harvesting is complete, the asparagus is soaked in water and put in the cellar, where it finishes coloring. Bundling. - Bundling early-growing asparagus is an art in itself. First, the plants are sorted; those too small to be put in the bundle are removed and made into separate bundles - because, despite all the care taken in selection, there are always some small ones. Next, we prepare a batch of those that will make up the "ornament" of the boot, another batch of those that will do the rest of the trick, and a batch of medium-sized ones, which will be placed in the middle. Once sorting is complete, a suitable mold is used for bundling (fig. 16). The trimming, G.E Fig. 16. - Oval asparagus bundling mold. or front of the bundle, is placed first in the bottom of the mold. This is followed by the middle bundle, which is gradually filled with medium-sized bundles. As the mold is conditioned so that the round asparagus exceeds the middle one by the thickness of the head, all you have to do is touch it everywhere. Then bind with two tightly tied wicker so that the bundle doesn't deform and remains exactly oval. We'd like to stress the importance of bundling from a commercial point of view. A well-trimmed, well-booted bundle of early asparagus is more valuable to merchants than a poorly-made bundle. As for the gardeners of the big houses who grow this crop, it's better for their personal self-esteem to present a beautiful bunch of Asparagus than a handful or a shapeless heap. It's one of those tricks of the trade for which Élisée Reclus, in his article "Paris agricole" in Géographie universelle, describes Parisian horticulture as unique. Asparagus doesn't last as long when forced as it does in its natural state. When it has been forced four or five times, it is preferable to destroy it and plant another in time to replace it, because as it ages it becomes smaller and yields less and less. In the good soil where we grew it, we managed to pick a large bunch per panel in the first few years, and then the harvest diminished more and more. Amateurs who want to grow this crop should only force a given plant every two years; it will rest in the meantime, and thus be able to supply for longer... Green asparagus. - Forced cultivation of green asparagus is a completely different kind of cultivation. Growers must cultivate hectares of asparagus on the plains, depending on the size of their forcing farm. The plant is pulled up when it is two or three years old, in autumn, before the frosts, or in winter when it doesn't freeze. When you want to force these claws, place them touch by touch in a few centimetres of potting soil, on a thick layer or on a thermosiphon heater set up under frames or in a greenhouse. As these claws are very strongly heated, all the eyelets they carry develop in a short time and grow in the open air; not being buried, Asparagus green in the air, and they are picked when they are Om, 20 to Om, 25 high. They are bundled as we have indicated above. After a short time, the claws are stripped of all their eyes. They are removed and destroyed, as they no longer contain any vegetative principles, and then replaced by others. Understandably, you need to grow a considerable quantity of young asparagus on the plains to maintain a forcing plantation of this kind for almost the whole year. Asparagus is a very expensive crop, requiring a substantial capital outlay. As a result, only a few specialists grow it in the Paris area, notably Compoint, in Saint-Ouen, which has at least 100 hectares of land dedicated to this crop, using a rotation system that is unique in agriculture and horticulture. But, it must be said, this rotation can only be done in the suburbs of Paris, thanks to the diversity of crops and the cheapness of fertilizers, which are nothing other than Parisian sludge. Green asparagus can also be forced on site, by installing thermosiphon pipes under the frames. MISCELLANEOUS WORK Carrots continue to be sown in beds. The main thing to do with these seedlings is to water them copiously as soon as the Radishes or Spinach and Lettuce have been removed. They are, in fact, badly damaged by the successive harvests of all the other plants that grew before they became strong. They need to be reinforced with potting soil, as they are more or less uprooted by the uprooting of these plants, and also by the feet of the trunks in the stretcher beds. These holes are filled by hand with potting soil, and the carrots are relined with a centimetre or two of the same material, so that the neck of the plant is well Fig. 17. - Early short fat carrot. surrounded, otherwise the carrot will turn green, harden at the top, and lose quality and market value. For these last layers of the frame, we use the Early Short Coarse Carrot (fig. 17). Spinach, to follow those sown in November, should be sown by hand in the layers made at the current time, with a few seeds in each hole. This produces beautiful, tender new spinach. We've seen some growers pick the large leaves first, before pulling up the stalks; it's a way of keeping them available until the new spinach arrives in the ground. We continue to plant the last Lettuces and Romaines, which will be consumed in the second half of March and at the beginning of April. We cover the cloches with straw mats in case of frost. The same precautions should be taken for cauliflowers. Romaines can also be planted in cold frames, from the end of December onwards, to take up all the available material. Cabbages sown at the end of August also require some care. We've seen terrible winters where it was very difficult to save cabbage plants, even those planted early in the autumn and perfectly recovered. False thaws" in particular cook the heart, as we say in the trade, and the plant is completely lost. You can protect yourself to a certain extent against these accidents by putting a handful of dry straw or manure on each cabbage when the frost arrives; you remove it when the plant has recovered, i.e. is no longer wilted. It's precisely while the ground is thawing that the sun "cooks" the heart of the plant. In January, we sow leeks on beds and in trays; they are replanted in the first half of April. Peas also continue to be sown. From the end of the month, Radishes can be sown in coastal areas sheltered from the north wind. Finally, we sow Purslane. The seed 1. is called ainst a beginning of thaw, followed by a sudden resumption of frost. being excessively fine, we mix it with ashes so as not to sow too thickly. The greatest difficulty is getting it to rise. The soil has to be constantly wet, otherwise the seed "contitutes", as the market gardeners say, and doesn't germinate. The treatise on vegetable cultivation by Claude Mollet, gardener to Louis XIII, already mentions sowing Purslane on a bed. As in previous months, we continue to pull up wild chicory for blanching, and to protect lamb's lettuce and other vegetables from frost. Artichokes. - In field crops, artichokes can be reproduced by sowing. In this case, the seed is sown in a nursery in February-March, on a good bed and under a frame. When the young seedlings have developed four or five good leaves, they are lifted into a rootball and planted permanently towards the end of April. In this way, a small harvest can be obtained the following autumn. However, this method of reproduction tends to return the plants to the wild type, which is much slower to bear fruit. Cabbages. - In the second half of February, cabbages are sown to follow those sown at the end of Fig. 18. summer. There are a great many varieties; each country has its own, and cultivation is becoming quite elementary; but Parisian market gardeners now grow only one variety, the Paris Flat Cabbage (fig. 18). It is sown in nurseries on beds and in trays. As soon as it has developed cotyledons, it is transplanted to the ground, also in a nursery, at a rate of four hundred per frame or thirty per bell. It is useful to give it plenty of air. Beans. - The forced cultivation of beans has been abandoned by Parisian market gardeners, but it has lasted longer than that of potatoes and peas, and is still practiced by amateurs who present beautiful specimens in January at the Société nationale d'horticulture. We remember seeing it done during the first years we lived in Paris. The method used for this cultivation was the same as that applied by Parisian market gardeners to almost all their forced crops. In the first days of February, they sowed the beans in a nursery, on a good layer and under a frame; eight days later, they prepared a dull layer, which they called "tranchée", to put the seedlings in place, also under a frame. Four rows of beans were planted per frame, in small clumps, four per row. These rows were planted in such a way that the plants, as they lengthened, were fed by laying them down on the rear side of the frame. The aim of this operation was to make them grow more regularly by giving them less air, and to make them bear fruit. We then had to give them as much air as possible, while protecting them from frost by covering the frames with straw mats; we had to peel the beans often, making sure they had no yellow leaves, and finally, we had to pick them on time, because if we delayed by just one day, the "needles" would be too big and lose their value. This crop was extremely labor-intensive, because once picked, it had to be sorted, the larger needles separated from the smaller ones, which cost much more, weighed in half-kilograms and packed in clean paper. Cutting lettuce - In the old days, when market gardeners didn't yet have the extensive equipment they have today, this crop was grown early in the spring, providing an excellent salad as early as April. All varieties of lettuce, if sown thickly, could be used to produce lettuce for cutting; moreover, whenever more than enough seed has been sown for the planting required, the remainder is cut and consumed as young seedlings. However, when a crop was grown specifically for this purpose, a very blond variety of lettuce was used, which only apples with difficulty, and whose seed is white and very long, and is called Cutting Lettuce. Grain manufacturers' catalogs even list several varieties. The first cultivated was sown in beds in February; if you wanted to get some early, you put frames over it, and by March 15, when it had reached 5 or 6 centimetres, you cut it for consumption. The last one was sown in the ground, in a square, at the beginning of March, to be consumed in the first fortnight of April, i.e. before the arrival of the head lettuces planted on the coast, because as soon as these appeared on the market, the lettuce for cutting no longer found buyers. We remember seeing this crop grown in the same way as Radishes and Spinach, i.e. sown between the racks of the last Beef Heart Cabbages, which were delivered for consumption around May 15 or 20. Lettuce didn't bother them much, since it was cut in the first fortnight of April, and then hoeing was carried out to remove the lettuce roots and any weeds in the cabbage. So this crop cost next to nothing. But today, at the time when this Lettuce used to be sold, there are sometimes more Lettuces on the Paris market than in the middle of spring or summer. Practitioners can no longer grow this crop commercially, as it would no longer be profitable; they prefer to sow Radishes, which always find buyers. In countries where early vegetables are not as plentiful as in Paris, lettuce for cutting is not to be disdained; it can even be grown on its own, by sowing in fairly dense rows. Instead of leaving a part of the kitchen garden unused until April 15th for certain crops that cannot be grown earlier, you can harvest a crop that costs only a few waterings if the weather is dry. Enthusiasts who are far from the cities, and who have a few frames and bells at their disposal, can obtain very tender lettuce in this way from the beginning of March until the time when the first head lettuces are ready to eat. Wild chicory. - In the past, Parisian market gardeners used to heat wild chicory, i.e. grow it 7. in beds, and then cold-roast it in frames. These crops have long since been abandoned, as they are no longer lucrative enough for the trade. However, we still saw cold cultivation in our youth, and we heard the old market gardeners tell us how they practiced forced cultivation. We're going to describe it for the information of amateurs who would like to establish it for their own consumption. In the month of February, a small layer of soil is laid on top of a box, or rather a plank; this layer is filled with 10 to 12 centimetres of potting soil, and the frames are placed on top. When the potting soil is warm, a few days after the layer has been set up, the seed is sown very thickly; it is covered with 15 millimeters of potting soil, and the frames are covered with straw mats. When the seed is well established, which takes barely a few days in these conditions, we give it a little light; but as this spring salad must remain very tender and blond-green, we must not give it air to obtain this result. This is more or less the same type of cultivation as for Romaine "reclochage" on cloche beds. Treated in this way, wild chicory is not hard. When it reaches 10 centimetres in length, we cut the leaves 2 centimetres above the ground, to respect the little hearts, which "reject" a second crop twelve or fifteen days later. The same operation could be repeated, but as the plant ages, it is no longer as tender. For cold cultivation, we sow Wild Chicory on well-prepared soil, in beds the length of frames, under the same conditions as for bed-grown chicory. If, for example, you wish to have a continuous supply of tender chicory, you place a frame over it as soon as you have sown it, but without putting the trunk in place. As soon as the plant's leaves come into contact with the glass, the frames are gradually raised, so that the leaves are always close to the glass. When the wild chicory has emerged on the neighbouring bed, where there is no frame, we place a second one, under the same conditions, and this harvest follows the first. This operation can be continued with a third frame, which is placed on the Chicory only when it is half grown. Well watered and shaded under this frame, it soon becomes tender again. In this way, with three frames, you can have very tender wild chicory throughout the spring. Turnips. - After a season or two of lettuces on beds, the first turnips are sown at the beginning of February, on the same beds that have been turned over. To establish this crop properly, market gardeners don't broadcast the seeds; instead, they place them by hand in pre-made holes. Here's how it's done. You have a frame with a surface area just equal to that of the panel, and fitted with as many rods as you want to make rows. Pointed pieces of wood are fixed in each rod, point downwards, spaced out as the Navets are to be. Simply place the frame on the soil and press down to make all the holes at once - usually twelve rows, and twelve Navets per row. - Then, by hand, two or three seeds are placed in each hole, so that if one is missing, the other lifts; more often than not, all the seeds lift. To fill the holes, a lath is passed over the soil, pressing down a little, and the whole thing is smoothed out. When the plants are well established and in good vegetation, we proceed with thinning, leaving only one turnip in each spot. Treated in this way, these early Turnips come on stream very quickly, as selected merchandise, and with almost no waste. The first ones to be grown need to be warmed by a good layer; otherwise they go to seed and therefore no longer have the same flavor or market value. They also need to be watered every day, to keep them tender and prevent them from going worm-eaten. They also need to be given the necessary air, sometimes from the top of the frame, sometimes from the bottom, to keep them in good vegetation, i.e. neither too soft, as they will then "blow away" into leaves, nor too hard, as they will then go to seed before they are fully developed. As you can see, this cultivation, while not delicate, requires a fair amount ofFig. 19. - Navet Marteau. care if you want to obtain a good product. The forced cultivation of turnips, created by Parisian market gardeners twenty-five to thirty years ago, is very prosperous; it produces a vegetable that is highly prized by gourmets, and gives rise to considerable exports to northern countries. Since it has been practiced, it has produced over one hundred million francs, of which more than two-thirds comes from abroad. It should be added that this perfected cultivation of early turnips (in Paris, only Navet Marteau is used for this crop) has completely ruined exports from the south of France. At first, the products of this crop were very expensive, but today prices are affordable for all pockets, and the result, as we noted in general in our book Les Jardiniers de Paris et leur culture à travers les siècles, is that consumption is still increasing. It's a win-win situation for growers, who are expanding their crops, and consumers, who are paying less. Radish. - Practitioners generally only use radish as a catch crop in other crops. They can be sown on carrot beds, and even with lettuce; in these conditions, they must be sown lightly; all radishes turn and do little harm to the other plants with which they are found, given their rapid growth. We have seen some market gardeners plant them in clumps in turnip beds, at the same time as turnips and using the same procedure. Each clump consists of ten to twelve seeds sown in the same hole. You might think that, under these conditions, the plants would get in each other's way, but this is not the case. As they grow, they move away from each other and all take their place in the sun. Radishes can also be grown alone on an air bed; in this case, they are sown very thickly and covered with straw mats when it freezes. From the end of January, they can be sown in coastal areas sheltered from the Fig. 20. - Round pink radish with white tips. north wind, and continue until the first days of October. There is a very large number of varieties of small Fig. 21. - Round scarlet hátif forcing radish. Radishes of all colors, from the purest white to violet, pink, scarlet and dark red. Shapes vary too: round, half-long, long and very long. Enthusiasts are spoilt for choice. Commercial specialists grow only pink, red and white-tipped red radishes. Early varieties are mainly round reds, which turn over more easily in the bad season. After this first season, white-tipped radishes are grown, and later on, all varieties. Spinach. - From February 15th, spinach is sown at any time until the beginning of August, to be harvested when ready for consumption. Cultivation requires no special care, just watering when the weather is dry. Curly chicory. - Also around February 15th, curly chicory is sown for cold cultivation under a frame, following the sowing of bedding plants in January. For Rouen chicory, 24 plants are planted per panel; for Parisian chicory, 30 or 36. Both require the same care, i.e. frequent watering and adequate air supply. Raising the plants requires the same care as for bedded Chicory. Raves. - According to the Vilmorin catalog, the name Rave, given at the same time to certain turnips and long radishes, often leads to confusion when buying seeds. Rave itself is no longer cultivated in vegetable gardens, where it is preferable to grow one or more varieties of Turnip, among which there is such a wide choice, depending on the country and the season. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, Parisian market gardeners used to force-grow turnips on beds and then under cold frames. This forced cultivation was more or less the same as that for turnips, i.e. you had to sow them not too thickly, heat the roots sufficiently through the bed, and water them enough to keep them tender, while giving them the necessary air, so that the leaves were not too soft or "vewy", as we say in the language of the trade. The forced cultivation of Raves was abandoned by market gardeners, and it was not until half a century later that they undertook the forced cultivation of Navets hâtifs race Marteau, which has become so important in the last twenty-five years. Peas. - Peas continue to be sown, as indicated in January. PLANTING AND MISCELLANEOUS WORK From February 15, we will be planting cabbages that could not be planted in November. The first cauliflowers, sown in September, will be planted out in February, on trays with lettuce already half grown. Most often, five cauliflowers are planted per panel; when the Lettuce is removed, care must be taken to give them air whenever the weather permits, so that they remain in good vegetation and are not too tender. It's better for them to be a little hard than too soft. At the end of the month, curly chicory, sown in January, is planted out. To establish this planting, you need to make a good bed, though not as strong as those used for sowing and transplanting. Market gardeners plant thirty-six chicory plants per panel. The same care continues: shading until the plant is fully established, watering accordingly, every day, and aerating according to the weather. In forced cultivation, there are no precise, absolute rules; it's the weather that dictates, and you must carry out its orders without delay. After four or five weeks, every other plant is lifted to bleach it. Chicories that are not lifted take up all the available space and become larger than the others. Under these conditions, the harvest lasts longer. Capuchin beard. - During this month, we continue to pull up wild Chicory for blanching in the cellars (Capuchin Beard), and to take various protective measures, which we have already indicated. Melons. - Melons sown at the end of January should be planted out when they have two leaves. They should be planted on a new bed, with two or three per frame; the bed should be heated with a thermosiphon, as we have already mentioned for sowing. At this time of year, the greatest difficulty is not in obtaining the necessary heat, but in greening the plant and giving it the right consistency to grow vigorously and produce fruit. To do this, you need a heating method that gives it daylight. These first melons are not grown in exactly the same way as those that will be sown later. They are planted at the bottom of the frame, close to the heating pipe. Specialists don't top the plant; they let it grow a single shoot, which they stop when it has five or six eyes. These develop, and are cut off when they have two or three eyes; it's on the latter, when developed, that the flowers begin to appear. Melon produces both male and female flowers; the latter are known as "meshes". When the young fruits reach the size of a pigeon's egg, we choose the most beautiful, the best placed, and we remove all the others as they form, so that they don't take sap from the first, on which all the strength of the vegetation must be concentrated. Once the melon has "stopped", as we say in the trade, pruning becomes secondary. The wood is left to grow, depending on the vigor of the plant, so that it can fill out the panel, since a vigorously growing plant will always produce more beautiful fruit than a weak, painfully vegetating one. Water very little at this time of year, as the soil generally contains enough moisture. Later on, if the weather is warm and the fruit is in full growth, you can water occasionally, but under no circumstances should you water the melon when the fruit is setting, as this would cause it to "sink". Air is given when the weather permits, as far as possible in the opposite direction to that from which the wind blows. It's in this first melon crop that the great advantage of thermosiphon heating comes to the fore, as it allows you to heat and ventilate at the same time; excess humidity is thus expelled from under the frame, and the plants remain healthy. This type of early cultivation requires a great deal of experience, and not all gardeners succeed, even if they have everything they need to combat bad weather. This is why, in the Paris region, it is only grown by a few specialists and by the leading horticultural schools, such as Versailles, Fleury-Meudon, etc. The other melons consumed in Paris in May come from the Midi. True cultivation of these fruit-vegetables, as they used to be called, begins around February 15, when the sun begins to gain strength. When the plant has developed its two cotyledons, it is transplanted to another layer as warm as the first, and when it has three or four well-formed eyes, the first pruning is carried out. This is called topping, and consists in cutting off the head to leave only two eyes growing above the cotyledons; these eyes will provide the arms! Melon is also susceptible to a disease for which no cure has yet been found; it's called nuile disease, and it develops in cold dews, eating away at the plant as it grows, always attacking the young shoots and fruit. Rust, another dangerous disease, generally only attacks older plants, and could be combated more effectively. Aphids, too, attack melons; we combat them with nicotine spread with water. However, we mustn't wait until these insects are too numerous. They multiply very quickly. Cucumbers. - Cucumbers, as we've already 1. The two main branches that make up the plant. are grown in all seasons in the same way as melons. However, when the fruit begins to swell, pruning should be made to one or two eyes, depending on the degree of vegetation. Moreover, to obtain beautiful, well-shaped, upright fruit, they must not touch anything. When there are too many, we remove a few so that they don't harm the others. Early cucumbers are usually grown in greenhouses; the plants are planted close to the glass, so that the fruit hangs in the air, and to ensure they grow straight, they are placed in a glass tube. This is more the culture of an amateur than a practitioner. It is, however, widely practised in England, where coal is much cheaper than in our country. The whole secret of this cultivation consists in keeping the plant always tender; each time you pick, you must take care to remove all the hard leaves, so that everything is green and young, and so that daylight and air can penetrate everywhere. Water often, and when the sun gets hot, shade the frames with Spanish white. When well cared for, cucumbers can be harvested throughout spring and summer, and in autumn in strong soils. Sometimes, after abundant production, the plant becomes tired and there are short intervals between fruiting. This is the time to rejuvenate the plants, by removing all the old wood and allowing young shoots to take their place. This procedure results in plants that

are still growing well. The most important thing to watch out for is aphids; when you see midges fluttering around your plants, there's no time to lose in watering with diluted nicotine. To syringe or spray nicotine on melons and cucumbers, first turn all the stems upside down, placing them carefully on the ground; it's then very easy to spray the underside of the leaves. When the operation is complete, the stems are returned to their original position. These sprays and syringes should be carried out in the evening, so that the sun doesn't burn the moistened foliage. If, in addition to aphids, rust appears on the plants, simply pull them out. Cucumbers fall into two main categories: green (fig. 22) and white. Each of these categories comprises a large number of varieties. For forced cultivation in winter and spring, green varieties are preferred; on the other hand, ribbed varieties are more commercially sought-after than smooth-skinned varieties, at least on the Paris market. It's up to the grower to choose the varieties most in demand on the market where he sells his produce. Lettuces. - The last lettuces sown towards the end of October are removed around February 15th, when heavy frosts are no longer to be feared; if any should occur after removal, care should be taken to cover the plants with straw mats. Romaine. - At the same time, we counter-plant North path South path Fig. 23 - Romaine counter-planting. six rows of other grey Romaines, one between two bells. If we look closely at the figure showing this arrangement (fig. 23), we'll notice that each row of bells is flanked by a row of Romaines in front and behind, making two rows of Romaines for one row of bells. These Romaine feet are placed in the free space between each bell. Artichokes. - From February 15th onwards, we begin to give light watering and increasing amounts of air to artichokes that have been grommeted in the autumn; this gradually hardens them out, so that they can be depanelled at the beginning of March. This month also sees the sowing of a large number of vegetables. Cauliflower. - The first summer cauliflowers are sown in the first fortnight of March, on old soil, i.e. soil with little or no caloric content, and under a frame. Give them plenty of air as soon as the seeds have emerged. If you're not afraid of heavy frosts, you should troubleshoot as soon as the seedlings have firmed up sufficiently. For all summer and autumn cauliflower seedlings, we prefer to sow fairly lightly and not transplant; the plants are more vigorous in these conditions. Carrots. - The last Carrots on a bed are sown in the first days of the month, on a bed with cloches or even on a bed in the open air. Carrots are then sown in the ground throughout spring and summer. After weeding and thinning, it requires no care other than watering when needed. Generally, other vegetables are sown into the carrot, such as radishes and spinach, or lettuces and romaine; however, care must be taken not to sow or plant too close together, so that the carrot also has its place in the sun. Carrot seed is very fine when well winnowed. If you plant Radishes and Lettuce, you need to sow a good centilitre per panel; if you don't plant anything with Carrots, you need a little less seed, because none is wasted. Market gardeners mainly grow the obtuse semi-long carrot for spring and summer, but there are many other varieties. Carrot flesh is divided into two zones: the outer one is more colorful and tender, while the central one is more yellow and more solid. This inner zone, called the "heart", even becomes woody to the point of being inedible, under the influence of certain circumstances, for example when Carrots age, when they go to seed, or when they suffer from thirst. There are two varieties of half-long carrots known as heartless, because their central zone, following a long and skilful selection process, has become as red and as fleshy as the periphery. These are the Nantaise and Chantenay carrots (fig. 24), both of which originate from the market gardens around Nantes. The former has a rounded shape, almost no larger at the neck than at the tip. The second, on the other hand, is very flared at the neck. Both varieties are excellent for growing in small gardens, but their yield is too low for market gardening. To grow them well, it's essential not to let them suffer from alternating drought and humidity, as their hearts would become woody. Large vegetable farms also grow a large carrot, intermediate in length between the early short carrot and the obtuse half-long S carrot, but much more voluminous; Fig. 24 - Chantenay half-long red carrot. this is the Guérande carrot (fig. 25). Very good for Fig. 25. - Carotte rouge demi-longue obtuse de Guérande. cooking, it is high-yielding and drought-resistant; but it is not sought after for market gardening because of its somewhat slow growth. Other red carrots are more widely cultivated; the long ones, along with white carrots, are used as root fodder. Turnips. - Parisian specialists who grow this crop on a large scale (some of them have 500 or 600 panels) plant turnips cold, i.e. in the ground, at the end of March or beginning of April. They set up boxes with 10 to 15-centimeter planks, which they secure in the ground with stakes. They plant the turnips in the same way as explained for growing on beds, and bring the frames from the first crops to the new ones. In the climate of Paris, turnips are planted on beds until March 15th or 20th; it is certain that in colder regions it will be necessary to make beds to establish these crops until April 1st; however, they can be made less strong than those we have indicated for the previous month. At this time, use whatever materials you have on hand. It is essential, however, that the layer does not dry out, otherwise the turnips will become worm-eaten. Cold-grown turnips, like hot-grown ones, need to be watered every day; this is essential if they are to remain tender and not go to seed, which often happens when cultivation is neglected. But the most important thing to watch out for at this time of year is aeration. Almost as soon as the turnips have emerged, you need to give them some air, at first very little, then gradually more, and taking care to change, i.e. to give air sometimes from the top of the frame, sometimes from the bottom. One of the most important points in forced cultivation is knowing how to aerate plants properly. In a special chapter, we have provided the information you need to set up the racks used to regulate aeration. Chicory and Scarolea. - This "cold" cultivation method is also used from the end of March for various other vegetables, such as Chicory, Scarole, etc., for which background heat is no longer essential. As for chicories, the fine Parisian variety and Chicorée Rouennaise are still used for cold cultivation. Leeks. - Along with cabbage and onions, leeks are one of the least delicate vegetables. It can be sown in the open ground in March, fairly early in the season, and grown all year round, taking care to put some in the cellar before the frosts. To obtain beautiful, white leeks, it is necessary to pull them up when they are as big as a schoolboy's pencil, and to replant them by sinking them deeply into the ground, then watering them often, as otherwise they get worm-eaten during severe droughts, and you are obliged to cut them flush with the earth. The most common way to grow leeks, which we could call "everyone's crop", is to sow them at the end of February or the beginning of March, and plant them at the end of May or even in June. This is enough to produce almost all year round. Specialists sell this season's leeks in July and August, and then plant salads in their fields. Leeks can be sown either in nurseries or in the field. In the latter case, you need to sow at least five times lighter than in the nursery. We estimate that you need about 1.5 kilograms of seed per acre in a nursery. Once sown, the seed is harrowed with a pitchfork and then top-dressed; later, weeded and watered as required. In short, to obtain beautiful Leeks, you need to use plenty of fertilizer, plant lightly and deeply, to get white, and water copiously. Treated in this way, especially for amateur growers, Leeks sown in March and transplanted in May will produce all year round. This excellent vegetable, used almost everywhere in soups and stews, can also be eaten in the same way as asparagus. Its taste is hardly inferior to that of Asparagus, and its price is always much lower; it has therefore been nicknamed the poor man's Asparagus. Most of the leeks that arrive at the Halles de Paris are produced by farmers in the outer suburbs, who grow only large vegetables. They sow in March, transplant in May, and sell from late summer to the following spring. There are a number of varieties, almost all of which are good to grow; however, the ones most generally adopted in the Paris area are the Poireau de Rouen and the Poireau long d'hiver de Paris. But, we repeat, it is cultivation that plays the greatest role in obtaining beautiful plants of all varieties. Lettuces and Romaines. - Cold cultivation can be started as early as January, weather permitting and if frames are available. The 8. variety of lettuce most commonly used for this purpose is the white-seeded Gotte lettuce, which grows larger and later than the black-seeded Gotte lettuce. As it needs to be more full-bodied, it can be given a little air, depending on the temperature; this type of cultivation produces very fine products. You can also grow other varieties of lettuce that don't get too carried away. We've grown a small variety of red lettuce ourselves, which did very well. Finally, for this crop, you already have a choice of varieties: either black-seeded gotte lettuce (42 per "market gardener" frame), or white-seeded gotte lettuce (36 per frame), or larger varieties, in which case you'll have to make do with 30, and even then, don't grow the large summer varieties, which would get too carried away and peel with difficulty. You can also plant Romaines for this "cold" culture, at a rate of twenty per panel, or even ten Lettuces and ten Romaines together. The best Romaine variety to choose for this is Romaine grise. All it needs is air and watering. Lettuces and Romaines can also be sown outdoors as early as March. Nothing is easier than growing these plants. The important thing is to water them every day when it's not raining. During the summer, they have a tendency to grow upwards instead of downwards, if they have not been well watered throughout the vegetation period. One month after sowing, they are ready to be planted. From March onwards, they can be sown to produce continuously throughout the summer, until the end of August, when cloche cultivation begins. The state of the moon, to which the ancients attached so much importance, has no appreciable influence. Today, we say to amateurs: Sow when you want, not too thickly, keep your plant tender, plant it young, continue to keep the plants tender by watering, and you'll harvest: that's the secret. When the Romaine is capped, we bind it to soften it even more, and to avoid breaking it when we pull it out. For spring sowing, we especially recommend Romaine blonde, which should be grown as early as possible, but only when there's no longer any need to worry about severe cold, as this variety is particularly tender. This is its great quality. Black radish. - Some Parisian market gardeners grow black radish under cold frames, just like turnips. It is sown towards the end of March or at the beginning of April, in rows under a frame. The best way is the same as for turnips. All you need to do then is water frequently and provide sufficient air so that the leaves don't become too tender; without this care, Black Radishes become worm-eaten or go to seed before they have fully developed. Spinach. - Spinach continues to be sown, generally among other crops such as Lettuce, Romaine, Chicory, Scarole, etc., but with care. Careful, clear sowing yields beautiful crops, which are harvested when ready to eat. In this way, you can have a succession of crops that take up no space and cost almost nothing. However, spinach can also be sown on its own; in this case, it should be sown in rays. It's always preferable to sow spinach in succession during the summer, rather than picking what you've got, because when they grow back they go to seed and are not as beautiful and tender as the young ones. In spring, it's best to sow Holland spinach, Viroflay spinach and lettuce spinach. It's a good idea to water spinach when it's dry, but never when the sun is hot. Water early in the morning, or in the evening, but only when the leaves are no longer hot; otherwise, they become "tavelled", i.e. the cold water literally cooks them. The same phenomenon occurs on lettuces when they are plucked. Sorrel. - Sorrel can be sown throughout spring and summer, but spring is always preferable, so that it can be harvested all year round, since it sets seed as early as May of the following year. Cultivation requires no special care; it is sown in rays, to make weeding easier, and between the rays is planted a row of lettuce, either Lettuce or Romaine, or even both, alternating. Unprotected sorrel remains dormant over winter, but as soon as the ground thaws it starts to grow again. Sorrel needs to be picked with a certain amount of care if it is to look good and be harvested often. In the first treatise on "courtillage" written in French, published in 1393 in the Ménagier de Paris and signed "Un bourgeois de Paris", the author says that it should be picked "à maistrise", i.e. remove all the large leaves around the edge and leave the heart leaves to grow, which, a fortnight later, have in turn become good to pick, and so on. We have nothing to add to what our 11th-century predecessor has to say on this subject. There is a long-established variety of sorrel that doesn't have the disadvantage of climbing; it's called virgin sorrel. It is planted in clumps and kept that way for several years. We believe that this plant comes from ordinary sorrel, which, after having had its flower stalks cut off for a number of seasons, has lost the habit of producing them. Virgin sorrel is mainly grown by private individuals, who need relatively little, whereas ordinary sorrel, which provides a lot, is grown by specialists who supply city markets. Wild chicory. - In March, wild chicory continues to be sown in cold frames, as described last month. As for cultivation in the open ground, in the Paris area this is now done only by growers of large vegetables, and mainly with a view to producing Capuchin Beard. To do this, sow the plants lightly in the open field at the end of March and beginning of April. Care should be taken to avoid tiring these plants too much in summer through repeated harvesting. Cabbage. - The cabbage season, which comes after those sown in beds in February, is very easy to grow. We sow in nurseries, not too thickly, so that the cabbages can grow sufficiently on the spot, without withering, until May, when we replant them. Spring-sown varieties all grow quite large; only three are planted per square metre. All you need to do then is hoe them when necessary and water them according to the water available. If the soil is rich in fat and fertilizer, and you give them plenty of water, you'll get monster cabbages. An example of this is the cabbage that grows on land irrigated by city sewage. This is what can be called large-scale market gardening. Cabbage can be sown in succession until June. Tomato. - In a way, this Solanée is a recent crop in the Paris region; it was only at the beginning of the 19th century that practitioners began to cultivate it. Over the last half-century, its cultivation has expanded considerably. Certainly, it cannot aspire to provide the same services as its sister, the potato, but it nevertheless holds an honourable place among the most useful vegetables. It is more difficult to grow than the Potato, and in the Parisian climate and in much of France, it always needs a few tricks up its sleeve, whereas the Potato requires no special care, except that it must not be allowed to freeze. Country dwellers will do well to grow a few vines for their own consumption, and if necessary to store some for the winter, exactly as is done for Peas and Beans. To grow good tomatoes in the Paris climate, sow the seeds in a nursery on a bed and under a frame around the middle of March. Like all seeds sown under these conditions, they are simply covered with a thin layer of compost. When the seedling is a few centimetres long, it is transplanted to the nursery on another layer; even specialists, after a while, pull it out and transplant it a second time, lighter than the first. Treated in this way, the plant is as big as a finger and can be planted out around May 15, when there is no longer any fear of frost. It is necessary to give it air when it is under the frame, gradually, so that it hardens sufficiently and is not "seized" when planted outside. Its condition tells the grower how much or how little air to give it; nevertheless, it should be kept firm rather than too tender, so that it bears fruit more easily. In our opinion, ordinary tomato cultivation, although requiring some care, should be much more widespread than it is in the countryside. The plant is not delicate in itself, and can grow in all types of soil, like the potato. Instead of using the tricks of the trade, we could sow it in April, along a wall sheltered from the north wind, and let it grow on the spot. A dozen or so plants planted at Om, 50 apart, along a wall, would suffice for a family's consumption, and would provide them with appreciable well-being, as this fruit is very healthy, can be eaten in many ways, and the sauce prepared with its juice pleases just about everyone. Southerners even eat the fruit raw, like an apple. Today, there are a large number of tomato varieties, most of which are amateur varieties. Growers in the suburbs of Paris, who work especially for shipping, cultivate the old ribbed variety (fig. 26), which is the firmest, and therefore crushes less in packing baskets than some of the more modern, rounder, juicier and more tender varieties. Gardeners Fig. 26. - Ribbed Tomato. who grow this crop for the markets of the towns they live in, and amateurs who want to obtain a good Fig. 27. - Path Tomato. production, should preferably grow the Path Tomato (fig. 27). This variety was bred and selected by one of our colleagues, Mr. Chemin, who has been growing it for some twenty years; it has a large, round, juicy, bright-red fruit, like a gigantic cherry. There are also many similar varieties on the market. As for connoisseurs, they can indulge their fantasies, for there are tomato varieties that resemble all kinds of fruit: apple, pear, plum, cherry, red currant, etc. These oddities have their hiding places. These quirks have their own cachet, and give a particular garden a certain originality that is much appreciated by connoisseurs. As tomatoes are prone to cryptogamic diseases, we advise growers to sulphate the stakes used to trellis them. According to the findings of various scientists, notably the late Professor Cornu, sulfating prevents disease from occurring near the stakes, and also helps to preserve them. It's also a good idea to sulfate tomatoes, like grapes, but with weaker solutions, e.g. 1 kilogram of copper sulfate and 1 kilogram of potash per 100 liters of water. This treatment should be applied preventively, and repeated if necessary. Eggplant. - Eggplants, which belong to the same botanical genus as tomatoes, require much the same care in raising seedlings. It is often sown on the same bed, and transplanted in exactly the same way. Once established, however, cultivation is not the same as for tomatoes. The stems of the latter are weak and crawl over the ground if not staked, whereas the Aubergine forms a small shrub at an early age that stands well without needing a stake. Practitioners who prune Aubergines are more concerned with building up this shrub than with obtaining more beautiful fruit. We've been doing this ourselves for a number of years, and we've never noticed that pruned plants produce better fruit than others. The pruning we did was mainly to facilitate access to the patch, as this plant has very hard thorns that prick like needles. We sowed the Aubergine on a bed and under a frame on March 15; we transplanted it on a bed, in a nursery, fifteen or twenty days later, to put it in place in the first fortnight of May. Eggplant cultivation was quite lucrative in the days when the Midi sent little or none to Paris. Today, it has been all but abandoned by Parisian market gardeners. We believe, however, that it could still be profitable. Instead of bringing the crop forward, since the Midi sends its produce early, we could delay it: for example, we could plant Aubergines at the end of June, after the last layers of cloches have been removed, to start harvesting at the end of August, and as soon as the cool September nights arrive, which give the fruit its nil, especially as the plant ages, we could superimpose two boxes one on top of the other and place the frames on them. At this time of year, this would cost nothing, since the frames are stored and not in use; and in this way, by providing plenty of daytime air, we could extend the harvest until well into autumn. Eggplants are not as useful as tomatoes; their fruit is not as widely appreciated. However, southerners, who grow this plant in open fields, are quite fond of it. But the fruit itself doesn't have much flavor, and to make a pleasant dish out of it, you have to prepare it in such a way that the sauce costs more than the fish, as the cooks say. There are several varieties of Aubergine on the market; the long violet (fig. 28), which is black in color, is the preferred variety. The other varieties are more suitable for amateur Fig. 28 - Long violet eggplant. cultivation. One white variety is highly original; its fruit resembles hen's eggs. The shrub is quite pretty, and a few plants in an amateur garden will not disappoint; but its fruit is not edible. Celery. - This old French plant used to be cultivated only in autumn. We say French, because Charlemagne, in his Capitularies, recommended its cultivation to his gardeners. Today, we have a number of varieties, and as early as July we see them on the markets. Among the most recommendable varieties is Céleri Chemin (fig. 29), obtained by the same grower - Fig. 29. - Céleri Chemin. who fixed the tomato variety of the same name. Having noticed some Celery plants in his fields that tended towards blond, he harvested seed from these plants, carried out an ongoing selection process, and finally succeeded in establishing a variety of beautiful golden Celery, which whitens on its own without being covered. This first Celery needs to be sown on a warm enough bed around March 15, and transplanted under the same conditions so that it doesn't go to seed immediately. Market gardeners generally plant it on beds after harvesting early crops such as turnips and carrots. It needs to be planted fairly thickly so that it holds and whitens, or rather gilds better. AHere are now several closely related varieties of collex, called Céleris dorés (golden celery). For mowing, it is preferable to grow Céblos, which should be covered with straw to whiten them. For winter, harder varieties are preferable, in particular green Celery, which has to be buried to blanch, and which keeps longer. At present, some young market gardeners are starting to grow early golden celery on beds and in cold frames, so that their harvest immediately follows that of the last green celery kept over winter. Celery root. - Another very old type of Celery, if not the oldest of all, is Celeriac. It is sown on an old bed in March, transplanted under the same conditions, and the plants put in place in June. There are a number of varieties of Celery root. If you want to keep some over winter, choose the hardiest ones, especially the small-leafed Celerirave, which doesn't have many leaves and stands up well to the cold. Cutting celery. - There's another kind of Celery that's grown for its leaves, called Cutting Celery. It is smaller than the previous ones, and its ribs are hollow. It is mainly used as a condiment in spring and summer, when there are no Golden Celery leaves. Cultivation is straightforward: sow in late March on a well-tilled bed. When the leaves reach 15 or 20 centimetres, cut 2 or 3 centimetres from the ground to spare the little hearts. Clean it up, water it again and, fifteen or twenty days later, cut it again. This process continues until frost. Thus treated, it is very tender and can be eaten as a salad. In the past, market gardeners used to grow a little on beds and under frames, to get some earlier, and then under cold frames. CONDIMENTS A number of condiments are also sown or divided in March. Under this heading, we've grouped vegetable plants that are mainly used for seasoning, either raw, in salads or on certain dishes, or cooked, in sauces. In general, their cultivation takes up little space compared to other crops, and there's no need to aim for large-scale production of condiments. For this reason, we recommend planting them in shady areas, or in areas that are less suitable for other vegetable crops. Chervil can be sown as soon as the ground has thawed, and then throughout the year until September 15. It requires no special care; specialists cut it as soon as it is ripe, and turn over the soil to sow more. Individuals can sow it once and have it for most of the year, because when cut carefully, not too close to the ground, it grows back like sorrel and parsley. The Ciboule is a bulbous plant of the same genus as the Onion, of which it has the same flavor, but the bulbs are less voluminous. It is sown from the end of February to August 15, in rays rather than broadcast, in newly tilled, loose soil. After sowing, specialists generally plant a row of Romaine between the rays of Ciboule. Romaine is ready to eat at the end of May, and doesn't interfere too much with Ciboule, which is still in its infancy. It is only towards midsummer that it begins to grow and is used for consumption; however, amateurs can thin it out before this time. In small vegetable gardens, where Ciboule is left in place for longer, each plant forms cloves the following spring; these are replanted separately, and each forms a new clump, so there's no need to sow them every year. Practitioners, on the other hand, pull up everything in summer or autumn, and sow it again in spring. Naturally, it's only in the vicinity of large cities that you can grow Ciboule over a certain area, as large quantities are never consumed. Garlic and shallot. - Garlic and shallots multiply by separating the cloves formed by the large bulbs. In the case of garlic in particular, it is essential to choose the largest bulbs for propagation, if you do not want to see it degenerate rapidly. Despite this precaution, it has always been observed in Paris that, to obtain large, healthy garlic, you have to buy bulbs from other regions almost every year. Garlic seems to have little difficulty with soil quality. However, without being able to explain exactly why, we sometimes see it "greasy", i.e. affected by a kind of rot that stops its vegetation. In this case, transplanting the garlic onto ridges, to protect it from humidity, excess humus or water stagnation after heavy rains, is often enough to prevent it from greasing. Cresson de fontaine and Cresson alénois. - Watercress is only grown by specialists occupying land that is, if not marshy, at least traversed by watercourses. The water is distributed in ditches, with a gentle current, and sluices are installed to fill or empty the ditches at will. To sow the seed, the ditches are at least partially emptied, and the seed is sown on their reverse side; the ditches are then filled, with a gentle current of water. The plant grows and soon covers the entire surface of these small streams. Then it's just a matter of picking as needed. Enthusiasts who have a stream at their disposal can thus obtain a very good vegetable at low cost. Cresson alénois can be grown in gardens in much the same way as Pourpier, without any further difficulty. Parsnips. - Parsnips are sown in spring, when there is no need to fear heavy frosts. However, they can be sown as early as the end of February, in coastal areas, by planting a few rows of fairly light Romaine among the parsnips. In Paris, this crop is only grown by growers of large vegetables; they sow in April, preferably in rays, and fairly light; in this way, the roots become larger, and the leaves longer. All cultivation consists of hoeing the soil and watering from time to time, if water is available; from midsummer onwards, you can start to consume, and continue through autumn, winter and until the following spring, when the plants go to seed. Parsnips have very limited uses, at least in the Paris region; they are used only to flavour soups. Parsley. - Parsley is sown as soon as the severe frosts have passed, preferably in rays. This plant takes a very long time to grow, so specialists sow Radishes and Spinach at the same time, and plant either Lettuce or Romaine, sometimes both together, alternating them. Once the first crop has been harvested (i.e. spinach or radishes), weeding is carried out and watering is carried out when necessary. But this type of cultivation is only suitable for specialists who sell their produce in the big cities. As for private individuals who only grow for their own needs, they need such a small quantity of parsley that a small corner in a vegetable garden bed is enough to establish it; more often than not, not even all of it is used. In the past, parsley was only used for medicinal purposes; later, it became a condiment plant that took a very important place in the culinary arts. There is no vegetable garden, however small, without a corner reserved for parsley. In fact, it's extremely easy to grow: all you have to do is water it from time to time. The more you water it, the faster it grows and the more it produces. To pick it properly, proceed as we said for Sorrel, always picking the large leaves at the tip and leaving the heart to grow. A variety of parsley is grown for ornamental purposes: dark green curly parsley, which grows vigorously and forms strong, dense clumps. 9. . - m P . . m . W . . W Pimento. - Chillies have never played a major role in market gardening. In the past, however, there were practitioners who devoted a few layers to this crop. Today, there are hardly any. They would sow the seeds on warm soil in March, and in May they would plant them in two rows per bed, spacing the plants 40 to 50 centimetres apart. Chillies can also be planted in the ground, but they grow more slowly than on old beds. Once the fruits are well knotted, you need to give them plenty of water to make them swell. When cultivated as described above, fruits begin to turn red in August, and continue to follow one another until the frosts. Purslane. - In March, start sowing Purslane in the garden (see instructions given in January). Tarragon. - Tarragon, whose name has come to be known as Estragon, can be propagated by splitting. All you need is one foot to reproduce it in profusion. However, as it is used only for its aromatic flavor, only a small quantity is needed if you grow it for your own needs. However, in the vicinity of large cities where there is a significant vinegar and canning industry, this plant can be grown commercially, and some Parisian market gardeners have entire squares of it. It's very easy to grow; all you need to do is water it when it's dry. Of course, it grows better and branches out more when planted in good, clean, deep-tilled soil. Tarragon chips are planted at the end of March and in April, or towards the end of July. Civet. - Civet is also a condiment much used in salads, but requires so little that two plants are perfectly sufficient for a household. It is reproduced, like tarragon, by splitting off pieces. It requires no special cultivation care. Artichokes continue to be sown in March, if you wish to use this method of propagation; but we would point out that the subjects it provides are often inferior to the cultivated type; in general, eyeletting provides a sufficiently rapid means of renewing and increasing the plantation. We are also continuing to sow Radishes, and we are starting to sow Spinach in the ground, which will be harvested at the end of April. PLANTING AND MISCELLANEOUS WORK Artichokes - In small gardens, for example, where frames and boxes are available, artichokes can be oiled in spring, as soon as they can be removed from the mother plants, and transplanted to a warm bed in the nursery. When they are well rooted, they can be removed in clods and planted out, ensuring good vegetation. This method, very practical for those who have the necessary equipment, is market gardening par excellence. It is described by Mr. Ch. Grosdemange. We don't think we can do any better in small-scale cultivation. In the October issue, we also mentioned Mr. Legros' method of preparing carnations in pots in autumn, and placing them in frame boxes over winter. Towards the end of March, these Artichoke carnations grown under frames are ready for planting. They are carefully unstuck and planted in pre-prepared holes. If you don't use this method, and the winter has been very harsh, you won't have many carnations to plant. However, you can replenish your supply of artichoke plants by following the method described by Mr. Grosdemange, which was devised by a horticulturist near Melun after the terrible winter of 1890-91. When he started his artichokes around March 20, he found only 15 or 20 still alive out of 3 or 400. He had the idea of removing these few clods and placing them on a warm layer under a frame; they soon produced numerous eyelets, which enabled the plantation to be reconstituted in May. This is, in fact, an exceptional case. Artichokes usually produce well-constituted eyelets. The amateur who grows a few plants for his own consumption will plant three or four carnations per clump, and with a little watering will ensure a good recovery. The clumps should be spaced 75 centimetres apart, and care should be taken to press the plants in only up to the heel. Many people who are not in the trade think that a plant recovers better when it is well embedded; the opposite is true. Once the artichokes have been planted and taken up, all that's left to do is to hoe them to destroy the weeds and water them copiously, because the more you water them, the more beautiful heads you'll get, especially if the soil has been well smoked. In market gardening, the essential condition for success is to give plenty of fertilizer. At the end of winter, when heavy frosts are no longer to be feared, the artichoke cover is removed and the mounds cut down, then the soil is smoked and ploughed. It's often while this ploughing is being done that we proceed with the "œilletonnage". Two or three well-formed eyelets should be left on vigorous plants, and just one on weaker ones; the best-formed eyelets are used for new plantings, and the smaller ones are discarded if not needed. But in any case, you mustn't leave more than one on each plant, otherwise the plant will become exhausted and produce nothing but small artichokes. Artichoke cultivation generally requires well-developed, rich and fairly moist soil. Near Bray-sur-Seine, we had the opportunity to see one of the most beautiful crops in existence. This crop is grown in peaty soil, on a fine sand base, and Fig. 30. - Large green artichoke from Laon. near the banks of the Seine. It should also be said that this locality is fed by springs that flow under the peat and maintain, by capillary action, a certain constant degree of humidity around the artichoke roots, so that the specialists who grow them do not need to water. There are a number of varieties of artichoke, but the most recommended and cultivated in France is the A. vert de Laon or de Paris (fig. 30). Elsewhere, other varieties are grown, and it could be said that, for artichokes as for cabbages, each country has its own particular variety. The Artichaut Camus de Bretagne, which is earlier than the previous variety, is grown in Brittany and Anjou. An improved sub-variety of Artichaut de Bretagne, called Artichaut de Niort, is grown mainly in the Deux-Sèvres département. These varieties are mainly grown for export. Artichoke vert-gris is grown in south-west France. The green Artichoke of Provence is widespread in the southeast; its heads are prized for eating raw, with pepper. Artichoke violet is grown in Algeria; it's a very delicate variety, but in this country, where there's no fear of frost, it can be grown in complete safety. There are also many sub-varieties derived, by selection, from these various types. Asparagus. - Asparagus is usually grown in the field rather than in the garden. Choose a good one-year-old plant, whose claw has already reached a certain consistency. If you want white asparagus, plant it in wide furrows, 80 cm apart and 60 cm apart in the row. The soil should be well loosened and smoked. Asparagus is not very delicate in terms of soil; however, it prefers sandy soil to clay, but can be grown almost anywhere. Once planted, all you have to do is hoe the soil to keep it clean and loosened. In the third year, you start buttering it for harvesting, but this first year without tiring it too much, i.e. picking for no more than a month; in subsequent years, you can extend picking to six weeks. A well-cultivated asparagus crop, grown in suitable soil and well-smoked, can last ten to twelve years, provided it is fertilized. As for growing green asparagus in the normal season, it's a crop reduced to its simplest form. All you have to do is let the asparagus grow, and pick it before it gets too high, i.e. when it's quite tender, because later its stem becomes woody. Asparagus is grown in vineyards, where certain plants can be grown in vines. Strawberry plants. - The strawberry plant grows spontaneously throughout most of Europe. In the 14th century, under Charles V, it was cultivated more as a decorative plant than for fruit production. Olivier de Serres, in 1600, cultivated it for the product; he says of this plant: "It is so easy to pick up that only small shoots with a few subtle filaments are needed to grow. Suffering as well from cold as from shade, they come naturally, without cultivation, through agrarian forests, among the clump of trees. However, they become engrossed as they are treated. So, to grow large strawberries, transplant them to a sunny spot in the garden, weed them well and, in drought, water them, cut off any running shoots and force them to stay in their lodges. But to get bigger and more plentiful strawberries than common, strawberry plants need special treatment. This is by not allowing them to climb to the ground, thus forcing them to rise to the top, shaping themselves like a small shrub. This is done by cutting off, with the fingernail, the shoots that want to climb to the ground, according to their natural shape. For this reason, the plants are planted a foot apart, in rows. So the land, after cultivation, will yield Strawberries exceeding in size, goodness and abundance the common ones, and in such qualities will make themselves almost admirable if the breed of itself is good. Considering that by such treatment the wildest become free! For ordinary strawberry cultivation, there is little to add to these indications, except that over the last 300 years, successive practitioners have succeeded in establishing a large number of varieties, numbering in the hundreds, many of which produce fruit of colossal dimensions. Now that these varieties are well established, true growers prefer to reproduce them by sowing, which produces more vigorous subjects than the "jettons" mentioned by Olivier de Serres; they are less likely to degenerate, as the great agronomist observed, since he indicated that the vines should be forced to grow taller and all the "jettons" should be cut back, as they always tend to revert to their primitive type. Nevertheless, the majority of strawberry plants grown today come from these "jettons", which we call "nets" or "coulants"; as they take root, they form the plants. Nothing is easier than to 1. olivier de Serres, Théâtre de l'Agriculture. obtain them; all you have to do is let the plant grow freely, but this is to the detriment of production. The best net to take to maintain the purity of the variety and to obtain a good product is the first one to develop. So there are two different ways of growing strawberries. The first is nursery cultivation, the aim of which is to create seedlings using nets. To do this, plant two rows of strawberry plants in a bed, leaving a free space on each side where the runners can take root. To help them do this, cut off all the flowers on the mother plant, so that all the sap flows to the runners. These grow very quickly; if possible, water them when the weather is dry, and in autumn you'll have perfectly formed plants which you can plant in place, and which will bear fruit the following spring. The second type of cultivation is that designed to produce fruit. On this point, there's nothing to add to what Olivier de Serres said. This cultivation is the opposite of the previous one: the runners must be carefully removed, so that all the strength of the vegetation is focused on the fruit. We're talking here about four-season strawberries, because most of the varieties grown for the trade are not remontant, they give a season of fruit in spring, and the harvest is over for the year. During the summer, runners develop and take root, but as there is no more fruit, this is not a problem. Thousands of hectares of this crop are grown in the greater Paris suburbs. We say: the greater suburbs, because they extend over a radius of at least 50 kilometers around the capital. Over the past twenty-five years, strawberry growing has developed considerably. In addition to the large quantities of strawberries needed to satisfy the "Paris belly", confectioners use them to make jams, and distillers use them to make a liqueur they call "fraisette". We have said that there are hundreds of varieties of non-remontant strawberries. Today, sowers have succeeded in establishing a few varieties of Quatresaisons, i.e. remontant strawberries, whose fruits have been considerably enlarged by crossing them with large-fruited varieties. These include Jeanne-d'Arc (fig. 31), Belle de Meaux (fig. 32), Saint-Antoine de Padoue, etc., which produce remarkably large fruit right up to the frosts. Until now, these varieties have only been cultivated by Fig. 32 - Strawberry of the Four Seasons Belle de Meaux. amateurs; we don't know whether specialists will adopt them. Ordinary Strawberry cultivation is to be recommended to rural populations, especially that of improved Four-Season Strawberries, which require no special care; for if the nets are allowed to grow, they will bear fruit the following year. The fruit will be a little smaller, but that's of little importance to people who don't grow for profit. A few nets are all you need to quickly expand your crop and enjoy an excellent dessert that costs nothing more than the trouble of picking it. Melons. - When summer̂tés Melons start to develop their two "arms", they are replanted on a third layer! at a rate of two per frame; amateurs can put three, the fruit will simply become a little smaller. You can leave one fruit on each arm. Instead of planting the melons at the bottom of the frame, as we did with those from the previous season, which are heated with the thermosiphon, we now plant them in the middle of the layer, and the arms extend on both sides, towards the top and bottom of the frame. The first pruning these Melons undergo consists in removing the two cotyledons, or first leaves; they are also called ears, and the operation is called the Melon auricle. Subsequent pruning is carried out in the same way as described above. It's the gardener's experience that tells him whether to prune longer or shorter; he must take into account a host of circumstances: the weather, the nature of the soil, the variety he's growing, and so on. The same variety, planted in two different areas, should not be pruned in the same way. However, in principle, the pruning theory can be formulated as follows: prune both 1. For the preparation of this layer, see chapter II. first branches, or arms, with four eyes; those that develop later, with two eyes, and those of the third series with one eye. It is on the latter that the fruits are formed. In short, the important thing is to avoid wood and force the plant to bear fruit; once the fruit is well established, the plant can be left to grow as it pleases. Before market gardeners introduced frames to their equipment, they hardly cultivated anything but the market melon. It was easy to grow, thanks to its hardiness. This melon has a slightly elongated shape, with a green, embroidered rind and slightly pronounced slices, Fig. 33 - Prescott melon, white background. especially on the stem side. Cultivated as a back-season crop until around 1870, it has been more or less abandoned by growers since that time. With the adoption of frames came the cultivation of Cantaloupe melons, already grown in large houses throughout the last century. Today, every market gardener, so to speak, has his own variety, from white (fig. 33) to gray, and of different sizes. For a number of years now, we've been growing the Melon de ChyFig. 34 - Melon Kroumir parisien. pre or varieties that more or less resemble it, including a much-improved one called Melon Kroumir parisien (fig. 34). These melons are very hardy and require less care than Cantaloupes. They can be planted in the open ground, without layers, with cloches simply to facilitate recovery. This is a boon for the working population, as the introduction of the Melon Kroumir makes this fruit accessible to all pockets, and, importantly, everyone can afford an excellent Melon ripe on the vine, in full vegetation, which makes a big difference to the products that come from the Midi, picked eight or fifteen days before ripening, and which ripen on straw or in front of fruit merchants. Finally, market gardeners leave two, three or four fruits on each Kroumir melon plant, so that you can buy a small, top-quality melon for O fr. 50, O fr. 60 or O fr. 75, whereas in the past you had to spend at least 1 fr. 50 to get a good Cantaloup. In fact, when the family is not large, it's much nicer to have a small melon, which can be eaten in a single meal, than to have a large one, part of which you have to save for the next day and which loses much of its flavor. Cucumbers. - Cucumbers are grown in the same way as melons. We'll just add one observation. We have often found, when growing this crop, that it is useful to leave the frames on the plants as late as possible, taking care to shade the squares with Spanish white. This keeps the plants tender and protects them more easily from rust and grayscale, which often attack them as they age, and against which we know of no remedy - a remedy that would be all the more difficult to apply in the case of worn-out plants. White cucumber varieties grown in late season are generally larger and even longer than green cucumbers, and their cultivation is even less delicate, if possible. Onions. - White onions that have not been planted in time before the frosts are planted at the beginning of March. As soon as the severe frosts are no longer to be feared, a number of onion varieties can be sown. The smallest known species, and the earliest, is the very early white Queen's Onion, which measures no more than 3 or 4 centimetres in diameter when fully developed. Sown in March, it starts to form, in other words, it "turns" as early as May. This Onion can be well used for small amateur gardens, but is not grown by market gardeners because of its small volume; it would not provide a sufficient yield for commercial specialists. The largest Onion is the Madeira Onion. It can only be grown in southern countries, and only appears in the trade in large consignments, which are bought for the consumption of troops, penitentiaries, hospices, etc. Soil preparation for cabbage planting Cabbage requires well-smoked soil. So, before ploughing, it is necessary to bury a good manure. Any compost you can get your hands on will do; gadoues, in particular, are excellent. Market gardeners often fertilize with vegetable detritus mixed with manure; this fertilizer is only suitable for cabbages; if it were used for salads, it would produce "cast iron". Once the fertilizer has been spread on the soil, a good, i.e. deep, ploughing is done to bury it. The board is raked and the rays made. If the soil is excessively thin, a supplement of chemical fertilizer can be applied in March. It would be beyond the scope of this article to discuss chemical fertilizers for vegetable growing. We can only advise gardeners to seek advice from competent specialists, or to consult published works on the subject. Let us say, however, that since cabbage is a big "fertilizer eater", there's no need to worry about ploughing 400 kilograms of superphosphate per hectare into the soil beforehand. After planting, or early in the spring, soda nitrate, spread as a cover dressing at a rate of 300 kilograms per hectare, before a good rain, produces a vigorous start to vegetation. At the end of March, a good hoeing will complete the filling of the rays dug for the cabbage plantation, while destroying the grass that is starting to grow, and this hoeing will be repeated. Careful hoeing is particularly useful if you don't have much water at your disposal; hoeing replaces watering to a certain extent. But if you do have water, you need to water copiously as soon as the weather turns hot and dry. Under these conditions, maximum yield is obtained. Cauliflowers. - Full-ground cauliflowers, sown like first- and second-season cauliflowers in September, are planted in March. These are the ones left under the trays after all the best ones for these first two seasons have been removed. Thinned out in this way, they also become very beautiful, all the more so as they will have been depanelled or 10 decloaked as soon as the heavy frosts are over. They shouldn't be given too much water until the plants show their buds, but afterwards they should be given copious watering and a careful covering. These last cauliflowers are delivered for consumption by Parisian market gardeners towards the end of June and the first fortnight of July. Let's say once and for all that in market gardening, cauliflowers are always planted in the spring with other crops such as lettuces, Romaine, radishes and spinach. The same applies to those harvested in summer, which are planted in autumn with chicory and scarolea. In our cauliflower crops at Vaugirard, we have even planted a second season of autumn cauliflowers in summer cauliflowers. But this is a crop that can only be grown in very fertile "marshes", like those of the specialists. Turnips. - When there is no longer any fear of heavy frosts, towards the end of March or the beginning of April, depending on the region, turnips sown in beds at the end of January or the beginning of February can be depanelled. Once this operation has been carried out, they should be covered with straw mats if any more frosts occur, as turnips grown in this way are very tender, and the slightest frost will damage them. Romaine. - When the first season of Romaines, sown at the beginning of October and grown under cloches, has been harvested, the cloches, which have thus become free, are replaced on three of the rows of Romaines that were counter-planted, as we said, in February. We proceed as follows: The paths, on these kinds of layers, are at the same level as the topsoil of the layers. It is therefore conceivable that the rim of a bell can be walked flat on both the path and the loam. We start re-packing from the north side 4 North path South path Fig. 35. - First re-packing of the Romaines. of the layer. If we refer to Fig. 35, we can see that row no. 1 of counter-planted Romaines is located near the edge of the north path. We remove the first row of bells and cover the first row of Romaines with them. A portion of the pathway is thus underneath this first row. To facilitate this operation, the bell at the end where you start is first carried to the other end of the layer. The arrows in figure 35 indicate the direction in which this is done. The second row of bells arrives on the third row of Romaines, and the last row on the fifth. It should be noted that, as a result of the way in which this first reclocking was carried out, the three remaining rows of counter-planted Romaines (nos. 2, 4 and 6 in figure 35) are sheltered from the north winds by the bells covering rows 1, 3 and 5. As soon as this operation has been completed, the top or "bonnet" of the bell and the part facing south are bleached externally, as the sun would harden or even burn the plants. This is usually done with Spanish white diluted in water, to form a slurry that is neither too light nor too thick. A fatty substance, usually milk, is added to prevent the mush from dissolving in the slightest dew. Care must be taken to ensure that the bells always remain white, otherwise, in this season, a single sunburn is enough to burn the plants. Growers can also provide air under the cloches, but in this case the plants grow more slowly and harden off more. When growing for the trade, the first method is preferable, because it produces earlier, and this is what you should be looking for at this time of year. In small crops, and in those where labor is not too expensive and the bells are available for longer periods, the following method can be used to give the Romaines air: each bell is raised above the ground by resting on three wooden wedges. In this way, the Romaines become much larger and remain tender. Let's say once and for all that, in all Romaine cultivations, whether on beds, in cold frames or in the open air, Romaines must be tied as soon as they are capped, i.e. closed. If you tie it earlier, there's a risk that it won't cap easily. Before tying, the rye straw used for the job should be soaked in water for at least twenty minutes, and then thoroughly shredded to make it supple. Green rye straw, dried in the shade, is even preferable to ripe straw. This straw should be cut, to within a few centimetres, to the length required to surround the Romaine, including the tie. To bind a Romaine, take a strand of straw, raise the leaves straight up so that they remain in their natural position, wrap the strand around the Romaine about two-thirds of the way up, and tie as follows: at the point where the two ends of the strand meet, twist them together 10. in two or three spiral turns at most (fig. 36). This twisting gives the ends of the straw strand an extreme stiffness, but by leading them with the finger below the level of the tie and releasing them, they are bowed, and this twisting, which is not even a tie and even less a knot, holds very well right up to the market. Let's hasten to add that, thanks to the skill of the operators (who are almost always women), it takes just five seconds to tie a Romaine. It's much longer and more difficult to describe than to execute. Chou plat de Paris. - Cabbages of this variety, sown on beds in February and transplanted under trays or cloches, should be aerated as much as possible; this is necessary to make them full-bodied and harden them sufficiently to allow them to be depanelled at the beginning of April. COMBINED CROPS Market gardening must be intensive in every sense of the word. To achieve a very close succession of crops on the same plot, you need to know how to combine sowing and planting, so that plants follow one another without getting in each other's way. In spring, for example, you can sow Radishes and Carrots in the same bed, and then plant Lettuce or Romaine, but preferably Romaine. Here are three "seasons" in the same field: Radishes will go first, without disturbing the Carrots too much, then come the Romaine, and then the Carrots will cover the whole surface. You can do the same with other vegetables. The most important thing for these combinations is to know how long the various plants will evolve, so that they help rather than harm each other. When it comes to the varieties of lettuce that lend themselves to this combined cultivation, you're spoilt for choice. The main ones are: Laitues blonde d'été, de Berlin, de Versailles ou de Chavigné, verte grosse, Tennis ball, Natura, blonde et brune de Naples, Chou de Naples, etc. This first season on soil will have been sown, as we have already said, around October 25 and raised under cloche or under frame to overwinter; once planted in place, it only needs watering when the weather is dry, but especially in the last period of its vegetation. Lettuce can be raised on a bed in winter, and is good for planting almost at the same time as the previous variety, but this entails manuring costs, and the plant is often not as stocky or as firm as the first. It is then sown in a cold frame; transplanted in the same way, this season is planted in April. Pumpkins, Giraumons, Gourds, etc. - These plants belong to the Cucurbitaceae family, like Melons, Cucumbers and Gherkins. They fear the cold and are damaged by frost, but they are much hardier than the above plants, especially Melons. Around Paris, their cultivation has almost entirely fallen into the domain of large-scale market gardening; only a few early market gardeners, who have a lot of land, still grow them a little, especially Pumpkins. They sow them on an old bed, under a frame, in April, and plant them out from May 1 to 15. There are several varieties of Pumpkin; the most widely grown around Paris, and therefore the one seen most at the Halles centrales, is the large yellow Paris Pumpkin; there are also bright red Étampes Pumpkins and varieties with more or less embroidered rind. Gourds, Giraumons, Patissons and Pumpkins, of which there are a large number of shapes and varieties, are of more interest to amateurs than to the trade. They are grown like pumpkins. Hobbyists often climb them on cradles, arbors, terraces, etc.; in this case, they are generally sown on the spot, so that the branches can be guided wherever you like, and all you have to do is water to obtain the fruit, which comes in some very bizarre shapes. There are also non-runner varieties, whose fruit is eaten half-ripe, but is often of poor quality. Curly Chicory and Scarolea. - Raising curly chicory and scarole plants for spring cultivation in the open ground requires the same care as for growing them in layers and under cold frames. This is the most important point in growing these plants, and we can't stress it enough. Until May 15th or 20th, it is always preferable to sow seeds on a warm bed, because in some cultures where these precautions have not been taken, we see, until the end of July, plants going to seed before their evolution is complete. Many gardeners attribute this to stormy weather, and it's true that it contributes a little, but a seedling that has been raised in good conditions, i.e. that has had the necessary background heat, has been kept tender by frequent watering, has not received any sun under the frames and has been planted young, will not go to seed, whatever the weather, unless it receives no watering during its growth. It's a general principle that you can't grow vegetables well without water. In this case, market gardening loses its name, and becomes ordinary farming, or almost agri-farming, since it is left defenseless to the influence of all the vagaries of the weather. In the Paris climate, the first Chicory and Scarolea are planted in the open ground from April 15th onwards, in soil that has not been cultivated since winter. Sow Radishes or Spinach, not too thickly, and plant Curly Chicory or Scarole in them, at a rate of eight or ten per square meter, with Scarole a little looser than Curly Chicory. These plants, like Lettuce, should not be sunk into the ground; their collars should be well out, so that they can spread out immediately. We also insist on this point, which is very important for the development of the plants, especially as we have noticed that almost everywhere where these crops are not grown by specialists, this essential condition is not observed. When planting lettuces, chicory or scarole, the neck of the plant must be completely out of the ground. Once the plants have been planted, they should be watered copiously at the base (what growers call "edging" the plants), even if it's raining or the soil is very wet. Water in such a way as to fill the hole or dimple that remains after planting. The watering in this way fixes the roots to the soil, and helps considerably with recovery, which is one of the most important conditions for good cultivation. From the end of March, if the weather is already arid, and until October, we advise all growers, whatever the plant they have to plant, to soak it in a tub of water when digging it out, without letting it stay there, but only so as to moisten all the rootlets; this greatly facilitates recovery. All that's needed then is a few basins of water to help the plants withstand the heat of the sun, and as soon as evening arrives, you'll see them straighten up and grow straight away. All these young plants don't need much water at first, just a few sprinklings if it's very dry. It's only when they're at least halfway through their growth that you need to increase watering, especially towards the end of the plants' development. For seedlings sown from April 20 onwards, you can sow on a warmer, lighter layer, and not transplant until May 20 under these conditions. Chicorée fine parisienne is still grown under cold frames, and you can also start Fig. 37. - Chicorée fine rouennaise. (fig. 37), which can then be grown throughout the summer. In the late season, it is preferable to grow Chicory with large ribs, such as Chicorée de Meaux, Chicorée de Louviers (fig. 38), etc., which are hardier than the above. Scarole varieties are less numerous than Chicory varieties, and also less distinct. This lettuce, which is even more widely grown in autumn than Chicory, thanks to its hardiness, has never been grown in layers by Parisian specialists. The first to be grown, in spring, is under a cold frame. It is then grown throughout the summer, like Chicory, and especially in autumn. Chicory sown in January Fig. 38 - Chicory from Louviers. is planted in late February or early March. After four or five weeks, they can be harvested, and a few days later they can be completely blanched and released for consumption. Thus treated, they become quite round, if not quite large. Chicory sown cold in February requires frequent watering and airing, and can generally be depanning towards the end of April or beginning of May. At this time of year, when vegetation is very active, if you leave the frames on the plants for just a few days too long, they will pack up, and you won't have such good merchandise anymore. As soon as possible, they are lifted and tied up for sale. Cauliflowers. - In April, we continue to sow cauliflowers. They are the most difficult to obtain in every respect, as they are sown at a time when it is already hot, and harvested in August, during the hottest weather. They are sown in the shade, as far as possible, to prevent flea beetles from devouring the plants. They need to be drenched often; drenching keeps these insects away. However, we have seen years when cauliflowers had to be placed in frames bleached with Spanish white for a few days, to protect them from the voracity of this terrible insect. Leeks. - In the first fortnight of April, we plant Leeks which have been sown on beds in January or early February. As they are very costly to raise, they are generally sown very thickly, and we have sometimes seen them planted as big as wires. They are delivered for consumption as early as June, and as they are also planted very thickly, they are often smaller than a little finger when the sale begins. A final sowing is done at the end of April or beginning of May, for planting in June. These leeks are eaten in autumn and winter. Scorzonera, Salsify and Scolymes. - These vegetables, whose roots are the most im1. Small-scale watering. MARKET GARDENING. 11 vegetables require no special care. They are grown especially by large-scale vegetable growers, and in gardens by amateurs; the yield of these plants is too low, given the length of time they occupy the land, for market gardeners to include them in their crops. They are, however, excellent winter vegetables, and their cultivation can be recommended to amateurs with large vegetable gardens, especially Scorsonera, which can be treated as a biennial plant. It is generally sown in April, preferably in rays, at a rate of around 100 grams per are, in deeply dug soil, as the roots prick a lot in the ground. Cool, sandy soils are better suited to these plants than overly compact soils, where the roots are hindered and liable to branch out and become tough and stringy. As soon as the young seedlings have three or four leaves, thin them out by hoeing, leaving about 10 cm between them. If water is available, baste in April to encourage emergence, then water more abundantly when it's dry, to make the roots grow. If you're going to keep these vegetables for more than a year, cut off the stem when it goes to seed, to encourage root growth. Young Scorsonera, Salsify and Scolyma shoots, etiolated in spring, have a very fine flavor and can be eaten in salads. Salsify and Scorsonera crops are subject to a kind of "powdery mildew", which can be combated by alternating sulfur treatments with Bordeaux or Burgundy mixture, or other similar copper sulfate-based solutions. Marsh beans. - These native vegetables, already grown in gardens in Charlemagne's time, are now only cultivated in fields, especially around Paris, where they belong to the domain of large-scale market gardening. Their cultivation, moreover, requires no care other than well-smoked, moist soil, as their name suggests. They are sown towards the end of April, in rows, to facilitate hoeing. In dry soils, provided they are sufficiently watered, Marsh Beans grow faster and are more tender. When the beans are large enough, the pods are harvested for green shelling; if the beans are already a little hard, the first skin is removed for consumption. Fava beans have their place in home gardens, where the aim is to grow as many vegetables as possible to vary the daily diet. It's also a highly nutritious vegetable, judging by the ordinary Fève, which produces excellent flour and grows almost without care. Grain growers' catalogs list a dozen varieties of Fava beans, but for garden use, it is preferable to grow the early dwarf Fava bean, which comes on more quickly, and whose grains are smaller and often more tender. Broad bean crops flourish in the north, as they do in colder climates. But as soon as these crops are grown further south, they are sometimes extraordinarily affected by aphids. To protect the beans, simply apply several syringes of nicotined water, at a rate of one Bordeaux glass of concentrated juice to one liter of water. However, these syringes should not be continued as soon as the pods begin to knot. Beet. - Vegetable beet is a large-capacity crop. It is grown in the same way as fodder beet and sugar beet. Vegetable beets, however, are smaller and can be sown more densely. We've seen them grown in well-established crops by a number of specialists. They are sown at the end of April and beginning of May, in rays spaced 30 centimetres apart, with the same amount of space between rows. Beet requires oily, well-smoked soil and, like sugar beet, the less water it receives in September and October, the more sugar it contains. Watering is all that's needed to get it to emerge, and then to put on weight during the summer. The only care it requires is frequent hoeing to destroy weeds and keep the soil loose. Beet can be eaten as soon as it starts to grow, but it's best used as a winter salad, mixed with Capuchin Beard or Lamb's lettuce; it lifts their blandness by sweetening them a little, and appeals to many people. Grain growers' catalogs contain at least twenty varieties of beet, varying in color from yellow to all shades of red and black. As with many other vegetables, every country has its own favorite varieties. In Paris, it's mainly the long red varieties that are grown commercially. As for amateurs, they are spoilt for choice; but there are some ornamental varieties with brilliant rosewood-red leaves that are a real eye-catcher in the kitchen garden, such as Dell's dwarf red variety. Artichokes. - We have shown how to sow Artichokes on a bed in February-March; they can also be sown on the spot, towards the end of April or the beginning of May, by drawing lines spaced from Om,75 to Om,80, on which holes or small basins are marked at the same distance apart; four or five Artichoke seeds are placed in each hole. This procedure saves on labor, but loses out in terms of production, since the crop is not harvested until the following year. Artichokes sown in beds at the end of winter are also transplanted towards the end of April. Generally speaking, sowing is rarely used; artichokes are mostly propagated by eyeletting (see October and March). Cardoon. - Cardoon is sown at the end of April or beginning of May, on an old bed. Specialists transplant it in a nursery to give it a "foothold", and in June plant it in place, spacing the plants at least 1.30 m apart. Well-watered, they become very large. Cardoon is planted with other vegetables, most often salads of all kinds. It requires only frequent watering as it gains strength. It is blanched in autumn. Potato. - This precious solanaceous plant belongs more to agriculture than horticulture. It is virtually no longer cultivated in gardens, and its cultivation is so easy and so well known that it is almost superfluous to talk about it here. All you have to do is choose the variety you prefer, according to the season in which you grow it, and there are so many varieties that you're spoilt for choice. The potato is so delicate that it can be grown in almost any climate and in almost any soil. All its cultivation consists of good ploughing to plant it, hoeing to destroy weeds, and buttering so that the tubers are not exposed to the air, which turns them green and reduces their quality. From the beginning to the middle of the 19th century, Parisian market gardeners practiced forced potato cultivation, but now that Algeria sends potatoes throughout the winter, and southern France in the spring, this type of cultivation is no longer sufficiently profitable. It is only suitable for wealthy individuals, far from major centers, who want to find everything in their vegetable gardens. It is probably for this reason, and for general professional training, that horticultural schools teach it to their students. Under these conditions, Potatoes are planted at a rate of five or six per frame, on a good layer of manure, loaded with a certain thickness of soil. Care consists above all in giving them air, so that the tops are not too tender, in depanning them at the right moment, and in protecting them from late frosts. Beans. - Beans are as much a part of agriculture as horticulture. Grown in open fields by specialists in dwarf varieties, they are planted in clumps of four to five seeds, spaced 30 to 35 centimetres apart in all directions. Around Paris, we start planting them as early as April 15th, but if there is a late frost, we must take care to butter them with soil to preserve them, as these plants fear frost at least as much as potatoes. The varieties grown in gardens are most often those that can be rowed, and with a little watering when needed, maximum yield is obtained. After cultivation on beds, which we described in another chapter, market gardeners still cultivated beans cold, in April. This cultivation was already less difficult; The seeds could be planted in place, under a frame, and all that was needed was to provide air to keep the plants in good vegetation, i.e. neither too soft nor too hard, and to peel them when necessary, even removing some of the hardest leaves, watering from time to time as the needles begin to form, and depanning when late frosts are no longer to be feared, taking care to harden the plants beforehand in the fresh air. It should also be pointed out that when plants are depanelled, care must be taken over the next few days to ensure that the sun, or simply a little arid wind, does not cause them to wither; if this happens, they must be basked several times a day. But, we repeat, these crops can now only be grown by amateurs, since at the time when these vegetables are produced, the markets are flooded with them at relatively affordable prices. Raves. - As we have already explained, we are dealing here with Raves only as a sort of memorial, since this crop no longer belongs in the realm of horticulture. Let us say, however, that to obtain a yield in the open field, it is preferable to choose fresh soil and not to sow too thickly. Twenty-five Raves per square metre is enough to cover the ground, if you want to obtain good yields. Care is simply a matter of hoeing, carried out as needed. To preserve turnips over the winter, pull them up before the frosts and store them in silos or cellars. Turnips. - Turnips can be sown from spring to September. Among growers in the Paris suburbs, this crop is grown with rare perfection. Growers in and around Croissy, with its warm, light soil on the banks of the Seine, achieve marvelous results. They often start bringing their produce to the Halles de Paris before the market gardeners have finished selling their cold-grown turnips. The secret to growing turnips at the height of the season is not to sow too thickly, but to keep the plant tender at all times, watering it every day when it's not raining. Turnips, like all Cruciferae, fear the ravages of flea beetles; to combat them, as we said about cabbages, you need to water often. Some authors also recommend spraying with tobacco juice at 15°, mixed with 15 liters of water. This can be an excellent method for large crops, but for small crops we prefer to shade young plants for a few days during the hottest hours of the day. In April, more or less early depending on climate and weather, cold-sown turnips are depanning. They should continue to be watered copiously if the weather is dry and hot, especially when we start to pull them up, which is a sort of thinning out, as we remove the largest plants as they grow. As these turnips have been treated in exactly the same way as those grown on beds, there is virtually no waste; however, despite all the precautions taken, the last ones pulled out are more "rooty" than the first ones. Romaines. - In April, the Romaines are reseeded for the second time. After the first recloSentier nord - Sentier sud = Fig. 39 - Second reclochage de la Romaine. chage, as shown in figure 35 (March), all the Romaines remaining in the open air and forming three rows are placed to the south, in relation to the bells. The second re-housing simply consists of placing II. - the bells that have become vacant when the Romaines from the first relocation have left, on the three rows of Romaines in the open air. The movement takes place from north to south, as shown in figure 39; the southern path is thus partly covered in its turn. However, before proceeding with this operation, it is necessary to give the roots a copious watering to soak them thoroughly. It even seems that this heavy watering gives new vigor to the layer, whose manure, however, is already largely decomposed. Romaines left in the open air on the bed have continued to grow, albeit outside, especially at the end of April, when vegetation becomes very vigorous in these conditions; sometimes, all they have to do is "comb their hair" and soften, which generally takes no more than ten to fifteen days. Here again, and more than ever, the bells must be kept well laundered. This last season is delivered for consumption between April 25 and May 15. The cloches are then removed for other crops, such as melons, tomatoes, eggplants, pumpkins, gherkins, etc., or put back if they are no longer needed, and the carrots on the layers are given the necessary care, topdressing and watering. Flat Romaine with bells and blond Romaine for market gardening are not as good as the gray variety for re-housing. In cold climates, we recommend planting the old green Romaine variety, rather than varieties with overly tender foliage; with it, you're more certain of obtaining a product despite bad weather. On the market, Romaines from re-harvesting are distinguished from the others by their more yellowish shade and softer appearance. As for Romaines grown in cold frames, after hardening them by giving them plenty of air, they are depanelled in April, watered copiously every day and then re-panelled. The result is beautiful plants at the end of the month, if they have been well cared for. When we were young, we still remember seeing the old market gardeners do this better than they do today. In the month of April, we depanelled every morning, watered and repanelled in the evening. This type of cultivation, which was very labor-intensive, has long since been abandoned by specialists, but it can be recommended to amateurs, provincial gardeners and establishments where labor costs are low, such as hospices and penitentiaries. It's a convenient way of bringing plants forward and making them very beautiful. Today's specialists are obliged to make their land produce as much as possible. They prefer to depanner their Romaine entirely at the beginning of April, and run a season of cold Chicory with the same frames. Romaine depanelled in this way comes after the last re-cultivations, preceding Romaine grown in the open ground; it still finds a fairly lucrative outlet. Romaine is also grown under cold cloches; three feet are planted under each cloche; air is given when necessary, i.e. when the plants become too tender; the cloches are uncloaked from time to time to water, and when the cloches are full, they are removed for good; then water copiously. Cabbages. - Cabbages sown in February on a bed are de-stemmed at the beginning of April, after having been suitably hardened, and are planted out around the 15th of that month. Parisian market gardeners usually counterplant this cabbage season with lettuces planted in March, and delivered for consumption at the beginning of May. When the lettuces are gone, the cabbages are given a good hoeing, first to destroy the grass, and then to increase the fertilizing power of the soil by loosening it. All that's left to do then is water copiously, and by June 15 you can start eating. Beefheart cabbages grown in the ground should be hoeed at this time of year; hoeing replaces watering to a certain extent. When, in April, the leaves take on a reddish tinge, it's a sign that the soil has not been sufficiently fertilized; when the cabbages have had enough fertilizer, the leaves are green and fat, and in this case, with much less water, a good harvest can be obtained. Cauliflower. - The first cauliflowers, sown at the end of September and planted on beds in February, are harvested from April 1 to 15, depending on the weather and the strength of the plants. It's easy to recognize when the time has come when the plants are too strong to remain under the trays. However, you can delay the operation by holding the frames raised to a certain height above the trunks, using wooden wedges or om, 16 flower pots; this has the advantage of further advancing vegetation. While cauliflowers are growing, they need little watering, right up to the moment when they start to "take the bud", i.e. when the flower appears. The aim of this treatment is to make the stalk grow larger and the leaves sprout. If the plants start to flower before the base is strong enough, the apple will remain small and flake off, without producing a beautiful product. As soon as the bud is set, i.e. when you can see it in the heart of the cauliflower, you need to water it copiously, which will result in a larger head. From this point onwards, the head must be carefully covered. Covering plays an important role in the cultivation of cauliflowers, especially summer cauliflowers. As soon as the apple emerges from the shell, i.e. the core formed by the central leaves, a tender, healthy leaf is broken off and placed on top. This cover is then doubled with hard leaves which are detached from the outer part of the cauliflower. Touching the young leaves in the heart should be avoided if the plant is not to harden excessively. The leaves placed on top of the first one should surround the head, so that it has as little air as possible. Cauliflowers covered in this way remain very white. It is necessary, however, to raise this covering every day, especially in summer, to destroy the caterpillars that come to devour the apples; the same applies in autumn for slugs, especially in wet weather. A single one of these insects considerably deteriorates the apple, depriving it of its freshness, and consequently of much of its commercial value. Care must also be taken to remove caterpillars and slugs that attack the leaves. 1. An apple is said to flake when the buds that make it up pull apart. This description shows the constant care that cauliflowers need, especially in midsummer, if they are to be fresh, beautiful and tasty. These first cauliflowers are generally harvested in the second half of May, when they have been well cultivated and kept under a frame with plenty of air until around April 15th. Let us indicate, once and for all, how to recognize when it's time to uproot cauliflowers, i.e. when they have reached full development. This is very important for commercial gardeners, as cauliflowers make very rapid progress, especially in the last few days; if you wait just a day or two too long, they will flake, spread out and lose their value. So it's at the precise moment when you can see that the cauliflower is beginning to flake slightly at the edges that you should harvest it. As for amateurs, they can eat cauliflowers before they are fully developed, if they have a certain quantity; the quality is the same, only the size differs. Summer cauliflowers, sown in March, are planted in the second half of April. They are usually planted in cold Chicory, but the frames should not be left on these young plantations for more than a fortnight, as they would become overly tender, since Chicory requires a lot of water during its growth. Black radish. - Of all the varieties of large summer and winter Radishes, which in Paris we call Raves, only the Black Radish is cultivated by market gardeners. In fact, it only appears at Les Halles in very small quantities, compared with pink radishes. Growing large radishes is as simple as growing small ones. Sow in rows 20 to 25 centimetres apart, spacing the rows evenly. Care must be taken to keep these radishes very tender through watering. Radishes are sown throughout spring and summer until August 15, or even a little later. In the latter seasons, they are plucked and placed in gauges to be eaten over winter. All other varieties of large Radish can be grown under the same conditions as the Black Radish; but they have more the taste of Raves than the finesse of well-cultivated Pink Radishes. Tarragon. - Tarragon, grown in bursts, is best planted in April, or towards the end of July. Eggplant. - Eggplants sown on layers on March 15th are transplanted fifteen or twenty days later, in nurseries on layers, to be planted in May. Artichokes continue to be eyeballed, and asparagus and strawberry plants are planted. The various varieties of Onion are sown in spring, as soon as the severe frosts have passed. This crop requires no special care, apart from watering in dry weather and weeding. Hobbyists can sow directly on the spot, without transplanting. All these varieties can be eaten after the white onion. They can be stored to last through the winter and into the following spring. Finally, we continue to sow a number of vegetables, such as carrots, lettuces, Romaine, wild chicory, radishes, spinach, sorrel, tomatoes, melons and cucumbers, cabbage, chives, parsnips, parsley, purslane, etc. ES AGR A. dmala dr Cauliflower. - Cauliflowers planted in cold Chicory in April are released when the Chicory is removed for consumption towards the end of May. It's a good idea, then, to give a little

The soil is then mulched with a good layer of old or half-consumed manure, and watered a few times over the mulch. A few days later, you'll see little roots sprouting from the plant's collar. From this point onwards, cauliflowers should not be over-watered until they reach bud stage; once the flowers appear, they should be watered every day, but not too heavily, so that the soil has time to drain as it grows. It's up to the grower to judge how much water to give, according to the nature of the soil. Cauliflowers are carefully covered (see April), and caterpillars are destroyed from the leaves and heart. This season's cauliflower, when well cultivated, is delivered for consumption between July 15 and August 15, sometimes later in some soils, but in this case the plants become larger. In this respect, it's surprising how much the nature of different soils can modify cauliflower varieties. The weather also has a major influence: in rainy summers, cauliflowers tenderize excessively, and come earlier, but smaller. Cauliflowers sown in April are replanted with lettuces when they are half grown. At this time of year, it's particularly important to keep an eye out for caterpillars, especially leaf caterpillars, which often destroy all the foliage. When the lettuces are removed, they are given a crutch, and a good mulch is put on the soil, as for the previous crop. Water sparingly, as already mentioned, until the flowers appear. After summer cauliflowers come autumn cauliflowers. The plants require the same care as the summer ones, since they are sown in May, and the sun is even hotter than in April. Melons. - Melons can be sown up to May 15, always in increasingly thin layers, as the sun makes up for this artificial heat. The last ones planted in the field, from May 1st to June 15th, can be planted under cloches. When they have recovered and begun to elongate, the cloche is vented, and they are left to grow outside. At this time of year, the melon is not delicate, and its cultivation, with the few indications we have given regarding pruning, is within everyone's reach. Gherkins. - In true market gardening, gherkins are sown at the beginning of May, on an old bed that no longer has bottom heat, and under a frame. If sown early enough, they can be left until the end of May, when they are planted out. To facilitate recovery and advance vegetation, we place a bell on each plant, taking care to shade it. Some growers simply place a sheet of white paper over the plant (the same is done for melons), and as the plant picks up, it lifts and throws off the sheet of paper. As soon as the plant picks up again, air is gradually added to the bells until they are released. This procedure brings the harvest forward considerably, because when the cool nights of September arrive, the gherkins are often attacked by nail disease, and also take on rust and gray; the fruit obtained is less beautiful and doesn't keep as well. It's for this reason in particular that specialists are urged to harvest as early as possible. In the past, when Parisian market gardeners grew gherkins, they gave them an intensive first crop, then put them in other plantations planted in March, which had time to be cleared so that they didn't get in the way of the gherkins. But for everyone's cultivation, Gherkins are sown around May 15 or 20, watered if necessary to encourage germination, and hoeed when necessary. It's a good idea to spread mulch over the soil to keep it cool; under these conditions, the plants grow vigorously. At least two meters of space should be left for them to run around. In the provinces, we've seen specialists rowing gherkins; this method of cultivation produces fruit that doesn't have a "layer", i.e. a white spot on the part on the ground; the fruit is all the more beautiful, and should keep better in vinegar. This is the method we recommend to amateurs with a small vegetable garden. Moreover, plants grown in this way take up less space. Pumpkins, Gourds, Giraumons, etc. - These vegetables are planted from May 1 to May 15. To establish the crop properly and produce fruit early, make a square hole om, 50 cm square, and fill it with warm manure; place a layer of Om, 15 soil on top, in which the pumpkins are planted, and cover with a cloche, shading it for the first few days to encourage growth; remove the cloche when frosts are no longer to be feared, after gradually hardening the plants. As a general rule, even the hardest plants grown under chassis or cloches need to be gently acclimatized to the open air, i.e. given a little more air from day to day; otherwise, they are seized when exposed to the open air; they wither, the leaves curl, sometimes even fall; in all cases, the plants become too hard, and the final result is compromised. When you've depanneled or decloaked too early, and the plants are still too tender, there's only one way to avoid the accident we've just mentioned, and that's to baste often, so that there's always a dew on the leaves; after a day or two, the plants are firmed up and the danger is over. Once pumpkins, gourds, etc. have been unstuck, they can be left to grow; as long as their fruits are not large enough, they don't need much water; later, they need to be watered heavily. In the trade, only one or two fruits are left per plant, so that they grow larger; under these conditions, if watered sufficiently, fabulous Pumpkins are obtained, often weighing over 100 kilograms. As for amateurs, they can leave many more fruits on each plant; the fruits are smaller, but just as good. Tomatoes. - Tomatoes sown on beds in March can be planted around May 15, when frost is no longer a concern. Once planted and starting to grow, they need to be pruned. All buds growing in the leaf axils are removed, leaving just one stem per plant. Some growers leave two or three, depending on the type of trellising to be used. When a bunch of flowers appears, we stop the growth of the stem above or below the bunch to facilitate fruit setting, and let the eye grow below or above. The same procedure is followed for all clusters, taking care to visit the plants often and remove any under-eyes that develop, as this plant is surprisingly vigorous in its vegetation. This is when the plant needs to be trellised. Some growers place a stile at each foot, on the north side, and tie the plant to it; others stretch wires, and trellis it in rows. We think both methods are good; what's important is that the stems don't drag on the ground, which would be very detrimental to fruit ripening in cold regions. A number of authors recommend various ways of shaping tomatoes through trellising and pruning. Of course, this is a matter of taste, of interest only to amateurs. When the plant is in place and its branches are developing, it can be given any shape you like, by pruning and then trellising; the essential condition is always to leave enough space between the branches for air and sun to circulate freely, and not to allow the plant to bear more fruit than it can produce in good condition. We believe that four to five well-constituted bunches per plant are quite sufficient; if we want more, it will always be to the detriment of the beauty of the fruit. Practitioners "stop" tomatoes altogether when they have four clusters. All the buds must then be carefully removed, so that all the sap can flow into the fruit. These begin to ripen around August 1st in the Paris climate. Eggplants. - Eggplants are planted in the first fortnight of May, generally after the harvesting of carrots from stretcher beds. The layer is turned over, and a little hot manure is added to give a little warmth to the soil, and two rows of Aubergines are planted per layer, making four plants per panel; as the bells are free at this time, one is placed on each plant, taking care to bleach them if they are no longer sufficiently white. Eggplant planted, bounded, cloched and shaded, soon picks up, especially with the background heat. Air is then gradually added, but the plants are kept under cloches for as long as possible. It's at this stage that they are pinched, which prevents them from rising too quickly and helps the development of the lower eyes. All that's left to do then is water and pick the fruit when it reaches a length of Om, 20 to Om, 25. Chard or Poirnea. - This plant, more than any other, requires rich soil. Parisian market gardeners used to grow it only on their beds, once the early harvest was over. Its cultivation in France goes back a long way, and was recommended by Charlemagne in his Capitularies. Poirée à carde has been more or less abandoned by market gardeners today, as a result of crop specialization. Trade has gone from being local to international, so to speak, which has led to certain crops being grown on a very large scale, with the possibility of finding the flow of produce. Preference is given to vegetables that are planted thickly, for a more remunerative crop. However, the well-cultivated Poirée à Carde still pays for the place it occupies, and is not a crop to be scorned. Its taste is similar to that of Cardoon. Sow it in a nursery, in the first days of May, in the open air, on a piece of old soil that no longer has any heat. All you have to do is water it to make it stand up, and then to keep the plant tender. It is transplanted in June, spacing the plants by Om, 40. There are five or six varieties of Poirée à carde, each quite distinct from the others by the color of the leaves, whose ribs are sometimes yellow, sometimes red, sometimes white. Poirée. - This plant is used more for medicinal purposes than for eating. It had its place in the market gardens of past centuries, where there were many pharmaceutical, aromatic and other plants, of which everyone grew a small quantity, as is still the case in small provincial towns, where the produce is sold on the spot. They were sown in the first days of May, in well-smoked, newly-ploughed and well-trussed soil. Sowing was done in rows and not too thickly, so that the leaves could develop well; all that was then needed was to hoe the soil to destroy the grass, and to water often. When the leaves reach 20 to 25 centimetres, they are cut 2 or 3 centimetres from the ground, so as not to destroy the young hearts that will provide the future cut. For these new harvests, instead of cutting everything with a knife, we pick the largest leaves one after the other, by hand, and we don't stay long without coming back to the same place. Celery. - Blond celery is grown at the beginning of autumn. This is sown in the first days of May; specialists transplant it in a nursery before planting. This procedure, which is applied to almost all plants, produces stockier, more regular specimens, which is a good thing when it comes to vegetables that are to be uprooted all at once and delivered to the trade. Varieties grown for winter must be very green, hard and stocky Celery, with a very full heart. They are sown at the same time as the previous varieties. We continue to sow sorrel. The previous year's sorrel goes to seed in the course of the month; you can cut the stems that go to seed, and the plant then sprouts from the base, but specialists prefer to destroy it and sow new ones every year; it is always more vigorous. It's a good idea to give Peas a few basins in the morning and evening when they are in bloom, as the flowers often burn and part of the harvest is lost when the weather is dry and arid at flowering time. This is particularly the case with the row varieties; by watering them when they need it, maximum yield can be obtained. Towards the end of May, spinach sets seed. At this point, it's best to ruin the planting, i.e. destroy the plants, and sow new ones in March to replace them. Radishes continue to be sown; from May to July and even August, they take eighteen to twenty days to grow in the soil, if well cultivated, and the whole process consists of watering them every day it doesn't rain, from sowing to harvesting. Curly endive and Scarole. - Until May 15 or 20, it's always best to sow these lettuces on a warm bed, to prevent them from setting seed prematurely. From May 20 onwards, seedlings are sown in the open ground, and all that's left to do is water the plants to keep them tender. Care must be taken not to plant too old plants. A young, tender plant recovers better, is more vigorous and grows faster than an old plant which is much stronger. Nature applies the same implacable rule to all living things. Chicory and Scarolea are tied to bleach them. It's best to do this when the lettuces are three-quarters developed, because once they've been tied, the heart continues to grow (albeit white), and the plant "fills out". At this point, watering should not be neglected, as the plant needs to grow fast, and you should try to help it as much as possible. In the provinces, we've seen flowering pots 12 with no holes in the bottom used to blanch these lettuces. They are simply placed on top, and as the heart whitens, it fills the pot. Enthusiasts can start tying when the plants are halfway through, choosing the biggest ones and continuing in this way. This is a practical way of getting the most out of your planting, because if you start eating too late, you can't keep up with the plants as they develop, and they rot. Chicory and Scarolea planted after this first season are counterplanted with Lettuce and Romaine planted at least a fortnight earlier. For Lettuce, however, eight days may suffice, especially in clay soils, which harden very quickly. The care to be given to these salads is the same in all respects; however, here, young plants are often too tenderized by the abundant watering given to Lettuces and Romaines, and when these have gone, it is a good idea to firm up Chicory and Scarole gradually. If the weather is dry and hot, give them a little watering, so they don't harden off too quickly. Witloof chicory. - To obtain large roots of this plant in autumn, sow in May-June, in rows spaced Om, 20 apart, and so that the plants are spaced Om, 20 apart in all directions. If you sow more densely, you'll get smaller roots. We also continue to sow Carrots, Turnips, Lettuce, Cabbage, Cardoons, Artichokes, Beetroot, Purslane, etc., and to plant Strawberries. Leeks. - When a leek plant has been sown in a nursery with a view to transplanting, it is very thick at the time of uprooting. If the soil is hard, the plants are lifted by passing the spade flat under the roots; they are taken one by one, rejecting any that are mediocre, and arranged in handfuls with all the bulbs at exactly the same height, so that one does not overtake the other. When you've got plenty on hand, cut off all the roots 1 cm or 1 1/2 c. from the bulbs, then the tips of the leaves, leaving the plant about 15 cm long. Place the handfuls in a basket, all facing in the same direction and neatly arranged, so that they can be picked up without searching. The basket is immersed in water, but not left to stand, simply to soak the plant, as is done for all vegetables to be planted; if the planting is not done on the same day, a board is placed on the plant and it is loaded, so that it remains flat and upright; otherwise the plants, continuing to grow, twist, making planting much more difficult. With the leek plant thus prepared, here's how Parisian market gardeners proceed. They have planks which are generally 3 meters wide. They draw a radius on the edge of the board, and leave the chalk line there, so as to go straight; then they lay a fir-wood board on the ground, stand on it, and plant by walking backwards, turning the board as they go. In fact, this is the procedure for all open-ground planting. Market gardeners take a handful of seedlings in one hand, and the planter in the other; with each stroke of the planter, which is given deep, to a depth of at least 10 or 12 centimetres, the thumb and forefinger of the other hand prepare the seedling and slide it into this hole, then it is bound with a single stroke of the planter. Some growers do this with surprising dexterity. Once planted, the leek barely emerges from the ground by 1 or 2 centimetres. The holes made by the planter are then watered copiously to fill them with water, and are soon closed again. Leeks planted in this way don't even wilt, and as early as the day after planting, you can already see them growing. All that's left to do is water it if it's dry, and weed it. We've seen a few market gardeners sow Radishes before planting, but this is only possible here, where we always cultivate in fertilizer-rich soil, which is often too rich. Leeks treated in this way come on very quickly. Leeks planted on May 15, for example, are ready for consumption in late July and August, giving the soil a new "season". A little later, this site is used to transplant Lettuce and Romaine plants for forced cultivation. Once the leeks have been harvested, the soil is very healthy and excellent for transplanting. In our opinion, this is the best method for planting leeks. It is practised only by specialists, who plant much more densely than amateurs, and their leeks are sold no larger than an ordinary cork. Planted in this way, the plants are straighter and tighter to take root, and the watering we give goes straight into the dimples left by the planter, i.e. to the roots of the plants themselves. Another method for planting leeks is to use a hoe to open deep gullies spaced 25 to 30 centimetres apart; place the leeks in these lines, spacing them about 12 to 15 centimetres apart, and close the gullies. If you have fertile soil, you'll get beautiful Leeks, but they'll take longer to come up than with the previous method. Once the Leek has been planted, all you have to do is water it copiously, and weed or hoe as required. This plant is easy to grow, and produces enormous numbers when given abundant fertilizer and good humidity. In Achères and Gennevilliers, for example, leeks irrigated with sewage are reaching dimensions unknown before the adoption of this cultivation system. 12. Combined cultivation. - What we said earlier about combined cultivation (see March) also applies to summer. At this time of year, for example, you can sow Radishes or Spinach (all these sowings must not be too thick, as everything will choke and nothing good will come of them) and, after mulching the bed as soon as it is sown, you can plant Lettuce, After mulching the bed as soon as it's seeded, lettuce, romaine, chicory or escarole can be planted at a rate of eight plants per square metre, spaced om.50 apart along the row. This will allow cauliflowers to be planted at a rate of four per metre when the lettuces are half grown. Radishes (or spinach) will go first, then lettuces, and finally cauliflowers. Cauliflower. - We've already mentioned how to care for cauliflowers in terms of covering and watering. Once they have bloomed, they must not be allowed to run out of water, and we must avoid, as far as possible, letting them wilt, which sometimes happens when the weather is stormy. Under these conditions, we give them a drenching in the morning, when the dew has fallen, and a little watering in the afternoon, when the sun loses its strength. When cauliflowers are left to wilt after the flower has begun to develop, they become "mossy", leafy and hard, and lose their beauty and quality. When the head has reached a certain size and a rainstorm occurs, which, as the saying goes, "sets the earth on fire", the cauliflowers must be watered copiously as soon as the rain falls, preferably with well water, to refresh the soil. At this point in their growth, the cauliflowers quickly flake off, and all that remains is to make the best of them by harvesting them all at once; otherwise they would be lost. Market gardeners in Paris can sow cauliflower until June 25th, but amateurs are advised not to sow after the 15th. Melons. - We have nothing to add to what we have said above concerning the cultivation of melons, but it is worth adding a few indications concerning picking. Well-ripe Cantaloupes are very heavy, well-dressed, i.e. the slices are well defined, the rind is firm, and the stalk is beginning to show signs of separation from the body of the fruit. It is by this sign in particular that practitioners working for the trade recognize that a melon is "struck", i.e. ready for picking; often, the rind is not yet ripe, and the peduncle (stem) is already slightly split from the fruit. In mild, rainy weather, this phenomenon can also occur on unripe fruit; in this case, you need to be guided by color and weight, as a ripe melon is fuller and heavier than one that has not fully ripened. It's a good idea to bear these observations in mind, so as not to pick a melon that's too green, when it doesn't yet have any flavor. Nor should it be picked too ripe. Inhabitants of big cities often eat melons that are too advanced, and no longer have any flavour. As soon as these fruits start to turn yellow, during hot spells, they are good to pick, as they ripen inside before the outside turns yellow. Connoisseurs who grow melons for their own consumption pick them as soon as they are ripe, and store them in a cool place until they are ready to eat. It's by observing all these instructions that you can eat a good melon, with all its qualities. It goes without saying that in warm years, melons are tastier and finer, especially at the height of the season, than in rainy years, at least in temperate climates, and even more so in the north. Pumpkins. - Pumpkins are usually not pruned; however, when a fruit is well knotted and about the size of an ordinary melon, it's a good idea to cut the bearing branch an eye or two above the fruit, to force the sap back into the fruit. Poorly ripened fruit is removed in the same way as melon. To give the plant more vegetation, the main branch, i.e. the first branch to develop, is pruned by laying it on the ground and rooting it every 70 or 80 centimetres as it lengthens, and watering copiously. Tomatoes. - Tomatoes require almost no water; however, market gardeners who have water at their disposal water them when the fruit has reached a certain size. Never water before the fruit is well established, as this would prevent the plant from producing any, as it would grow too luxuriantly. Eggplants. - Eggplants are usually ready to be broken up around June 15th; at this time, a good mulch is applied to the soil, mainly to keep it cool, and as the fruit begins to set, we start watering. As the fruit grows, you increase the watering. As with tomatoes, you should never water until the fruit is well established. Picking begins around July 15, and continues until the first autumn frosts, returning to the same spot every three or four days. This was a fairly profitable crop in the days when the Midi did not send large quantities of Aubergines to Paris, as it does now. Chard. - Chard is transplanted in the first fortnight of June; more often than not, it is counterplanted with lettuce, or planted alone, spaced at Om, 50 on the rows, in a checkerboard pattern. All that's left to do is to water it copiously to make it grow; it finds substantial nourishment in this well-wetted layer, its leaves develop quite rapidly, becoming large and thick, and the plant forms a beautiful clump which is tied up on the spot, before being pulled up, to be delivered for consumption. It can also be sown up to June 15, so that it's available until the frosts. In the past, market gardeners used to sow them until July, and the plants from the last sowings were overwintered; as soon as the cold weather arrived, they were covered with straw or leaves; by the end of April or May, they were growing again, and could be eaten. This last type of cultivation has long since been abandoned by specialists. Cardoon. - Cardoon is planted in June, with plants at least 1.30 m apart. Under these conditions, provided they are well watered, they grow very large. Cardoon is planted with other crops, most often salads of all kinds. Cardoon is a delicious vegetable, little known by our rural populations. Its cultivation is highly recommendable, and easy to do, because in strong soils you only have to start it again; then it grows by itself, even if you don't have any water to give it; in that case, it simply grows smaller. Once it has been planted and taken up, all you have to do is bind it to bleach it when it's ready to eat, and take the steps we've indicated so that you can have it all winter long. The difficulty lies in getting it to take up again, as it is a plant with large dry roots that cannot be left with a hair. To avoid this difficulty, amateurs can sow it on the spot, using the following procedure: in a ploughed area 2 meters wide, make two furrows 1 meter apart; mark on a radius, at each meter, the spot for a foot of Cardon; if the soil is soft and good, make a small basin at each spot, in which you place two or three Cardon seeds, which you bury 2 or 3 centimeters apart. In general, the seeds don't need to be buried very much; the closer they are to the surface of the soil, the better they benefit from the sun's rays; but if they are covered very little, care must be taken to keep the soil moist at the surface, since we're doing intensive cultivation here, and the seeds need to germinate quickly. If you want to do better, and have potting soil available, remove a spade of soil from the marked spots and replace it with potting soil. Water the spot copiously enough, and the seed sprouts after a few days. As soon as the plants are well established, they are thinned out, leaving only one plant per clump. Salads can still be planted in this crop, as it's hardly until September that they cover the whole ground. There are several varieties of cardoon: one, Cardon d'Espagne, has the disadvantage of hollow ribs, and can be grown when you don't want to keep any for winter; another, much more widespread in our countries, Cardon de Tours, which is much thornier, has full ribs; it is also much stockier and tastier than the previous one, so it is better for wintering. If you don't water it enough, it will come up like a large green celery plant, making it easy to protect against frost. Celeriac. - Celeriac is planted in June, with plants spaced Om.50 apart along the row, and Om.25 rows apart. It is generally counter-planted in salads of any kind, but the leaves of this Celery spread out a lot, and you mustn't plant it too thickly if you want it to grow large. Once planted, when the salads have gone, give it a good mulch, after hoeing, and all that's left is to water it copiously. Enthusiasts can eat it as soon as it has formed, i.e. the root, because, unlike other varieties, it is the part in the ground that is eaten. It forms a ball that becomes quite large once the soil has been properly smoked and watered. The leaf also makes an excellent condiment for stews, but is generally too tough to be eaten in salads, unless the heart is chosen altogether, especially when it has been buried and overwintered in these conditions. Cabbage. - Cabbages that are to be overwintered are sownFig. 40. - Aubervilliers Savoy cabbage. around June 15th. The hardiest varieties are chosen, in particular Chou de Vaugirard and selected varieties of this breed, followed by the whole category of Choux Milan: des Vertus, d'Aubervilliers (fig. 40), de Pontoise, and so on. Here's how to grow these late varieties: sow them in a nursery, fairly lightly so that they don't wither; give them the necessary care: watering, protection against flea beetles, etc., then plant them in place, using a planter, towards the end of July. These last cabbages will only be eaten at the end of winter and the beginning of spring, while awaiting the harvest of those sown at the end of August. Rapunzel. - Rapunzel has never been widely cultivated; however, Parisian market gardeners used to grow a certain quantity, which has now diminished more and more. We don't even know if any growers still cultivate the plant today. Its roots are used, along with its leaves, which are eaten as a salad in winter, from December to April. Gardeners who would like to have some beautiful Rapunzel should sow it at the end of June, not too thickly, as the leaves of this plant spread out over the ground, a little like a large Lamb's lettuce. The seed is so fine that it's hardly possible, unless you're very experienced, not to sow it too thickly if you sow it on its own; so you mix it with wood ash or fine, dry earth. A thimbleful is enough to sow a 30-metre bed. There's no need to plough the land to sow the seed; a little crutching is all that's needed. Once the seed has been sown, the soil is harrowed with a fork, compacted, lightly mulched with short manure and then watered. Market gardeners usually sow Rapunzel in other crops, for example in the last spring cauliflowers, harvested around July 15. Very fine, shallowly buried seeds are more likely to emerge under these conditions, as cauliflower crops require a lot of water, so the soil is always excessively cool; what's more, the newly sown seed is shaded by cauliflowers. So, as we've already said, one crop helps the other, far from harming it. MARKET GARDENING. 13 Dandelion. - Dandelion grows wild in all temperate countries. Growers near Paris have been cultivating it for at least half a century, and have selected it to a certain extent. It is grown mainly to produce white dandelions, i.e. by sowing in autumn, early enough for the plants to grow in the spring, and half-burying them with fine earth or sludge to whiten the heart, a very tender, fine-tasting salad is obtained. In the last fifteen years or so, Parisian market gardeners have taken over this crop, and have greatly improved the size of the Dandelion, firstly through skilful selection, and also through the cultivation they give it. They produce Dandelions the size of small, black-seeded gotte lettuces. They sow in nurseries, in the second half of June, not too thickly, so that the plants can form from the stalk, and they transplant them in place at the end of August. This simple cultivation, which is highly recommendable from every point of view, can be done by anyone, and with a few precautions in terms of covering during severe frosts, you can have this excellent lettuce throughout the winter and into spring. For amateur growers, here's how to establish a Dandelion crop. Sow towards the end of June, taking care to choose well-selected seed, such as is available from many seed growers, given the importance of this crop. A well-smoked bed is ploughed and levelled, then sown by broadcasting, harrowing with a fork and top-dressing. If you don't have potting soil, you can replace it with a well-consumed mulch. Care must then be taken to keep the soil cool enough to ensure good emergence, and to continue after emergence so that the plants are tender. We continue to sow Turnips (sow not too thickly, and water every day it doesn't rain); we also sow, as we've already said, Lettuces, Curly and Scarole Chicories, Witlooi, Spinach, Radishes, Beans to be consumed in needles, Purslane, Carrots, etc. Last but not least, as we've said many times before, general care consists in hoeing and watering frequently in dry weather. Asparagus grown under forced cultivation, and sown on January 15th, is planted out around July 15th. For this purpose, we choose the most beautiful and best-formed plants, because at this time we can already judge which are the ones whose tips are well formed and color most easily. To do this, however, you need to sow many more seeds and transplant many more plants than you'll need. It's a costly process, it's true, but it produces a plant in one year that's as good as a two-year-old. Asparagus, on the other hand, is better selected than when the seedling is left in place to plant the claws in spring. We have had occasion to note that a claw that gives small stems at the start always continues to give small ones, more numerous, it's true, than the large ones; but in forced cultivation, one large Asparagus is more valuable than five small ones. Finally, when Asparagus is left in place, it is impossible to distinguish between those that color well and those that do not, since they are only planted in claws. To lay out the Asparagus for forcing, prepare one or more planks, the width of which should correspond to that of the trunks to be placed on them later. Between the Asparagus planks, the paths should be about Om, 65. In July, when we were ready to plant, we watered our seedlings copiously before digging, and lifted them with a fork, to preserve all their roots; having been transplanted, the seedlings already had a small, well-constituted heel, and the Asparagus twigs were about fifteen centimetres high. After having undergone the selection process mentioned above, we proceeded with the planting. To do this, we placed a line of chests in the spot where we were to plant, and planted at a rate of four rows per line of chests and sixteen feet per panel, sinking only the heel of the plants into the ground. It's a good idea to put the boxes in place to get a good idea of the position of the plants, so that they are not under the heads or bars of the boxes, but well spaced out under the glass of the frames. This precaution is justified, because in December, January and February, when the sun's heat reaches us much less, we need to keep the surface of the soil as close as possible to the glass, because the glass "pulls" the asparagus and colors it when it emerges from the soil; and if they were placed under a bar or a head of a box, they wouldn't benefit from this powerful auxiliary; already, after a few years, the claws always spread far enough for some of them to find themselves in these poor conditions. Planting was done with a planter, of course. It was then watered copiously, like all summer plantings, and care was taken to keep the soil constantly fresh, especially until the plants were fully established. As soon as they were up and running, the asparagus would "heel" again, and some asparagus as big as a five-year-old's finger would come out. We remember surprising practitioners when we told them it was Asparagus sown the same year. Growing in absolutely fertile marshland, on a sandy base, a soil that Asparagus loves, our crop was helped by the natural state of the soil. Like all market gardeners who grow this crop, we never left our land unoccupied, either in winter or spring. The very first year we planted Asparagus, we sowed Lamb's lettuce at the end of August over the entire surface of the planted area, so that we only lost one crop that first year. The following spring, we gave the Asparagus a good crutch (ploughing with a pitchfork), ploughed the paths with a spade, levelled and put down a good topdressing, then planted a full square of Red Lettuce, and in addition a row of Cauliflower on each path. The Lettuce was gone before it got in the way of the young Asparagus, and the row of Cauliflowers on the path didn't bother them either, since the path was Om, 65 wide. Later on, the Asparagus was no longer put in; besides, it was already strong enough to fill the whole place during the summer. In autumn, when the stalks were ripe, we cut them off. We then sowed another crop of lamb's lettuce, and we sometimes saw asparagus being forced the following February. Harvesting took place in March and April, immediately preceding that in the open ground. However, the plant must not be overworked in the first year. This late-season crop is no longer sufficiently remunerative for specialists working for the trade, due to competition from products from the south of France; but it can still be very good for amateurs, all the more so as it is easy to grow, with the sun already helping a great deal at this time of year. Strawberry plants prepared for forcing already have well-rooted nets in July; these nets are pulled out and transplanted in the nursery, spaced 15 to 20 centimetres apart; they are watered as needed to encourage growth, and very fine plants are obtained at the end of September or beginning of October. Curly Chicory and Scarolea can be sown up to July 20, for planting up to the end of August. It is not wise to continue later. Broccoli is sown in early July, in the open ground, light enough not to require transplanting. There is no need to care for the plant other than watering to keep it tender; it is planted out in the first days of August. To have Poirée in winter, we sow it in July, in rows the width of the frame boxes. When the frosts arrive, we put the boxes in place, surround them with a good acot, and then put in the frames, which we cover with straw mats during the night. In this way, you can have Poirée all winter until May, when it goes to seed. Tarragon. - The end of July is, along with April, the most favorable time to multiply Tarragon by splinters. Sorrel. - It's a good idea to water sorrel frequently during the summer, to avoid the ravages of flea beetles. When sorrel is heavily invaded by flea beetles, it's best to cut it back to ground level, so that it grows back tender. Sorrel can be sown in summer, but spring is always preferable. Finally, carrots, turnips, beans, winter cabbage, radishes, spinach, lettuce, purslane, etc. continue to be sown in July. Mushroom cultivation in France is relatively recent. La Quintinie, in his Traité de culture potagère, speaks of it only vaguely, and seems to rely on chance, on the state of the manure when it is decomposing in the beds, and on the growth of the mycelium that produces the Mushrooms, rather than thinking of organizing an actual culture, where the manure is prepared to perfection and pieces of this mycelium are introduced, spreading rapidly throughout the bed. In the Maison rustique by Malpeyre, Bixio and Bailly, written at the beginning of the century, we find a Traité de culture des Champignons (Mushroom Cultivation Treatise) that shows great progress. However, the authors of this last treatise left out many small details; for, according to the old market gardeners, our ancestors, a century ago, already cultivated Mushrooms well, but in small quantities. Twenty years ago, Lachaume, a renowned specialist, published a work on the cultivation of Cultivated Mushrooms which constitutes the first complete treatise on cultivation as it is practised today; this treatise, which met with great success, is still a classic today. 13. Another skilled specialist, Mr. Duvillard, professor of vegetable cultivation in the Seine department and member of the Chambre syndicale des ouvriers jardiniers, has more recently written another excellent Traité de la culture des Champignons. From the information we obtained from the Syndicat des champignonnistes, much of which we already knew, it appears that mushroom growing has taken on the proportions of an industry. We can estimate the production of this crop, together with the sale of the grindstone, i.e. the manure used, at ten million francs a year. CHOOSING THE LOCATION To grow mushrooms in the best possible conditions, you need a cellar, a basement, or at least a place where the air is not too dry. It's also necessary to be able to ventilate the room properly, with window wells that can be opened or closed according to the needs of the crop. In short, to grow mushrooms successfully, it's not enough to choose the right seed or mycelium, to know how to prepare the manure, set up the layers, or millstones, as practitioners call them, and take the necessary care. You also need a suitable room, where the temperature is regularly maintained between 15° and 20° centigrade, and where the air can be renewed frequently, while remaining fresh without being too humid. Mushrooms can be grown in the greater Paris suburbs, in all the abandoned underground quarries in the Seine, Seine-et-Oise and Seine-et-Marne departments, from which the ashlar, rubble and plaster used to build the city were extracted. Mushrooms can also be grown in the open air, in the vegetable garden; but in this case, a thicker or thinner cover is required, depending on the ambient temperature. We'll explain how to proceed below. PREPARING THE MANURE The ancients claimed, and were probably right, that it was in donkey manure, and later in mule manure, that the mycelium took hold most easily. Horse manure was the next best. As this crop is grown mainly around the capital, horse manure is used almost exclusively. We have never heard of any attempt to grow mushrooms with sheep manure, so we cannot comment on its value. We will confine ourselves here to the cultivation of mushrooms using horse manure; moreover, if the manures of sheep, donkeys, mules or any other animal were good, the work, for the whole cultivation, would be no less the same. As far as possible, fresh manure should be used, i.e. manure that has been out of the stable for no more than a fortnight. If it is older, mix it well with the new manure. In the vegetable garden, or close to where the millstones will be placed, lay out a rectangle 1 m to 1.5 m thick, with a width proportionate to the size of the crop you intend to grow. This operation is called "cutting the manure down to the floor". Care must be taken to place the manure in the same direction and to mix it well, as if you were building up a layer, so as to obtain a homogenous mass and avoid pulling on it to turn it over. As soon as the floor has been knocked down, it is watered copiously to induce uniform fermentation. Once fermentation has lasted eight or ten days, the manure is turned over. This operation consists in taking the last placed manure, turning it over in another direction, making a "gauge" again, and taking care to bring the manure on the edges back into the middle, and vice versa. If, during these operations, the manure were to become too dry in places, it would be necessary to water these places, forming the beds in such a way that the floor heats evenly throughout its surface. It is also necessary to narrow the width of the floor, to keep it at the same thickness. Eight days after this initial turning, the manure, which has continued to ferment as actively as it did at the start, has lost its primitive smell and has already taken on that of Mushrooms. The manure is then turned over again, in the same way as the first time, starting from the side where you finished the previous time. The floor is shrunk again to keep it at the same thickness, and even thicker if the weather is rainy. If, on the other hand, the weather is dry and the manure contains parts that are too dry, water moderately during the operation. By the time it is used for grinding, the manure must be smooth, so that no water comes out when it is pressed by hand. MOUNTING AND BONDING THE MOLLS Once the manure has been prepared, which takes an average of twenty days, the millstones are mounted, i.e. chains of manure in pyramids of Om, 40 at the base, and Om, 45 to Om,50 in height (fig. 41). This work must be done with care. The manure is first brought in and placed in a chain; the operator takes it with his hands to form the wheel, spreading it out well so as not to leave buffers, and treads it with his Fig. 41. - Mushroom wheel. hands and knees. By hand, he removes any manure that protrudes from the sides and does not hold firmly to the mass; this is called "combing" the wheel. After this operation, the wheel has a smooth surface and is as compact at the edges as it is in the middle. A few days later, when the wheel is no longer too hot inside, which you can check by sticking your hand into it, and if the manure no longer stings, i.e. doesn't burn, you can "larder" the wheel, i.e. garnish it with mushroom spawn; we'll explain below how to obtain this spawn or mycelium. To fill the wheel with spawn, we prepare pieces called "mises", 10 centimetres square and Om,01 thick, which we place at Om, 40 from each other, in two rows in a chessboard; the first row is placed as low as possible, a few centimetres from the base, and the second in the middle of the height of the wheel. If the grinding wheel still appears hot, place the bets loosely, to allow the surrounding mass to cool a little. For the same purpose, specialists use a large pointed stake to make holes from distance to distance, which they call suction cups. The millstone is left in this state for twenty to twenty-five days, at least in premises where there is no fear of bad weather; in open-air cultivation, when the weather is rainy, the millstone must not be left to drown, as the manure would rot and the harvest would be null and void. After twenty to twenty-five days, we check to see whether the spawn has begun to vegetate, i.e. whether the stakes have produced filaments that have extended into part of the body of the millstone; if this were not the case, the spawn would be infertile and the operation would fail; but this failure rarely occurs when the manure is well prepared and the spawn is vigorous. When we see that the mycelium has a tendency to develop, and that the little filaments are lengthening on all sides, we proceed with the "gobleting" operation, which consists in covering the mould with uncultivated soil, preferably from the subsoil, to a thickness of one centimetre. Mushrooms will form in this soil and appear two or three weeks later, if all the work has been well done, and if the quarry or cellar has always had more or less the same temperature and a regular draught. When the goblet soil becomes too dry (this depends on where the millstones are set up and on the weather), it should be watered lightly with a fine-headed watering can, so as not to damage the goblet. Before gobbling, pat the sides of the wheel with your hand, placing your knee on the top to support the wheel in all its thickness, and knocking off any protruding bits of manure, so as to make the surface as even as possible. Some time after gobbling, the earth is squeezed onto the wheel with the back of the shovel, so that it adheres well. This operation, which is the last before picking, is called "talochage"; its purpose is to ensure that the soil adheres well to the manure, so that the Mushrooms cannot grow under the layer of soil, but are forced to pierce it. When we pick mushrooms, they generally come out in clumps, called "rocks"; we must take care to "gobble", i.e. remove the stump, after picking, and when there is nothing left after the rock. After ten or fifteen days, a new flock of mushrooms is planted in the same place, and so on until the manure is completely used up. OUTDOOR CULTIVATION If you're going to mount the stacks outside, you'll need to wrap them in a large quantity of dry manure, which will be renewed as often as it becomes too wet. This is called "putting on a shirt", and over it you put a thickness of dry manure that varies according to the weather, to maintain a heat of at least fifteen to twenty degrees. Sometimes, even during severe frosts, the paths have to be filled with manure to prevent the frost from penetrating the earth. Manure must be carefully selected to cover the millstones. First, a light layer of large, dry manure or straw is placed immediately in contact with the grinding wheel, followed by a thicker layer of large, dry manure. Warm manure would give off too much heat, causing the spawn to "spin", i.e. the mycelium would elongate more quickly, be less compact and tend to spread to the edges of the grinding wheel, whereas in good conditions it should form in the interior of the mass, thin, tight and very compact. A millstone that is well covered throughout with this fine, tightly-packed mycelium produces a more abundant, longer-lasting harvest. How long this lasts is hard to say, as it depends on a number of circumstances: firstly, the vigor and hardiness of the mycelium used; secondly, temperature and humidity, as some mycelia require more heat or humidity than others; and thirdly, other influences that have not yet been elucidated in cultivation practice. Generally speaking, however, hot, heavy weather is less favorable to mushroom production than cool, dry weather. DISEASES. - WHITE RENEWAL When the weather is heavy and rainy, quarries lack air and "sulk", say mushroom growers. When this happens, they set up long wooden chimneys over draft holes, and light a strong stove at the bottom of the quarry to expel the stale air it contains and renew it. Despite all these efforts, they often fail to achieve the same results as when the weather is dry and cold. If the millstones sulk, they form "molles", a kind of other cryptogam that penetrates the earth and produces nothing; this represents a leprosy on the surface. If the air is sufficiently renewed, the disease disappears, but always with some benefit to the grower. When the air is vitiated and not sufficiently renewed, crops are often invaded by midges and moths, which are very harmful to them, but which can be eliminated by aerating. Once the manure has been prepared, the most important question, as in all cultivation, is the choice of seed, which we call here blanc de Champignons, and which is to be used to lard the grinding stone, as mentioned above. Virgin spawn, formed by the germination of spores, can be found around piles of manure, in old layers, around piles of sludge from towns and cities, in detritus of any kind, even in meadows where cattle graze. Large-scale mushroom growers sometimes take seed spawn from their own crops, but only if they can't get any better. Here's how they do it. When the wheel is well covered with mycelium, and the mushrooms are beginning to form in the earth covering the wheel, they cut slices of Om,25 from the wheel with a long knife, and remove these slices, which form compact cakes, thanks to the network of mycelium running through them; they then cut them into pieces Om,10 thick, which they place on shelves in a cool, airy place, to dry. Under these conditions, the white can be preserved for a long time. It is used when no other product is available, or when the manure from the millstones is too wet. Some specialist firms supply selected and renewed virgin white in slabs (fig. 42). Virgin whites are always preferable to those that have been cultivated for a number of years, being more vigorous by their very nature, and probably also because they are younger. The purity of the - Fig. 4. - Plate of mushroom spawn. spawn used for larding must also be taken into account, as it is not uncommon for it to be diseased, devoured by another, more voracious cryptogam, which mushroom growers call "verdigris". Care should be taken to peel the white before introducing it into the grinder, removing any parts that appear green, and leaving only what is quite white with very fine, tightly-packed filaments. Chancy" and "plaster" are other inferior fungi that devour cultivated Agaricum, and which must be carefully avoided in cultivation. For some years now, the Institut Pasteur has been working on reproducing mushrooms from seed, by sterilizing the mycelium. The spores are taken from varieties that give and promise a profitable harvest. At the first flush, the most beautiful plants are selected and kept as seedbeds, and sheets of paper are placed underneath to collect the spores, which are then placed in a vase in a dry place. The manure is prepared in exactly the same way as described above, filling glass tubes (fig. 43) and 1 Fig. 43 - Tube of sterilized mushroom spawn. The tube is plugged with a wad of AB absorbent cotton, which overflows into C. The seed is sown in these tubes, which are hermetically sealed and placed in an oven; the spores vegetate vigorously; after a fortnight, the filaments have spread to all parts of the manure and, a few days later, this manure, which we have referred to above as mise, can be used to lard other millstones. To date, specialists have not obtained all the results that might be expected from this innovation. It's a problem that's still under study, and can only be solved by scientific investigation, aided by specialists in practical and commercial aspects. Presumably, this mycelium will have to be renewed once or even twice in the open air, to acquire the necessary rusticity. In short, it will have to be acclimatized to outdoor temperatures, so that it becomes strong enough to produce a profitable harvest. There is every reason to believe that this problem will soon be solved, and that mushroom cultivation, which has so far been based on routine, will one day be able to proceed with certainty. In a word, this great family of Mushrooms, whose species are so difficult to destroy, and whose superior species are no less difficult to cultivate, will have its fundamental basis for cultivation, like all plants, in seed selection, the primordial principle of all good cultivation. Here again, the scientists at the Institut Pasteur will have rendered a signal service to industry, particularly in the Paris suburbs, where this type of cultivation has taken on such great proportions. Of course, we don't pretend to make growers believe that we'll achieve perfection, that cultivated mushrooms will be free of disease; no one is free of disease; but by working on young subjects, there's always more hope of cure than by working on worn-out subjects. Every grower will have to take many facts into account, and it is his or her initiative that will help the scientist and bring out, from his or her theoretical research, the practical results necessary for the prosperity of this industry. POTAGERS AND THEIR DISEASES Among insect pests, one of the most dreaded is the mole cricket. This terrible insect comes as big as a man's thumb, and burrows into the earth exactly like the mole, cutting and gnawing every root it encounters, even Carrots, Turnips, etc. It is especially fearsome in the soil, where it can cause serious damage. It is especially formidable in layers, establishing its lair at the bottom, where it can only be tracked down when the topsoil is removed to reconstitute new layers. The substance that market gardeners use to destroy them is oil or petroleum, which is poured into the holes where they settle, by pouring water over them; a drop of oil that reaches a mole infallibly kills it. But these insects have nests containing hundreds of eggs, so there are always enough to go around, and it's almost impossible to get rid of crickets completely in the terrain where they live. In late spring and summer, they come up for air at night, and cats, who are very fond of them, destroy many of them. White grubs, called horseflies by gardeners, and which are the larvae of cockchafer beetles, are only to be feared in newly-cultivated vegetable gardens, where they cause considerable damage; they are much less pleasant in old vegetable gardens, where the soil is too greasy and too often disturbed. The only way to destroy them is to seek them out without delay at the foot of plants you see withering and kill them; otherwise, when one plant is cut, they move on to another and end up destroying the whole crop. Various aphids also destroy vegetables. One of the most dreaded is a black aphid that attacks Cucurbitaceae. In some years, it multiplies so quickly and abundantly that it is difficult to get rid of. Against all aphids, nicotine cut with water is used in high doses: fifty liters for one liter of nicotine, to the degree to which the Tobacco Administration delivers it, and the plants are watered with this solution, preferably in the evening; but you must not wait until the aphids are too abundant, as you would almost have to destroy the plant to destroy the insect. Caterpillars and larvae of all shapes and colors attack plants in different ways, some through the roots, others, in greater numbers, through the leaves. The only way to get rid of them is to look for them and crush them. However, the caterpillars that eat the leaves of cabbages in general, and cauliflowers in particular, are fairly easy to get rid of; all you need to do is water often; when the leaves are continually wet, the butterflies that produce these caterpillars don't settle on them. Flea beetles, which destroy sorrel and young cabbage plants, can be combated by frequent watering; young cauliflower plants sometimes have to be shaded in late spring to get rid of them. A small white worm, called a guillotine, attaches itself especially to the roots and crown of cabbages of all varieties. It produces a kind of bulge at the root, and the plant perishes. So far, we know of no effective remedy for this plague. Loaches or slugs are very common in certain areas, especially in autumn. To destroy them, powdered lime is sprinkled on the soil, and those affected are burnt. But these insects often hide under the leaves, where they cannot be reached, so care must be taken to find them before destroying them. In some crops, small piles are made of leaves or debris from carrots and other vegetables, where slugs come to take refuge. Unless they are actively hunted down, these insects cause a great deal of damage. Ants can also cause damage to vegetable crops in hot, dry weather, but are quickly eradicated by watering. Grey mould is caused by a tiny Acarus insect that attacks the parenchyma of plants, especially as they age. Cucurbits, beans and celery are particularly susceptible. To combat it, we recommend either diluted nicotine, or the following solution: dissolve 60 grams of white soap in a liter of water, then add 20 grams of naphthol 8, followed by 1 liter of nicotine at 12° and 10 liters of water. You can also add a little quassia amara. Lettuce and Romaine rust, in spring, is due to the action of a microscopic fungus that spreads through sudden changes in temperature, cold sleet, etc. We don't know what causes it either. Nor do we know of any effective way of preventing this disease from occurring, except that young plants sown at the end of winter are less susceptible than those sown in autumn, and even then in certain damp, cold soils. In any case, all affected parts must be cut off and burned to prevent the disease spreading. Asparagus rust can be treated with Bordeaux or Burgundy mixture, as can strawberry rust. Melon blight, which mainly affects early and late-season melons, also appears after cold dews. This disease always attacks young shoots and fruit, when present; it literally cuts them off, and it is very difficult to obtain fruit from diseased plants. Since Cucurbitaceae are inherently cold plants, could it be that a kind of frost is produced on them, when the thermometer is several degrees warmer? Scientists are not yet in agreement on the remedies to be used against this disease; it's a very serious subject of study for anyone involved in horticulture. In the late season, when market gardeners see this cold dew on their plants, they water them to wash it off. Melon canker is cured by cutting away the diseased part and sprinkling the wound with sand or quicklime. Cabbages are sometimes attacked by a disease called hernia or grosfoot, which consists of an enlargement of the roots. Care should be taken to uproot any plants affected and not to leave any debris in the soil. Despite these precautions, however, the disease is still likely to spread if cabbages are grown again in the same soil, unless care is taken to place a good handful of quicklime at the foot of each plant, at the time of transplanting, in a trough six to ten centimetres deep, which is then filled with soil. Dephosphorization slag also prevents the spread of cabbage looper, and is used at a rate of around 1 hectoliter per acre. How many studies remain to be carried out on these various diseases, which often compromise market garden crops! Eggplant cultivation has been abandoned by market gardeners, and tomato cultivation has been seriously compromised, not only because of competition from products from the Midi, but also because of the disease to which these plants are prone when the cool nights of September arrive. However, good results are now being obtained in combating this disease, either with Iysol, spread at a rate of 12 grams per 10 liters of water, or with the following solution: in 1 liter of denatured alcohol, dissolve 250 grams of naphthol g crude powder; the solution is made cold after a few minutes; pour into a tub containing 500 to 600 liters of water, stirring constantly with a stick; this slightly cloudy liquid is sprayed on plants and used to water the soil. A disease of the same type as the previous one, which was not well known, or at least did not cause serious losses before the introduction of early crops, is miller's disease (Peronospora ganglüformis), which attacks lettuces and Romaines under frames and cloches. Plants grown outdoors recover quite easily, when the weather turns dry and warm. As for those grown 14 en primeur, as we have just said, when they are affected, they do not recover; the disease makes more or less progress, depending on the weather, but never disappears completely. The parasite causes the affected leaves to dry out, often seriously damaging the plant. During wet winters, the disease makes much more progress than when the weather is dry and cold. We estimate the losses incurred by market gardeners in the Paris region during these wet winters at several million francs. Forced cultivation of lettuces and Romaines begins in October, and continues throughout the autumn, winter and spring, until the plants are ready for cultivation in the open ground. We estimate the annual production of these early vegetables at one hundred million Lettuces and twenty million Romaines, in the market gardening corporation of the Paris region. About twenty years ago, the miller was already seriously studied by Mr. Maxime Cornu, the late Professor of Culture at the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle. This scientist has submitted a memoir to the Académie des Sciences, in which he gives a very precise scientific study of the development of the disease that practitioners know from routine. Science has had many Peronospora to study over the last twenty years; Mr. Cornu once told us that the one that invades Lettuce and Romaine crops bears a close resemblance to the one that attacks Vines and is known as "mildew". As the latter could only be effectively combated with a copper sulfate-based treatment, he felt that the same would be true for market garden crops. PLANT PESTS AND DISEASES. 243 However, in this case, treatment becomes more difficult; as we are dealing with very soft and tender plants, it will be necessary to operate in a different way than for Vines, as the slightest toxicity hardens and retards them, and thereby causes harm to the grower. We therefore believe that, as far as possible, preventive action should be taken to destroy dormant spores. A few growers have already experimented with this approach, guided by routine, and have obtained certain results. With a view to resuming this research in a scientific manner, guided by the scientist who has already attached his name to the study of this disease, we have carried out new experiments, the results of which we are about to publish. Unfortunately - or perhaps fortunately, as our experiments are all the more conclusive - M. Cornu was absent from Paris at the time when preventive treatment should have begun, so we operated on plants already severely invaded by the terrible parasite. On December 20, 1899, we carried out an initial experiment on three panels of lettuces on bedding, half grown, and on ten bells of Romaine plants already showing some strength; these plants were to be planted on bedding with bells at the beginning of January. The treatment used was celestial water, composed of 1 kilogram of copper sulfate and 1,250 grams of commercial ammonia per hundred liters of water. The plants were sprayed. The lettuce being particularly tender, because it was on a bed, the diseased leaves turned red a few days after this operation; the non-diseased parts remained intact; however, the plants as a whole were hardened, but the disease was stopped. A few days after this treatment, the lettuces were peeled of all their diseased leaves, which were then dried; the plants continued to grow, quite healthy, quite clear, i.e. disease-free, and if they had been left for another eight days, they would have produced average, clean produce; but as they were in the first layer of a square that had to be turned over, the grower didn't want to delay his work for such a small quantity of lettuces. The result was still achieved, as there was no longer any disease. The delay caused to these plants, in full growth on the beds, can be estimated at eight or ten days. As the Romaine plants were harder, because they were transplanted cold and on soil, the same phenomenon occurred as for the Lettuces, only a little later. It's also worth noting that this experiment was carried out during a false thaw; as the frost picked up again the following night, it's possible that the plants, after this treatment, weren't sufficiently covered and that this fact contributed to hardening them even more. On January 5, when we made another visit, the miller was back on four of the most seriously affected bells. They were given a new drenching, exactly like the first, even where the disease had not reappeared. Around January 10th, with the thaw having come and the miller seemingly extinct, the plants were peeled of all their diseased leaves, which were also dried, and they continued to vegetate. Only, instead of giving them air as with other, non-diseased plants, they were kept enclosed under the cloches. Despite this, they suffered a delay of at least a fortnight, and instead of being planted around January 10, they were not planted until the end of the same month; a row of cloches had been set up along the entire length of the bed, the better to see the difference with the other plants next to them. Towards the end of February, after a few days of mild weather and a strong westerly wind, the disease invaded the whole square of layers, and the treated row, with a few exceptions here and there, remained unscathed. The plants, which belonged to the flat Romaine de Paris variety, were green and well spread out, while the other diseased plants were already closed, which would make bad merchandise, because, as all practitioners know, this variety, to come into its own, must be spread out at the start of its bed planting, and the leaves must take the edges of the bell to cap (i.e. close) at the bonnet. But with the disease so widespread throughout the square, could these plants remain unharmed until the end? Around March 15, a few traces of the disease could be seen on them. Nevertheless, as they were already strong, they were delivered for consumption at the end of the month, and were still the most beautiful merchandise in the square. Seeing such an appreciable result, we asked Mr. Cornu, accompanied by his assistant Mr. Bois, and former gardeners Mr. Duvillard, Mr. Laurent and Mr. Becquerelle, who had worked with Mr. Cornu on this subject in the past, to verify the results. This experiment was carried out on the premises of Mr. Canard, a market gardener at route de Châtillon, 85, Montrouge, and this practitioner knows only too well the ravages caused by the terrible parasite, in a marsh that is nonetheless exceptionally well tended. We believe, both scholars and practitioners, that this 14. experiment is not complete, having been started too late. Here, then, are the means we recommend, from a practical point of view, to combat this terrible cryptogam. At sowing time, spray celestial water on the soil to be sown and a little on the surrounding area, to destroy the disease spores; at transplanting time, repeat the operation at the place where the plants are to be transplanted; pass the cloches through a solution of sulfated water. For bed planting, M. Cornu felt that watering was no longer sufficient; he recommended the use of fine wood shavings, soaked in the same solution and spread over the bed; we pointed out to him, as an old practitioner, that this was not practical. It was therefore agreed that the wood shavings could be replaced by very dry, fine mulch, such as the body of a grinding wheel. This mulch, placed in a basket of some kind, would be soaked in a solution of celestial water prepared in a barrel; a light layer of this mulch would then be spread over the soil to be planted. As the soil soaked up the solution, the gases would remain active for longer on the surface of the soil, under the bell or frame. The experiment we have just described clearly demonstrates that the disease only reappeared when the gases in the solution were no longer active. In old marshes contaminated by this disease, care should be taken to pass chassis, cloches, etc., through a sulfated water solution. If, between transplanting and planting, the slightest trace of disease should appear, the plant should be bathed with the above solution, but reduced by at least half, so as not to harm vegetation, or preferably with a simple copper sulfate solution, the composition of which is described at the end of this chapter. Perseverance is the only way to eradicate this terrible disease, especially in old contaminated marshes. By publishing these experiments, which were conducted by a professor from the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, we believe we are providing a useful service to practitioners whose crops are at risk of contracting this disease. It is also up to them to seek other practical means of combating it; we give the one we have used, believing that even better ones can be found. It's in everyone's interest to work towards this goal. Here's a striking example to edify them: Ten or fifteen years ago, when downy mildew was wreaking such havoc in vineyards, and the means of combating it had finally been discovered, some people, resistant to all progress, did not want to sulfate their vines; so in the same vineyard, towards the end of August and September, you would see vines whose leaves were quite green, alongside others whose leaves were yellow or even fallen off; the cause of this difference was that the former had been sulfated and the latter had not. Faced with such a result, even the most reluctant were forced to face the facts, and today all winegrowers sulfate their vines. The difference between the first and the last is that those who agreed to heed the advice of the scientists reaped the rewards, while the others reaped nothing. This example is conclusive enough in itself to encourage the younger generations of gardeners to seek every possible means of combating a plague that devastates their crops during the winter. Today's scientists are well aware of the disease, how it comes about, how it develops, how it spreads, etc.; they tell us the remedies with which we can combat it - not destroy it, that's impossible. It remains for practitioners to find the most effective and convenient ways of applying these remedies. This experiment is all the more conclusive in that we have carried out others with no appreciable results. These experiments were as follows: before planting, we sprayed a few bell beds with Bordeaux mixture, and others with sugar mixture; but the plants were already contaminated, and three weeks or a month after planting, i.e. when the gases produced by these solutions had been extinguished, the sucker reappeared with the same violence as everywhere else. Nevertheless, we invite practitioners to continue trials with the different copper sulfate solutions. To make these studies easier for those unfamiliar with the composition and use of these solutions, we indicate how to prepare and use them. One kilogram of copper sulfate dissolved in three liters of hot water, stirring the crystals; after cooling, add one and a half liters of commercial ammonia at 22° Baumé; pour into one hundred liters of water. BOUILLIE BORDELAISE Two to three kilograms of copper sulfate and two kilograms of slaked lime, all in one hundred INSECTS HAZARDOUS TO PLANTS AND DISEASES. 249, liters of water. First dissolve copper sulfate in ten liters of hot water; slake the lime; after cooling, pour it into the sulfate solution (do not do the reverse); add ninety liters of water. SWEET MUD Dissolve two kilograms of copper sulfate in fifteen or twenty liters of water; add three kilograms of soda crystals dissolved in a few liters of water. When the copper has precipitated, add two kilograms of molasses, leave for twelve hours, then add water to make up one hundred liters. Instead of soda ash (crystals), use two kilograms of crushed lime. SIMPLE SOLUTION Formula: three to five hundred grams of copper sulfate per hectoliter of water. To prepare all these products, use wooden containers. To use them, preferably with a sprayer. The composition of all these solutions has been supplied to us by Mr. Cornu's laboratory at the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle. We feel that the simple solution should only be used on plants that have been attacked by the disease despite the preventive treatments we have indicated above. We did not feel it necessary to enumerate in detail in this table the various operations whose succession constitutes cultivation proper, and which you will find indicated in their place in the monthly work schedule which forms the main part of this work. However, we felt it necessary to include indications of almost constant use, but which are only given once, to avoid tedious repetition, as well as certain indications which were not strictly appropriate for one month rather than another, such as those relating to the choice of varieties. Ados................. 70, 81 ¡ Artichoke: sowing. 114, 155, 185, Aération des châssis...... 45 - des cloches..... 46 Garlic: multiplication.. 24, 151 - fat disease. 151 Animal and insect pests: flea beetle........ 188, 223, 238 - vole............ 74 - caterpillars........ 193, 238 - cockroach............ 237 - ants.............. 239 - gray............ 167, 239 - guillotine 239 - larvae............... 238 - slugs.............. 239 - loaches................ 239 - aphids.... 127, 129, 238 - horsefly................. 237 - white worm............ 237 Watering................. 39 Artichoke: carnation and cultivation... 24, 72, 131, 155, 195; 206; - frost protection. 73, 90, 96; - varieties.............. 158 Asparagus: selection... 105, 220 - cultivation...... 158, 195, 220 - forcing........... 73, 104 - harvesting...... 107 - bundling.... 107 White asparagus and green asparagus..... 73, 104, 109, 159, Assolements..............5 Aubergine: seed harvest................... 24 - sowing and cultivation 145, 195, 202, 212; - delayed cultivation...... 146 - watering............. 212 Long purple eggplant. 147 Capuchin beard. 74, 96, 113, 125 Spades................... Al ¡ Celeriac: protection during Benatons.................. 43 Béquillage............... 197 Bette, see Poirée à carde. Beet: cellaring or silo...................80 - culture.......... 184, 206 Blanc de Champignons.. 232 Boundary planting. 59 Bouillie bordelaise...... 248 Bouillie sucrée.......... 249 Broccoli, culture...... 59, 223 - conservation during winter................... 90 Cales à châssis........... 44 Cales à cloches..... 47 Campagnol............... 74 Cardon: harvesting seeds. 24 - cultivation...... 185, 206, 214 - blanching........... 77 - winter storage................ 89, 96 - varieties........... 78, 215 Carrot: seed selection and harvesting................ 22 - sowing and cultivation. 58, 63, 93, 96, 110, 132, 196, 206, 219 224; - frost protection.................. 97 Carrot grelot............ 93 - grosse courte hátive... III - half-long obtuse.... 133 - de Guérande......... 134 Heartless half-long Nantaise and Chantenay carrots................. 133 Celery: seed selection. 22 - sowing and cultivation..- 148, 204 - blanching........... 66 - winter protection. 88, 96; Cutting celery.......... 149 - blond............ 148, 204 - Chemin............... 148 - golden.................. 148 - green.................. 149 winter................88 - sowing and cultivation.. 149, 215 Small-leaf celeriac............... 149 Chervil, sowing and cultivation. 58, 63, 150 Mushrooms: cultivation... 225 - diseases............. 232 - renewal of spawn. 233 Loader............. 42 Glazed frames............27 - aeration of frames... 45 Caterpillars........... 193, 238 Chicory: seed selection and harvesting............ 23 - sowing and cultural care. 59, 10l, 123, 186, 177, 205, 210, 219, 223; - tying................. 205 - frost protection and conservation........ 87 Chicorée de Louviers..... 179 - de Meaux 179 - fine parisienne. 102, 136, 179 - rouennaise. 131, 179 Wild chicory. 117, 141, 196, - Bleaching (Capuchin Beard)... 74, 96, 113, 125. Chicory with large root (Endive or Witloof). 75, 96, 206, 219 Cabbage; seed selection. 20 - varieties........... 52, 216 - soil preparation for cabbage plantations. 168 - sowing and cultivation. 54, 58, 62, 65, 69, 91, 96, 103, 112, 114, 115, 124, 141, 174, 191, 196, 206, 216, 224; - winter storage..................89 Beefheart cabbage...... 58 - York cabbage................ 53 - cabbage.................. 53 - Milan cabbage 53 1 - very early Étampes cabbage... 54 ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS Paris cabbage.... 92 - Paris dish. 115, 174, 191 Cauliflower: seed selection and harvesting............ 22 - varieties............... 60 - sowing and cultivation. 60 71, 86, 91, 112, 124, 132, 169, 181, 192, 197, 210, 222 - covering the apple. 193 - harvest............... 194 Ciboule, sowing and cultivation. 150, 196 Pumpkin........... 176, 200 Civet.............. 24, 155 Bells.................. 33 - stacking. 36, 47 - repairing broken bells................... 37 - aeration under bells. 46 Chests................... 29 Cucumber: seed harvesting................. . 24 - sowing............ 104, 196 - pruning and cultivation... 128, 167 - aphid control................. 129 - gray mold disease... 167 - rust disease. 167 - varieties.............. 1290 Condiments............. 150 Baskets................ 43 Gherkins: harvesting seeds....................24 - cultivation............... 198 Layers: preparing manure...................7 - location of layers. 9 - making layers. 10 - melon layers...... 15 - layer humidity. 16 - change of place. 17 - turning the beds...............17 Squash: harvesting the seeds. 24; - cultivation.......... 176, 200 Cricket.............. 237 MARAICH GROWING. 253 Crémaillères.............. 44 Cresson de fontaine...... 152 - alénois............... 152 Cultures combinées.. 174, 210 Celestial water.............. 248 Shallot............. 24, 151 Endive: sowing...... 206, 219 - blanching....... 75, 96 Fertilizers..................3 Spinach: sowing and cultural care. 51, 93, 94, 96, III, 123, 139, 155, 196, 205, 210, 219, 224; Dutch spinach. 51, 140 - de Flandre............ 94 - d'Angleterre........... 94 - de Viroflay........... 140 - à feuille de Laitue.... 140 Estragon.... 24, 154, 195, 223 - conservation during winter....................88 False thaws............. 112 Leaves: use for making nappies..... 9 Marsh bean......... 183 Forks for aeration of bells............ 46 Ants................. 239 Strawberry: varieties....... 162 - cultivation...... 159, 195, 206 - choice of varieties for forcing................80 - preparation for forcing.............. 67, 223 - forcing............ 79, 91 Manure: preparation of layers....................7 - choice and preparation for cultivation of Mushrooms................ 227 Giraumon, cultivation.. 176, 200 Gobleting of Mushroom wheels.............. 230 Seeds, choice and selection. 19 Grise.............. 167, 239 Guillot................ 239 Beans: cultivation. 57, 187, 219, 224; 15 Beans: protection from frost................. 74 - forced cultivation........ 115 Hotte and hottereau........ 42 Insects: see Animals and insect pests. Lettuce: seed selection and harvesting................23 - sowing and cultivation, 55, 62, 65, 69, 71, 84, 86, 93, 96, 112, 130, 138, 196, 206, 219, 224; - how to plant Lettuce................. 178 - Lettuce in combined cultivation. 170, 175, 210, 222 Lettuce gotte à graine noire 56, 70, 71, 138; - gotte à graine blanche. 70, 138 - Passion blanche et rouge. 70 - blonde laesseuse...... 70 - brunette laesseuse....... 70 - Palatine............... 70 - à couper............. 116 Lardage des meules de Champignons.............. 228 Larves.................. 238 Slugs................. 239 Loches.................. 239 Mâche....... 51, 62, 71, 222 - protection against frost. 90, 113; Round lamb's lettuce............. 51 - Italian or Regency..... 71 Diseases: Salsify and Scorzonera powdery mildew....... 182 - Melon canker.... 240 - cabbage foot rot.... 240 - Garlic grease........ 151 - Cabbage hernia...... 240 - Tomato diseases. 145, 241; - Melon miller.......... 71, 241 - Melon nail... 127, 240 - Asparagus rust... 240 - Cucumber rust. 176, - Lettuce and Melon rust: seed harvesting. 24 - making layers. 15 - use of thermosiphon. 103, 125; - cultivation. 103, 125, 127, 164, 196, 198, 199; - pruning............. 126, 164 - picking............. 211 - varieties.............. 165 - nail disease... 127 - aphids....... 129 Mushroom wheel... 226 Turnip: choice of seeds. 22 - sowing and cultivation. 58, 63, 119, 135, 170, 188, 206, 219, 224; - forced cultivation........ 119 Turnip race Hammer...... 120 Onion: seed selection. 20; - sowing and cultivation. 49,63, 69, 195; Early white Paris onion. 49, 63; - jaune des Vertus...... 49, - blanc très hâtif de la Reine. 168; - Madeira........... 168 Sorrel: seed selection. 22; - sowing and cultivation. 72, 88, 140, 196, 204, 223; Virgin sorrel............ 14 Doormats: manufacture.. 31 - sulfating, for preservation...................33 Parsnips.............. 152, 196 Baskets..................43 Patissons, cultivation.... 176, 200. Peronospora gangliiformis. 71, 242. Parsley: sowing and cultivation. 153, 196; Parsley, dark green.... 153 Pepper.................. 154 Romaine........... 932 1 Dandelion, cultivation.. 59, 65, 218 frosts.............. 91, 96 Plantations: how to plant................... 178 - boundary markers............... 59 Leek: seed selection and harvesting............23 - sowing and cultivation. 58, 112, 136, 181, 207; - winter storage.....................88 - varieties......... 137 Poirée.............. 203, 223 Poirée à carde...... 202, 213 Peas: sowing and cultivation. 94, 96, 124, 204 Potatoes: sowing... 25 - culture...... 185 Pumpkin: harvesting seeds. 24 - culture...... 176, 200, 212 Purslane, sowing and cultivation. 112, 154, 196, 206, 219, 224 Aphids....... 127, 129, 238 Radish: seed selection and harvesting............... 22 - sowing. 57,63, 74, 93, 96, 112, 121, 155, 196, 205, 210, 219, 224; - varieties.............. 123 Black radish, cultivation... 139, 194 Rapunzel, cultivation....... 217 Raves: outdoor cultivation. 187 - forced cultivation........ 123 - winter storage................. 90 Reclochages......... 171, 189 Repiquages, how to make them.......... 82, 178 Romaine: selection and harvesting of seeds..... 23 - sowing and cultural care. 55, 62, 65, 70, 71, 85, 96, 112, 130, 138, 151, 171, 189, 191, 196; 255 Romaine: combined cultivation. 151, 170, 174, 210; - varieties.,............ 57 Romaine flat with bells, 57, 86 - gray......... 57, 138, 190 - blond................ 139 Salsify: cultivation.......... 181 - disease.............. 182 Scarole: seed selection and harvest............ 23 - sowing and cultivation. 59, 136, 177, 205, 219, 223; - tying................. 205 - winter storage.................. 87 - combined cultivation..... 210 Scolyma: cultivation....... 181 - disease.............. 182 Scorsonera: cultivation..... 181 - disease.............. 182 Copper sulfate against cryptogamic diseases. 248. Talochage des meules de Champignons.............. 231 Taon....................237 Terrain: choix du terrain et préparation............1 Tomate: sélection et récolte des graines,........... 24 - semis et culture. 66, 98, 142, 196, 201, 212; - sulfuring............... 99 - cryptogamic diseases. 99, 145, 241; - ripening and preservation of last fruits.... 81 Tomatoes Currants, Cherries, Apples, Pears............. 25 - Path........... 99, 144 - dwarf early outdoor. 99; - Perfection............. 99 - large smooth.. 99 - liage................. 1721 - ponderosa............. 99 Tomate Mikado.......... 99 à côtes............. 43 Tranchées ou couches à Melons.................13 Ver blanc............... 237 Vitrage des châssis....... 28 Witloof : semis..... 206, - blanchiment....... 75, 96 FIN DE LA TABLE ALPHABÉTIQUE DES MATIÈRES. The Librairie agricole de la Maison rustique sends its most recent lo catalog free of charge to anyone who requests it. LE BUN JARDINIER Encyclopẽdie horticole 150' ÉDITIOX entirely revised and updated in a handsome in-8° dovecote volume. Hx15.5 of more than 1,000 pages on two columns more than 100,000 lines of text WITH S COLOR PLANS reproduced in photochromogravure from watercolors specially executed by A. Millot a landscape architecture plate plans of gardens, paros and rœseraies and more than 500 black engravings in the text Oubrage absolument noubeaindispenzable à tous les Amateurs et à tous les Jardinierz PRICE Paperback... .. 10 francs - Hardcover. . . . 13 francs rama, Iaœ. A. samaa, ar, s. "ue sva-staue.