70 157 1°2 OF CALIFORNIA FROM THE LIBRARY OE COUNT EGON CAESAR CORTI AIN LIE.-AGRI. 00g10 - -----.------ --- ---~ " --. -. -4- " 2. COMPLETE GARDENER'S MANUAL. II. *. Mani ise COOglo Chez Mme HUzaRD, imprim.-libr., rue de l'Éperon, n° 7; HAUTCOEUR-MARTINET, rue du Coq-Saint-Honoré, n° 13. And at Chez: Agen..... . . . . ... NOUBEL. Amsterdam... . . . . . .. S. DELACHAUX. Angers... . ........ FOURRIER-MAME. Besançon........... GIRARD. Blois...... ....... Bordeaux... . . . .... Bruges............ Brussels......... Clermont-Ferrand... ... Dijon..... ........ AUCHER-ÉLOY. GASSioT, eldest son. BOGAERT-DUMORTIER. DEMAT. TARLIER, son. THIBAULT LANDRIOT. VICTOR LAGIER. Geneva. ... ... ... ... . ... BARBEZAT and DELARUE. Havre... ... ... ... .... CHAPELLE. Liége............. DESOER. Lille...... . . . ... BRONNER-BAUWENS. VANACKÈRE. Lyon. . . . . ...... MAIRE. Mans..... . . . ..... PESCHE. Marseille.... . . . .. .. CAMOIN, frères. Meti............. HUSSON, frères. Milan... . . . . . . . . . J. BOCCA. Mons......... . ... LEROUX. Moscow. . . . . . . ... FR. RISS, father and son. Nancy. . . . . . . . . . . VINCENOT. Nantes. . . . . . . .... MELLINET-MALASSIS. Petersburg. ... ... ... ... SAINT-FLORENT. Rennes. . . . . . . ... DUCHESNE. Rouen. . . . . . . . . . .. FRÈRE, aîné. Strasbourg. . . . ..... FEBRUARY. LEVRAULT. Toulouse.... . . . . . .. DEVERS. Turin. . . . . . . 3 . ... CHARLES BOCCA. 1; PARIS. - IMPRIMERIE DE CASIMIR, RUE DE LA VIEILLE-MONNAIE, N° 12, prè la rue des Lombards et la place du Chîtelet. JARDINIER MARAICHER, PÉPINIÉRISTE, BOTANISTE, FLEURISTE ET PAYSAGISTE; PAR M. LOUIS NOISETTE, MEMBRE DES SOCIÉTÉS LINRÉENNE DE PARIS, HORTICULTURALLS DE LORDAES ET DE BERLIN, D'ACRICULTURE ET DE ROTANIQUE DE CAUO, ET AUTEUR DU JARDIN FRUITIER; Abvec uu quanò uoubre de Siqurea. TOME DEUXIÈME. PARIS, ROUSSELON, LIBRAIRE-ÉDITEUR, RUE D'ANJOU-DAUTHINE, N° 9. 1825 ORRECJS GOC MAIN LIB.-AGRI. SuIEeS Google JARDINIER. S77 182- V. 2 utitiibutrdibuterubuurlurdetedlbiirbiede GENERAL PRINCIPLES. PART THREE. 7N8 CHAPTER ONE. DE LA GREFFE. The art of grafting has been known since antiquity, but the name of its inventor has not come down to us. It is likely that chance provided the first example, and that mankind merely perfected this discovery. The branches of two similar trees," says Dumont de Courcet (1), "intertwined and tightened immediately. The wind that agitated them tore and removed their bark at the point of their junction; the sap reunited the two parts together, and one of the two changed into the nature of the other. Whether you then cut off one of these branches below their junction, and all those on the stem of the other, you may have been astonished to see one almond tree bearing the peaches of its neighbor, or the latter producing almonds. Thus, we can believe that the grafting approach is the first (1) Le Botaniste cultivateur. 2. M734939 velles. 3 Whether this is the case or not, it is no less true that one of the world's most ancient peoples, the Phoenicians, knew this operation, by which the nature of almost all plants can be changed at will. They passed on their knowledge of grafting to the Carthaginians and Greeks. The Romans received it from the latter and spread it to Europe, where it first made great progress, but was soon lost almost entirely, because no one knew how to apply it properly, and it was regarded more as a curious and amusing experiment than as something useful. In fact, if we take the trouble to read what ancient authors had to say about it (1), we'll see that they only suspected the immense advantages that could be derived from it. It was La Quintinie who was the first of the modern authors to give a glimpse of the importance that grafting could have in agriculture: his work caused a great sensation, and the art of grafting became fashionable. It was then thought that all we had to do was to subject all trees, whatever their nature, to this operation, to metamorphose them into fruit trees, and turn our forests into immense orchards. These dashed hopes soon led to a second complete abandonment of this (1) Among Greek authors, Aristotle, Theophrastus and Xenophon; Magon among the Carthaginians; Virgil, Pliny, Varron, Constantine Caesar and Columella among the Romans; in more recent times, Kuffner, Agricola and Sikler in Germany; more recently still, Miller, Bradeley and Forsyth in England; Olivier de Serre, La Quintinie, Duhamel, Rosier, Cabanis, etc., etc., etc., in France. My first master and friend, the venerable M. Thouin, whom death has just snatched from the sciences and his many friends, has given the public, in the Annales du Musée, a monograph dos grefses in which he has recorded the progress of this astonishing art. And Baron Tschudy, in publishing his method of herbaceous grafting, has completed the history of this means of multiplying varieties. Such is the nomeuclature of ancient and modern authors who have given really interesting details on this subject. method, as had already happened eight or nine hundred years before. A graft," says M. Thouin, "is a living plant part which, when joined to another, or inserted into it, identifies with it, and grows there as on its natural foot when the analogy between the individuals is sufficient. It follows from this definition, which is perfectly accurate, that the art of grafting aims to change, according to the will of the person performing the operation, the trunk, or just the branches of one plant, into the trunk or branches of another plant; at least this is what is most commonly intended. But the results are extremely varied, and it is perhaps for this reason that this method of multiplication has so many charms for all those who devote part of their lives to cultivation, and who make it their sweetest enjoyment. Indeed, what more appealing spectacle for the thinking man, than that of a wild nature, producing at first only lacklustre flowers and bitter fruits, suddenly obeying the powerful hand that directs it, and almost immediately adorning itself with the most brilliant gifts of Flora, and delicious fruits. There's no denying that grafting, through which these miracles are performed, is one of the most lovable and useful conquests that art has made over nature. By grafting, we can preserve and multiply varieties and sub-varieties obtained by chance or by artificial fertilization, when seedlings would be powerless to reproduce them. This is how the amateur can be sure that his collections will always include those beautiful roses which are admired by all who see them, and those magnificent fruits whose exquisite flavour rivals the most seductive color. Even when these precious varieties can be multiplied by other means, we still have recourse to this one to ensure and, above all, hasten our enjoyment. If a disease, or a bizarre accident, changes the nature of a plant to a certain extent, but in a curious or pleasing way, it's through the use of chaff that we fix this monstrosity, and perpetuate it. This is why we have trees with variegated or laciniate leaves, with semi-double, double or full flowers; with fruits remarkable for their flavor, their colors or their singularities. Mossy roses with prolific lettuce or hemp leaves; laciniate, variegated or spotted maples; hermaphroditic orange trees, cluster cherry trees and a hundred other anomalies, each more singular than the last, cannot be preserved or multiplied in any other way. Grafting also has the invaluable advantage of hastening fruiting by several years. If an amateur notices in his nursery a young tree without thorns, whose leaves are developing more fully, and whose buds are closer together than in others of the same species, he can look forward to obtaining a new fruit; but this flattering expectation will not be realized, or disappointed, until the plant has reached ten to fifteen years of age (the average time for a frank tree to bear fruit); and this long wait makes a result sometimes of little value pay dearly. So what does he do? He cuts a branch from his young pupil, grafts it onto an old plant; and the second, or at the latest the third year, he can judge the merit of his new acquisition. And there's more. Although we have said that grafting preserves varieties, it does even more: it perfects them. The more an ornamental tree or shrub is grafted, the more its flower increases in volume and brilliance; this improvement is less noticeable in fruit, but it does exist. The good thing about fruit is that it increases their quality the first time it is grafted, and facilitates ripening by accelerating the time of ripening. The phenomenon of graft recovery is easily explained by physiologists. Gems, they say, are rudimens of buds, just as seeds are those of complete individuals; since the former have the faculty of making themselves clean and assimilating to their nature the fluids supplied to them by foreign roots, grafting will take place whenever the vessels designed to carry these fluids from the root to the branches are not clogged in one of their parts, and the nourishing juices can easily circulate from the subject to the graft. To achieve this, the truncated part of the graft's vessels must be in precise contact with the truncated part of the subject's vessels; the orifices of these vessels must be positively pressed together, so that the sap can pass from one to the other without encountering obstacles. The nourishing liquors deposit, as they pass over the wound, a sufficient quantity of organic matter to weld the edges of the wound; the overabundance passes into the bud, which it develops, and recovery takes place. In the absence of discerning and accurate observation, it was once believed, and authors are still printing today (1), that "whatever the method (of grafting) used, it is always a question of uniting the liber of the two individuals". The liber (first bark joining the sapwood) plays no more essential a role in the success of this operation than any other part of a plant in which nourishing fluids circulate. We ask these authors whether they have ever seen grafts of fruit, leaves or herbaceous stems performed with complete success; they (1) See L'HORTICELTEUR FRANÇAIS. O° know that these parts have neither bark nor bast: so how can it be the bast that has brought about the recovery? In their organization, plants offer us a phenomenon that's easy to observe: they have parts, which we'll call living, in which reside all the principles of vegetation or growth; sap, through extremely fine and untidy channels, circulates to feed them: so they're the only ones that grow by their own energy. This is particularly true of leaves, fruiting bodies and bark, as well as the stems of herbaceous succulents. Woody plants have dead parts that take no growth by their own energy; these are sapwood and wood. For example, if a tree trunk grows, it owes this only to the overabundance of fluids produced by the bark. The quantity in excess of what is needed to nourish the living parts extravasates between the wood and the bast, thickens there, and becomes the so-called cambium, which soon hardens, lignifies and forms a new layer of sapwood. If it finds an opening through which it can pass to the outer surface of the bark, it coagulates by contact with the air, and forms new gems, which soon develop into vigorous branches, or roots if placed in favorable circumstances. If we thought we had to assign to the graft a particular principle that acts to revive it, we would say that this principle is nothing other than the cambium, or, if we prefer, the sap that has reached a certain degree of thickening; and by this we would explain all species of grafts, since sap is in circulation in all living parts. We conclude that the best way to ensure the recovery of a graft is: 1° to place it on a plant in the part where the sap, being more elaborate than elsewhere, has the greatest tendency to organize itself; 2° to make the subject's sap vessels coincide as closely as possible with those of the graft; 3° to choose, for grafting, the period when the sap also has the greatest propensity to organize itself. However, even with all these precautions, we still won't succeed in carrying out the recovery unless the two individuals we subject to this experiment have a certain degree of analogy between them, which we haven't yet been able to calculate. Some authors say that, to ensure the success of this operation, it must be carried out on two congeneric subjects: but what do they mean by congeneric subjects? That's what we don't understand, and even what they'd be at a loss to explain. As is all too common today, they avoid a difficulty by equivocation, and this method ends up confusing science to such an extent that its progress is singularly retarded. We have carried out many experiments on this subject, which have led us to the knowledge of a large number of specific facts; but these same facts, far from enlightening us on the general principle, seem on the contrary to cover it in our eyes with a more impenetrable veil. For example: the analogy between pear and apple trees is far more striking than that between pear and quince trees; yet pear trees grafted onto quince trees are perfectly successful, whereas apple trees vegetate for a year or two without bearing fruit, and then perish. What could be the cause of this? This pear tree, which we have never been able to get to recover completely from the apple tree, will succeed to a certain extent if we graft it onto medlar, azero and even thorn, all species which seem to have much less in common with it. Cherry trees cannot unite with plum trees, with which they are closely related, nor with apricot, peach and almond trees; and Virginia chionanthus, whose fruit is a berry, does very well on ash, whose fruit is a capsule. An estimable author is wrong when he says that the theory of the art consists in "only grafting varieties of the same species, species of the same genus and, by extension, genera of the same family" onto each other. If we put this theory to the test in practice, we'll see that the exceptions, or rather the facts that contradict it, are a hundred times more numerous than those used to establish it. It is true that the author adds that it is still necessary to: "Observe the analogy of trees in the "epochs of the movement of their sap, in the perma" nence or fall of their leaves, and in the quali" tés of their own juices, in order to put all these "things in relation between the subjects and the grafts." In the majority of cases, the analogy between the permanence or fall of leaves is of no use at all; there is more: in some, circumstances an evergreen tree takes over from another whose leaves fall every year; but it is not this error that we need to concern ourselves with at present. We will only point out that, when he speaks of seeking analogy between the proper juices, he is much more consistent than the authors with congeneric species, without having taken science one step further; for how is it possible to recognize analogy in the proper juices? If we were to subject them to chemical analysis, the result, which is very difficult to obtain, would be useless. Should we rely on analogies that the eye can grasp, all limpid juices resemble each other, as do all milky, gummy and resinous juices. If we could reasonably recommend to gardeners a study which would perhaps be more harmful than useful, because of the loss of precious time it would entail, we would advise them to look for these analogies in the vascular system of plants, in the shapes of medullary cases, etc., and perhaps this research, aided by experience, would lead them to make some valuable discoveries in the art of grafting. As for us, we shall confine ourselves to the theory we gave above, and add only that, to ensure success, the operation should be carried out very lightly, so as not to give the amputated parts time to dry out; as much accuracy as possible should be used in reassembling them; they should be protected from meteorological influences that could harm them, and we should try to help them benefit from those that could be favorable. Further details will be given in the article on each individual crush, and the subjects to be chosen for placing the species and varieties will be listed in the cultivation of each individual. Lacking knowledge of the degrees of affinity necessary between two trees for the success of a cranesbill, a great many ridiculous tales were once told on this subject. For example, it was claimed that grafting a peach tree onto a willow tree produced a fruit of prodigious size, but whose flesh was inedible. It has been claimed that, to protect the orange tree from the effects of frost, all you had to do was graft it onto the holly; that a rose grafted onto the blackcurrant bush produced black flowers; and finally, even today, some authors have allowed themselves to be persuaded by charlatans that a rose grafted onto the holly bush produces a green rose. Dumont de Courcet himself, while refuting these errors, seems to believe them to a certain extent; and, in fact, it takes many years of experience not to be tempted by the appearance of naivety with which many people tell you they have seen it. One has, either foolishly or out of ignorance, put forward a false fact; one supports it out of self-love: such is the spirit of ordinary men: one prefers to support a silliness against the very evidence, than to admit that one has been mistaken, or that one may have been! The results of grease are perhaps even more difficult to explain than the relations of analogy it needs to resume. This operation so modifies the character of certain trees, that it seems to change their nature. For example, apple trees grafted onto franc trees grow to prodigious heights; on paradis they reach just a few feet; and it's much the same for all trees grafted onto scions. The scissor sorb grafted on hawthorn grows, in a few years, to a height of twenty-five or thirty feet; from seed, it remains a mediocre shrub for a long time. The ragouminier produced by its seeds crawls on the ground and rarely reaches more than two feet high; grafted onto a plum tree, its stems stand upright, join together in bundles and grow to four or five feet. What is even more singular is that many trees that cannot withstand the cold of our winters when they are free-standing, cease to be sensitive to it when they are grafted; For example, the Japanese medlar, grafted on hawthorn, has spent the winter for some years in the open ground, with the simple precaution of covering its branches with a little straw, whereas those from seed have not been able to withstand the frost, even though more meticulous precautions have been taken for them. The true pistachio tree, grafted on terebinth, is not sensitive to a cold of ten degrees; if it is produced by its seeds, it perishes at six, says a famous professor (M. Thouin.) Finally, all trees, without exception, produce more fruit, of greater volume and better quality, when grafted; and the more often they are grafted, the more these qualities increase. As this is the most useful and ordinary result we intend to achieve, it is also the only phenomenon D. will try to explain. If we succeed in lifting a corner of the veil with which nature likes to cover her most essential operations, we will believe we have done science a real service, because our conjectures will perhaps point the way to someone more skilful than us, who will later complete the task of shedding full light on this part of the gardener's art. Then, as experience will always agree with theory, we'll no longer be groping our way along, and we'll suddenly obtain the precious results that may still be hidden from us. First and foremost, we need to specify the effects of grafting on the fruiting bodies, and admit only those observed by experience. 1° It is certain that the fleshy pericarps of all fruits with pepins and most others are almost always, by a fifth, a quarter, and sometimes even a third, larger on grafted individuals, even of the same variety, than on those resulting from seeds. 2° Seeds, far from being altered by this development of the pericarp, are on the contrary larger, in equal numbers, and just as fertile. There are exceptions to this principle, which we'll discuss later. 3° Grafting influences the flavor of the fruit, making it sweeter, more fragrant, and more agreeable to the taste, but simply by altering the stems, without involving the subject's own juices. Some authors claim that the subject modifies the flavor of the grafted fruit, or even changes it. They say that the Queen Claude plum, grafted on different varieties of wild plants of its species, is tasteless on some and delicious on others; that cherries grafted on mahaleb, cherry laurel or wild cherry have a completely different taste. But several experiments have taught us that this is a mistake. We'll explain the results of our observations below. In the great majority of plants, and particularly in those that take cuttings or marcottes, and which lend themselves to grafting (perhaps in all of them), all the parts that compose them are endowed, by the effect of their particular organization, with the faculty of elaborating the nourishing juices that are transmitted to them by any matter whatsoever, and of assimilating them to their own nature, without these juices ever retaining the slightest analogy with what they were before (1). The only influence they can have on a plant is to produce a greater development of vegetation, if they are abundant, and this for the sole reason that the plant appropriates a greater quantity of them. (1) This is not to say that terroir has no influence on the quality of harvests; experience gives us proof to the contrary in every place, and it will certainly never be denied that Bordeaux wine is better than Surène. But these differences are only slight modifications in the flavor of the fruit, and cannot be used to characterize varieties. What's more, if we were to take into account the influences of climate, exposure, meteorites, cultivation, wine-making methods, time of ripening and species of plant, the contribution of the land would be reduced to very little, perhaps even nothing; it's almost certain that, if soil from the Clos Vougeot were brought to Paris, the vines planted there would produce no better wine than Surène. We are aware that other objections may be raised: for example, vegetables grown in soil smoked with excrement are usually tasteless; at least those grown on some of the plains around Paris are reputed to be so. This is not, as is often thought, due to the nourishing juices supplied by the fertilizer, but rather to the miasma it exhales, which attaches itself to the surfaco of the leaves and other parts of the plants, impregnating them with a bad odor. It would be more difficult to explain the so-called "terroir taste" in certain wines. However, it has often been remarked that vines placed in the vicinity of a lime kiln impart to the wine an unpleasant taste, caused by the sediment that the smoke deposits on the grapes, and not at all by nourishing juices; would it not be the same in this case, and could we not attribute this so-called terroir taste to mephitic mists that act in the same way as the lime kiln smoke? 9 For example, a tree planted in good soil will grow much larger than one planted in poor or mediocre soil. This principle of plant physiology is proven by experience, and we really can't imagine how anyone could have doubted it, when they wondered whether the sap of a subject on which a graft had been placed would influence the shape, color and flavor of a fruit, to the point of making it a new species, or at least a new variety. The sap of the subject will act on the graft in precisely the same way as the nourishing juices of the earth act on a cutting or a marcotte. Whether these juices are supplied to a plant by clay, silica or alumina, by calcareous, sandy or granitic soil, by humus derived from animal or vegetable decomposition, from the moment they are absorbed by the cutting, they will metamorphose into its own substance, they will become of the same essence as it, regardless of what they were before absorption; and the most trained eye will see no difference in the forms and tissues of two cuttings of the same species growing in different types of soil. Now, grafting is nothing other than a cutting, which, instead of being made in the ground and absorbing nourishing fluids through roots, is placed on a bark whose nourishing fluids it absorbs by bringing its sap vessels into contact with those of the subject. Finally, to cut a long story short, a graft is nothing more than a parasitic plant, living at the expense of another, without ever forming a single individual with it. To be sure of the truth of this assertion, all you have to do is take a grafted tree of any age and remove the grafts. You will see that the fibers of the serous vessels of the subject and the graft are superimposed, but never continuous. Even more 4 convincing proof: if the graft were not parasitic, when, for example, it is placed at half stem height on a three-year-old subject already having six woody layers, twenty years later it could no longer detach, because there would be forty uninterrupted woody layers, from the root of the tree to its head, and the first six superimposed layers would be enclosed under the other forty continuous layers. But this is not the case: each woody layer starting from the root retains the nature of its subject until it is grafted, at which point continuity is broken; not only does its nature change, but it is abruptly interrupted, and another layer, completely distinct and of the nature of the graft, is superimposed in such a way as to seize its nourishing juices without there being any prolongation of the first, or even the slightest inter-crossing in their reciprocal fibres. Lastly, a graft is held to the subject only by a kind of gearing and a particular sticking. We conclude from all this that the subject's sap has no influence on the shape, flavour or color of the fruit; that it cannot modify the nature of the graft, and that the subject influences it only by the greater or lesser quantity of food it supplies; which can be estimated on roughly the same scale as the influences of a plot of land on the bonture placed there, according to its good or bad quality. 4° Trees whose grafting has the greatest effect on fruit development live much shorter lives than others. The apple from paradis is the largest, and the tree lives only twenty-five years at most; the apple from doucin is often smaller, and the tree more vigorous; the apple from franc is smaller still, and the tree lives up to one hundred and twenty years; the apple from sauvageon is the smallest, and the tree lives two hundred years. 5° The more the graft develops the size of the fruit, the more it also stops the general development of the tree: and this phenomenon follows the same progression as longevity. It has been feared that certain foreign trees seem to evade the general principles we have just established; for example, red and yellow poppies, grafted on horse chestnut, are said to live longer than those grown from seed; bird mountain ash and Lapland celni are in the same situation, etc.; but it would be easy for us to give you more details.But it would be easy for us to establish that, if these facts are true, they are mere anomalies that must be attributed to particular causes, and we can affirm that individuals from seed are always the most vigorous and longest-lived. Now let's try to find the causes to which we can attribute these phenomena. You'd have to have never observed nature not to have noticed an invariable law to which it is subject: it is to sacrifice everything, even individuals, for the preservation of the species; and this law applies to all organized beings. It is as a consequence of this principle that we see the largest and most robust animals, those which can therefore most easily avoid danger, or resist accidents which would destroy them, produce only a few young. Their individual strength is enough to preserve the species, so there was no need to multiply them. But when creatures share only weakness, are constantly subject to all kinds of accidents, and succumb to the slightest shock, the species would soon be destroyed if the individuals were not very numerous. The whale and the elephant produce only one young, the herring a million, the butterfly a hundred, and the mouse five to eight every month. It's much the same with plants. Annual plants, which are consequently the most hazardous D8 in terms of preservation, are those that generally produce the greatest number of seeds. A poppy, for example, will provide a hundred or two hundred times as many seeds as an oak or a chestnut; and these can be counted among the trees that multiply their seeds in greater numbers; and the reason for this is that, being found only in the north, they have to fear the rigors of winters that trees in the south have nothing to fear. The latter are generally less fruitful, although their fruits are usually larger. It follows from this principle that, since nature has in mind the multiplication of species and nothing else, it must also ensure that each individual reproduces several times before it is destroyed. So we see that, when any being, animal or vegetable, is altered in its constitution, the organic principles which should, in its healthy state, be distributed to all its parts to maintain them in their proportions and vigor, take another course and concentrate, as it were, on the organs of reproduction, in order to ensure the future existence of the small beings that will replace the one it abandons to death. This general law also applies to human beings. Naturalists and physicians have noted that people who are stunted, phthisic, or suffering from a chronic disease caused by a defect in organization, are those most prone to the venereal act. Animals that have been domesticated for a long time are the most altered in nature, and also those that reproduce in greater numbers. This observation is particularly striking in plants: When a tree is very vigorous, it bears little fruit; but when it has been mutilated by pruning, by the amputation of some of its roots, by several transplants, or even by a wound made to its trunk; when it has been subjected to ring incision, to bowing; when it has been altered at last, nature makes an effort; it seems to apprehend the destruction of the individual before it has fulfilled the purpose it expects of it, and it covers it with flowers and fruit. From this, we can conclude that experience has proven that the number, size and often the quality of fruits are inversely proportional to the vigor of the individual that produces them; and that, consequently, the more altered the plant's habit, the more it will bear fruit. However, this alteration must not be carried to the point of disorganization, as exhausted nature would make futile efforts, and the tree would bear aborted fruit and promptly perish. Grafting is an operation by which the constitution of a tree is altered, by hindering the flow of sap from the roots to the branches; the more the tree is grafted, the more it will be altered. So, according to the established principle, grafting should increase the size and number of fruits. This is all the more true as we can see that the very alteration of the subject on which we graft already influences at least their volume. Let's follow our first comparison: take, for example, two apple trees on the same branch; place the first on paradise, the second on franc; you'll get a tree from the first that rarely rises to the height of four or five feet, but the fruit will be much larger. The reason for this is that paradis is a natural marcotte detached from the base of a tree and already much altered, therefore providing less sèvè. The second will rise from twenty to thirty feet, and the fruit will be much smaller than on the first. To succeed perfectly in the grafting operation, there must also be other analogies between the two subjects, but these are much easier to grasp. If we 2. 7 D6 grafted a strong individual onto a weak or languishing subject, the result would be that the roots and trunk below the graft would never be in proportion to the head of the tree; The former, too spindly, would not attach the tree strongly enough to the earth, and would leave enough room for the winds to uproot it, or at least shake it badly; the latter, slender and thin, would eventually, after a certain length of time, no longer be able to transmit nourishment to the branches, and the tree would perish. In addition, the place where the graft would be attached to the subject would form an enormous bulge, which would soon become cankerous, present an unpleasant look, and finally lead to the loss of the plant. Varieties should also be grafted onto subjects of other varieties which experience has shown to be more suited to them, either because of their own affinities, or because of the quality of the soil in which they will be planted. For example, Provence apricots can be grafted onto stone plums, albergiers onto peach almond, and Portuguese apricots onto large damas. In dry, sandy soils, peach trees can be grafted onto almond trees; in wet soils, they can be grafted onto plum trees; and again, the varieties of grafts must be matched to the varieties of trees. All these special cases will be dealt with in detail in the articles on particular crops. Now that we've covered the general effects of grafting, we'd like to talk about the lesser-studied effects of grafting, which are more specifically related to plant physiology, but which are nonetheless essential for even the simplest practitioner to know. 1° Grafting, whatever the subject on which it is placed, as we have said, changes little or nothing in the fruit and size of the tree. Shape, growth habit, health and disease remain unchanged, with very few exceptions. When you want to multiply a species or variety by this ingenious means, it is important to choose grafts from vigorous subjects with no particular vices, and possessing all the qualities you want to fix in your offspring. By the same token, if you wish to perpetuate a disease or anomaly, such as variegation, double flowers, etc., you can do so by grafting; and you will be all the more successful if you choose the branch on which these defects are best determined. An essential observation is that diseases are only perpetuated by this operation when they are constitutional, i.e. when they belong to a modification of organization whose cause is almost always unknown, and not to an accidental lesion. Success will be certain when the disease is general; but if it modifies only a part of the plant, it will become doubtful, unless we are certain of having inserted a modified gem. Let's suppose that in a nursery there is a subject that has developed two branches, one of which will bear single flowers, the other double flowers, and that you want to propagate the double-flowered variety. If a bud is taken indiscriminately for grafting, even on the double-flowered branch, it is possible that it will be chosen below the place where the organization is altered, even if it is the bud closest to the anomaly, and the operation will be missed. But if you take a bud from the same branch and place it above, success is guaranteed. Not only are these changes transmitted by grafting, but also those due to the nature and vigour of the gems; hence the need, as far as possible, to choose the eyes to be grafted onto healthy branches, of a size proportionate to the type of graft and the size of the subject. 2° The graft, by a particular reaction on the subject I which receives it, can modify its nature to an extent which is not yet known, for lack of experiments on the subject. From some of the facts we have observed, it seems that patch grafting acts on the plant receiving it, in the same way as inoculation on animals. On several occasions, we have grafted a variegated variety onto a species that was not variegated; the graft, after having grown for some time, perished by accident, or was detached entirely, and the subject that had received it nonetheless contracted variegation. Diseases can be perpetuated by this kind of inoculation, but we don't believe the same is true of anomalies. Before going into the details of the different ways of grafting, we need to describe the instruments most needed for the operation, and indicate the substances used, either to hold the parts in place, or to facilitate wound healing. There are two types of grafting instrument. 1° The ordinary grafting knife; this is a kind of small knife, with a blade one and a half to two inches long, slightly rounded at the edge. The handle should be made of stag horn and rough, so as to fit more easily into the hand. The tah is fitted with a spatula made of boxwood, ivory, bone, and sometimes, but mistakenly, copper, forming an oval, flattened at the edges, but not sharp. This instrument is too well known to require any further description, but it must be razor-sharp to cut very cleanly, and the blade must always be kept very clean. Care should be taken to wipe it clean each time it is used on a tree of one species, and then on another of a different species. 2° The angular grafting tool, which we have invented and illustrated, pl. 6, fig. 7. It consists of a blade fifteen lines long, hollowed out into a triangular gutter a, the wider, truncated end of which is sharp; it is screw-fastened into a handle four inches long, and a small copper cover or case b is used to defend it when the instrument is put in one's pocket. Fig. 8 shows the same instrument turned upside down for more convenient cutting close to the ground. Blade a is placed, by means of a screw, on a pivot, which turns on a spring when pressed. This mechanism is used to replace the blade perpendially on the handle, so that it can be covered with a sheath, as shown by the dots. Fig. 7 is reduced by a quarter, while Fig. 8 is drawn at natural size. The other instruments are limited to a few wooden wedges, of various sizes, to place in the slot made in a strong subject, and hold it open while the graft is being driven in; and a hammer to open this slot by striking on a sharp instrument, when operating on a tree trunk that has already reached a certain size. The materials most commonly used to make the bindings that hold the parts in place until they are welded together are: 1° coarsely spun, loosely twisted wool. It is highly advantageous, because its elasticity allows it to relax as the subject grows, thus preventing strangulation and nodosities. It also has the advantage of taking moisture with difficulty, and when impregnated, retains it for a long time. This substance seems preferable to all those used to date. 2° bark strips. They have the disadvantage of being difficult to tie, of rotting too quickly, and of not loosening when the subject gropes. 3° hemp, never loosens, and, for this reason, almost always produces strangulations which not only cause nodosities, but even hinder the recovery of the cocks. 4° rushes retain too much moisture, rot quickly and lack strength. 5° wicker, split and soaked in water for some time to soften it, is used for very strong subjects, whose bark is not very delicate, 6° tar cloth: this offers the precious advantage of holding the parts together, and preserving them from humidity and the drying contact of atmospheric air. As it is not yet in use, we'll show you how to prepare and use it. Take some fine cloth, cut it into ribbons of varying widths, as required; then melt two parts black pitch, one part tallow and one part wax in an earthen vase, and cover the ribbons with it, but only on one side. Thus prepared, they can be kept for a very long time; when you want to use them, simply warm them with your hands or breath, and apply them with the precaution of running your fingers over them several times to attach them to the bark of the grafted plant. 7° Finally, in the absence of the substances we have just mentioned, anything that can be used to make a ligature can be employed with varying degrees of success. Sometimes it is not necessary to bind to maintain the graft on the subject, but it must always be protected from atmospheric influences, and particularly from humidity caused by rain for too long. In this case, we use grafting wax, or what gardeners call Saint-Fiacre's ointment. The former is composed in several ways: 1° a mixture of pitch resin and yellow wax, in equal quantities, is melted in an earthen vase; 2° or five eighths of black pitch, one eighth of resin and one eighth of yellow wax; 3° or one pound of Burgundy pitch, one quarter of black pitch, two ounces of yellow wax, two ounces of resin and half an ounce of sheep's tallow. This composition, used in our establishment and in that of Luxembourg, is excellent: it is melted over a very small fire in a cast-iron pot, and heated on a portable stove, to be used as needed; 4° or two-thirds of yellow wax and one-third of tallow, 5° or finally one-third of black pitch, one-third of yellow wax and one-third of tallow, to which is added a roughly equal quantity of bricks pulverized as finely as possible. This last method also seems very good to us, because brick dust gives solidity as well as economy. Grafting wax is used when it is heated enough to become liquid and spread easily over the bark with a brush; but care must be taken that it is too hot, as it will dry out the edges of the bark, and the operation will be missed. Saint-Fiacre ointment is nothing more than a mixture of clay and cow dung. In rainy weather, it has the serious disadvantage of retaining too much moisture and rotting the graft; in dry seasons, it has the advantage of maintaining freshness, and consequently helping recovery. Finally, some people simply use pure clay, once it has been beaten enough not to crack as it dries. Each of these methods is to be preferred in particular circumstances, but the one that offers the most general advantages is the use of wax. If you had to graft in a place far from habitation, where you wouldn't have the convenience of a fire to soften the various waxes we've just described, you'd prepare in advance the following recipe: one pound of yellow wax, one pound of fat turpentine, half a pound of white or Burgundy pitch, and a quarter of sheep's tallow. When the composition is melted, well mixed and cooled, we knead it, wetting our hands so that it doesn't stick, and we put it into small loaves, which we take with us to use as needed. All you have to do is knead it again to soften it and make it suitable for attaching perfectly to the bark to which it is applied. Few authors have attempted to methodically classify the different types of graft, and only one has succeeded in providing truly analitical divisions: Professor Thouin. Duhamel was the first to try: he divided them into five sections, to which he gave the names of approach, cleft, crown, flute and escutcheon grafts. These sections have no characters to distinguish them from one another, and are therefore arbitrary and bad; but it is already a great achievement to have indicated to the authors who were to write after him, the methodical route they should follow to reach a useful goal that he himself missed. Rosier, who came after him, should perhaps have seized on Duhamel's conception and perfected it; all he did was add a sixth section, just as arbitrary, to which he gave the name of grafts by juxtaposition. Finally, M. Thouin included his analitical classification (1) in the memoirs of the Musée d'Histoire Naturelle, the best that we believe could be adopted in a work that would be less practical than this one. We shall extract it verbatim from his excellent work, before giving our own, based on quite different foundations. M. Thouin says: "We restrict the type of grafting to three sections, and call them: the first, approach grafts; the second, scion grafts; and the third, gem grafts. (1) Monographie des greffes, ou Description technique des diversa sortes de greffes employées pour la multiplication des végétaux. 18 "The first covers all types of grafting carried out by means of some of the parts of plants that are attached to their rooted feet. "The second includes all those made with woody parts separated from one individual and transported to another. "The third and last section includes all those performed using gemma or eyes, lifted with the portion of bark surrounding them, from one plant and placed on another. "These three sections are themselves divided into series, each of which has its own secondary characteristics to distinguish them from one another. "These in turn are divided into types, each with its own distinctive characteristics. "Finally, the various varieties and sub-varieties offered by some of these types are distinguished by particular definitions, and are arranged after their main types. "Grafting by approach is divided into five series, or five different groups, according to the various parts of the plants with which they are made: " 1st series, grafts by approach on stems. "2° series, approach grafts on branches. "3° series, approach grafts on roots. "4° series, approach grafts on fruit. "5° series, approach grafts on leaves and flowers. "Scion grafts are made from young woody shoots, such as buds, twigs, small branches and roots, which are separated from their individual parts to be placed on another, to live and grow at its expense. "The kinds of grafts belonging to this section being numerous, they have been divided into five series, according to the parts of the trees with which they are performed, and the operations they require." 000 "The first includes those known as split grafts, which are usually made using young shoots produced by the first sap. "The second is usually called crown grafting, and is almost always carried out with young shoots produced by the penultimate sap, aged between twelve and eighteen months. "The third category includes branch-tip grafts, or those made from twigs with their twigs, leaves, often flower buds, and sometimes young fruit. "The fourth category includes side grafts, which are made on stems without requiring amputation of the head of the individuals on which they are made. "The fifth and last category consists of grafting roots onto aerial plant parts, and young scions onto root stocks. Grafting by gemma consists of an eye, bud or gemma, carried on a plate of bark of varying size and shape, transported from one place to another on the same or other individuals. "As this section offers a fairly large number of different types and modes of grafting, it has been divided into two series: "The first includes all the scape grafts carried out by means of an isolated gemma, or several joined into a single button. "The second includes all flute and juxtaposition grafts, which can bring together several gemmas, separated from each other, on the same bark tube. The reader can see from this excerpt how precisely and accurately Mr. Thouin has created divisions to which the zoa grafts he knew 90, those that were unknown to him, and even those that may be invented in the future, can easily relate. If we have not adopted his classification, it is because we wanted to present the graft species as far as possible in the order of their use. Our intention being to produce a useful work, we must always ascribe the theoretical approach to the practical one; moreover, it will be easy to classify all our grafts in M. Thouin's divisions, and it is with this aim in mind that we have reported the characters he assigns to each of his main divisions. bbb FIRST SECTION. GRAFTING FRUIT TREES. FIRST DIVISION. GENERAL GRAFTING OF FRUIT TREES. When we graft a fruit tree, we propose one or more aims, but these can only be the following: 10 to multiply a variety or species, by placing it on a different variety or species; 2° to place several species or varieties on a single subject; 3° to rejuvenate a tree in whole or in part; 4° to repair a shape defect in its bearing; 5° to increase its vigor; 6° to obtain fruit on a very young tree; 7° to increase the quality and size of the fruit in a particular way; 8° to repair a wound made to the bark of a precious tree; 9° to obtain a large number of francs on a single stump. 08 Grafting for variety propagation. (L. ESCUTCHEON GRAFTS. An escutcheon is a small plate of bark, imitating a shield, on which is a gem commonly known as an eye or bud. Several types of grafting, which we will describe below, have taken their generic name from this plate, and are carried out according to the same general principles. They are usually used on young trees, from one to five years old, and even older if their bark has remained thin, smooth and healthy. They are suitable not only for fruit trees, but also for all other non-coniferous trees, shrubs and bushes, whose bark has the qualities we have just described. They are done in spring, when vegetation is beginning and the trees are well into sap, which can be recognized by the great ease with which the bark can be detached from the wood, or during the sap of August. The gardener's first step is to choose carefully the branch of the tree whose variety he wishes to multiply, and on which he is to raise the crest. This branch must be a shoot from the previous year, well budded, with perfectly formed eyes. If you fear that the buds are not ripe enough, pinch the end of the branch to stop its growth, force the sap to reach the eyes, and delay cutting until perfect maturity. When the branch is cut, the leaves are removed, but with the precaution of leaving a portion of the petiole, two or three lines long, attached to the wood; this will serve to hold the escutcheon with two fingers, when it is removed, and to place it more conveniently in the incision prepared to receive it: moreover, when, after being dried out, it falls from the graft, separating cleanly and without effort, it will be the most favourable augury for the success of the operation. 61 If you don't need to graft right away, and have to keep the cut branches for a day or two, stick them in damp earth and keep them in a cool place. If they are to be kept for several days, greater care is needed: wrap them in damp cloth or moss. Finally, if they are to travel, they should be pricked into a ball of moist earth, wrapped in wet moss, and enclosed in a tin can. Mr. Thouin recommends, for a journey of four or five days, to prick them in a cucumber or other watery fruit; and, for more distant distances, to put them in a honey bath: but these precautions seem to us excessive and even risky. If you need to graft immediately, you can remove the buds and throw them into a vase of water, to prevent the air and heat from drying them out: at least this method is used by some gardeners. But the safest way is to dip only the branches into the water, and remove them one after the other, as needed to lift the escutcheons and place them in their incision. This is done by cutting the bark of the tree from the epidermis to the sapwood, first by a transverse cut, then by a longitudinal one which starts in the middle of the first and extends, downwards or upwards, in a length proportionate to that of the crest, so as to form the shape of a straight or inverted T. To place the escutcheon, start at the top and spread the two lips of the incision with the spatula or ivory blade of the grafting machine, lifting the bark with great care to avoid tearing or injuring it. The escutcheon, which had been placed between the lips to keep the hands free, is grasped by the petiole and slid under the bark: the bast of the transversely cut part is made to coincide perfectly with the bast of the transversal incision of the subject; then the lips of the subject's bark are brought closer together, so that there is no gap between the parts, through which foreign corps could enter. The ligature is made by wrapping the whole, except for the bud, with several turns of wool or hemp; not too tightly, so as not to injure the bark by compressing it, and the operation ends there. All that remains is to visit the grafts from time to time to make sure that the ligature has not formed any constrictions or bulges; and, if this happens, the grafts are undone on the spot to make them looser again. After a fortnight or a month, the bark is reunited, and the graft resumed. We will now list and describe the escutcheon grafts most commonly used to propagate fruit species or varieties). Nora. All grafts marked with an asterisk" are used in daily practice; those marked with two " are generally used. 10** Ecus graft its woody. Lenormand graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1re, fig. 3. c, incision; a, open incision; b, escutcheon (1). An escutcheon is raised on a branch. To do this, we make a transverse incision above a healthy, vigorous eye (1) We have shown the sizes of all the grafting species we know, and we have referred to M. Thouin's Synonymy all those known to this learned professor. However, we must warn our readers that they will sometimes find differences in cuts, if they compare our figures with those cited by this respectable man; here is the reason: M. Thouin, in writing his Monographie des grefses, was writing the history of the art, rather than wishing to teach its new application to current practice. He therefore had to quote the authors' figures without allowing himself to make any changes. Our aim being different from his, we felt it necessary to illustrate our grafts as they are used in current practice, either in our establishment or in other growers' establishments, without bothering much with the sigures of the former authorsa. The first incision is a deep, vertical cut; then, bringing the blade of the grafting knife a little higher than this cut, a strip three to four lines wide and an inch or an inch and a half long is removed; it is pointed at the bottom, and the first incision causes it to be cut transversely at the top. The eye should be about one-third of the way up, and the stipules or other membranes that sometimes accompany the stalk that has been left behind, the prickles or other appendages, should be carefully removed. Using the tip of the grafting tool, the wood is removed from the escutcheon, leaving a slight blade about a third of the way along. This escutcheon is then inserted on the tree, and tied as described above. This graft is suitable for all seeded and stone fruit trees, as well as for most forest and ornamental trees, and is the most widely used in the Paris area. ** Graft in the form of a shield with a growing eye. Jouette graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1re, fig. 3. a, subject incision; b, escutcheon. The escutcheon is cut and placed in the same way as for the previous graft; but as soon as it is placed, the head of the subject is cut off, and all buds growing on the stem are cut off daily. This grafting, carried out in spring, offers the real advantage of forcing the inserted bud to develop immediately, and thus hastening a year's enjoyment; however, it sometimes happens that, if the grafting does not take place, the sap, not finding a way to emerge, causes the subject to perish from fullness, at least in a large part of its length. Done in August, it rarely succeeds, because the young shoots of the escutcheon, not having time to harden off, perish in the frost, often leading to the subject's ruin. 14 3°** Sleeping-eye escutcheon graft. Vitry graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1re, fig. 3. a, subject incision; b, escutcheon. It is done in the same way as the previous ones, but at the time of the August sap, and nothing is removed from the subject until the following spring, in order to prevent the bud from developing before that season. By postponing enjoyment for a year, this type of crane secures it even more. It also has the advantage of not harming the subject if it doesn't come back. It is used almost exclusively by the inhabitants of Vitry, the largest fruit tree grower in the Paris region. It also appears to be the most suitable for peach tree propagation. 4° Reverse crest graft. Knoop graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1re,. sig.5. .a, reverse incision; b, the crest cut backwards. The escutcheon is raised in such a way that the tip of the eye, when placed on the subject, is inverted and facing the ground, whether the incision of the subject is made in the ordinary way, or in Trenversé (L). By this method, the buds are forced to grow in the opposite direction to the one they should have naturally; but they soon straighten up too, and the aim of this graft, to increase the size of the fruit by hindering the flow of sap, has been missed or more or less. (He. SPLIT GRAFTS. These are made from branches or young shoots of the last sap, well grown, with from one to six or seven eyes. One of these shoots is cut at the bottom, in the shape of a knife blade covered with its bark on the side where thickness has been preserved, or beveled with bark on both sides. The subject's head is cut, the wound is joined together, and lateral slits are made, which are brought down straight, 906 to a more or less considerable length. Using the tip of a serpette, or a wedge of wood, this slit is held ajar, while the bevel of the graft is inserted. To ensure recovery, the liber of the branch and that of the subject must be made to coincide exactly, regardless of the outer part of the bark. All that remains is to make a ligature to prevent the cracks in the subject from letting the grafts escape as they spread, and to cover the wound with grafting wax or Saint-Fiacre's ointment. When the latter composition is used, it is wrapped in a piece of cloth or canvas, bound from underneath, to prevent rainwater from washing away or at least degrading the apparatus; in this case, the graft is sometimes called a doll. Slot grafting is performed in spring, when sap begins to appear. It is used for all fruits with pips, and for a large proportion of those with stones, berries, etc. It is the most common method of grafting. It is most commonly used to form high-stemmed trees) 5.** Simple split grafting. Grafting! Atticus, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 1. a, subject split to receive the graft; b,b, branches pruned in bevel, d, or in bevel with retreat, c;c, e, branch adjusted in the split. We prepare a young branch of a smaller diameter than that of the subject, leaving two or three buds, and pruning it to three or four lines below the last eye; we then cut the stem of the subject, either at the root collar, or at different heights, up to that of eight feet; we split it in the middle of its diameter, and insert the graft with the precautions indicated above. This graft, being one of the easiest and most 2. 2 0 reliable, is generally widespread, especially in the provinces. It is perfectly successful on seed trees, less so on stone trees, with the exception of cherry and some plum trees. It is suitable for trees that need to be grafted underground, and for those that need to be raised to high stems to form orchards. It is also used for many ornamental shrubs and bushes, because it offers the precious advantage of flowering and forming a pretty head in the course of a year. Roses grafted with a single cleft almost always flower in the same year and often in the same spring. But enthusiasts, who are more interested in owning a robust tree of good growth than in premature enjoyment, are careful to remove the flower bud as soon as it appears, whether from a rose, a shrub for pleasure or a fruit tree; the sap, which would have been carried to the flowering and fruiting organs, benefits the branches and twigs. 6. * Split graft Ferrari. Thouin. Pl. a, fig. 3. Take a young branch of exactly the same size as the stem of the subject; cut it bevelled on both sides, or rather in the shape of an oboe's mouthpiece, taking care to preserve the bark on each side as it was preserved on one side in the previous operation. The subject is cut and split in the middle of its diameter; then the graft is inserted, with the precaution of making the bark of the branch and the subject coincide perfectly on both sides. This method of grafting, widely used in Italy, and particularly in Genoa, is ideal for young fruit trees, as well as many ornamental shrubs, such as jasmines from the Azores, Spain and Arabia. It hastens the fruiting of the former, the flowering of the latter, and does not have the disadvantage of often causing unpleasant bulges; however, the trees on which it is used gain less growth and last less time. 7.r Single-stem lateral split graft. Pl. 2, fig.1. This is done in the same way as the previous method, except that, since the pith of the subject must remain intact, the slit, instead of cutting the subject positively in the middle of its diameter, cuts it about a third of the way through its thickness, so as to pass alongside the pith without damaging it. This method is used for the same purposes as the previous one, and is perfectly suited to young fruit or ornamental trees, whose thick, spongy pith needs to be protected. 8.** Split graft with two branches. Palladius graft, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 7. as for the simple split graft, n° 5, two branches are prepared instead of one; then the stem of the subject is split in the middle of its diameter, and the two branches are inserted opposite each other, i.e. on the two outer edges of the split, so that each occupies half the circumference of the cut of the subject. This grafting technique is used on subjects whose stems are already an inch in diameter, or even considerably larger. The chance of success is doubled, because it is rare for both grafts to perish, if there is no particular cause for this to happen. If desired, two different varieties of fruit or flower can be placed on the same tree. This method of grafting is as widely used as the simple split graft. 9.* Lateral split graft with two branches. Like the previous method, with the difference that the subject is split slightly sideways to spare the pith. 508 This technique is used for the same purposes as the previous one, and is merely a modification of it. 10.** Split graft with four branches. Gresse Laquintinie, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 8. four branches are prepared in the same way as for the previous ones, then two slits are made on the cut of the subject, crossing in the middle of its diameter and dividing it into four equal parts; the two slits are extended, going downwards, by one to three inches in length, and the four branches are introduced into them; after which the whole is wrapped in a dolly. It is invaluable for grafting old trees whose head you want to change into a more pleasant or more useful species or variety. It quadruples the chances of success and, better than the previous methods, provides a well-filled head in a short space of time. It can also be used to bring several species to the same individual. It can only be carried out on subjects or branches that have reached a certain size. (III. SLOTTING BY ROOTS AND ON ROOTS. These are made in several ways; sometimes they are twigs that are grafted onto roots left in their place; sometimes they are roots separated from their stumps that are grafted onto stems or branches; or finally they are roots of different trees that are grafted onto each other. They are done at the beginning of the spring sap, and in the same way as other split grafts. Although not widely used, they might be worth adopting, as several plant species are very well suited to them. In addition, they would undoubtedly improve fruiting, because they impede sap flow more, and therefore force it to focus more particularly on the fruiting organs. But to achieve this goal, the operation would have to be twofold. For example, we would graft a stem of a different species onto the roots of an individual; then, when this stem was strong enough, we would graft it in turn by placing another variety on it) 11. Cleft graft on a root collar. Gresse Guettard, de Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 10. One or more branches are prepared as for other slit grafts; then the subject is cut on the root collar, one or more slits are made, into which the branches are placed in the usual way. You can also simply make incisions in the bark, as for crown grafting. When a strong, well-established tree has a counterfeit or diseased stem, or one on which grafts cannot be placed for some other reason, far from pulling it out, as is usually done, you should take advantage of its vigorous root to graft onto it, and in a very short time obtain a robust tree of very fine growth. If an accident breaks a tree on the ground, this graft can still be used. (IV. APPROACH GRAFTING. Approach grafts are somewhat similar to marcottes; like them, they feed on their mother's roots until they have recovered to the point where they can do without them. They are very well suited to young trees, and even to those that have reached a quarter, a third or half their size. They can be carried out at any time of year, as long as there is no excessive heat or frost, but the best time to ensure prompt recovery is during the sap flow, especially at the beginning. These grafts are nothing more than the welding together of two parts of the same plant, or of two different plants, examples of which are often found in nature. To perform the operation, the part to be grafted is given a clean wound proportionate to its size, and the subject is given a similar and corresponding wound. The two are then joined so that they overlap, so that the libers of the graft and the subject are in contact at as many points as possible, and so that there is no gap between the two. The parts are secured with strong bindings, and held together with strong stakes, to prevent any movement that might cause them to come apart. Finally, we protect them from contact with air, water and even light, by covering them with a plaster of Saint-Fiacre ointment when they are made on large, robust subjects, or with a thick layer of grafting wax if they are delicate. As with other grafts requiring a ligature, careful attention must be paid to any nodosities or constrictions that may form, and the ligature must be undone and reattached less tightly if any are found. This operation, if carried out before the graft has been separated from its base, requires a great deal of care, as the stems, which have been bent to bring them together, will spring back; and, if care is not taken, they will come unstuck and untie the graft to return to their natural position. Once the weld is firmly in place, the next step is to wean the graft from the branch or stem that supplied it. If you were to cut it off all at once, you'd run the risk of losing it, because the plant's sap wouldn't yet be sufficiently abundant to nourish it completely; so you start by making a small cut underneath, and from time to time enlarge it, until finally you cut it off completely. The wound is then brought closer to the graft, by removing the heel it forms at its base; the wound is joined as close as possible to the weld, and the operation ends there. Grafting by stem approach is carried out on stems or trunks of different sizes). 12. Grafting by tongue approach. Gresse Pradeley, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 5. a, stem to be grafted; d, its splinter inserted in the slit of the subject; b, the subject; c, the splinter, formed by cutting the bark, inserted between the splinter and the wound of the stem to be grafted. The head of a young tree is cut; the cut area is slit as for a split graft, then a piece of bark is removed from one side, as for an ordinary approach graft. Once this has been done, take the branch or stem to be grafted, make a splinter in it and remove a sheet of bark of the same size as that removed from the subject; then press the splinter into the slit in the subject, join the wounds together and finish with a ligature. Very good for hardwood trees, and above all very solid. (V. BRANCH-APPROACH GRIFFES. These differ from the previous method in that, instead of welding trees by their stems or trunks, they are made by grafting a branch or twig to a trunk, stem or branch. They are easier and safer than stem grafting, and provide greater opportunities for propagation). 13.a Ordinary approach grafting. Agricola graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 9. a, a, subject and graft; b, junction. This involves bringing a branch of the variety to be grafted up against a branch or stem of the subject. Both are cut longitudinally up to the medullary sheath or a little less, and the two wounds are joined as we have said. The angular grafting machine, of our own invention, is particularly useful for this type of cress, making it much easier to join the libers, thanks to the accuracy with which it allows 08 to be placed in the two notches. It saves a lot of time and ensures good recovery. Ordinary approach grafting is widely used to propagate all delicate species and varieties of trees, shrubs and bushes, on which slit and escutcheon grafts are difficult to propagate. It is most commonly used on those with thin bark, hard wood and gems without a scaly envelope. 14. Grafting by notch approach. Cabanis graft, by Thouin. This is done in the same way as the previous method, with the difference that a simple notch is made, which must penetrate to the marrow of the subject. It is also used for the same purposes. Grafting to obtain different fruits on the same plant. It often happens that, either as an object of experiment or curiosity, we wish to have fruits of different species on a single individual. To ensure satisfactory success, you must not take the first varieties that come along indiscriminately: on the contrary, you must be very discerning in your choice, so as to establish a balance of sap in the various grafts, without which the most vigorous would soon choke the others. If, for example, you had placed a sour cherry and a sour cherry dwarf on the same subject, or a calville apple and an apis apple on a franc, there's no doubt that the sour cherry and the calville, despite all the precautions you'd take when pruning, would soon starve the other two by taking all the sap, and promptly cause them to perish. You must also choose the subject on which to operate, and give preference to one whose vigour will be in harmony with the strength of vegetation of the grafts you will place on it. Moreover, despite the care taken when pruning, and despite the precaution of only pruning trees that are suitable for this operation, you should never expect a long-lasting product, especially when you have placed more than two species. Another serious disadvantage is that, since each variety of fruit tree has its own particular habit, and its buds do not grow at the same angle, it is almost impossible to subject these heterogeneous individuals to a regular shape. To achieve this goal, all grafting techniques can be used, enabling several buds or branches to be placed on the same tree: but there are a few more specifically designed for this purpose. 15. Grafting in escutcheon at the end of branches. Jansein graft, by Thouin. This graft is done in the form of a budding or dormant bud, and is applied to branch tips whose bark is still smooth and green. If carried out in May, the branch tips are cut off as soon as the operation is completed, but with the precaution of leaving a wood eye slightly above them for some time, in order to attract the sap, or at least prevent it from leaving the branch tip, and consequently the bud, to retreat to lower buds. If you have grafted in August and then cut back the branch tips the following year, this method is not necessary, because, the welding having been perfectly carried out, the graft bud develops at the same time as the others, and is sufficient to maintain the balance of the sap. This procedure is used for all fruit species. 16. Split grafting at the end of branches. This is carried out at the same time and in the same way as ordinary split grafting, but with the precaution of leaving no buds below the buttress. 08 It is most commonly used to obtain plums or cherries of different shapes and colors, ripening at different times. 17. Grafting by compression approach. Pl. 5, Jig. 1. several plants of different species of the same height are planted in the same hole; they are spaced as little as possible, so that when recovery is certain, they can be joined into a single bundle, which is held together by means of a sheath of fresh lime bark or other material. As the trees grow, their stems are compressed and welded into a single trunk. The ancients, and Olivier de Serres among them, believed that, as the saps mixed, the result was mixed-race fruit, participating in the nature of all, without belonging more specifically to that of one than to that of another. But this error has been corrected; each species retains its own stem and roots, and produces its own fruit. 18. Approach graft, spiral graft. Diane graft, by Thouin. Pl.5, fig. 3. As with the previous method, several plants of different species of the same age, height and, as far as possible, strength are planted in the same hole. When they are perfectly established, and especially well rooted, their stems are twisted one on top of the other, much like the strands of a thick rope, following the course of the sun, i.e. from sunrise to sunset, and at a height of seven or eight feet, more or less. The stems weld together to form a single trunk, imitating a torso column. The head offers the most varied view in its foliage, flowers and fruit, and can eventually provide extremely strong twisted wood. 43 If one wished to obtain varieties on francs, one could use marcottes and cuttings on certain subjects; but, as this kind of propagation is always long, and often difficult, one can use grefse with much greater advantage. (V. CROWN GRAFTS. These are slit grafts, but differ from ordinary grafts in a number of respects. 1° They are made with branches from the last sap but one, and sometimes even with eighteen-month-old wood. 2° They are placed on subjects that are not split in all their diameter, and whose heart is not attacked. They are mainly used for grafting old fruit trees of the seedling division, whose stems or branches are too large to be budded or to receive the ordinary split graft. They can also be used on young trees with thin bark and very hard wood). 19.* Small crown graft. Liébault graft, by Thouin. A tree is dug up to its roots and cut. Using small wooden wedges, the bark is lifted, and as many twigs as can fit are placed between it and the wood, trimmed as for the split graft. Cover with soil, taking care to leave only a third, or so, of the length of the grafts above the soil surface. They grow very vigorously, and the lateral buds are removed as they grow. After three years, we dig them up and remove the rooted ones. The others are marcotte and, by strangulation, are made to emit roots very easily. The free-standing plants obtained by this method make very good mother plants, which for a long time produce young free-standing offspring. (VII. SIDE GRAFTINGS. These grafts are distinguished from other scion grafts by the fact that they do not require amputation of the subject's head, and that, like approach grafts, they are made on the side of the stem. They also differ from approach grafts in that the branch to be grafted is detached from its mother. They are more commonly used to replace a missing branch than to propagate varieties, and are much rarer than the others, although they are fairly easy to perform. They must be strictly carried out at the first sap flow of spring, before the buds have begun to develop). 20.* Grafting by cutting approach. Pepin graft, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 6. a, the cutting planted in a pot; b, c, cut. A branch of sufficient length to make a cutting is cut and planted next to the subject. It is then grafted to three-quarters of its height, and trimmed to three eyes above its union with the subject. The humidity of the soil sustains life in the graft until it is welded; and, when it is taken up, the subject supplies sap to the branch until it has taken root. The result is that by cutting the branch below the weld, we have a free-standing subject, and the subject, wild before the operation, is changed into an individual of a good species; and we have two trees instead of one. O08 Grafting to obtain fruit from young trees. A very young tree can be forced to bear fruit by various means, but almost always at the expense of its lifespan. However, the grafting method described here only alters the tree to a certain extent, and when pruned carefully, it can continue to bear fruit for several years. 21. Side graft, inserted like an escutcheon. Girardin graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 8. a, bevel of graft; b, incision and insertion of graft. A branch bearing fruit buds is selected, and its base is cut with an extended bevel. A T-shaped incision is made on the subject, as if to place a crest; the bark is lifted with the spatula of the grafting machine, and the bevel of the graft is inserted. Ligature is then applied in the same way as for the previous graft. This scion graft belongs to the side graft series. Grafting to increase fruit quality. Accredited authors such as Olivier de Serres, Miller, Duhamel, Rozier, etc., believed that it was simply a matter of placing several grafts one on top of the other, to hasten the fruiting of a tree, greatly increase the volume and flavor of the fruit, and hasten the time of ripening. Most growers today are still imbued with this belief, which becomes an error if we give it the same extension as the ancients. In our Theory of Grafting we said that the more a tree was altered, the more its fruit gained in quality, and it is through the abuse of this true principle that a false consequence has been drawn by saying: If a first graft increases the volume of an O00 fruit by altering a plant, a second graft, increasing the alteration, will increase its size; a third, even more; a fourth likewise, and so on indefinitely, or at least until, nature having made its last efforts, the fruits have reached monstrous dimensions. They did not consider that this alteration, once reached a certain degree, would produce an effect absolutely opposite to the one they supposed, and that the tree, at the fourth, perhaps even at the third graft, would cease to bear fruit, languish for some time in exhaustion, and perish in the long run. But supposing it resisted these mutilations, thanks to the long intervals of time that we could put between each operation, we would still only obtain the degree of alteration that we usually obtain by other means, such as cuttings and layering, and that we naturally find in offshoots. Let's suppose, for example, that we graft an apple tree onto a wild tree: The first graft will produce a degree of deterioration; a second graft will produce a second degree of deterioration, which we compare to that of the franc; a third will produce the degree of deterioration of the doucin; a fourth, that of the paradis, and a fifth will produce nothing, since the deterioration of the paradis, reducing its size to two or three feet, is the last degree of deterioration that a tree can withstand without perishing, or at least without remaining sterile. The proof is that paradise trees that do not reach this level of development - and this happens quite often in poor soils - cease to bear fruit, which means they have to be uprooted. If we were to compare the fruit obtained by grafting with that obtained by selecting subjects, their increase in volume would follow the same pattern, and the fifth graft would produce precisely the same fruit as the first one obtained from paradise; after which no more results would be expected, as the tree would be entirely exhausted. Even if the alteration by grafting did not work in exactly the same proportions as that from wild to frank, from frank to doucin, and from doucin to paradise, the two extreme points being the same, the final result would also be the same. Assuming, therefore, that grafts-on-grafts have the influence on fruit that the authors attribute to them, which seems more than doubtful to us, the product would be of little interest, since it can be obtained immediately by another, simpler and, above all, much less time-consuming method. We are therefore only giving these grefses to complete our monograph, and at the same time to provide growers with the means to ascertain the truth of our assertion. 22. Graft-on-graft in slit. Slot grafting is done in the ordinary way. When the graft is sufficiently advanced, we take one of our own shoots and graft it onto the previous year's growth. The operation is repeated, always taking the branch from the shoots of the last graft, until there are several, one on top of the other. 23. Graft-on-graft in escutcheon. Duroy graft, by Thouin. Grafting is carried out in the same way as above, with the difference that the escutcheon graft is used instead of the slit graft. It seems that Mr. Thouin does not positively deny the usefulness of these two grafts, as he recommends leaving fruiting branches below each of them, in order to have irrefutable points of comparison, which will easily resolve this important question. 009 Grafting to increase a tree's vigor, or rejuvenate it. The descriptions of these grafts, most of which are rarely used, will provide sufficient indication of the more or less advantageous benefits that the grower can derive from them, 24. Noël graft by approach. Thouin. Several trees of different heights, but of the same species and variety, are planted a year in advance. They are grafted onto each other using the following grafting procedure, by wedge-shaped approach. Mr. Thouin claims that this method gives the trees extraordinary vigor, and modifies the flavor and size of their fruit. This last point does not seem sufficiently proven to us, and we believe even less that new breeds can be obtained. 25. Grafting by wedge-shaped approach. Monceau graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 11. a, triangular cut; b, wedge-shaped end. The head of a very long wedge is cut, then a deep triangular notch is made in the tree to be grafted, in the opposite direction to the wedge: the wedge is inserted into the notch, and the parts are tied together with a ligature. This gives extraordinary vigour to a tree that receives nourishment from two root systems, even though it has only one head. The preceding graft is said to increase vegetative strength even more, because it gives several root systems to the same head, whereas this one gives only two. 26. Greffe Buffon, by approach. Thouin. When a fruit tree is spreading its branches horizontally, a savage of a certain strength is planted under each of the largest branches; the tops of the branches of large trees are arched; the end is cut off and beveled. Once this has been done, the wildings are notched, the bevels joined to the notches, and held in place with a ligature. In no time at all, you have an extremely singular tree, whose head is all the better for being fed by several trunks. This grafting technique could be very advantageously employed in landscape gardens, where picturesque effects are sought: in addition, it produces a greater number of more beautiful and better fruits. (VIII. APPROACH GRAFTING ON ROOTS. Their name indicates what they are, and how they differ from other approach grafts. They could be very useful for re-establishing a tree that is ill due to exhaustion or any other alteration of its roots; but so far they have not been used in the usual practice of horticulture). 27. Grafting by root approach. Lemonnier graft, by Thouin. Two holes are dug, one on each side, at the foot of a diseased tree whose roots have been slightly uncovered. Two root stocks are planted in these holes, chosen from species known to provide good subjects for grafting the species or variety of tree affected by the disease: then, on the cut surface of the two root stocks, the ends of the two main roots of the individual to be cured are grafted, by inlaying, so as to preserve its stem and all its ascending parts. This inlay is made by making a notch in the subject, into which the beveled root tip is inserted, as for an ordinary slit graft. Cover with soil, and the operation is complete. It is claimed that this method, by providing the tree 2. 9 with healthy, vigorous roots, not only restores it to full health, but also increases its fruiting. 28." Crown grafting for rejuvenation. Pliny's graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 3. a, flute beak with its notch. Pliny described this graft, calling it incisio inter corticem et lignum. The branches or even the trunk of an old tree, which is beginning to bear no more fruit, are cut at various points; the bark is lifted around the cut area; the branches to be grafted are cut in the shape of a flute-beak; a notch is made at the upper part of the notch where the flute-beak begins, then they are inserted between the bark and the sapwood of the subject. These new branches grow very vigorously, and in a short time produce a beautiful head, or vigorous branches that bear fruit for several years. 29. Crown graft in the bark. Théophraste graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 4. As in the previous method, the branches or trunk of the subject are cut off, but instead of lifting the bark, it is split vertically in all parts of the perimeter where grafts are to be placed. The branches are pruned in the same way, and inserted between the sapwood and the bark where the latter has been split, so that the two lips of the split cover both sides of the flute mouthpiece made at the base of each graft. It is more advantageous and safer than the previous method, in that it allows a greater number of branches to be placed, and because the bark is not detached from the wood next to the grafts, air cannot get in to dry out the cambium and prevent repriscation. It also serves the same purpose. D4 30. Crown side graft. Gresfe Richard, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 8. a, bevel of the graft; b, T-shaped incision into which the branch is inserted. A branch is taken and trimmed at its base with a long, flattened bevel. A T-shaped incision is made in the subject, as if to place a crest; the bark is detached from the sapwood with the spatula of the grafting machine, and the bevel of the graft is slid between the two, held in place with a ligature. It is ideally suited to replacing the escutcheon graft on trees whose old bark has become thicker and stronger. It can be used to place branches where they are missing, or to replace those that have had to be cut off due to accident or disease. Before the discovery of herbaceous grafts, they were used quite advantageously for resinous trees. 31. Crown side graft, ame sorte. Pl. 3, fig. 8. c, T-shaped incision from which the circular piece of bark is removed. This is done in the same way as the previous one, but a small circular piece of bark is removed from the T-bar, so that the bast of the upper part of the subject's incision coincides with the bast of the upper part of the graft's bevel. It is suitable for the same uses as the previous one. 32. Peg side graft. Terence graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 9. c, branch inserted in hole. A small branch, twig or twiglet is cut; it is headed at one end, and the base is trimmed and thinned to form a dowel. Then use a crankshaft 000 to make a hole in the stem or trunk of a tree, and press the graft into it, always taking care to match the bark. The wound is covered hermetically with grafting wax. It is used for the same purposes as the previous ones, but is much stronger. 33. Grafting from the side and backwards. This is done in exactly the same way, but on the opposite side.

Instead of pruning the branch at its base, it is pruned at its upper end, so that it is inserted backwards. The Romans preferred to use these two grafts to propagate the most precious varieties of vine and olive. Terence especially recommends their use. 34. Side graft, simple, by notching. Pl. 5. fig. 7. Take a branch slightly smaller than the stem to be grafted, cut it into a thin wedge elongated at its base, and cut its upper part two or three eyes above the bevel. A deeper cut is made as it is lowered to an inch or an inch and a half, but never deep enough to reach the heart of the wood. The graft is placed so that the bark on either side of the notch coincides perfectly with the bark on either side of the wedge, and is secured by a ligature. This method, which is simple and easy to perform, offers a high chance of success, and produces fairly solid heads. 35. Side grafting, double, by notching. The twigs are cut into wedges as for the previous method, but bark is left on one side only; or better still, they are cut into knife blades, with bark only on the thick part opposite the cutting edge. On a tree much larger than 906 the grafts, make a notch similar to the previous one, just as long but shallower, and insert two grafts, one on each side of the notch, taking care to ensure that the bark coincides perfectly. The width of the notch and the size of the grafts must be combined in such a way as to leave no gap between the two branches when they are placed in pace. Ligature is used to hold the branches together. As easy as simple grafting, this method deserves preference, because it offers a double chance of success. 36. Side grafting by transverse notching. Gresse Roger Schabol, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 10. a, subject cut; b, spatula-cut branch; c, insertion. The branch is cut in the shape of a flute-beak or spatula, and the subject is notched crosswise, reaching directly to the middle of its diameter without raising or lowering the notch; then the graft is inserted in the same way as a tenon in its mortise. The wound is covered with grafting wax. This method, much more difficult than the previous ones, is not as successful, and is rarely used. It is used for the same purposes. These seven grafts are included in the series of crown grafts, because several can be placed around the same stem when it is strong enough. 37. Die-cut escutcheon graft. Mus tel graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, Jig. 4. a, wound; b, bark blade. One must have a specially made punch, with which one removes a plate of bark from a subject. Using the same tool, or the blade of the grafting machine, we lift the escutcheon or bark blade, in the middle of which is a vigorous O09 eye. It must be exactly the same size as the wound made in the subject, in order to fill it with the greatest precision. When it is well adjusted, it is held in place with grafting wax, or soft wax. This method is excellent for placing escutcheons on old trees, whose thick, rough bark would not lend itself to ordinary escutcheon grafting. Grafting to maintain a tree's shape and vegetation balance. In the absence of well-placed branches to bend into the shape intended for a tree (cattail, goblet, espalier, etc.), we are sometimes forced to maintain a vicious shape, or to place buds where nature has denied them. To do this, we employ several types of grafting, according to the various circumstances that chance may present, and with time and patience, we manage to restore to a precious individual all the regularity and grace of which it was deprived. Quite often, a tree loses its regular shape, because the sap, carried away in some branches without anyone being able to guess at the cause, abandons other parts which initially lose weight and end up withering away after a while. 38. Grafting by approaching gourmands. Malesherbes graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig.1. a, gourmand branch; b, its insertion in the stem. We measure the length of branches commonly known as gourmands, which grow on some parts of a tree at the expense of the useful branches they starve. We see whether their tops can easily reach the main stem, or the suffering branches, by means of a slight inclination or arch. 906 A notch is made in these parts, to receive the end of the gourmands that have been bevelled, and they are welded together by means of inlay or braid in the ordinary approach. The result is that the sap, which was too abundant in the gourmands, is restored by them to the parts that were deprived of it, and the balance is quickly re-established. 39. Grafting by approaching branches. Forsyth graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4,sig. 2, a, branch lacking twig; b, twig grafted to it by approach, at c; d, twig cut when perfect recovery is achieved. On the stems and branches of a subject, wherever twigs are missing, notches are made from the sapwood down to the wood. Select nearby twigs, cut them in opposite directions, join the parts wound on wound, taking care to ensure that they overlap exactly, and that the bark coincides; then hold the unit together with ligatures. When the graft is complete, the twigs are cut off below the graft, and the tree is well stocked with them wherever they were lacking. Grafting is particularly used on fruit trees pruned into goblets, espaliers, fans and especially cattails, to add branches where they are lacking, make them more regular and more pleasing to the eye, and thus increase their yield. 40." Approach grafting for head replacement. Cauchoise graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 4. a, triangular notch of the subject; b, notch of the young subject which is to provide the new head; c, the same notch seen from the front. 009 The head of a subject is cut off, or the wound is joined when the tree has been broken by an accident, then a triangular notch is made on the cut area. As close as possible to its foot, plant a young tree whose head is beginning to form; tilt it over the cut of the first one; and, by means of a wedge-shaped notch made in its stem, fix it in the triangular notch of the tree, and make a ligature to hold everything together until perfect recovery. Then the young tree is cut below the graft, and the old trunk, supplying abundant sap to the new head, soon makes it develop dimensions equal to those of the first one it has lost. If the wind, or any other accident, breaks or destroys the head of a tree in an avenue, a stagger or an orchard, it is much better to replace it with another, using this graft, than to replace it with a young subject whose growth will be very long, even supposing that the neighbouring trees do not choke it. The inhabitants of Normandy, Picardy, etc., use no other means to repair the damage that the wind sometimes causes to their immense plantations of cider apple trees. 41. Grafting using a prop approach. Gresse Duhamel, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 8. a, an old tree, its trunk destroyed by age, in b, is replaced by young trees, c,c, c,c. Around the trunk of a large tree are planted several subjects of a certain strength. The following year, when they have fully recovered, their heads are cut off, and the ends of their stems are pruned into tenon shapes. Mortises are dug into the trunk of the large tree, into which the tenons are inserted and fixed. Young trees should be planted at a distance from the old trunk, calculated so that when they are bent to fix 4 them, they do not form an angle of more than 35 to 40 degrees. An extremely strong ligature is made over the wounds, with chissons and old ropes on top. If, when the trunk of an old tree has deteriorated, we wish to preserve it, either because we attach pleasant memories to it, or because of its product, we undercut it in this way, and greatly increase its vigor at the same time as prolonging its existence. 42. Grafting by shield approach. Denainvilliers graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 14. a, incision of subject and insertion of graft; b, bevel of young subject. An elongated, flat bevel is cut on the bud of the last or penultimate shoot of young trees planted the previous year around a tree that is not as old as the previous graft. On the bark of the tree to be grafted, two inverted T-shaped incisions (L) are made, and the bark is lifted with the spatula of the grafting machine; then, between the bast and the sapwood, the bevels of the stems of the subjects are inserted, and a solid ligature is made, as for the escutcheon graft. This graft offers the same results as the previous one, but has the advantage of being much easier and more reliable. It is used on young fruit trees, and even more often on ornamental trees whose growth is to be increased and given a picturesque shape. 43. Grafting using a brace approach. Fougeroux graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 15. a, subject; b, b, young subjects grafted in c, c. Young subjects are planted around a tree that is still young, as for the previous grafts. When1009 their recovery is perfect, they are bent over the middle tree, and their stems are notched (without cutting the head) from the first layer of bark to the sapwood. On the trunk of the tree, notches are made corresponding to those of the subjects, covering them one by one, and the ligature is made as for ordinary grafting. When the grafting is complete, the heads are cut off. This technique is used for the same purposes as the three preceding ones, and has the advantage over them that, if the operation is unsuccessful, there is little or no damage to the subjects; but it is also a little less solid and a lot less clean. 44. Complicated approach grafting. Rozier graft, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 5. b, 6, mother branches; a, a, etc., scction points where buds are grafted. Franc-grafted trees are planted in rows, and at pruning, two opposite mother branches are established, horizontally trellised and as close to the ground as possible. Buds are left to grow on the branches, and kept as close together as possible. As soon as they have reached eighteen inches or two feet in length, we incline them, one to the right, the other to the left, and so on, so as to make them form a sort of lozange grid on each mother branch; their inclination should never be more than 30 to 45 degrees. At each point of section, the buds are incised down to the medullary sheath, and the wounds are joined in the same way as for ordinary approach grafting. As the buds increase in length, their tips are grafted again. This is extremely useful for forming hedges and fruit-covering palisades in orchards, especially in landscaped gardens of a 10 rural type. Of all fruit trees, the apple tree is the most suitable for forming solid, well-defended fences with high yields. Grafting to cover an amputation. 45. Close bark grafting. Pl. 4, fig. 7. c, c, c, strips of preserved bark; d, cut of subject above graft e; b, strips applied to cut, above escutcheon a.. Before cutting the stem of a subject, above a graft or an eye, we begin by encircling the bark all around at a height (above the place where we want to cut) equal to the diameter of the stem. The bark is then longitudinally split into three, four or more strips, depending on the size of the subject; the strips are peeled off the sapwood and turned over; the wood is then cut to the desired height, and the scar is perfectly joined. The strips are brought closer together, and cut into triangles whose points should meet towards the center of the cut when they have been tilted. The libers are made to coincide as closely as possible, and the apparatus is held in place with grafting wax. This method welds the bark together very well, covers the amputation and prevents heat and humidity from penetrating the wood or pith. This type of grafting can be useful for precious trees with soft, supple wood, grown in open soil. Grafting to repair tree bark. If a tree is stripped of its bark by any kind of accident, such as an impact, the alternating contact of heat and humidity on the sapwood will soon cause it to crack, canker will set in, and the tree will be lost in no time unless promptly remedied. When the wound is large, it is futile to cover it with grafting wax, Saint-Fiacre's ointment or any other ingredient; it can only be covered by means of grease. 46. Graft in escutcheon without eyes. Tillet graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, sig. 1. a, wound; b, plate. On a useless tree, of the same species or only of the same genus as the injured tree, provided however that the analogies are sufficient, a patch of bark slightly larger than the wound of the tree to be preserved is removed and given a regular shape. The bark of the wound of the useful tree is cut to the same shape and exact dimensions as the plate, so that the latter can be placed and inlaid as accurately as possible. With the libers of the plate and subject perfectly joined all the way round, and the plate well applied to the sapwood at all points, the graft is held in place by a ligature, and the edges of the wound are covered with grafting wax. Needless to say, this operation can only be carried out during the sap flow, as a shock will only loosen the bark of a tree at this time. However, if it were otherwise, we would cover the wound with Saint-Fiacre's ointment, and wait for the right moment to operate; but then we would have to thoroughly clean the sapwood, and even remove all the dried-out or mouldy surface. MO SECOND DIVISION. SPECIFIC GRAFTS FOR CERTAIN FRUIT TREES. The grafts we have just listed are suitable for most fruit trees, but there are a few whose particular organization requires special methods if they are to be successfully grafted. Vines, walnuts, chestnuts, olives and oranges are particularly well-suited to this situation, and we'll be providing separate articles on each of them, supplemented as far as we can. However, we do not pretend to say that, apart from the methods we are about to describe, there is no procedure that can lead to the same end; we will simply give the most reliable of those most commonly used. Grafting vines. For a long time it was believed, and this error is still held by some growers, that the vine had no bark, and that consequently it was not necessary to make the libers coincide in order to carry out the recovery of its split graft. It is certain that this coincidence is as necessary in this plant as in all other tree species, whatever some authors may have said; and, far from grafting being easier on this shrub, which it should be if grafting could be carried out on all its parts as they claim, it is on the contrary all the more difficult, as the bark is thinner and the bast intimately attached to the sapwood. 47. Double V (W) split graft. Pl. 2, fig. 9. a, a, drying horns. The only difference is that mortality, which always occurs to a greater or lesser extent on the cut of an ordinary subject, descends in the vine much lower than on other fruit trees, and prevents recovery if this inconvenience is not counteracted. To achieve this, the graft is pruned into a knife-edge or wedge shape, without retreating so that it sits on the cut surface of the subject. This wedge, cut from an eye, will be very thin on the side that is to be inside, and the opposite side will be thicker and covered with bark. If the wedge is, for example, eighteen lines long from the eye where the cut begins, the subject is split two inches deep, so that the eye can be brought down to six lines below the upper end of the split; for experience has taught us that, in a subject of ordinary size, six lines or so of the two horns made by the split dry out and die before recovery. The graft is inserted in the usual way, i.e., by matching the bark as closely as possible, and the ligature is made starting from the bottom and working upwards, to just above the eye, where the two horns begin to stop touching the shoot. The following year, when the graft is perfectly fused, the two dried horns are cut off, as close as possible to the bud, and the wound is bound together to heal perfectly. This method is the safest of all, but as the operation is rather difficult and time-consuming, it is rarely used except for grafting trellises grown in gardens to supply table grapes. It is still used with great advantage for grafting walnut and all trees with thick, voluminous pith. 48.* Buried slot graft. Pl. 2, fig. 10. a, a, ground level. As this technique is used in large-scale cultivation, we O6 will describe it as it is practiced in the Lyon area. A number of branches proportionate to the quality of the stock to be grafted are prepared by wedge pruning, and placed in a basket carried by a woman. Once this has been done, a man with a pickaxe begins to dig up the first stock in a row of vines to a depth of six inches; he removes any small roots that may be found within five inches of the surface of the earth, and moves on to the second stock in the same row to prepare it in the same way, then to the third, the fourth, and so on; another worker follows him, and cuts the vine at its roots, to a depth of soil that circumstances require, but which cannot be less than three inches and more than six; he unites the cut area, and opens, by means of a strong, slightly curved serpette, one, two, three or four slits, according to the size of the subject. The woman who comes next places as many grafts as there are slits; finally, a third worker, who comes last, secures the grafts by compressing a little earth around them with his hands, then covers them with a pickaxe, but taking extreme care not to disturb them, and leaving two eyes out of the earth. These grafts, made on three- or four-year-old subjects, are very successful; but the vigor of their vegetation is incredible when they are established on old vines whose nature can be changed, for example, from red to white. Three men and a woman can easily graft ten to twelve ares in a day. 49. Split grafting on provins. Olivier de Serres graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 12. Around a vine stock, well-cultivated sarmens are placed, and their ends are cut four or five inches below the surface of the earth. These are split and girdled, in a single split, with slightly thinner, but equally well-aruged branches; then D6 cover with soil, leaving two eyes as for the previous method. This method is ideal for gradually changing the species in a vineyard, and only by replacement, as well as for multiplying valuable species more rapidly in a garden. It can also be used for foreign trees, after preparing their stock by cutting. 50. Buried slot graft with grooves. Vine graft, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 10. a, a, soil surface. It is done in much the same way as the penultimate graft. The stump is uncovered, the stem cut three or four inches into the soil, and two triangular grooves formed, one on each side. Two sarmens are cut into triangular points, one side of which is left with its bark. These are fitted exactly into the subject's grooves, with the bark coinciding, and covered with earth so as to leave only two eyes above the surface. This method is used, like the previous ones, to transform mediocre varieties into good ones, and to increase the yield; but the difficulty it presents in digging the grooves, and in establishing the grafts firmly enough not to be disturbed by the soil with which they are covered, means that it can only be used to advantage in gardens, and is not very suitable for large-scale cultivation. 51. ** Split graft in the middle of the wood. Pl. 2, fig. 16. a, the split shoot into which the blade has been placed b. On large, well-arched wood from the previous year, a slit is made which divides it in two throughout its thickness, and between two knots. Then cut a graft of the variety to be propagated, giving it the shape 009 of a knife blade, very flat, with a sharp point at both ends, thickening towards the middle where the eye is, and with bark on both sides. It is inserted into the slit with its lips parted, and the bark on both sides is made to coincide. To do this, the blade must be as wide as the subject is thick. A strong ligature is made with strips of bark or very flexible wicker. This graft is widely used in gardens around Paris to propagate precious varieties. 52. Split graft with double notch support. Pl. a, fig. 14. a, tip of bevel ending in a flute beak; b, notched notch at base of bevel. Select a branch to be grafted of exactly the same size as the subject. We cut it into a long bevel ending at its tip in a small flute beak, and make a notch at its top; we cut the subject in exactly the same way, but in the opposite direction, so as to be able to adjust both when laying them down. The ligature is made in the same way as the previous one. It is as widely used as the other method in the Paris area; but, while it is easier, it is also much less reliable. 53. crown graft, buried, with notch incision. Hervy graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 1. The stem of a vine is cut at the root collar, and a triangular incision three to four lines deep is made in the cut area. A very ripe vine shoot is chosen, and its large tip is cut into a wedge the same length as the notch, into which it is fitted as exactly as possible, so that the bark coincides on at least one side. Cover with soil as before. 2. 5 006 This graft has been recommended for large-scale use in vine-growing countries, but as it presents the same difficulties as the previous one, it has not been successfully put into use, and has remained relegated to gardens, where it is used to propagate young, hardwood trees whose grafts do not easily recover. 54. Aerial crown graft with notch incision. Pl. 3, fig. 1. This technique is performed in the same way as the previous one, except that it is carried out above ground on young trees at an arbitrary height, and the graft is attached to the tree by means of a ligature and grafting wax. This method is suitable for the same purposes, and has the same disadvantages as large-scale grafting. 55. Grafting by Chinese approach. Two vines of different grape colors are split lengthwise, to about one-third of their diameter; the thinner side is removed, and the two stems are joined wound to wound; then a ligature is made all along the two stems, which become one. This process produces vines that yield grapes of two colors or species. 56. Grafting using a complicated Chinese approach. Chinese grafting, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 4. Several young plants of approximately the same strength, but of different colors and varieties, are taken and planted as close together as possible. When they have recovered perfectly, they are split lengthwise into equal triangular quarters, and only one quarter is kept per plant. The size and angular dimension of the quarters must be calculated so that, when joined together, they form a round stem, with the bark joining well on the outside and the wood on the inside. This union is held together by a ligature, which is left in place until the weld is complete along the entire length. When this grafting is successfully repeated, fruit of several varieties can be obtained on the same stock, as many as the number of quarters joined together. But some people still believe that this method produces grapes of strange shapes and particular flavors on the same stock, a mixture of all the varieties combined in a single fruit: this error is all the more crude because it contradicts all the laws that nature has established for plant organization, and offends common sense as much as plant physiology. 57. Grafting by perforation approach. Gresse Virgile, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 9. A hole is drilled diametrically through the stem of a vine using a crankshaft. The branch of the species to be grafted is inserted, trimmed to two eyes above the point where it exits the hole, and both sides of the wound are luted with grafting wax. It used to be thought that this method greatly increased the volume of the grapes, and that the least result was to have them the size of plums. This wax has the same effect as the others, and the error has fallen into the disrepute it deserves. 58. Grafting by heterogeneous approach through perforation. This is absolutely the same as the previous method, but instead of choosing a vine stock as the subject, the graft is placed in a walnut branch perforated to receive it. Quite a few authors have written that the grapes obtained by this method grow to an O00 enormous size, but that they are not edible, because they contract the bitter taste of walnut stain. This absurdity no longer needs to be refuted today; for not only would the fruit not be as they say, even if the recovery were successful, but the latter is impossible. 59. Grafting by twisting approach. Caton graft, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 3. Open a pit and plant three to five crossettes of different varieties. The strongest bud of each plant is allowed to grow, and the others are destroyed. When they have reached a sufficient height, they are twisted slightly one on top of the other, and tied lengthwise to force them to weld together as they grow, forming a single stem. It was once thought that grapes obtained in this way should be variegated in color and have the mixed flavor of all the varieties making up the aggregation. This error has fallen into disuse, and we now know that only unmixed varieties can be obtained, but several on the same stem. 60. Slit graft of the laxative and unguentère vine. Constantin César graft, by Thouin. We have retained the name given to this graft by Constantine Caesar, liv. 4, chap. 7, as we report on the virtues, as marvelous as they are ridiculous, that he attributes to the fruit obtained. A vine stock is cut between two plots of land, split in the middle of its diameter, the pith removed, and replaced with colors, aromatics and medicines. Two shoots are prepared as for the simple split graft, inserted in the same way on the two split sides, and covered with soil, leaving two shoots protruding from the surface of the soil. According to the author, this method will produce 96 green, blue, white grapes, etc., depending on the colors used; they will taste of cinnamon, nutmeg, clove or other flavors; and they will be laxative or unguentère, to use the author's expression, depending on the virtue of the medicinal agents used. Certainly, we had to rely heavily on the credulity of our ancestors to dare print such things. If we have described these last three grafts, it is because in writing our work we have made it our duty not only to give all the true and interesting facts, but also to point out the numerous errors accredited, even today, by authors whose learned theories, all taken from books, have not been subjected by them to the tests of experience. Walnut grafts. The walnut, being a very soft tree, is very difficult to graft. However, it is quite often successful when grafted with the following grafts: crest with growing eye, ordinary flute, split, double W, and even better the following. (IX. FLUTE GRAFTS. These are gem grafts. The operation consists in bringing back one or more eyes placed on a ring of bark, without sapwood. They are commonly known as "whistle", "cannon", "ring", "pipe", "cornuchet", "flute" and "chalumeau" grafts. They are most commonly used for fruit trees grown in fields and large orchards, and for propagating some species of foreign hardwood trees. The best times to do this are in spring, when sap begins, and in August, when sap ends. To carry out the operation, a 006 tube of bark with good eyes is removed from the branches of the trees to be propagated; a young branch is selected from the subject, from which a ring of bark of the same length as the tube is removed, and this is placed exactly in the place of the removed ring. Other care consists of sealing the scissures to prevent air, water and other foreign bodies from entering the wound. The best time to operate is when the weather is mild, with no rain or sunshine, and when the sun's drying rays are not too strong. As soon as the eyes of the graft start to grow, all the buds growing underneath are cut off, and the subject is cut above the last eye of the tube. They are very solids and are not prone to being blown off by the wind). 61. ** Ring flute graft. Jefferson graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 11. a, wound made on subject; b, bark ring with eye. On the tree to be propagated, select a branch as big as, or bigger than, the subject to be grafted. Using a serpette, we circle the bark above and below an eye, in the shape of a ring, which we detach by splitting it perpendicularly on one of its sides, and lifting it with the spatula of the squeegee. The same operation is then performed on the subject, i.e. a ring of exactly the same bark width is detached from its stem in the same way, but without bothering whether it has eyes or not. The removed ring is returned to its place on the branch of the variety you wish to propagate, taking extreme care to ensure that the libers join at the top and bottom. No ligature is used, but the whole is covered with Saint-Fiacre ointment or grafting wax. Neither the branches nor the head of the tree are removed until the recovery is complete. The two most favorable times for this type of grafting are when the sap is at its peak in spring, and at the end of August. I This type of graft has the advantage of never mutilating the subject, because if it does not vegetate, the bark of the ring remains in place, and takes the place of that which was removed. Not only is it suitable for propagating walnut trees, but also all rare hardwood trees, such as American oaks and chestnuts. 62. ** Flute graft by juxtaposition, or whistle graft. Whistle graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 12. a, wound made on subject; b, bark pipe. The head of the tree to be grafted is cut off, and a bark tube one to three inches long is removed at the end. From the tree you wish to propagate, select a branch of exactly the same size as the subject, and remove a ring or tube of bark from the large end, a little shorter than that of the subject, but with two or three good eyes; fit it onto the subject in place of the one removed, and make sure the bark is joined at the bottom. By splitting in all directions the excess wood of the subject which extends beyond the ring of the graft, we reduce it, as it were, to lint, which we fold down on each side of the graft to hold it in place, and with the grafting wax we smooth out all the scissures. In most of France, this method is used almost exclusively for grafting walnut, chestnut, mulberry, fig and other fruit trees with thick bark and abundant pith; it is also used for seed and stone trees. Chestnut grafting. This tree can be grafted with a growing eye when the sap has risen, but success is more certain when the following grafts are used, especially the first. 208 a, subject stripped of its bark; b, b, b, b, strips of bark; c, pipe; f, f, strips raised and applied by means of ligature g; h, one of the pipe's eyes; d, bevelled amputation. The subject's head is cut off, but instead of removing a pipe of bark, as in the previous operation, it is split longitudinally into four or five strips two or three inches long. On a branch of the tree to be propagated, a pipe is removed, slightly shorter than the strips, but longer than in the whistle graft, and fitted with four or five eyes. The straps are detached from the subject, and turned over towards the ground while the tube is inserted; then they are raised onto the graft they are protruding from, and fixed to the top of the bark-free stem by means of a ligature. Make sure they don't cover any of the eyes. Grafting wax is then applied to all the scissures. This method serves the same purpose as the previous graft, and is almost as widely used. 64. "Split flute graft. Pl. 1, sig. 11. a, subject stripped of a ring of bark; b, split pipe of the graft. This is done in exactly the same way as the previous ones, with just one difference. If all you had to lift the graft pipe was a branch larger than the subject, you would split the pipe longitudinally on one of its sides before lifting it; then you would bring it back onto the subject, applying it around its entire circumference; and, bringing the two sides together, we would immediately see how much wider it would be, and we would remove a strap so as to make it very-fair, and to make it envelop the stem at the same time as its two edges would meet exactly. A 908 graft ligature would then be made, and finished off like the others. Less used than the others, because it is only used when necessary, it is suitable for the same purposes. 65.* Split flute graft, with strap. This is the counterpart of the previous one. When the branch on which the graft is to be placed is smaller than the stem on which it is to be placed, the pipe is split as described above, and applied to the subject. The space uncovered on one side is filled with one of the strips of bark from the subject, which has been trimmed to a width proportionate to the need, and which has not been peeled off the sapwood to overturn it with the others. It ends like the previous one, and is used for the same purposes. 66. Grafting by approaching several debarked stems. Magon graft, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 4. A pit is opened, into which several young plants of the same height and size, and above all of the same variety, are planted. When they are fully recovered, they are barked on one side, facing each other, along the whole length of their stems; they are brought together so that their wounds cover each other, forming a single stem, and they are held firmly in position by means of a ligature with strips of fresh bark. This grafting technique is said to considerably increase the volume and vigor of the tree, as well as the quantity of its fruit. Examples include the famous chestnut trees of Mount Etna and the ancient olive trees of Spain. 009 Olive tree grafts. This tree can be grafted in the same way as above, by side grafting in peg (n° 32), in escutcheon, and in the following manner: 67. Square escutcheon graft. Aristotle graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1,sig. 8. a, subject's wound; b, strap lowered; c, escutcheon on; dpl, escutcheon placed and strap raised. Three incisions are made on the subject, one transverse, the other two longitudinal, starting on either side of the horizontal one, and descending parallel to four or five lines. They will be three or four lines apart, and will represent a long square with the bottom line missing. This square strap is lifted and lowered onto the subject. Or, on a branch of the tree to be multiplied, cut a square escutcheon with a good eye, exactly the same size as the subject's plate, and apply it to the wound it is intended to cover with the greatest accuracy. Once this has been done, we lift the bark strip from the subject, cover the escutcheon with it up to the underside of its eye, smooth the scissures with grafting wax, and bind the whole like other escutcheon grafts... It seems that this grafting method was formerly widely used, and was perfectly successful; but, as it is a little meticulous in its execution, and takes a lot of time, it has almost entirely been abandoned; we nevertheless recommend it as one of the most advantageous. 68. Approach grafting on disgenic root. Columelle graft, by Thouin. A young fig tree is planted at the foot of an olive tree, and when it has fully recovered, the roots are dug up and the stem cut off at the collar. A triangular notch is made in the cut area, which is continued at some depth by a slit. An olive branch is lowered onto the stump, its wedge-shaped end inserted halfway into the cut. If necessary, the branch is held in place with a bark binding, and covered with earth. It used to be thought, and Columelle thought, that this graft proved that all trees, even those of absolutely different natures, could, with certain precautions, take over when grafted onto each other. But this experiment only proves what we already knew, that the olive tree easily takes root from the marcotte; for the graft only succeeds because it is buried, and grows roots that nourish it. We have therefore only mentioned this method to point out an error that is still quite widespread among amateurs and farmers with little knowledge of plant physiology. Orange tree grafts. This tree, interesting for its beauty, the sweet fragrance of its flowers and the delicious quality of its fruit, has always attracted the attention of growers. It has therefore been the subject of a great deal of experimentation, to ascertain the most suitable cultivation and the surest means of multiplying its many varieties. The result has been the invention of a fairly large number of grafts specific to this tree, in addition to approach, split and escutcheon grafts, which are more or less suitable for it and other fruit trees. (X. TWIG GRAFTS. These differ from ordinary split grafts in that the branch planted on the subject must be covered with leaves, flowering buds and even young fruit. The only way to ensure 008 their success is to carry them out when the first sap is most active, and with special precautions that we will list in their respective articles. They have the advantage over all others of producing fruit with surprising speed; for example, it is easy to sow a seedling, graft the stem it produces, and obtain flowers and fruit, all within the space of a few months, and, with certainty, before the year is out; but they are also less durable than the others, and less easy to recover. They require more or less submissive care to regulate the degree of heat, light, watering and even the quantity of air they absolutely require). 69.* Twig graft for orange trees, 1st type. Huard graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 5. b, triangular notch in subject; a, graft insertion. It is performed on a subject from eight months to three years old, or even much younger if it is strong enough. We cut off its head, and make a triangular cut on one side of its stem, extended longitudinally by five or six lines. Choose a branch with its leaves, flower buds and nascent fruit: prune it by the large end into a triangular point, leaving the bark on one side, and fit it into the notch so that it fills it exactly, without revealing any part of the wood of the subject or the graft. The pot in which the plant is placed is placed on a warm surface covered with a frame, and shaded for the first few days. The frame can be replaced very advantageously by a tarpaulin or a warm greenhouse with a layer of tannin, and then the graft is smothered for a few days with a glass funnel, which is covered until it has given the first signs of vegetation; the small opening of the funnel is plugged with a paper plug, which is removed some time before the funnel is removed, in order to gradually accustom the plant to the open air. This method, suitable for making very young orange trees produce fruit, is also suitable for propagating exotic evergreen trees from the hottest climates, which are grown here in hot greenhouses. 70. Twig graft for orange trees, 2' type. Riedlé graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 6. It is done in much the same way as the previous one, except that a triangular notch is made in the cut surface of the subject, leaving two recesses, one on each side. The twig is wedge-cut, leaving a notch on each side to press against the subject's recesses. The braid is adjusted by making the bark coincide as in the previous process, and is subjected to similar treatment until it recovers perfectly. It can be used for the same purposes, but has the added advantage of being suitable for fruit trees. 71. Graft in twig for orange trees, 3rd type; or heel graft, doe foot graft. Collignon graft, by Thouin. Pl.a, fig. 5. a, the subject; b, the subject's bell and the graft's tooth; c, the tongue. The end of a twig is cut into a very long tongue, and a sort of tooth in the shape of a very short wedge is made above the tongue. In front of this notch, a strip of bark the same size as the tongue of the graft is removed from the stem, and the two wounds are joined together by inserting the prong of the branch into the notch of the subject, and applying its tongue exactly to the part where the strip has been removed. Ligature is made in the same way as for the previous ones, the scissures are healed with grafting wax, and the plant is subjected to the same treatment. It is used in the same way as the others, and is particularly suitable for propagating hollies, myrtles and laurels. 72. Branch graft for orange trees, 4th type; or Daphne graft. Riché graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3. -Fig. 7. a, notch into which the base of the bevel enters. This graft is almost identical to the previous one; however, it differs in that the branch tongue, a little thicker than the other, is beveled at its tip. At the base of the wound made in the stem to remove the strap, a notch is cut to receive the bevel of the graft. The graft is then adjusted, the ligature made, and the same procedure followed. This graft is particularly useful for thin, slender subjects. It is very well suited to delicate shrubs with barely woody stems, such as most daphnes, and its recovery is so complete that flowering shoots can be used without aborting the fruit they are intended to produce. 73.* Twig graft for orange trees, 5th type. Pl. 5, fig. 10. a, triangular base of twig; b, bevelled subject. Three or four young plants are planted in the same pot, as close together as possible. Their heads are cut off at the same level, and a long bevel is made at the top of the stem. Choose a twig slightly larger than one of the subjects, and cut its base into a point the same length as the bevels, and triangular if there are three subjects, square if there are D0 to four, or offering as many sides as there are stems. We fit the bevels of the subjects onto the sides of the graft, so that they completely cover the wound at its base, so that the barks of the graft and the subjects coincide perfectly at the top of the graft, and the barks of the subjects with each other on their longitudinal cut. A strong ligature is made, and the apparatus is covered with grafting wax; the whole is then placed on a warm layer and under glass, until perfect recovery. This very curious graft produces very picturesque trees, as the young stems can be braided before the operation. It also produces very vigorous buds, all the more beautiful as they are nourished by several complete root systems. 74.* Woodless escutcheon graft. Poederlé graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 3. a, incision; b, escutcheon. This graft is made in exactly the same way as the ordiary escutcheon grafts (n°*1, a, 3.); only, instead of leaving a portion of wood in the escutcheon, it is removed with the tip of the grafting tool, so as to leave only the smallest possible amount of sapwood, precisely under the eye, in order not to remove its gem. The tree is then laid down, tied and driven like any other of its kind. In addition to its excellent suitability for orange trees, it is also suitable for grafting hardwood trees such as myrtles, hollies and other exotic plants similar to these. It can be done at will with a growing or dormant eye. 75." Inverted escutcheon graft. Gresse Schneewoogt, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 5. a, incision; b, escutcheon. The triangle-shaped escutcheon is removed as in the previous example, but instead of cutting the tip 006 below the eye, it is cut above. We realize that the incision in the bark of the subject must be reversed in the same way, i.e., instead of having the shape of a straight T, it will have that of an inverted I. To achieve this, the longitudinal incision is made above the transverse one, instead of below. Incidentally, it ends in the same way as the previous grafts. This graft is almost the only one used in the south of France, especially in Genoa and Hyères, to propagate orange trees, and all those sent to us by the trade in these countries are treated in this way. It is also suitable for multiplying trees whose sap is abundant and gummy, and we believe it could be used to ensure the recovery of crests on resinous trees. This is the end of the list of grafts most commonly used to propagate fruit trees. In the nomenclature of the following sections, you will find a few that can be applied to them in certain circumstances, just as most of the first ones can be given to ornamental and forest trees, as the occasion arises. duucbbubbb SECOND SECTION. GRAFTING FOREST TREES. To propagate forest trees, we could, in the greatest number of cases, use split, approach and escutcheon grafts, which are used to propagate fruit trees; but as a tree is always taller and more vigorous when it is free-standing, and it is these qualities in particular that we look for in those that populate forests, and not the rarity of the varieties, we will make little use of them. Either to decorate an ornamental park, and produce picturesque effects, or to obtain woods that nature must begin to shape, in order to make them suitable for use in the arts or in certain constructions, we are obliged to graft by particular methods, and it is these different grafts that we will deal with in this section. Grafting resinous trees (XI. HERBACEOUS GRAFTS. We had long been experimenting with herbaceous grafts, and were using them to great advantage in our establishment, when Baron Tschudy published his excellent Mémoire on this interesting subject in Metz. We are pleased to do justice to this esteemed man; although he is not the author of this discovery (as the author of L'Horticulteur français says, although he must have seen it on our premises long before Mr. Tschudy mentioned it), he gave it much greater scope than we did, by practicing it on vegetable plants. We have always restricted their use to resinous trees and succulents, which prompted Mr. Thouin to give our name to a graft of this species. (See his Mémoire already quoted, page 49.) In any case, herbaceous grafts belong to the division of split grafts; the only difference is that, instead of using a twig from the previous or older shoot, we use a bud that is a quarter or a third developed, and still has all the softness that its herbaceous nature gives it; once it has become woody, it is no longer suitable for regrowth. It should be inserted into a notch made on a branch of the same size, nature and degree of development. As 2. 6́ neither is yet barked, and the circulation of sap takes place in vessels that fill their entire thickness, it is necessary as far as possible to establish correspondence between these vessels, and to place the graft close to a shepherd's crook or a leaf that attracts sap to it until recovery has taken place, after which they can be cut down. Needless to say, this type of grafting should only be done during the peak of sap flow, as it is impractical at any other time) 76.* Herbaceous grafting of resinous trees. Gresses des Unitiges, by Tschudy. Pl. 5, fig. 11. b, a bud of the year; a, graft insertion. When the terminal bud of a green tree, such as pine, fir, larch, pear tree, etc., has reached about two or three inches in length, it is cut and wedged at its base; the subject is cut below the current year's bud, and a fairly deep, triangular notch is made in the cut area. The braid is inserted into the cut so as to fill it exactly. Next, we make a very loose ligature, which we take great care to loosen again once the graft has taken hold, as can be seen by the vegetation of the graft; or better still, we hold it in place with grafting wax into which we've put a lot of wax and tallow to make it softer, and give it the ability to spread as the stem increases in thickness. It is covered with a small paper cornet to protect it from contact with air and light until it fully recovers. This graft has the advantage over all others of being extremely solid; the reason is that it is held to the subject by all the wood fibers, whereas the others are held only by the bark and a few layers of sapwood. It can be used not only on green trees, but also on all plants, trees or grasses, which grow a vertical main stem. 77. Grafting by tongue approach. Aiton graft, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 12. The green trees to be grafted are planted or sown in pots. When they have reached the right height, they are brought close to the tree whose species you want to propagate. A longitudinal wound is made in the stem of the subject, down to the sapwood, as well as on the branch or twig to be grafted; and, if desired, a staple is made in the middle by means of a projecting notch and a hook to receive it. When the two wounds overlap perfectly, the ligature is made as in ordinary approach grafting, and the pot is firmly fixed, so that it cannot be disturbed and the parts loosened by watering or cultivating the soil. It is ideal for propagating precious species of resinous and evergreen trees. It is also used to bury evergreen trees on deciduous ones, which are difficult to regrow. 78. Crested grafting of resinous trees. Magneville graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 6. a, the incision with a triangular wound; b, the escutcheon with the angular point on which the bud is placed. A T-shaped incision is made on the stem of a young tree, as for an ordinary scallop graft, and a double incision in the shape of a broken chevron is made two or two and a half lines above the upper bar of the T, cutting the bark about a line wide and down to the sapwood. A bud eight or ten lines long, covered with bark like an ordinary escutcheon, is removed from the tree to be propagated; it is inserted into the wound after lifting the bark with the spatula of the grafting machine, and a ligature is made. As a result, the eye is positioned above the T-bar, and is less likely to be drowned by the sap. This graft works well not only on resinous trees, but also on those with gummy or very abundant sap. For coniferous trees, the crown side graft, n° 30, can also be used with some advantage. Grafting forest trees to make them suitable for use in the arts or for shipbuilding. 79. Grafting by approaching branches onto the tree providing them. Michaux graft, by Thouin. Pl.4, sig. 3. a, T-shaped incision, receiving the end of the branch. The longest branches of a tree are selected, bent in a circular shape, and carefully so as not to break them, so that their top touches the stem of the subject. The tip is trimmed in the shape of a flute beak, and inserted into a T-shaped incision in the bark of the stem, in the same way as for the inverted shield graft. A ligature is made to secure it, and the scissures are smoothed with gresfer wax. This produces curves suitable for art and the navy, and picturesque effects in gardens. 80. Approach grafting on trunk. Sylvain graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 8. a, a, the two subjects; b, one of the two with its e-notch. Two young trees with straight, high stems are planted side by side. They are bent one on top of the other, and at the point where they meet and cross, two transverse or slightly oblique cuts are made in the stems, penetrating as far as the medullary case 008; they are fitted one inside the other, with the bark coinciding as closely as possible, and the apparatus is held firmly in place by means of a wide ligature. The operation should be carried out as close as possible to the two heads, so as to bring them together as one. It can be used to produce angular woods, rustic one-piece frames for doors in country homes, and very picturesque effects in landscaped gardens. 81." Approach grafting by joining trunks together. Hymen graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 9. a, a, heads of two trees, joined by grafting, in b. It is done in much the same way as the previous method, but instead of crossing the stems of young trees, they are brought together in parallel. Two cuts are made longitudinally, facing each other and penetrating as far as the medullary case, and they are joined so that one is covered by the other. The heads are brought so close together that they are obliged to intermingle their foliage naturally, which does not happen in the previous method; and the stems, instead of rounding off in the same way, form a very sharp angle below their junction. Ligation is carried out in the same way as for ordinary grafts, by approach. It is quite commonly used to bring together the two saps of a dioecious species on a single individual, to provide the arts with very angular wood, and finally to produce very picturesque effects in landscape gardens. 82. Approach grafting with four splinters. Dumoutier graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 10. a, a, a, etc., the splinters seen separately on one of the subjects b, and joined on both in e. The stems of two young trees are brought together, as in the previous example, but instead of simply making a longitudinal cut, a piece of bark is removed from each tree at the same height; On each wound, two wooden splinters are placed in opposite directions, i.e., in one case, the upper splinter turned point down, and the lower point up; in the other, the upper splinter turned point up, and the lower point down. These are set into each other from the side, and the ligature is made. It is suitable for the same uses as the previous one; and, if it is a little more difficult to do, it is also much stronger. 83. Grafting by feather-beak approach. Gresse Vrigny, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 12. b, bevel of young subject; a, notch of rootstock tree. A young tree is planted at the foot of a mature tree. The following year, when the tree has fully recovered, the head is cut off, and the end of the stem is trimmed to a very long bevel, with only the bark in the last third of its length. In the bark of the trunk of the tree to be grafted, a cut is made down to the sapwood, exactly the same shape and dimensions as the bevel of the subject, and it is firmly attached by means of a ligature. This graft gives extraordinary vigor to a tree, because it feeds it with two sets of roots. In time, it can still provide angular wood for the navy, and can be replaced by the escutcheon approach graft (n° 42.) 84. Approach grafting of gems. Muséum de Thouin graft. Pl. 4, fig. 16. a, a, terminal branches of the two subjects; b, b, reunion of the two eye portions. Two young trees are planted at a short distance D04 from each other; the following year, their terminal buds are split into two parts, with the precaution of leaving a portion of gemma in the half retained. One of the split portions is removed, along with a small strip of bark and wood underneath. Bring the two half-buttons of the two subjects together, and fit them against each other so as to cover each other's wounds and form a single eye. Ligate with great care, starting lower than the graft and tightening firmly, then tightening less as you go up, and finally tightening only enough to reunite the two half-buttons when you have succeeded. The whole is covered with a good layer of grafting wax, except on the eye, where it is applied very lightly, and only up to the height of the lower third. It is more suitable than the others for bringing two individuals of different sexes together in a very intimate way. It produces a picturesque effect in gardens, and provides the arts with very solid angular woods of rare shapes. Its only disadvantage is that it is meticulous and difficult to do, but it is easily repeated, as we were able to see at the Jardin du Roi, where M. Thouin had it done for the first time in June 1805. 85. Arc grafting. Arc grafting, by Thouin. As in the previous method, two young trees are planted at a certain distance from each other, and then, after they have been transplanted, they are bent one over the other, rounding them in a semicircle. Their heads are cut off, and the stems are joined together by means of two corresponding notches, with or without staples, overlapping each other, or by two bevels, or finally by a split buttress. It provides curved wood for shipbuilding, and could be used, in a landscape garden, to form living bridges with an effect as singular as it is picturesque, especially if the lateral branches were grafted into lozanges, to make a natural grid that would replace the floor. We assume that two parallel arches would be established, and that the grid would be formed by the lateral branches growing between the two arches. Grafting evergreen and hardwood trees. This can be replaced by ordinary approach grafting, and even quite often by split or escutcheon grafting, but with much less chance of success. 86. "Approach grafting of a lateral branch onto a stem. Varon graft, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 13. a, insertion of the graft; b, its wedge-shaped notch; c, triangular notch of the subject. Young trees are raised in pots, and when they have reached a suitable size, their heads are cut off. A triangular notch is made on the cutting surface, and a slit is made at the bottom, cutting the plant across its entire diameter. Bring the pot close to the tree to be grafted, and select a suitable branch. Cut a wedge-shaped notch in half its thickness, and fit the notched half into the cut of the subject, so as to represent a slotted graft fitted on its side only. A ligature is made, and the grafting wax is applied. When the graft is complete, the branch is detached from the tree by cutting it below the graft, and the wound is joined. It is suitable for multiplying evergreen trees, such as blackcurrant, holly, phyllirea, etc., and hardwood trees, such as hornbeam, oak, beech and the like. O Mbb THIRD SECTION. GRAFTING FOR ORNAMENTAL TREES AND SHRUBS. 87. Grafting by branch fragment, without gem. This is performed in the same way as ordinary split grafting, but a branch without an eye can be used for grafting, such as the stalk of a rose from which the flower has been cut. The apparatus is placed on a warm surface and under a frame or glass, as recovery depends almost entirely on the deprivation of air and light. Once soldered, gems are soon formed, which develop in a very short time in the same way as other grafts. This method is useful for multiplying a species which, by chance, would only have a flower with its stalk in our hands. 88. English-style split graft. English graft, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 6. a, subject; b, graft; c, sketch of graft; d, sketch of subject. The head of a young subject is cut at a very long bevel, and a slit is made in the middle of the length of the wound, so as to form a splinter. We choose a branch from the previous year, cut it over two or three eyes, and cut its base like the head of the subject, but in the opposite direction, and slit the wound in the same way to form a splinter. The grefse is then fitted into the subject, by fitting the splinters one on top of the other in the two slits. Ligature is made, and lute is applied with wax. 908 This very strong graft is very suitable for propagating exotic and hardwood trees. 89. "English-style split graft. Miller graft, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 5. a, subject; b, subject's notch and graft tooth; c, base of graft cut into bird's tongue. This is done in almost the same way as the twig graft for orange trees, 3rd type, n° 71; but, instead of choosing a twig with leaves and flowers, we take a twig from the previous year, cut it at its base into a bird's tongue shape topped by a projecting notch; we hollow out a corresponding notch in the subject to receive it, make a longitudinal wound to be covered by the tongue, adjust and bind. This graft is suitable for most species, trees and shrubs with thin bark and hard wood. 90. Slot graft with bevelled subject. Bertemboise graft, by Thouin. Pl. a, fig. 2. The branch of the graft is cut to the shape of a knife blade, and inserted into a slit made in the cut surface of the subject, after having removed its head. It dissects an ordinary split graft, in that the cut of the subject that is not covered by the base of the branch is cut to a long bevel. This makes it easier for the wound to heal, prevents unpleasant swelling and produces straighter, defect-free stems. It should therefore be used whenever the graft is to provide a portion of stem before forming the head of the tree. It is particularly useful for avenue and alignment trees. 91. Split grafting by juxta-position. Kuffner graft, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 11. A branch of exactly the same size as the subject is chosen; it is cut cleanly at its base, then, six or eight lines above, it is cut transversely1 in half its thickness; the splinter is removed, by means of a slit, over half the diameter of the cut area, and the wound is well united. The same operation is performed on the subject, but in reverse, and the wound is joined so that what has been removed in one is found in the other. It is very rarely used, although it is quite suitable for shrubs with thin bark. If it is not widely used, this is because it can be advantageously replaced by others in all circumstances. 92. Split grafting with beveled juxtaposition. Pl. 2, fig. 12. This technique is very similar to the previous one. The subjects must be exactly the same size. The base of the twig and the stem of the subject are cut in the shape of a bird's tongue, and made to overlap one another. When making the ligature, great care must be taken not to disturb the coincidence of the bark, which is all too easy. As little used as the previous method, it is suitable for the same purposes. 93. Split grafting by juxta-position with bevel and notch. Pl. 2, fig. 13. Same size conditions as above, and same bird's tongue size; but the end of the tongue of the graft is beveled, and a notch is made at the bottom of the wound to receive it. If the subject were stronger than the branch, this grafting would still be practicable by leaving a retreat on the cut surface, as we have illustrated; but, for the barks to coincide, the stem of the subject must be a little flattened, which happens quite often in some part of its length. The stem is then trimmed and tied, and in the latter case, covered with wax. 906 and very suitable for delicate shrubs in pots. 94. Split grafting by juxta-position with bevel and tooth. Pl. a, sig. 15. This is done in much the same way as bevelled juxta-position grafting, except that a notch is cut in the middle of the length of the subject's cut, into which a projecting tooth or notch is fitted in the middle of the graft's bevel. Less widely used than the preceding techniques, it is suitable for the same purposes. 95. Slit graft with dormant eye. Maupas graft, by Thouin. Pl. 4, fig. 6. a, subject's slit, shown with its lips parted; b, branch cut into a wedge on one side, or rather into the blade of a knife, to be inserted enc. In August, when the sap begins to fall, we make a deep incision in the stem of a young tree, or rather a slit, without cutting its head. We choose a young shoot from the previous year's growth, and try to find one with a natural inflection, which is better because, adjusted, it will be less tight against the subject's stem; we cut it like the blade of a knife, implanting the sharp side into the slit; we make the ligature, and cover the wound, especially the top of the slit, with grafting wax. The following spring, all branches and buds above and below the graft are removed, to encourage the sap to flow to it. To carry out this grafting, we can also use the slit grafting method in the middle of the wood, n°, 51, and pl. 2, fig. 16. Although more widely used than the previous methods, its practice is nevertheless very limited; it could however be used with hope of success for the multiplication 90 of exotic, but robust and open-ground trees, whose gems would be scaly. 96." Split grafting with triangular notch. Lée graft, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 4. a, triangular notch not reaching the heart of the subject; b, branch cut into a triangular point, seen from the side opposite the bark. The head of the tree is cut, and a triangular, longitudinal cut is made on one side, not reaching the medullary case, which must remain intact. The base of a branch is triangularly tapered to match the subject's notch, so as to fill it as exactly as possible. The parts are then joined and tied together. This graft is generally used for very young or delicate trees, whose pith must never be attacked. It is also used for old trees whose hardened bark offers little sap. 97. Crown grafting by enfourchement. Dumont graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 2. After cutting the stem of a young tree, it is pruned into the shape of an extended wedge, leaving the bark on either side. Choose a branch of the same size, and cut a deep triangular notch in its base, so as to overlap the wedge and receive it in its entire length. The two wounds are joined together, and a ligature is made; or, if you don't mind a bit of shock, you simply cover with grafting wax. This method was previously indicated for grafting vines between two plots of land; but, as ordinary split grafting is equally and perhaps more advantageous, it has been relegated to the garden, where it is used to propagate exotic trees grafted onto very young stock. 98. Varin graft, in twig between bark and wood. Varin graft, by Thouin. Pl.3, fig. 4. The head of the tree is cut off and the bark is lifted on one side of the cut, after which it is split longitudinally. Choose a twig with its leaves and flower buds, cut a flute-beak shape at the base, and cut a notch at the top to seat it on the subject. Insert it into the incision, between the bark and sapwood, in the same way as for a shield graft, and tie it in place. This graft is carried out under a bell and on a layer. It is very well suited to exotic trees and shrubs with eyes not covered by scales, as well as to those with hard wood. 99. Grafting in twig onto cuttings and done at the same time. Choose a young, healthy and very vigorous branch, of an orange tree for example; cut off its tip, and make a slit on the cut surface, or a longitudinal triangular notch on the side. In the first case, cut the twig of the variety you wish to propagate, like a knife blade; in the second, cut it like a triangular point. It is then adjusted, tied and covered with grafting wax. Once this has been done, the base of the young branch is bevelled to prevent the pernicious action of humidity; the wound is covered with a little wax, then a hole is made in good soil prepared in a pot; a little sand is thrown into this hole, again to prevent humidity; the soil is covered, and the whole is carried in a tarpaulin on a warm layer; the cutting is covered with a glass funnel, and is stunted until it sprouts again: then gradually acclimatize it to air and light. Suitable for propagating rare and delicate varieties. 100. split graft on root holding the subject. Gresse Hall, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 12. A root is uncovered without detaching it from its subject, -1 and its tip is lifted from the ground, cut and split in the middle of its diameter, to establish a branch of the penultimate sap, in the manner of ordinary split grafting, i.e., cut at the base into the shape of a knife blade; then covered with soil. This method is very rarely used, because its usefulness is very accidental. It is suitable for propagating rare trees which have no analogues and which refuse other means of propagation. It has also been thought that it could serve as proof of the existence of descending sap, but this would only prove that sap does not have a regulated course of circulation. 101. Crown graft on root. Saussure graft, by Thouin. Pl. 2, fig. 10. A large root is detached near the stump of the subject; the large end is raised a little above the surface of the soil, the wound is united, and one or more slits are made to receive as many twigs cut in the shape of a knife blade, and inserted in the same way as the ordinary slit graft. Bind with Saint-Fiacre ointment and cover with soil. Like the previous method, it is suitable for propagating rare trees that have no analogues, but has the advantage of being quicker and easier to do, and of offering a much more reliable recovery. 102. Split grafting on separate roots. Cels graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 15. a, two plants joined; b, b, soil level. Roots are separated from their stump, transplanted and then cored using the same method as for English-style coring, n° 89. Care should be taken to bury them only up to the penultimate eye of the branch. It provides an easy way of multiplying plants for which there are no similar species, and could be used to pO6 multiply others more abundantly and more safely. 103. Root slit grafting under the stem collar. Bourgdorf graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 13. a, subject cut, and good root inserted b. The root collar of a tree is dug up, and a notch is made penetrating to half its thickness, a little above the furrow of the large roots, higher or lower, depending on the case usually resulting from disease. From another tree of a similar species, we select a good root, healthy and full of hair. Separate it and cut a wedge at its large end, so as to fill exactly the notch in the subject; fit it in, hold it in place with a ligature and St. Fiacre's ointment, and cover with soil. If a tree's roots have been broken by an accident, or destroyed by white grubs; if they are attacked by a disease whose progress threatens to destroy them entirely by spreading to their collar, this method is used, with almost certain success, to replace them with others. This method can also be used to increase and accelerate the vegetation of a valuable individual. 104. Split grafting of roots on roots. Chomel graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, fig. 16. a, insertion of the wild root. Without detaching it from its stump, lift the end of a tree root from the ground, cut it transversely at a point where it is at least the size of a feather pipe, and split it in the middle of its thickness. A vigorous root is taken from a wildflower of the same species, trimmed at the large end to the shape of a flute mouthpiece, inserted into the slit in the usual way, tied and covered with soil. It is used to increase the vigor of a young individual, or to replace its diseased roots. 105. Approach grafting of roots onto branches 1 holding on to their tree. Palissy graft, by Thouin. Pl. 3, Jig. 14. Choose a young, well-grown branch from the tree you wish to propagate, and make a notch in its bark, or simply a sliding incision. From the same tree, we take a vigorous root, very hairless, and about the same size as the branch. Detach it from the tree, cut it off at the large end, and carefully plant it in a pot three-quarters filled with good soil. Bring the pot closer to the branch, fit the tongue into the notch or slide in the bark, and make a ligature or cover with grafting wax. The pot is then filled with soil, so that the grafted area is covered by about a finger's worth; then, from time to time, water is applied to maintain humidity, but only in sufficient quantity to sustain the life of the root. Once the root has recovered, the branch is detached from the tree by cutting it close to the graft. This method is not widely used, but can become indispensable if you want to propagate an exotic tree that does not respond to cuttings or grafting, and for which you have no congeners on which to graft it. 106. Grafting in escutcheon by inoculation. Xenophon graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 2. a, wound on subject; b, eye with bark border. With the tip of a grafting knife, or better still a penknife, a bud is encircled, leaving a small strip of bark around it, and removing a portion of the wood that remains. On the subject to be grafted, we make a wound the same width as that of the bud and its border, and a depth equal to the length of the piece of wood left. The whole is adjusted so that the eye rem2. t perfectly folds the wound, and the scissures are covered with gresser wax. This graft is used to transport flowering buds from one place where there are too many, to another where there are too few. 107. Graft in escutcheon on roots. Sickler graft, by Thouin. In spring, at the time when growing-eye grafts are made, the roots of a tree are uncovered, and an eye taken from its branches is grafted onto them in the form of an escutcheon. The graft is left uncovered, but all other parts are covered with soil. In the spring of the following year, when the graft is well established and has grown a fine shoot, we cut the root above the graft, carefully pull it out and transplant it elsewhere. In this way, you have an individual that you would not have been able to multiply either by marcottes or cuttings, or by the ordinary dregs, for lack of suitable subjects. 108**. Opposite escutcheon graft. Descemet graft, by Thouin. This graft is done in the same way as the dormant and growing eye grafts; the only difference is that, instead of placing just one on the stem of a subject, two are usually placed opposite each other, sometimes three, or even more, laid in the form of a crown around the stem. It has the advantage of ensuring success by multiplying favorable chances, and is perfectly suited to forming beautiful heads on weeping trees, such as ash, locust, laburnum, etc. 109. Graft in ecus its cover. Gresse Sintard, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 7. a, eye growing through hole in plate; b, plate pierced. This is done in the same way as the ordinary escutcheon graft, but when the eye is in place, instead of making a ligature, the scissures are plugged with grafting wax; a plate of bark is removed from another tree, pierced with a small hole in the middle, and applied to the graft so as to cover it, except for the bud which is uncovered by the hole. A ligature is made to hold the device in place. This graft, which is far too meticulous, has been rejected from ordinary practice, because it can be replaced by several others with the same advantages. It was indicated for use on rare and delicate trees. 110. Shield graft by portion of terminal eyes. Gretfe Sennebier, de Thoum. Pl. 1, fig. 9. c, split terminal eye; b, the same eye seen from the front; a, its insertion. The tip of a twig is cut to the length of six or eight lines, and split in two, dividing the terminal eye exactly down the middle. A T-shaped incision is then made in the subject, and this eye half is inserted in the same way as a crest graft. If necessary, the terminal eye can be divided into four equal parts. If you want to be sure of success, you must graft with a growing eye; however, this graft can also be successful with a dormant eye. This method can be very useful if the tree to be multiplied does not offer young wood strong enough to remove a shield. It is particularly suitable for rare trees with scaly buds and opposite branches. 111. Flute graft. Pl. 5, fig. 14. a, subject cut into a flute; b, base of twig stripped of bark, fitting into the slit in the subject. The stem of a very young tree, such as a three- or four-month-old orange, is cut two or three inches from the ground. A longitudinal incision of five or six lines is made in the bark, the bark is detached from the wood along its entire length, and the bark is spread or inverted so that the wood can be amputated cleanly with the tip of a penknife or grafting knife, precisely where the incision ends. Take a twig of the species to be multiplied, exactly the same size as the subject; remove a ring of bark at its base, just as long as the incision in the subject, and press the stripped part of the wood into the flute of the subject, so as to precisely fill the place of the amputated wood, and make the bark coincide. This easy-to-perform grafting technique is highly advantageous for the rapid multiplication of delicate species. It is carried out on warm soil, in the same way as the cutting graft, n° 99. 112. Flute grafting with dormant eye. Pan graft, by Thouin. This is done in the same way as flute grafting by juxta-position, n° 62; but instead of in spring, it is done in August, and with buds produced by the first sap of the same year, whereas for the other, eyes from the previous year are chosen. It is rarely used in daily practice; however, it can be useful for multiplying trees with very hard wood. 113.* Flute and strip grafting. Faune graft, by Thouin. Pl. 1, fig. 13. It is done in the same way as the ordinary flute graft, no. 63; but once the ligature has been made, the bark and wood are cut in the shape of a flute beak, above the last eye of the graft, and luted with grafting wax; in addition, the tube to be grafted must have at least five or six eyes, which makes it very difficult to detach. This graft is excellent for multiplying foreign hardwood trees; it would be equally useful for fruit trees, if the time it wastes, and the difficulty encountered in doing it, had not led gardeners to abandon it and replace it with others. 114.* Grafting using water. On the tree you wish to propagate, cut a branch from one foot to eighteen inches in length; make a longitudinal side cut in its upper part, six or eight lines long, below two or three good eyes; make a similar one on the stem of a subject, and unite the parts by the ordinary procedure of approach grafting. Once this has been done, a small vase, cup or flask, depending on the circumstances, is attached to the subject's stem; it is filled with water, and the base of the grafted branch is left to soak until it recovers, to prevent it from drying out. This procedure is excellent for grafting two trees that are too far apart to be able to join their branches. 115. Approach grafting on cuttings. A cutting is planted in a pot; a longitudinal wound is made on one side of its stem, and the pot is approached by a branch from the tree you wish to propagate; a wound similar to that of the cutting is made on this branch, they are joined, the ligature is made and wax applied. The soil in the pot is kept moderately but continuously moist, to facilitate root emergence. Grafting provides a means of obtaining, in a very short time, complete individuals of the rarest and most difficult species to propagate. Grafting and cuttings are mutually helpful: the former to make roots in a species that is difficult to take as a cutting, the latter to maintain humidity and life until the cut has been made. The difference between this method and cutting grafting, n° 20, is that in the latter, the cutting becomes the subject, whereas in the former, it only provides the graft. -1 Grafting for trellises and palisades. 116. ". Grafting by cradle approach. Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 2. b,b, grafting the stems of subjects a, a;c, c, c, etc., grafting the branches at their junction point. Young trees of similar species are planted in two parallel rows; their heads are bent into a cradle shape, and held in place with a light framework. As their tops lengthen and cross, they are cut at their junction point, and grafted using the arc grafting process, n° 85. The lateral branches are arranged so as to form 45-degree angles with their stems, and grafted using the trunk grafting process, n° 80. In this way, all the trees in an arbor share the same sap, so that if the roots of some die, the stems are nourished by the others. In addition, the cradles are impenetrable, well furnished with greenery, and in time provide the arts with highly prized bentwood. 117 - Grafting by diamond-shaped approach. Thouin. Young trees are planted in rows, eight or ten inches apart. When they are fully established, they are inclined to form an angle of 4o to 45 degrees, one to the right, the other to the left, and grafted at all section points, one on top of the other, using the trunk approach grafting procedure, n° 80. The same result is obtained using another method. Young trees are planted in the same way as the previous ones, but cut six inches from the ground, on two eyes, one on the right, the other on the left, in the direction of the line. As the two buds grow, they are grafted at an angle of forty-five degrees (CI.), and they are grafted by approach, according to the same procedure, at all their meeting points. Graft again as the branches lengthen and cross. These two methods of grafting are excellent for forming impenetrable hedges, palisades and picturesque fences for landscaped gardens. FOURTH SECTION. HERBACEOUS GRAFTS OF PERENNIALS AND ANNUALS. Here we come to the herbaceous grafts of Mr. Tschudy, mentioned above. This skilful amateur used them on vegetable plants, with the intention of increasing the quantity and quality of their produce; but, death having taken him away from his useful work, the positive results of his experiments have not been published, and we are still unaware of the extent to which they could be used to perfect horticulture. We regret that the nature of our work has not allowed us to follow these experiments ourselves, and we urge amateurs to do so. 118 *. Grafting succulents. Noisette graft, by Thouin. Pl. 5, fig. 15. A young stem or leaf of a fat plant, such as a cactus or opuntia, is beveled at the base and implanted into a slit in the stem or leaf of another species of the same genus. M. Thouin, in classifying this cress in his monograph, was mistaken about its results, and the error of this 908 man, as learned in agriculture as he was respectable for his private virtues, undoubtedly stems from the fact that his gardeners, in carrying it out in the greenhouses of the Jardin du Roi, did not follow exactly the information they had to obtain from our establishment. M. Thouin says: "The inserted parts live and grow, not like grafts, but like parasitic plants. This may be the case if, as he recommends above, we graft crassula and cotyledons onto cacti and opuntia; the reason is that, as these species do not have enough analogy, the grafts, instead of fusing, grow roots. But when the species are analogous, the welding takes place, and the graft is real. 119.* Grafting on fleshy roots or tubers. Pl. 6, fig. 1. a, tuber; b, b, grafts. It often happens that a dahlia tuber, finding itself devoid of eyes, either because of an accident which has broken the stem collar, or because nature has denied it any, despite all the care of the amateur, remains for one or two years, or even longer, without growing, and ends up rotting. Nothing is easier than to notice this, if you look carefully at the neck, as this is where the gems are always placed. In this case, you wait until a bud from another dahlia has begun to develop, circle it with the tip of the grafting tool, and remove it, leaving a small piece of the tuber above. A small hole is made in the neck of the sterile tuber, into which the graft is inserted, but in such a way that the base of the eye is perfectly level with the surface of the tuber. The tuber is planted in a pot, taking care not to bury the neck where the graft is, and the vase is placed on a warm layer under a frame. When the plant has recovered perfectly, remove the rootball and plant in the open ground. 1. This graft is used for the purpose we have just described; it can also be applied to other tuberous plants, principally peonies. It can be used to multiply precious species at the expense of common ones. 120. Stem grafting of annual or perennial plants. Pl. 6, fig. 2. a, stem; b, graft; c, its insertion near a leaf. The time of greatest vegetation is chosen, i.e. a few days before flowering. The stem is cut cleanly, above a leaf, as close as possible to the petiole attachment, and a slit is made in the cut area. A bud of the species you wish to propagate is taken from the root, its base bevelled, and inserted into the slit in the subject, taking care not to damage the leaf, since it is the leaf which must nourish the bud until it is fully established, maintaining the circulation of sap. A ligature is made, and the scissures are covered with grafting wax. When recovery is certain, as can be seen by the growth, the ligature is loosened, the leaf cut off, and the lower buds removed. In this way, Mr. Tschudy grafted artichokes onto thistles, and other plants onto their congeners. 121. Grafting melons. Pl. 6, fig. 3. a, cucumber stem with fruit; b, insertion of watermelon graft, with young fruit c. On a cucumber stem, or that of another plant in the Cucurbitaceae family but similar to the melon, choose a vigorous spot with a well-developed leaf. A half-thick oblique cut is made in the leaf axil. On a melon branch, cut a bud that is sufficiently developed to already have its fruit fully formed, and bevel it two inches below the fruit. Insert it into the cut in the subject, always leaving the leaf untouched until it is perfectly attached; make the ligature, and carry out the operation in the same way as the previous one. This grafting technique is quite successful, but has it really served any useful purpose, at least so far? Tomatoes can be grafted onto potatoes, and other plants of different species, but with sufficient analogy; and this is what experience alone can teach us to recognize. Herbaceous grafts for fruit or ornamental trees. We've included them here because, until now, they've been little more than objects of curiosity. If we were to consider them as useful, we would find a large number of other grafts to compare with them, which would fulfil the same purpose, and which are at the same time safer and easier. They are performed on buds while their tissues are still succulent and herbaceous. 122. Herbaceous groove graft for omnitiges. Pl. 6, fig. 4. a, subject groove; b, graft base. Mr. Tschudy gives the name "omnitiges" to plants whose branches all have the same arrangement, without any of them seeming to want to rise more vertically than the others, and to take up a greater portion of sap. In this case, all branches are equally vigorous and can be grafted indiscriminately. The tip of a bud is cut off, at least one inch from a bud with its leaf, as in previous grafting techniques. An incision is made in the leaf axil, next to the bud, in the form of a triangular groove, dug down to near the middle of the stem, and descending to one inch or eighteen lines. A vigorous bud is selected from the tree, its base trimmed to a triangular O09 point, leaving one side intact, and inserted into the incision so that its tip is level with the subject's eye. Ligature is made and wax applied. As the graft grows, the ligature is undone, the bud and leaf of the subject are removed, and the lower buds are cut off. This graft is successful not only on tree buds, but also on the stems of annual or perennial plants. 123. Herbaceous grafting for opposite-leaved buds. Pl. 6, fig. 5. In the middle of the stem, between two opposite eyes, a longitudinal and angular incision is made, crossing the stem from one side to the other. The graft is wedge-shaped at its base and top, and inserted from the side, so that the two eyes are on the same level as those of the subject, and form a whorl with them. Ligature is made, wax is applied, and the process is repeated as for the previous ones. Specific to tree species and annual or perennial plants whose gems are opposite each other on the stem, which is particularly the case with multi-stemmed plants. M. Tschudy gives this name to those whose central braches, tending to rise more vertically than the lateral ones, are also more vigorous; and it is on these that one should graft. dio

dr FIFTH SECTION. EXPERIMENTAL GRAFTS. These are of no use in the usual practice of gardening, but they are curious and of amusing execution, besides serving to explain 900 some phenomena of plant physiology, knowledge of which may lead to valuable discoveries for agriculture. 124. Approach grafting of branches from several trees onto a single stem. Egyptian graft, by Thouin. Two young fruit trees are planted three feet apart from a tree of the same genus, but of a different species or variety. On the stem of the middle tree, two longitudinal wounds are made, corresponding to two branches of the young trees, which are grafted onto them in the usual way. None of the other branches are cut, and are left to grow as they should. It has been thought that this graft brings about a change in the size, flavor and color of the fruit, and even in the hardness of the wood, but this error is no longer worth refuting. 125. Approach grafting of roots together. Malpighi graft, by Thouin. The roots of two or more neighboring trees are dug up, brought together, and grafted using the trunk approach grafting procedure, n° 80, or trunk abutment approach grafting procedure, n° 81. Then put them back in place, and cover with soil. In this way, the roots of several trees are brought together by sap, and it was once thought that their fruit would undergo some advantageous changes as a result. This has now been recognized as a mistake. 126. Grafting by approaching fruits in their buds. Pomone graft, by Thouin. As soon as they are born, two fruit embryos are brought together, before or as soon as the flowers open, and pressed against each other, so that, unable to move apart, they are forced to weld together as they grow. This graft, like the following one, is often found naturally, produced by accident or because the fruits have been hindered in their development by a branch or some other cause. We have succeeded in imitating nature by reproducing these remarkable monstrosities at will. 127. Grafting by approaching the fruit of one tree onto another. Leberriays graft, by Thouin. Two trees of different but similar species or varieties are brought together; for example, an orange tree and a lemon tree; and, when their fruits have reached a fifth or a quarter of their size, two corresponding wounds are made, and they are joined together; but great care must be taken not to allow the cut to penetrate as far as the lodges containing the seeds: thus, in the example cited, only a small part of what is commonly called the fruit rind is removed. Grafting can also be carried out by simple compression. To do this, a young fruit is brought close to the branch of another fruit of a similar species; the two fruits, which in this case must be barely formed, are brought together and held together by some means so that they cannot separate as they grow. These two methods of grafting have no useful purpose, so they are only used as objects of curiosity. 128. Approach grafting of leaves and flowers. Adanson graft, by Thouin. On young herbaceous stems, leaves, flowers or fruit, small incisions are made in the most suitable places, into which young leaves or flowers are inserted. The operation is carried out with as much delicacy as precision, and maintained with grafting wax. Grafting rarely takes place, but when it does96 , it can lead to some very curious observations about plant physics. 126. Split graft with branch inserted upside down. Lenôtre graft, by Thouin. The head of a subject is cut off, and a longitudinal slit is made in the cut area. Choose a branch from the penultimate sap, and instead of cutting it off at the base, cut it off at the top like a knife blade, and insert it into the slit so that the eyes are upside down. Ligature and cover with grafting wax. In the past, it was thought that this method would produce weeping trees, but experience has shown that the branches immediately straighten out. A more important error to note is that almost all authors have indicated that this method should be used to hasten fruiting. We have often experimented with this method without obtaining any results other than those obtained with ordinary split grafting. The only remarkable consequence that can be drawn from it concerns the uncertain way in which sap circulates in plants; it is therefore only of any use for the study of plant physiology. 130. Grafted sideways by means of a seedling. Grew graft, by Thouin. A branch six or seven feet long is selected, sharpened into a triangular point at the base, and cut into a flute mouthpiece at the top. The triangular point of the branch is driven into the ground at the foot of a large tree; a notch is made in the trunk of the tree, penetrating as far as the medullary case, and filled exactly with the plancon's flute-tip. It is generally believed that this graft is used to propagate trees that have no congeners on which they can be grafted; and this error is due to the fact that we attribute the regrowth of the seedling to the sap supplied by the tree trunk, whereas in reality it is nothing more than the regrowth of an ordinary cutting. Thus, the consequences drawn from this, to prove the descent of sap to the roots, prove nothing, since they are false. 131. Graft of three pieces. Muzat graft, by Thouin. Pl. 6, fig. 6. A vigorous, healthy root with a good head is selected and planted in a pot three-quarters filled with good soil suited to the nature of the plant. The large end of the root, which protrudes out of the soil, can be trimmed into a wedge. A branch of a congenial species is chosen, splintered at the base so as to sit or rather straddle the corner of the root, and fixed there by means of a ligature and grafting wax. Once the first graft is complete, the top of the branch is split in the middle of its diameter. Choose a twig from a tree of the same family, complete with leaves, flower buds and even young fruit. It is trimmed at the base with a very long bevel, and fitted into the branch cleft in the same way as an ordinary cleft graft. Once the ligature has been made and the wax applied, the pot is filled with soil and placed on a warm layer, in a tarpaulin or frame. The plant is deprived of air and too bright a light by means of a frosted glass funnel, and is only gradually given back both, when it is known from its vegetation that the two branches have been perfectly re-grafted. This extremely curious graft is of little use in normal use, but is useful for the study of plant physiology. 132. Composite graft in escutcheon, approach and cleft. Lambert graft, by Thouin. Two young, vigorous wildings are planted eighteen inches or two feet apart. They are grafted 908 in escutcheon facing each other with gems taken from trees whose fruits will be remarkable for their flavor and fragrance. When the grafts have produced two beautiful scions, they are grafted by approach, joining them together over as great a length as possible. As soon as the union is perfect, cut the new stem at the point where it will be most closely joined, make a longitudinal slit in the cut area, and fit a branch of a species with insipid fruit and no flavor at all. Mr. Thouin proposed this method to find out "whether mixing the sap and juices of different trees would not modify the flavor of the fruit, and establish new domestic breeds, more perfect in fruit quality than those we possess. Experience has taught us that the subject's sap has no influence on fruit quality. 133. Duhamel compound graft. A young, robust wild pear tree is selected. A quince tree is grafted onto it, in a slit or escutcheon; a hawthorn is grafted onto the hawthorn, a medlar tree is grafted onto the medlar tree, and a good Christian pear tree is grafted onto the medlar tree. This graft is proposed by Duhamel for the same purpose as the previous one; and, although we have not experimented with it, the analogy makes us presume, or rather gives us the certainty that the result would not be more advantageous. 134. Grafting woody plants onto perennial roots. Nebulous graft, by Thouin. The collar of large perennial roots is dug up, and woody species of the same genus are placed either in a slit or in an escutcheon. If you have grafted in escutcheon, cover with soil up to the level of the graft, but do not bury it; if, on the contrary, you have grafted in slit, bury the graft, and leave only two eyes out of the ground. 1 Olivier de Serre recommends this method for obtaining carnation, viola, passe-roses and passe-velours flowers of different colors. We see here only perennial plants, not woody ones: so it would be almost impossible to graft them in escutcheon; and, supposing we succeeded, we are certain that they would not take root again. As for split grafting, we can well imagine that it can take root, even with woody species, but only in the manner of ordinary cuttings, i.e. it will grow roots, but will not weld. In all cases, the species or variety will remain intact. 135. Grafting non-analogous species. Butret graft, by Thouin. Choose a subject with non-evergreen leaves, and graft onto it a species of the same genus, but whose leaves do not fall off in winter; or use the latter as a subject, and place on it a braid from the former. The experiment can also be carried out in other ways: 1° on a subject whose vegetation is slow and late, we graft another whose sap starts moving actively and very early; 2° on an individual whose sap is sweet and insipid, we place a graft whose sap is acrid and corrosive. Mr. Thouin proposes these methods to prove that it is not enough to graft trees of the same family, genus and species onto one another, to obtain complete success in the operation; but that the movements of the sap, in its ascent and descent, as well as the qualities of the proper juices, must also be more or less the same; otherwise these mismatched grafts perish in a few years. We don't agree with Mr. Thouin at all, and we can assure you that some evergreen trees 2. 009 do very well on deciduous ones; for example, Japanese medlar on hawthorn, burning buiason on hawthorn, olive trees on privet, and so on. As for the difference in sap, we know that pears are delicious on quince, whose fruit is unbearably pungent, and a thousand times late-sucking species are successfully grafted onto early-sucking species, and vice versa.d 136. Grafting seed into escutcheon. Bonnet graft, by Thouin. This graft and the following one have been proposed by M. Thouin to resolve a number of plant physiological questions of importance to agriculture; we shall extract them verbatim from his monograph, and give our opinion on the proposed questions. "Make an incision in the bark of a plant, either an annual or herbaceous perennial, or a tree or shrub, abundant in sap, to the depth of the fibers or woody layers. Introduce into this wound either a whole seed with its envelopes or without its tunics, or one deprived of its cotyledons and reduced to its germ. Cover the wound with a plaster, and keep the parts in their place, by means of ligatures which cannot hinder the development of the germ. "Uses. To find out: 1° whether these germs will develop - We believe that the germs will develop, but in the ordinary way, i.e., by the effect of the humidity maintained by the sap, and vegetation will last only as long as this humidity; they will perish when the sap has passed. "2° Whether the plants born from them will live in the manner of "parasites or false parasites"-it is certain that, during the short time that the germs vegetate, their radicle will run between the bark and the sapwood, and perhaps grow a few roots, to seek ¡1. moisture over a larger surface area. They would thus live like false parasites. "3° And finally, what changes will they undergo "in the subjects on which they grow?"-No changes, whether they vegetate as grafts or as parasites. We have given the reasons for this on pages 11 and following. 137. Grafting leaves in the manner of ecus son. Gresse Bosc, by Thouin. "Choose young subjects in full sap, and old ones in pots; make Tet-shaped incisions in their stems proportionate to the size of the petioles they are to receive; take leaves from congeners with little sap, at a quarter, a third, or half their size, or about to reach it; separate them from their trees with their pedicel in all its length, and its appendix, but saus gemma; put these grafts in the incisions made in the subjects, and place them on a warm layer covered with a shaded shawl, and under which will be maintained a vaporous, humid and warm atmosphere, during the recovery of the grafts. " "Uses. To find out: 1° whether the leaves will come back on neighboring species, which is likely... " - They will resume under the same conditions as for ordinary escutcheon grafts, i.e., on similar subjects. "2° Will they refuse to graft on disgeners? -There's no doubt about it. "3° Whether these leaves will produce gemma in their axils, as if they had remained on their natural foot? As we said in the article on the eyeless crane, n° 87, all the living parts of plants, bark, leaves, peduncles, petals, etc., can with certain precautions form gems that will develop and reproduce a complete individual of the same species. Thus, there is no 4009 doubt that the leaf will produce, not only in its axils, but in all its parts, gems capable of perfect development. Experience has proven this several times, as will be seen in the chapter on cuttings. However, in the grafting operation, only the pedicles, in favorable circumstances, will form embryos. "4° What will be the nature of the buds that develop from these gemmas? According to the principles established on page 11, the buds can only be of the same nature as the grafts that supplied them. There is no reason to believe that a plant will produce beings different from itself, in one part rather than the other. "5° And finally, whether these gemma exist in the seed, and only develop through the act of vegetation; or whether they are produced, each year, by the leaves of the plants?" - We regard this solution as absolutely useless to agriculture: so we won't venture to give our opinion. This question belongs more to philosophy than to the subject we are dealing with, and the philosophers of all centuries have discussed it in turn, without ever having been able to resolve it. This concludes the nomenclature of the grafts we know and which we have almost all performed in our establishment, either as part of our usual practice, or as an object of experiment. It remains for us to present the table in the analytical order of their affinities; and that's what we're going to do, adopting M. Thouin's classification as the one that seemed most natural to us. Although we have described thirty-five more grafts than this patriarch of agriculture, they would all relate exactly to his classification, if, at O00 the time of publication of his monograph, he had known about herbaceous grafts; but this valuable discovery has forced us to change his main divisions a little, and to establish new ones in which some of his own naturally fall. Nora. The number placed after each graft is the order under which it is to be found in the descriptions. FIRST CLASS. WOODY GRAFTS. These are made from woody parts, or by application to wood. FIRST SECTION. Grafting by approach. FIRST SERIES. Approach grafting on stems. 1. approach grafting of suckers. 38. 2. - 3. - . - 5. - 6. - 8. - 10. - 11. - 12. - 13. - 14. - 15. - 16. - by approaching branches. 39. by approaching branches on the subject supplying them. 79. per approach for head replacement. 4o. by tongue approach. 12. per lateral branch approach on stem. 86. per approach on trunk. 8o. per approach by joining trunk. 81. per approach with four splinters. 82. per wedge-shaped approach. 25. Christmas approach. 24. per featherbill approach. 83. per prop approach. 41. per escutcheon approach. 42. by brace approach. 43. by gem approach 84. 17. graft by arch approach 85. 18. - by cradle approach 116. 1 - 20. - 21. - 22. - 23. - 24. - 25. - 26. - 27. - 28. - 29. - by compression approach. 17. by spiral approach. 18. by multiple debarked stem approach. 66. by complicated Chinese approach. 56. by approach on disgenerated roots. 68. by perforation approach. 57. by close debarking. 45. by Chinese approach. 55. by heterogeneous perforation approach. 58. by water approach. 114. by cuttings approach. 115. 30. - by cuttings approach. 20. SECOND SERIES. Approach grafts on branches. 31. Grafting by notch approach. 14. 32. - ordinary approach 13. 33. - 34. - 35. - 36. - 37. - by tongue approach. 77.. by complicated approach. 44. diamond-shaped approach. 117. by approaching branches of several trees on a single stem. 124. by Buffon approach. 26. 38. - by twisting approach. 59. THIRD SERIES. Grafting by root approach. 39. Grafting by root-to-root approach. 125. 4o. - 41. - by approaching roots. 27. by approaching roots on branches holding on to their trees. 105. Scion grafts. FIRST SERIES. Slot grafts. 42. Simple split graft. 5. 43. - split on provins. 49. 44. - 45. - 46. - - 48. - - 50. - 51. - 52. - 53. - 54. - 55. - 56. - 57. - 58. - 59. - 60. - 61. - 62. - 63. - 64. - bevel-cut subject. 90. split with juxta-position. 91. split with bevelled juxtaposition. 92. juxta-position split with bevel and notch. 93. juxta-position split with bevel and tooth. 94. dead eye split. 95. triangular notch split. 96. ferrari split, 6. English tongue split. 89. English split. 88. split with branches inserted upside down. 129. two-branch split. 8. buried, grooved split. 50. laxative vine split, etc. 60. four-branch split. 10. one-stem lateral split. 7. two-stem lateral split. o. branch-tip split. 16. graft-on-graft split. 22. double-W splitting. 4́7. buried splitting. 48. 65. - midwood split. 51. 66. - split with double clamp. 52. 6... - split by twig fragment without gem. 87. SECOND SERIES. Crown grafting. 68. Crown grafting by forking. 97. 69. - Buried crown with notch incision. 53. 119 70. Crown grafting for rejuvenation. 28. 71. - in bark crown. 29. 72. - 73. - Small crown. 19. aerial crown with notch incision, 54. THIRD SERIES. Twig grafts. 74. Twig graft, for orange trees, 1*th kind. 69. 75. - 76. - . - 18. - 80. - id. 2nd kind. 70. id. 3rd kind. 71. id. 4th kind. 72. id. 5th kind. 73. à la Varin in twig between bark and wood. 98. in twig on cutting and done at the same time. 99. 81. - in twig placed in flute. 111. FOURTH SERIES. Side grafts. 82. Side graft in crown. 30. 83. - 84. - 85. - 86. - 87. - 88. - 89. - 90. - id. 2° sorte. 31. de côté en cheville. 32. sideways in ankle and backwards. 33. sideways, single, notched. 34. side, double, notched. 35. sideways by crosscut. 36. sideways by means of a planchet. 130. sideways, inserted like an escutcheon. 21. FIFTH SERIES. Grafting by roots and on roots. 91. Split graft on root holding the subject. 100. 92. - Split graft on separate roots. 102. 93. - - 95. - 96. - 97. - crown on root. 101. cleft on root collar. 11. root cleft under stem collar. 103. split root on root. 104. three-piece. 131 Grafting with gems. FIRST SERIES. Escutcheon grafts. 98. Graft in escutcheon without eyes. 46. 98 - in escutcheon by inoculation. 106. 100. - Woodless escutcheon. 74. 101. - in wooded escutcheon. 1. 102. - as a root escutcheon. 107. 103. - in growing eye escutcheon. 2. 104. - in dormant eye escutcheon. 3. 105. - in die-cut escutcheon. 37. 106. - Opposite escutcheon. 108. 107. - reversed escutcheon. 75.: 108. - reverse escutcheon. 4. 109. - in escutcheon at the end of the branches. 15. 110. - on graft in escutcheon. 23. 111. - compound in escutcheon, approach and slit. 132. 112. 4 Duhamel compound. 133. 113. - in escutcheon on resinous trees. 78. 114. - covered escutcheon. 109. 115. - square escutcheon. 67. 116. - in escutcheon by portion of terminal eyes. 110. 117. - in crest of non-analogous species. 135. 118. - of seed in escutcheon. 136. SECOND SERIES. Grafting in flask. 119. Ring flute graft. 61. 120. - Juxtaposed flute or whistle flute. 62. 121. - in dead-eye flute. 112. 122. - with flute and strap. 113. 123. - as an ordinary flute. 63. 124. - split flute. 64. 125. - split flute with strap. 65. 121. SECOND CLASS. Herbaceous grafts. These are made from soft, herbaceous parts that have not yet reached their woody state. 126. Herbaceous grafting of resinous trees. 76. 127. - succulents. 118. 128. - on fleshy roots or tubers. 110. 129. - on stems of annual or perennial plants. 120. 130. - melon, 121. 131. - herbaceous grooves for omnitiges. 122. 132. - herbaceous for opposite-leaved buds. 123. 133. - woody plants on perennial roots. 134. 134. - of leaves in the form of an escutcheon. 137. 135. - by approaching fruits in their buds. 126. 136. - by fruit approaching from one tree to another. 137. - by approaching leaves and flowers. 128. DIOMECSD( 123 --..-- CHAPTER II. PRUNING. FIRST SECTION. GENERAL PRINCIPLES. Under the title of this chapter, we will include not only pruning as such, but also all operations which have some connection with it; thus we will deal with disbudding, shearing, bowing, ring incision, etc. The purpose of pruning is to give a tree a different shape from that which nature has imposed on it. The purpose of pruning is 1° to give a tree a different shape from the one imposed by nature; 2° to maintain the balance of sap in all its parts, so as to keep it in robust health; 3° to force it to produce more abundant, better-quality harvests every year. Pruning is an entirely artificial operation, for which nature offers no model. This mutilation acts on plants in the same way as grafting, i.e. by altering their constitution it forces them, by the same principle of plant physiology, to give to fruit production the sap that nature intended for the maintenance and growth of wood. If it increases the quality or quantity of a harvest, it owes it to this cause, and to the hand of the grower who, by removing useless wood, retains or subtracts, according to circumstances, that destined to bear fruit. It seems that this operation was unknown to the ancients. At least, if we are to believe what little they have left us on 208 this subject, they only knew about pruning and shearing, and their only aim was to subject their trees to regular, pleasing and sometimes bizarre shapes. Many authors have written on this interesting subject, but almost all of them, carried away by blind routine and lacking sufficient knowledge of the laws of vegetation, have given incoherent, disjointed precepts which, not being founded on any principle, are always vicious and often impossible to apply. In 1795, this grower published a small treatise entitled Taille raisonnée des arbres fruitiers, in which he gives excellent rules based on the true principles of vegetation. It is unfortunate that this esteemed author confined himself to describing only the pruning of peach trees, and only that practiced in Montreuil. Instruments for pruning, and wood cutting. The serpette is the oldest instrument ever used, and still the best. To be of the most convenient proportions, its handle should be 3 to 4 inches long; it should be made of deer horn, so that the roughness of this material fixes it firmly in the hand. The blade, two inches long, should be curved at the tip, so that it can easily remove a branch, but without snagging too hard to break. It must be extremely sharp, and always very clean, as the sap of certain plants is known to be caustic enough to attack the temper if left on the steel for a long time. In recent years, attempts have been made to replace the O08 serpette with the secateur, invented by Mr. Marquis Bertrand de Molleville; but this instrument, whose only merit is to save a little time, has so many disadvantages that it cannot be used in good cultivation. It consists of two crossed branches, ending in the shape of curved scissors with two blades, one oval and sharp, the other crescent-shaped to provide a point of support. The other details of its shape vary according to the intelligence of the craftsman who makes it, or the whim of the amateur who has it made. When using pruning shears, the crescent is pressed against one side of the scion to be cut; and, by squeezing the branches, the blade is brought closer together, cutting more or less cleanly through the portion of wood interposed between its crescent and the blade: but the result of this operation is that, as the wood presents its fibers perpendicularly to the blade, its resistance is much greater and causes a pressure which, by crushing the wood, also detaches the bark up to a few lines below the wound. The mutilated branch tip, far from healing, dries out, and mortality usually spreads to the underside of the eye, which itself is often damaged. The pruning shears have other serious disadvantages, which we won't go into here, because the one we've just mentioned is enough to make them inadvisable for any good crop. In addition to the pruning shears, we recommend a hand saw or egohine, with a narrow, strong, elongated blade, for amputating large branches; an ordinary pruning shear; shears or scissors for trimming hedges and palisades; volans, loppers, pruning hooks, etc. The way in which the serpette is used, or rather the way in which the wood is cut, is not at all indifferent. Whenever you are working on a species with a hard, not very soft wood, and whose sap does not flow in too abundantly, the amputation should be made above and as close as possible to an eye, but with extreme care to avoid damaging it. To do this, place the blade of the serpette on the part of the bark opposite the eye, and a little higher than it. Bring the blade of the instrument up, cutting so as to form an oblique, bevelled wound, the upper end of which will end a little above, or about, the level of the upper end of the gem. Pl. 7, fig. 1. One of the principles of cutting is to always make a bevel cut when the point of section is within the length of a scion or a young stem; and, as far as circumstances allow, the wound should be turned towards the north, so that, being naturally shaded, it is not so quickly dried out by the sun's rays. The result of bevel cutting is that, should any sap flow, it flows along the wound onto the bark opposite the bud, and does not risk reaching it. On plants with soft, supple wood, and especially those whose sap will be very abundant, the principle is no longer the same. No matter how clean the wound, it never heals on the cut itself; the end of the wood dries out and dies; the mortality descends to form a snag of a certain length, and would destroy the eye if it reached it. Walnut, for example, is in this situation. The reason for this is undoubtedly that the wood's great porosity allows air and heat to penetrate to a certain depth into its fibers, destroying their organization by drying out the nourishing juices right down to their finest vessels. The moisture that then penetrates completes the destruction of the medullary substance. It seems that, in trees with a high sap flow, such as vines and fig trees, there is another cause in addition to 3 this one. Shortly after cutting, the sap flows into the wound in great abundance, escaping and overflowing it on all sides; despite the inclination of the chisel, it flows over the eye and drowns it. Therefore, whenever you operate on individuals of this type, you should make the same bevel cut as for the previous ones, but at least half an inch above the eye. Pl. 7, fig. 2. This will produce a small snag, which will disappear the next time the tree is pruned, because it has been carefully removed to repair an unpleasant deformity, and to allow the bark to cover the wound. There is another way of avoiding this problem: by pruning closer to the eye, you could cover the wound with soft wax; but the time this method would take makes it impossible when you have a large number of trees to prune. When a small branch or bud is to be cut off entirely, it should be cut as cleanly as possible at its base, i.e. at the bark of the stem or branch on which it was placed. Extreme care should be taken to perfectly unite the wound, so as to make it easier to cover it by bringing the bark of the subject closer together. Pl. 7, fig. 3, a, b, It is always with astonishment that we see a large number of cases where authors make exceptions to this rule, which in our opinion should not exist. For example, they state that, in gum-prone trees such as peach, if we cut a branch or bud while the sap is in motion, i.e., while the tree still has its leaves, we must leave a snag to prevent gum and the canker that follows. We have never left a snag on any of the trees we have grown, and we have never noticed the slightest inconvenience. It is above all for resinous trees, such as pines, firs, etc., that they recommend, for all pruning periods, snags, whose slightest effect is to deprive a tree of the pleasant look that makes up all its merit in a garden where it can only be considered as an ornamental object. The reason they give is that the sap extravasates and exhausts the subject. We believe this to be the case, if one were imprudent enough to prune during the vegetation period; but, in a favorable season, we are certain that no accident would result. Experience would not have convinced us of what we are saying, and reasoning alone would lead us not to act otherwise. It's certain that any amputation always causes a tree to suffer at the moment it's made: so why put ourselves in the position of having to perform two operations for one? Besides, in resinous trees, if there is to be sap loss, it will just as easily occur through a wound made on a stump six inches long, as through a wound closer to the trunk. The authors say that this stump should be left to dry, and then broken off; this is even more inappropriate, as it is impossible in this case for the scar to recover, and mortality will necessarily increase with the thickness of the stem. All the resinous trees that have come out of our nurseries in the last twenty-five years have been pruned flush with the trunk, and we have never complained about their vigour. If a branch to be cut off is too big to be cut with a serpette, we saw it as close as possible to the trunk; then we seal the wound with a sharp instrument, until the smallest trace of the saw has disappeared, because otherwise the amputation would never heal; decay would quickly set in, and lead to the loss of the subject. If the wound is not large, it is covered with grafting wax; otherwise, with 11 Saint-Fiacre ointment. If, in order to rejuvenate a tree, we were obliged to cut it back to its trunk, i.e., to amputate its largest branches, we would use the saw as we have just said; we would unite the scar with a sharp, strong instrument, such as a carpenter's chisel, and cover the amputation with St. Fiacre's ointment, held in place by a canvas headstock. Mr. John Robertson, a member of the London Horticultural Society, proposes to replace St. Fiacre's ointment or wax, in this case and whenever it is necessary to treat a wound caused by the extirpation of a canker or other disease, with a mixture of tar and pulverized charcoal. We believe that this composition may be as good as our grafting waxes; but we see no reason why it should be better. If the tree were precious, or if we were very keen to preserve it, we would spread a thick layer of grafting wax over the wound, covering it with an extremely thin sheet of lead, similar to that used to wrap tobacco. This must be thick enough to protect the scar from contact with meteors, but not thick enough to resist the new bark as it forms. Finally, when the head of a young tree has to be cut off, the wound can be covered using the close bark grafting method. See page 59, n° 45. Time of pruning. The most favorable time to prune trees is in spring, when vegetation begins. In the Paris climate, this operation is usually carried out from the beginning of February to the middle of April. But this cannot be taken as a general rule, for the reason that, 2. even without leaving France, there are regions where vegetation is much earlier than in the vicinity of Paris, and others where it is less so. So, it's in the very principles of vegetation that we need to study the precise period at which we should prune. When a plant is in a state of absolute rest, when the sap, stagnant in its woody vessels, cannot carry nourishment to any of its parts, it would be absurd to make a wound which, unable to cover itself immediately, would remain exposed for a long time to the pernicious influences of air, cold and frost. The disease would penetrate to the very depths of the trunk, forming incurable cankers that would soon lead to the total loss of the individual. If a tree is in vegetation, the disadvantage of mutilating it while nature is at work becomes just as great. The sap is imprudently opened up to channels through which it escapes and is lost outside, instead of reaching the gems it was supposed to develop into leaves, buds or fruit. In addition to this, the individual, suddenly interrupted in its vegetation, experiences a jolt that can cause it to perish. If an amateur were uneducated enough to prune a tree when it is in full sap, that is, when its gems have already metamorphosed into twigs with leaves, a greater danger would be added to those we have just mentioned. Stripped of the absorbent pores that nature has placed on the leaf surface for plant respiration, the tree would suddenly perish of asphyxiation. These two equally dangerous pitfalls must be avoided. To do this, take advantage of the moment when the tree begins to vegetate enough to hope that, after a few days, the sap, increasing in vigor, will easily repair the alterations caused by pruning, 1 moment when the sap is not moving enough to risk being stopped in its course, and when it is not flowing enough to be lost, and consequently exhaust the subject. It's easy to see that this favorable period cannot be precisely indicated, since not only does it advance or delay due to different climates and more or less precocious years, but also due to the health of the individuals and the hot or cold exposure in which they will be placed. For example, a peach tree in light, warm soil, facing south, will flower eight or even two weeks earlier than another in less favorable soil, facing east or west. There's more: two trees of the same species and variety may, for reasons that are little or not at all known, flower, and consequently vegetate, at fairly distant intervals from one another. But there is a very simple way of recognizing, in all climates and under all circumstances, the true moment of pruning; this means spying on the moment when the prodigiously swollen buds are going to develop into flowers and leaves. The gardener's trained eye can distinguish with certainty the species of buds, enabling him or her to direct the operation with ease and discernment. When pruning a large crop, it is very important to choose the right moment, firstly to maintain the vigour and health of the trees, and secondly to avoid wasting time. If, through forgetfulness or lack of knowledge, you neglected to prune the early species first, and started with the later ones, the result would be that you would find yourself surprised by the vegetation, and O6 that you would suddenly have more trees to prune than you could cope with. Forced to mutilate them during their first growth, not only would their constitution be greatly altered, but you would also be exposed to breaking and throwing down a quantity of good joists and flower buds. There isn't a gardener who doesn't know that wood becomes much more fragile when it's in sap, and that trellising is very-difficult then. To follow the order of vegetation, we prune apricot trees first, because they bloom first, then peach trees, followed by plum, pear and cherry trees, and finally apple trees, because they bloom last, usually in April. GENERAL PRUNING GUIDELINES. Until now, it has been believed that sap has two movements, one ascending, destined to the growth and maintenance of wood, the other descending, charged by nature with developing and nourishing flowers and fruit. This doctrine, professed by learned and respectable men, would be a very interesting subject for discussion in a treatise on physiology, but we won't deal with it here, because the consequences drawn from it with regard to pruning are poorly deduced and of no application, since all the phenomena of vegetation and fruiting can be explained very well without the help of these ascending and descending saps. So, whether sap rises and falls by a regulated or periodic movement, or whether it doesn't, which seems more likely to us, the principles of pruning and of horticulture as a whole are no less the same; what's more, they will be much easier to conceive, once we have rid them of the hypothetical reasoning deduced from this prejudice. 1 FIRST PRECEPT. A tree's vigor depends, to a great extent, on the equal distribution of sap in all its branches. If the sap leaves some branches to flow more freely into others, those left behind will first lose weight, sometimes run out of fruit, and become thin and spindly. Mortality starts at the tip of the twig, spreads to the branch, and soon to the trunk; and, either if the diseased part is left there or detached too late, it forms a canker which soon brings the tree to complete ruin. No one has ever failed to notice this, particularly on espaliers. When one of the two mother branches dies, it's impossible to re-form the tree on the remaining one, and we're still lucky if we can prolong its existence by dint of art and care. It is therefore necessary, if a tree is to retain its health and shape, to prune in such a way as to maintain a perfect balance in all its main branches; and the gardener must pay scrupulous attention to this; for, if he neglects for a year or two to remedy the weakness of a branch by the most effective means, he will no longer be able to recapture the sap carried away by the other parts. This rule should be followed most rigorously during the first few years, when sap is most resistant to the symmetrical, unnatural shapes we impose on plants to make them more pleasing or useful. However, this is also the moment when it is easiest to tame sap, because we only work on a few buds. 009 SECOND PRECEPT. The life and vigor of a tree depend, to a great extent, on the constant balance between its branches and roots. It follows from this principle that whenever a newly planted tree is pruned, and its roots have suffered, or even lost some of their parts in the process of replanting, which is almost always the case, its branches should be cut back close to the stem, so that they do not have to expend a greater quantity of sap than the roots can supply. The same procedure should be followed whenever the roots are affected by disease or old age. If we acted otherwise, the roots would soon be exhausted, the sap responsible for providing them with hair would be absorbed to their detriment by the branches, and the tree would perish after languishing for some time. But it sometimes happens that, through whim or some other cause, we want to amputate the large branches of a tree. If its roots are vigorous and healthy, which is easily recognized by the beauty of its vegetation, they should never be cut back to the stem or trunk, because the abundant sap supplied by the roots, finding no outlet to rush out and develop into leaves and buds, will remain in its vessels, deteriorating there, and dealing a blow to the tree's health from which it will never recover well; but that's assuming he doesn't die of repletion in the first, second or third year at the latest. The stem should therefore be left with enough branches and buds to keep the sap busy, and provide it with a passage to the outside. From this principle, we can also draw the 009 escential consequence that a young subject, with vigorous roots, can nourish a greater number of buds than an old one, and consequently be pruned longer. THIRD PRECEPT. As sap always tends to rise from roots to branches as vertically as possible, it abounds in straight branches, to the detriment of others. It is on the knowledge of this principle that we have established the arcure, a means by which we hinder the progress of sap, and force it to divert to other buds. On the other hand, when the trellised branch of an espalier, for example, becomes thin, the sap is forced to flow to it by straightening it into a more or less vertical position, as required. As a result, when we fear that a tree is thinning at the bottom, we prevent the sap from reaching the top by inclining the upper branches. Some authors recommend long pruning in such cases, and we have a comment to make on this subject. The reason for this is quite simple: instead of concentrating on one or two buds (which would have happened if we had pruned short), and developing them into gourmands, the sap will be forced to divide itself between twelve or fifteen to which it will provide nourishment, and these will only acquire a suitable development; the fact is certain. But won't the quantity of sap required for fifteen small branches be as considerable, and even da vantage, as that diverted for the benefit of two larger ones? We believe so; and then O00 the sum of expenditure being equal, the lower branches will find themselves weaned off an equal quantity of sap. This means of restoring balance is therefore vicious, and should not be used. If the vigour of a branch cannot be stopped by inclining it, it would be better to use a bow, or a half-twist, or perhaps even a ring incision, than to prune it long. FOURTH PRECEPT. Sap develops much more vigorous buds on a branch pruned short, than on one pruned long. The reason for this is extremely easy to understand: having to develop only one or two buds, it is clear that it will develop them much more strongly than if it had had to divide itself between fifteen or twenty. This precept is nonetheless very useful, because a vigorous branch will only very rarely bear fruit, so you should prune short whenever you want to have strong, well-nourished wood; but you must not believe, as some authors say, that the sap carries more force in a shortened branch than in another. It follows from this that, when any part of a tree is less vigorous than another, either because it has been exhausted by a large production of fruit, or because it is languishing due to disease, by pruning it short for two or three years, we will obtain a sufficient quantity of wood to bring back the sap, restore its original vigor, and by this means re-establish the necessary balance in all parts of the plant. O08 FIFTH PRECEPT. Sap, always tending to flow to the end of branches, develops the terminal bud more vigorously than the lateral buds. This is especially true of young trees. Whenever you want to extend a branch, you need to prune on the most vigorous wood eye, leaving no twig or stalk beyond that could divert its nourishing juices; it's on this eye that you need to focus all your attention. Choosing the right eye requires a great deal of thought. For example, if you're working on an espalier, regardless of the fact that it should be kept only where wood is needed, either to extend a mother branch or a limb, it must be placed above or below the branch, and never on the sides. In the case of a cattail, other considerations apply: if the species of tree tends to develop its lateral branches too horizontally, which is very rare, it would be necessary to prune on a bud placed on the side of the stem to bring the branches closer together. But, much more commonly, if the branches tended to grow too close to the trunk, to grow too vertically, we would always prune on an eye placed outside, i.e. on the opposite side to the stem. Finally, since trees are subject to thinning out in some of their parts, either through an accident, or through poor pruning in the previous year, or through mortality caused by disease, we try to fill the void by pruning on eyes facing the side we want to fill. 508 SIXTH PRECEPT. If a branch is entirely removed, the sap benefits the neighboring branches and twigs. When a branch is so exhausted that there is no hope of it recovering, or when it is affected by canker or any other disease with a long or doubtful cure, or when, on a tree with a regular shape, it occupies a place that disturbs symmetry, it should be felled without hesitation. Neighboring branches will soon replace it in a way that is more advantageous for the elegance of the form; and, if it has been cut off because of disease, this replacement will take much less time than if we had tried to cure it instead of cutting it off. However, we would always advise the grower to think carefully before deciding to amputate a large branch from a tree; for, despite all the precautions he may take, this mutilation will always harm the tree, and all the more so the older it is, and the larger the wound. Only extreme necessity should determine this. Our precept should only be applied generally to branches no older than two, three or four years. SEVENTH PRECEPT. Branches in which sap flows abundantly produce much wood and little fruit; those in which sap does not flow abundantly produce much fruit and little wood. The consequence of this principle is that, when a branch becomes too woody, all we have to do is divert the sap by any means, such as tilting it horizontally, to force it to bear fruit. If, on the other hand, we wanted to turn it into wood, we would straighten it and concentrate all its sap on two or three buds, by pruning it short and on two or three eyes. Experience has shown that if you prune over one or two eyes, you'll get strong, sturdy woody branches; if you prune to half length, the top third will provide woody buds, the middle third twigs, and the bottom third joists; at least that's the way nature works on mature trees, and on ordinary branches that are neither too weak nor too vigorous. Often, a tree will grow branches of extraordinary vigor, which gardeners rather inappropriately call "gourmands". They are quick to prune them very short, and by this clumsy operation, they keep them in extraordinary and useless vegetation. It's much simpler to prune them very long, or even just pinch their tips, bend them and force them to set fruit. These branches can become precious, and should only be cut back when they risk deforming the tree. EIGHTH PRECEPT. The more sap is hindered in its circulation, the more twigs and fruit buds it produces. This principle is based on the same physiological reasons as detailed in the article on grafting, i.e. on the natural tendency of all plants to hasten the moment of fruiting when some alteration seems to threaten them with premature destruction. He explains in a very natural way how a bow, a twist, an annular or longitudi1008 nal incision, by impeding the flow of sap, determines a hitherto sterile branch to set fruit. It seems that the ancients knew, or at least suspected, this phenomenon of vegetation; for, when they wanted to force a tree that was too vigorous to bear fruit, they made a prosaic notch in its trunk, or a hole into which they drove a dowel of dry wood. NINTH PRECEPT. Any branch that is disbudded or pinched will produce a large number of branches and fruit buds, due to the overabundance of sap that cannot be released by developing wood. But for this principle to have its full effect and application, the operation must be carried out at the time of disbudding, i.e. after the first sap and during part of the year; For, if it were done in the first days of spring, the result would be that either the cambium would emerge through the bark and create new gems which would soon develop into wood, or that the subject would perish through a kind of plenitude; and in this case the disease would be announced by gum or incurable cankers. So, when you have exhausted the ordinary means of very long pruning, inclination, bowing or twisting, without success, on a woody branch, pinch its tip and cut off its lateral buds; this will soon force it to set fruit. 908 TENTH PRECEPT. The more you force a tree to bear fruit, the more you exhaust it; the more you keep it in wood, the more you increase its vigor. This principle shows gardeners how they should behave if they want to obtain good harvests for a long time on robust trees; they will never overload them, and the fruit will be much bigger, of better quality, and more abundant. This last point might seem extraordinary if we didn't explain it. Everyone has noticed that, once a tree has produced a large quantity of fruit, it usually goes one, two or even three years without yielding anything. The reason for this is that the tired tree, having exhausted all its joists, is obliged to reform others on new wood. And since the joists usually take two or three years to form, it's clear that they won't bear fruit during that time. Can a tree, however overloaded with fruit, produce as much in a single harvest as it would in three ordinary harvests? This is not a difficult question to answer, and we can say with complete certainty that it cannot. If three harvests of better quality are equivalent, and more, to one whose fruit will be small, gravelly and unscented, it is therefore to the grower's advantage to establish, as far as possible, an annual balance of produce for as long as the tree lives. To achieve this, pruning should leave only as much fruit as the tree can feed without damaging the woody branches, and therefore without altering its constitution. We have often seen amateurs admire their gardener with a kind of enthusiasm, 009 because their trees were covered, under his hand, with a prodigious number of fruits: if this same gardener had performed a similar prodigy in our establishment, we would have thrown him out immediately; we would have had him pruned, and we would not have been in a position to conclude, as the amateurs do, that an espaliered peach tree only lives twelve or fifteen years, and that a pear cattail only lasts twenty or twenty-five. The health and longevity of a tree depend very much on the reasoned balance the gardener strikes in the production of fruit and wood branches; and, if some of the former are to be sacrificed, it would be better to cut them down. What little may be lost in one year will be recouped in subsequent harvests. ELEVENTH PRECEPT. Depending on the species, fruit buds appear either at the tip of the branch or along the branch. This means that not all fruit trees can be pruned every year, if they are to produce an annual crop. The medlar, for example, cannot be pruned; as its fruit is always borne at the end of the branches, it would have to be cut down every year if we wanted to correct the bizarre shapes it affects in its habit. The same applies to the quince tree. TWELFTH PRECEPT. Fruit buds, in seed-bearing species, are usually born on old wood, and in stone-bearing species on one-year-old wood. All good pruning methods are based on the recognition and rigorous application of this principle. We have said that the fruit buds of seed-bearing species usually develop on old wood, because apple and pear trees are sometimes exceptions to this general rule. However, in order to help the reader better understand the consequences we are about to deduce, we feel it our duty, first and foremost, to enable him or her to recognize perfectly the nature of wood and buds, in relation to their product, and their differences resulting from the various species. THIRTEENTH PRECEPT. In trees with seeded fruit, all the gems, as they develop, are organized in such a way as to be able to produce, according to circumstances, wood buds, twigs or lambounds. A wood bud is easily recognized by its position: it is always applied to the branch, without any particular support or foot that carries it on and off. Its shape is thin, slender and elongated; it is less enveloped in scaly membranes than the others, and its tip extends into a sharper point, a little curved at the beginning of its growth. It is most commonly found at regular intervals on the previous year's buds, particularly at their tips. (Pl. 7, fig. 3, c, d.) The fruiting or flowering buds are carried on small supports of a particular shape and naturalness, to which we have given the names lambourdes and brindilles. In seed trees, these supports are the true fruiting branches. Fruit buds can be recognized not only by their peduncles, but also by their shape. They are much larger than wood buds, more enveloped in scales, and more rounded in shape. (Pl. 7, fig. 3, e.) The twig (Pl. 7, fig. 3.) is a small branch, O two to five inches long, which first developed from a woody œeil, and would have produced a branch if some particular circumstance had attracted a sufficient quantity of sap to it. Its bark is usually smooth, especially when it is at its longest, and it can be found on all parts of a tree, provided they are neither too young nor too old. Nevertheless, it is not uncommon to see a new bud produce a twig on the second shoot, and to see others emerge through the rough bark of an old branch, or even a stem. The twig is almost always provided, especially at its base and tip, with two or three eyes, from which, if necessary, wood could be obtained; but, to do this, it would be necessary to bend it over two of these eyes, and attract the sap to it by cutting off the buds placed above and below its base, or even by shortening the whole branch. A good twig that has never been mutilated can last and bear fruit for many years. The gardener's pruner must therefore always respect it, unless it is misplaced and deforms the tree. If it grows a bud at its tip, as in f, the following year, break it off or cut it off near its exit. The lambourde (pl. 7, fig. 3, g.) is the immediate support for a fruit bud. It usually develops on a twig, but often on an old or young woody branch. It usually takes three years to form, and sometimes longer. In the first year, instead of developing a single leaf and a woody bud in its axil, a bud produces three leaves and a small support one to four lines long, which is the first rudiment of the lambourde (fig. 3, h.). In the second year, the bud, already rounder and larger than a wood bud, produces five leaves; the lambourde lengthens by half an inch, more or less, and its bark wrinkles circularly to form deep, irregular folds; (fig. 3. g.) The following year it produces seven leaves (and sometimes, but rarely, its flower). The bud is then considerably larger than a wood-eye, and can no longer be mistaken for one, even by the most inexperienced man; yet its shape is still elongated. Its scales, scarce and brown at the tip, are pale green at the base, (fig. 3, k, K.) The lambourde has elongated further, revealing on its sides, near the base of the bud, other gems which, the following year, will in turn produce other fruit buds (fig. 3, l.). Finally, in the fourth year, the prodigiously swollen, almost round bud (fig. 3, e.) develops an indeterminate number of leaves, and a corymb of flowers in the middle. The flap has reached its full length, the folds of its bark have become even more pronounced, and the new buds, if any, are already sufficiently characterized for us to be able to judge the year in which they will bear fruit. The new shoots on which they are placed are much shorter than those on which they are placed, and very rarely produce new shoots. These are the general rules of fruiting in pear trees, but exceptions are extremely frequent. Young, vigorous pear trees often develop fruiting shoots and buds on current-year wood. We have even sometimes seen a gem grow a vigorous scion for the first month, then suddenly develop, in the middle of its length, a flower bud whose fruit knotted in July and reached, before falling, a quarter or a third of its size. These anomalies are even more common on apple trees, particularly on apis grafted on paradise. It happens that, on the previous year's wood, one or more flower buds develop in April, blossom immediately and 2. 10 GOO bear fruit the following autumn. It follows that, if you want to make the most of these last trees, you must not prune them until vegetation is sufficiently advanced to recognize these precious buds perfectly and not cut them down; which would necessarily happen if you pruned in the ordinary way. This would necessarily happen if the pruning was carried out in the usual way, as it is then necessary to keep wood which would otherwise have been removed; but when disbudding, we start to remove the wood on which the flowers or fruit have aborted, and at the next pruning we repair the deformities. Moreover, accidental circumstances can easily change the destination of a fruit bud, whether in its first, second, third or fourth year. If sap suddenly flows into it, the characteristics that made it a fruiting bud disappear, and a woody bud takes its place. The clues we have drawn from the number of leaves developing on a fruit bud are even more uncertain, because it takes less influential circumstances to produce remarkable variations. FOURTEENTH PREGEST. In stone fruit trees, flower buds are usually born on wood of the year, and cannot metamorphose into wood buds. Cherry and a few other species are frequent exceptions to the first part of this rule, which must be applied rigorously only to peach trees, and for which we will also give the principles of fruiting. Peach trees have two types of branches that are easy to distinguish, but which must be recognized before pruning begins. The first O09 are the woody branches, always the strongest and most vigorous; they are at least the size of a finger, and often reach an inch or more in diameter if the trees are young, and in a suitable exposure and soil; their length, in this case, can reach from three to eight feet. But the best way to recognize them is that, from the autumn of the first year, they take on the uniform grayish hue of old wood. Fruiting branches are to peach trees what twigs are to seed trees, but with the essential difference that they only bear fruit once, and that if they are kept, they only produce other thin fruiting branches. They are rarely less than six inches long, and even more rarely reach two and a half feet. Their ordinary size is equal to that of a small feather-pipe; and, however vigorous a tree may be, it rarely reaches the size of a little finger. On the contrary, they retain a reddish tint on the side facing the sun, and their green color on the side facing the wall. On peach trees, however, there is a kind of fruit-bearing branch that can be compared to lambourdes, but with the difference that it only flowers once; it consists of a small snag no more than one, two or three inches long, trimmed all around with flower buds, and ending at the top with a wood bud (1). In stone trees, the gems destined to form a flower bud, as we have said, can never provide a woody eye; but the result is (1) If we were writing a work on physiology, we would be careful not to establish divisions in the nature of branches; because in reality there are no two species, and all can produce wood and fruit equally well on the peach tree as on all other GOOs O no disadvantage, because, as the flower buds are always placed next to a wood bud, if it were a question of reproducing a new branch, we could always prune on it. To be able to prune with full knowledge of the facts, it is essential to be able to distinguish perfectly between a wood bud and a flower bud, and this is not difficult if you pay a little attention, because by August, the differences are already sufficient to characterize them. Flower buds are rounded and large, and each has a leaf whose function is to attract sap until they are perfectly formed, at which point the sap ceases to be useful and falls off; wood buds are thinner, longer and more pointed. FIFTEENTH PRECEPT. All flowering buds on stone fruit trees remain sterile unless accompanied by a woody bud. Here's a principle of recognized accuracy, published long ago, but which few gardeners are aware of, even though it is essential to know in order to direct the proper pruning of peach trees. The fruiting branches of the peach tree do not all have the same arrangement of flowering buds. On some, a single flower bud is placed next to a wood bud; on others, two flower buds are placed, one on one side and the other on the other side of a wood bud; on a third type of branch, the flower bud is not accompanied by its wood eye, and so the branch, being arbrea. However, as the weakness of one branch means that it is more likely to bear fruit than another, we have adopted a special name for it, and consequently an artificial division into fruiting branches and woody branches. We have done this to present the pruning operation in a clearer and easier way. If the fruit is sterile, it must be removed, because if it were to ripen, as it sometimes does, it would be of mediocre quality. Finally, in the species of lambourdes we mentioned earlier, the flowers gathered in bouquets have no wood-eyes next to their buds; but they are no less fertile, because the bud, placed at the top, is sufficient to provide them with the necessary nourishment: so they should never be pruned, since this could not be done without removing the wood-eye. It's easy to see that nature has only placed a bud next to each flower to attract sap and supply the young fruit. If the bud is missing, the blossom falls without tying the knot; if by chance the fruit forms, it languishes for a while, turns yellow, dries out, and usually perishes before reaching a third or half of its size. Peach trees should therefore not be pruned until the wood-eyes have begun to develop; for, as winter very often exposes them to death, if we were unable to recognize those that are alive and intact, it would very often happen that we would keep as good fruit branches whose wood-eyes had been destroyed by frost or cold, and the result would be that we would have kept many sterile flowers, while we would have cut down good ones. In addition, these useless woody branches would remain bare, without flowers, leaves or wood, for the whole year, forming unpleasant and pernicious snags. However, we must not wait to prune until the tree is in full bloom, because then the operation would be very-difficult so as not to knock off a large part of it, especially when palming the branches. 100 SIXTEENTH PRECEPT. Once a peach tree branch has borne fruit, it no longer bears fruit. It is therefore necessary to renew it, i.e. to cut it down in order to have another one develop on one of its lower eyes, which will have been preserved for this purpose. It is the knowledge of this principle that has led to the discovery of the pruning operation in the peach tree, which we call replacement, and which we will deal with in greater detail, because it is as essential as it is little practised by routine gardeners. It is perhaps only in a few gardens around Paris and in the village of Montreuil that all the important consequences of this rule have been drawn. SEVENTEENTH PRECEPT. Leaves are used by plants to breathe; any tree that is partly deprived of them is impaired in its health; if it is entirely deprived of them, it risks perishing. So, in summer pruning, disbudding, etc., only as much foliage should be removed as is strictly necessary to achieve the intended purpose. If a tree - a peach tree, for example - were so full of fruit that a large proportion of its leaves had to be removed in order to allow it to benefit from the sun's fragrant and coloring influences, it would be better to sacrifice the quality of some of the fruit than risk making the tree very tired. This precept also indicates that, when pruning in spring, we must leave a tree, albeit formed, with a sufficient quantity of wood to provide it with a well-filled foliage, otherwise it will gradually perish from asphyxia. It also follows from this principle that whenever we remove all the leaves from a twig or branch while the sap is flowing, if the season is too late for sub-buds to develop, the branch or twig will be abandoned by the sap and will dry out. EIGHTEENTH PRECEPT. Any branch or twig around which air, light and heat cannot circulate freely will wither, elongate, become thin and flabby, and produce neither fruit nor wood. It was this rule of vegetation, known to ancient French growers, that perhaps gave rise to the first idea of subjecting trees to regular forms, which, by placing each branch and twig in a calculated position, enables all parts of a tree to enjoy the influences of air, light and heat. We see proof of this in the cups hollowed out on the inside, and in the fans so highly recommended by Laquintinie. We draw the consequence from this principle, that a gardener should never allow branches and twigs to pile up in the center of a tree, so as to make a mass of foliage too bushy and thick enough to prevent atmospheric influences from circulating freely through it. Nature herself has laid down this principle, an example of which she gives us in all the individuals abandoned to her care. If we follow the development of an apple tree, for example, throughout its life, we will see that, as its branches lengthen and move away from the trunk, it forms domes of greenery, provided only by the ends of the branches, and placed in such a way as to be able to receive the influences of the air which can circulate with ease in the bare interior of the tree's head. It will not be objected that this is an effect of the principle and not the cause of it, if we consider that the branches refuse to naturally produce wood buds along most of their length, and mainly as they approach their base. NINETEENTH PRECEPT. Old wood only produces buds when forced to do so by pruning or by the alteration of the young wood that ends the branch. It is therefore necessary, especially in espaliers, for the gardener to prune carefully so as to keep branches at the base of the main branches, as they lengthen, in order to always have enough wood to fill the interior of the tree. If it is stripped, it will be impossible to develop wood eyes, and the tree will needlessly occupy a very large space. This is the major flaw in almost all peach trees found in amateur gardens. There is now only one way to repair this defect, and that is to bring a bud from a neighboring branch onto the branch lacking wood, and graft it there using the approach grafting method, page 54, no. 38, or to place a scion graft if the bark is still young enough; but this method will never repair the defect in such a way as to make the shape of the tree as beautiful and regular as if it had been well cared for from the start. 008 TWENTY-FIRST PRECEPT. Any bud developed outside the time of the two sapstocks is usually sterile, thin and incapable of producing wood or fruit. These types of production, which have been given the name of false buds, and which we more appropriately call under-buds, are never found on a tree abandoned to nature's care. They are the result of an accident or of pruning carried out in an untimely season. For example, if the trellising of a peach tree were done too early, i.e. before the buds were sufficiently developed, the removal of useless wood would cause the sap to flow to the eyes that should not have developed until the following year, and these eyes would give only aborted wood, incapable of ripening and withstanding the rigours of winter, hence under-budding. Lastly, any eye that vegetates before perfect maturity, and before a rest between two saps, produces a sub-sprout. They must all be removed as sterile and useless, serving only to exhaust a tree. toviνdddωιυππιυιινπυddυν SECOND SECTION. SOME PRUNING OPERATIONS. The proper management of a fruit tree, or any other, is not limited to spring pruning alone in order to obtain the result one promises. It must also be subjected to various other practices, depending on the circumstances and the goal to be achieved, and it is from the judicious and reasoned execution of all these operations that the art of pruning has been formed. Disbudding. This essential operation for all tree shapes, and indispensable for espaliers, consists in removing all unnecessary or misplaced buds, before or after their development. In the first case, in autumn or spring, as soon as the last sap has run, i.e. as soon as the leaves have fallen, or before the gems have developed, we choose a day of fine weather, or at least without rain, and with our fingernails, or better still with a sharp instrument, we detach and remove all the misplaced buds. As a result, 1° the wounds heal much more easily and, above all, more quickly than if we had waited to disbud until the gems had begun to grow; this is because the wounds are much smaller, and the sap's first efforts can be directed at them; 2° the sap, being diverted from the outset, is more vigorously directed to the useful buds; 3° the second disbudding is easier, less extensive, and therefore less harmful to the tree. With much less suppression, the balance of vegetation will be less disturbed, and there will be few under-budding. The second, and almost the only, disbudding is carried out when the young buds have reached a quarter, a third, or at most half of their growth, which usually happens in May in the Paris area, or earlier or later in warmer or colder climates. We use an instrument to remove all those trees on an espalier that are on the sides of the branches, to 908 keep only those that are on top or underneath, so as to be able to trellis them easily, which would not be possible if they were on the front, unless we made them form a very unpleasant bend. Those placed on the side facing the wall would have an even worse effect, because they would be crumpled in their growth, which would soon lead to gum or canker. It's the terminal buds of the main branches that need the most attention. It must be the most robust to provide a strong, vigorous extension. If this is not the case, either because it has been altered by an accident and has produced only a weak shoot, or because it has failed altogether, the end of the branch should be cut back to the strongest lower bud. This bud must be dominant over all the others, and it is this consideration that would determine the gardener's choice. In stone fruit trees, disbudding is carried out not only on wood branches, but also on fruit branches. These should not be touched until the fruit is knotted and perfectly formed, otherwise irreparable mistakes could be made for the rest of the year. All woody buds not destined to bear fruit should therefore be removed, and even if they have not all set, the branch should be cut back to the last bud to bear fruit; finally, if all the flowers have aborted, the branch should be cut off entirely, leaving only the two buds at its base, to provide new replacement branches, as described in the article bearing this title. It's especially at the time of disbudding that you need to detach with extreme care all the shoots that appear on the stems, and particularly on the root collar. Nothing exhausts a tree like the roots; if you delay cutting them off, they will constantly grow back from the nodule they form at their base, and it will be very difficult to destroy them without making a large and dangerous amputation, which can easily be avoided while the buds are still herbaceous. Another essential precaution is to give the buds the shape and inflection they should have when they become true branches; to do this, tie them in the direction they should take and in the place they should occupy, as they increase in length and strength. This is another way of avoiding accidents caused by high winds, which, by breaking them, would deprive the trees of wood that is all the more precious as it should be used to extend the mother branches. Sometimes, during disbudding, it may be useful to remove some of the fruit that a tree is overloaded with. It's up to the gardener to decide how much to remove, according to the nature and vigor of the tree. He should always arrange to leave an almost equal space between the remaining fruits, so that the nourishing juices are evenly distributed. He must also be careful not to injure the attachments or pedicels of the others, and above all to avoid shaking them. Moreover, although we have determined the most favorable time for this operation, it can be carried out all year round, and as often as circumstances require. Trellising. Its purpose is 1° to replace disbudding if it has not taken place; 2° to repair defects or omissions resulting from the first operation; 3° to facilitate fruit coloring and ripening by uncovering them; 4° to 009 allow useful branches to benefit from the sap by removing those that are not; 5° to prepare for spring pruning and make it much less long and difficult. This operation, referred to by some authors as "second pruning", is just as absolutely useful as the first, i.e. spring pruning, especially for stone fruit trees which have been given an espalier shape. The time of year depends entirely on the species, or even the variety, of tree on which it is performed. Clearly, varieties that ripen early should be trellised first, and later varieties last. However, it's not only the earliness of the fruit that should be taken into account in all cases. Here are the reasons why: if trellising were done too early, the large number of buds that would have to be removed would cause sap to carry over to the eyes destined to develop only the following spring, giving rise to a large number of sub-buds, all the more harmful as they would grow at the expense of the following year's wood. What's more, as the trellised buds have not yet reached their full length, the operation would have to be repeated eight days later, doubling the work and wasting a lot of time. The vice would be even greater if you palmed the fruit before it was strong enough to withstand the burning rays of the sun, or the drying influences of the hot winds. Until they have reached a certain size, they need to be covered by the shelter that nature has given them by making them grow under the leaves. We will therefore not say, as most authors do, that trellising should take place in June and July, but rather at the time that presents the least incon4 venience, i.e., as late as possible. Moreover, all buds must be long and strong enough to be easily tied. The moment when the first sap ends, and the interval during which vegetation seems to stop, only to start up again in August, seemed to us the most favorable time to begin. To prevent the fruit from turning brown, it's best to choose a dark or even rainy day, so as to gradually acclimatize them to the influences of air and light. This operation should be continued, if necessary, throughout the year for most fruit trees, and until replacement for peach trees. Young, strong, vigorous trees, especially when they have no fruit, can be trellised before the time we have just determined. Their strong, vigorous buds will more easily take on the shape you want to give them, and as they have not yet been subjected to regular pruning and training, they will be freed of a large quantity of useless branches and wood. As fruit-bearing branches are not expected, and their shoots are always longer than necessary for their formation, there is less fear of under-budding. The trellising operation consists in attaching to the walls and trellises in espaliers, to the hoops and stiles in counter-espaliers, goblets, etc., all the buds that must be kept, either to give wood or to provide fruit-bearing branches; it also consists, as we have said, in removing all the useless wood. The ties used should be soft and flexible, so as not to injure the young bark in any way. Against trellises, hoops or stiles, use rushes, and against walls, use nails and rags; in all cases, tighten the hen as little as possible. All preserved wood and fruit bungholes should be tied at various points along their length, depending on whether it is more or less considerable; they should be spaced, as evenly as possible, at distances calculated to avoid confusion, and above all they should never cross one another. Whatever the shape of the tree, they should be immediately placed in the position they must always maintain to maintain this shape and even give it grace. As for the useless buds that need to be cut off, there are several types, which we will deal with below. The first is to remove all those that are badly placed, i.e. those that would harm the tree's beautiful shape, due to their poor insertion on the mother branches. For example, in a perpendicular espalier, you should scrupulously remove any branches that protrude in front of or behind the branches, as they would tend to thicken a tree that should only be thick in width and height. A fine espalier should have, so to speak, only one surface and no thickness: at least, the latter should not be greater than the greatest diameter of the trunk, or the greatest length of a twig. In horizontal espaliers, on the other hand, we remove all buds above and below the trunk, for the same reasons applied to our species. Excluded from this general rule are twigs and lambourdes, as well as those small flowering branches, with a single terminal bud, often found on stone trees, and which, for peach, we have compared to lambourdes. If they are to bear fruit for several years, they should be kept as they are; if not, they should be removed at the next pruning. In the goblet, keep the necessary lateral buds, and remove the others, especially those growing outwards and inwards. The cattail is disbudded in a different way: as it must be filled in internally, but there must be no confusion, if the nature of the tree were to give it a tendency to fill in too much, only the lower buds are left, i.e. those turned outwards; this is always essential for a pyramid. Any poorly placed bud that can't be trained without forming a basket-handle bend gives the tree an unpleasant appearance, indicating the inexperience of the tree's leader. Buds which cannot be trained without causing confusion are poorly placed, whatever their insertion: they must therefore be cut back. When the eye destined to provide the extension of a branch has grown two or three buds, only the strongest and longest should be kept; the others should be cut off. However, it often happens that this terminal bud has developed several small sub-buds at its tip, giving it an unpleasant, spiky appearance. These cannot harm the shape of the tree, since they will be removed the next time the branch that produced them is pruned; in addition, they can be useful by attracting sap to the main bud, which strengthens it even more, and by amusing it in such a way as to prevent it from developing sub-buds in places where they could be harmful; they should therefore not be cut. At the second or third trellising, they can be removed, because by then the branch, as it lengthens, will have produced others which will replace them. In stone trees, and particularly in peach, remove all buds next to the fruit, but take extreme care 1 not to cut them below their third or fourth leaf; if you cut them off entirely, the fruit will lack nourishment, and may dry out; at the very least, it will rarely reach its natural size, and will lack fragrance. If we cut below the third leaf, the result would be much the same, because the snag left would run the risk of perishing, or would not attract a sufficient quantity of sap to nourish the fruit. The three lower buds, whether or not they accompany fruit, are left for the following reason. In trees of the same type as the previous ones, we cut off all the fruiting branches on which the fruit is aborted, and we cut them down to two or three lower buds, which we keep and trellis to replace them. If the three lower buds are missing, whether or not the branch has fruit, the higher ones should be kept. But it's a matter of principle that the lower ones are always preferable, because they lengthen this precious branch less, which is all the better for being placed closer to the stem of the mother branch. With the exception of those mentioned above, all under-bud trees are to be cut down, unless they are needed in places where, by chance, they are needed to fill a gap. In that case, we run the risk of seeing them perish during the winter, for want of having been sufficiently Augusted; but, if they resist, at least in part of their length, which happens quite frequently, they will become extremely valuable. These under-buds are what the authors no doubt call "rag branches". A branch that is diseased at the tip is often seen to produce, a little before the point where the disease begins, a vigorous bud of extraordinary growth; in a word, what gardeners with few ins2. 11 2 truits call a gourmand. In this case, and even in most other circumstances, we must be careful not to cut it down, because it will replace the sick or weak branch very advantageously; almost always we find strong, well-constituted sub-buds on its sides, especially when a trained eye has recognized and pinched it during disbudding; we keep them to make main branches, when it has become (at the next pruning) a vigorous mother branch. It remains for us to make an observation on this first trellising, which puts us at odds with the authors. They claim that every time a bud is cut at its base, i.e. on the bark of the branch on which it will be placed, the sap or gum will travel to the wound, which the season will not allow to heal, and that incurable cankers will most often result. Consequently, they want us to leave a small heel half an inch long, which we will cut down during the spring pruning. We think that this should be cut very close to the branch, because, contrary to what they say, the season is very favorable for healing, and in all possible cases, it is better to have only one operation, which always causes the tree less suffering. We have said that trellising must be carried out all year round, and this should be the case in a well-cultivated garden; but it is especially for peach espaliers that this work is indispensable. For the second trellising, little work is required if the first has been well done. The whole operation is limited to continuing to tie the buds as they lengthen, removing the under-buds as they are replaced by others capable of entertaining the sap, and trellising those you wish to keep. At the last trellising, when the sap is completely withdrawn, which in our climates takes place in September and October, we can, if we wish, remove all the under-buds from the ends of the branches, because we will no longer have to worry about growing the lower eyes destined to supply the following year's shoots. Breaking. This operation consists in breaking off three or four eyes of the twigs to be used for fruiting. We say "twigs" because we have heard of branches that are already ready to bear fruit, but which do not flower because they have an overabundance of sap that forces them to grow wood. Only long experience can enlighten the gardener as to which buds to break, and we consider this method to be extremely difficult to apply, although bad workers are in the habit of using it without the slightest hesitation. Every time you break a vigorous branch, or even one of mediocre strength, you'll get the exact opposite result to the one you were expecting; and, far from making it bear fruit, you'll make it develop a large number of sub-buds on the very eyes you wanted to turn into laths. Breakage affects fruiting by exhausting the branch through a wound which, unable to heal because of its splinters, causes a great loss of sap for a long time. What remains is carried to the gems, engorging them and preparing them to bear fruit. Care must be taken when performing this operation on peach and apricot trees, as the gum would immediately flow, and the tree would infallibly perish unless promptly remedied. More specifically, it can be used to great advantage on trees with seeded fruit. However, it should only be used on trees that are too vigorous, that lose their wood every year and don't produce fruit; it should be used sparingly on weak trees that are well equipped with joists and twigs. Whatever the majority of authors have said, breaking should usually only be carried out at pruning, and very rarely at the time of trellising. However, there are a few circumstances in which it can be useful during vegetation: when an untamable tree resists all the means used to make it fertile, such as very long pruning, for example; in this case, only the tip of the branch should be broken, and it will soon develop twigs and stalks. When you want to produce

In addition to breaking off the tip, other methods can be used to remove fruit from a vigorous branch which is to be removed later. These consist of cutting the branch transversely, more or less deeply, depending on its size, or cutting a notch in the bark and sapwood, or making an annular incision or arcure. Ring incision. This operation, unknown to ancient farmers, has been, like all modern discoveries, either too much blamed or too much praised. It is certain that, if used blindly in all circumstances, it will exceed its useful purpose; but, done with discernment, it can ensure harvests, increase the yield and size of fruit, and above all hasten maturity. It consists in removing a ring of bark from the branch on which it is applied. Below the OL fruit, a first circular incision is made, penetrating to the sapwood and embracing the entire circumference of the branch. Below this, about a line more or less, depending on the size of the subject, a second similar incision is made, then the strip of bark in between is removed. If you wish, you can operate with a serpette or a grafting tool, but it's easier to use a ring incisor. The operation can be carried out at any time of year, but is particularly effective during sap flow, when the flowers are about to bloom. Authors have written that the annular incision influences fruiting, because, they claim, the descending sap, being interrupted in its course, gives itself entirely to the fruits, to the formation and nourishment of which nature has entirely devoted it. We will ask these physiologists why, if it is only destined for fruit, it moves towards the roots when the annular incision interrupts its course; why, finally, it descends. We'll ask them why the branch that has undergone the annular incision doesn't stop covering itself with leaves and twigs which, according to them, are the product of the ascending sap. We will ask them why a wound made to a branch, but which does not interrupt the course of the descending sap, such as a through-hole, an implanted dowel, the longitudinal incision, or simple twisting, produces the same effect on fruiting as the annular incision they cite as proof of the existence of these two saps. But we won't pursue this line of reasoning and these awkward questions any further, because it was never our intention to turn this manual into a work of controversy or polemic. We will content ourselves with giving these effects the same cause as that which we have attributed to the effects of grafting and pruning: alteration. Only here, it is only local, existing only above the wound; whereas in pruning, it is general, and in grafting, it is general to the whole area above the weld, that is, to all the branches forming the head. If the effects of the annular incision are more marked, it's simply because, the lesion being more essential, the alteration is also greater. In any case, this operation should only be carried out on parts of a tree destined to be removed the following spring; for, even when the bark has reunited and the wound is perfectly healed, the branch is still suffering and exhausted. In addition, a plant on which this is done too often would end up suffering in all its parts, becoming generally exhausted, and perhaps perishing soon, or at least being weakened for the duration of its existence, which would itself be greatly shortened. From what we have just said, it can be seen that the ring incision is of little use on trees whose fruit-bearing branches are to be kept for several years, such as those with pepen fruit. For trees with stone fruit, it can hardly be used, as it would certainly lead to gum disease, and consequently to canker. This is because the fruiting branches are fed by clear sap, and renew themselves every year. For this reason, it is only with regard to this precious plant that the annular incision has been advocated or decried. Whenever a vine is vigorous, and placed in soil rich in nourishing juices, when the wood has developed and the grapes are about to blossom, the operation should be carried out at about the middle of the interval between the bunch and the old wood, i.e. above the fifth or sixth eye, so that the two to be preserved for pruning in the spring are not altered in any way. Perhaps it would also be a good idea to wait until the fruit is knotted, as the annular incision does nothing to prevent germ abortion, commonly known as coulure. Vine flowers, like the flowers of all plants, only abort or drop when the pistils have not been fertilized by the stamens, and there are several causes that can prevent this fertilization. A cold fog one night, followed by a blazing sun the next, is enough to destroy a flower's delicate pistil, or at least its stigma. Heavy rain during flowering can wet the anthers, bursting the pollen vesicles and dispersing the seminal liquor before it reaches the pistil. The annular incision can do nothing about this. We conclude from all this that, with the exception of vines, the gardener should only consider this operation as an extreme means of taming too abundant and vigorous sap in a branch. He should therefore only use it when all other means have been exhausted without success. Longitudinal incision. In some provinces, we were surprised to see this incision used to obtain a result positively opposite to the one it actually produces. Growers have been known to apply it to young chestnut, walnut and other high-growing fruit trees, to increase their vigor and make their trunks bigger. The longitudinal incision is made by splitting the bark of a tree from the birth of the branches to near the root collar. As it has to be done at the moment of sap flow, if the wound is to heal immediately and not cause any decay, it results in a great deal of wastage, which considerably weakens the individual. If this operation is really useful, it is to alter a young tree and force it to bear fruit before the time set by nature. But the gardener must be convinced that, if he obtains premature harvests, it is always at the expense of the tree's longevity. The longitudinal incision can also be made on a branch, in which case it has fewer disadvantages, because the stem still supplies sap, making it easier to repair the damage. Its results, in terms of fruiting, are absolutely the same as those of the annular incision. Arcure. This is the name given to the action of bending a branch into the shape of an arc or half-ring, in order to impede the flow of sap which, as we have said, tends to rise vertically. So, for the arch to fulfil its intended purpose, the end of the branch must be inclined towards the earth, and the supposed bowstring must be at least parallel to the horizon, if it were not inclined more towards the weaker side of the branch. The result of bowing is to make a bud develop twigs, laths and fruit-bearing branches, to the detriment of the wood; it should therefore only be used on all the branches of a tree when it possesses a vigor impossible to tame by elongated pruning, and which renders it sterile. There is one circumstance in which budding becomes extremely useful, and that is when the aim is to obtain a strong, vigorous bud along the length of a main branch, to replace, at the next pruning or later, D0 the branch's languishing tip. When disbudding, select a well-placed bud of good constitution; detach the branch and straighten its lower part (i.e. from its insertion in the stem to the bud), but without greatly affecting the shape of the espalier. The upper part (from the bud to the tip) is tilted as much as possible, forming a sharp bend just below the bud. The angle of this bend should be as acute as possible, without breaking or even overtaxing the woody fibres. The sap will immediately abandon the inclined end, which will nonetheless produce beautiful, good fruit; it will flow abundantly towards the bud, which will lengthen, grow considerably, and become what we call a gourmand, especially if it is pricked vertically. When it is big enough and long enough to replace the end of the branch, the whole branch is removed, the bend is straightened a little, the base is inclined as it was before, and the bud is formed into a vigorous extension, while the old end is used as a secondary branch very suitable for providing a quantity of twigs, lambourdes or fruiting branches. Delimbing. In fruit trees, the purpose of this operation is either to change the shape of a tree that is still young enough to lend itself to a new shape, or to bring together an old and exhausted tree, but valuable for some particular quality. By bringing it closer together, or, to use the gardener's expression, by lowering it right down to its trunk, it is forced to produce very vigorous young shoots, which soon bear 4 fruit, prolonging its existence for several years. These amputations must be carried out with the utmost care, and treated in the same way as described in the article on wood cutting on page 126. When you want to rejuvenate an espalier tree, an operation which is rarely carried out on anything other than pear and apple trees, you should always leave a foot or so at the base of the mother branches; if you cut closer to the root collar, you run the risk of seeing the stump perish. On full-wind trees, we also leave stumps of varying lengths, because the gems will form and pierce the bark more easily than the trunk, which is always much harder, and the new head will be a little less deformed. We even leave a few secondary branches to draw sap into the stumps, thereby hastening both their healing and the development of the new head. Sometimes a tree has to be limbed for reasons of locality, not all of which we can foresee. If, for example, it was to uncover a neighbouring property whose shade was detrimental, the branches would be amputated as close as possible to the trunk, to prevent them from regrowing buds, and to avoid putting ourselves in the position of having to start again soon; the sap, by its propensity to rise, would be carried in the vertical branch placed most perpendicularly to the wound, and would make no effort to form new gems around the scar, which it would abandon as soon as it was covered. But it's mainly amenity and forest trees that are prone to lopping, and it's also for them that this operation, so simple at first glance, requires a great deal of discernment and knowledge of dendrology. To achieve this, trees are delimbed in their youth, until their trunks have reached the desired height. Delimbing should be done with moderation, because it is by means of the sap attracted by the branches to different parts of the trunk that the latter gains strength and diameter. If it were deprived of this before its size was in balance with the volume of its head, it would always remain thin and slender, and would risk being broken by the slightest storm. Nor should a tree be limbed all the way to its tip, which would make it unpleasant to look at, and easier to be broken by the winds, besides which its head would never be proportionnće to the height of the trunk. Any forked tree, rising on two stems, must have one of them cut off, unless it is intended to produce a picturesque effect in a garden; and in that case it is liable to be parted by the wind, if its two main branches are not provided with branches and foliage right up to their enfourchure, so as to present only one mass of resistance to the storm. But it's exotic trees in particular, whose natural habit is unknown to us, that require great precautions when lopping. If their nature is to form a broad, low head, we run the risk of destroying them by lopping them to make them rise vertically. If, on the other hand, their stems are straight and slender, like those of the Italian poplar, and they are lopped to give them a broad, rounded head, they will never develop into anything more than languid, stunted individuals. Finally, there are some for which amputation can be fatal, when the branches have acquired a certain I SIZE. size; the tulip tree and virgilia in particular provide examples of this. If they are lopped, especially when the sap is in motion, the wound usually refuses to heal, and leaves a passage for the sap for several years, which extravasates, gets lost, and decays the bark around the amputation. Resinous trees are also in this situation, and cannot be safely lopped until they have reached twenty or thirty feet in height; and even then, only one of their whorls of branches should be felled each year, starting with the one at the bottom. Pruning. This operation consists of cutting off all diseased branches and dead wood from a tree, or subjecting it to regular shearing, to obtain wood suitable for making faggots; it is particularly performed on willow, poplar, ash, elm, etc., to obtain the latter result. In the first case, pruning in spring can be very useful for maintaining the health of ornamental trees and increasing their vigour; in the second, every two, three, four or five years, a fairly good quality of branches is obtained, but this is always at the expense of the trunk, especially when, to make cutting easier, the trees are topped and kept at a much lower height than they should naturally have been. If you want the amputation to cause as little harm as possible, it should be carried out at the right time, with an extremely sharp serrated blade, so that the clearer wounds can also be covered more easily with bark. No snags should be left, but neither should the cut be made very close to the trunk, otherwise too much sap will be lost. Shearing. This is done with shears or a crescent, on ornamental trees and shrubs that are to be given regular, pleasing shapes, for green fences, cradles, canopies, vases and other figures. It should only be carried out during sap stagnation, and will be repeated several times a year. The first will take place in spring, before the buds develop; the second towards the end of the spring sap, and the third after the August sap, around mid-September. This last one is not necessary if you intend to do the spring one; on the other hand, if it is well done, the spring one is reduced to very little. Trees and shrubs intended to form palisades are prone to receding at the bottom, which is a major defect. To avoid this inconvenience, they must be sheared with great care during their early youth. Before they have reached their intended growth, they should be pruned back only a few inches in length, so as to produce strong branches on the sides, capable of filling out perfectly, and subsequently attracting a sufficient quantity of sap for their nourishment; once they have reached the desired height, they should always be pruned back on the same branch, to maintain them in the given proportions. This principle, applicable to all trees subject to shearing, needs to be explained in greater detail. When the scissors or the crescent always cut a branch in the same place, the result is an unpleasant snag, and nodules which soon blacken and become cankers after a few years; you are then obliged to cut back on a portion of the large branches to rejuvenate the tips. This is a serious operation, the results of which are often dangerous and always unpleasant, because trees treated in this way lack greenery until they have produced new buds and sub-buds, which does not usually happen in the first year, unless they are young and vigorous. The way to avoid this vice is to lengthen the pruning by two to six inches, more or less, depending on the size of the individuals, at each shearing and for three years. At the end of this period, the buds are renewed and the foliage is constantly thick and vigorous, while unpleasant snags are avoided. In any case, only those species whose nature makes them suitable for regular shaping and periodic shearing should ever be subjected to this procedure; such are, for example, hornbeams, privet trees, lime trees, yews, boxwoods, thorns, etc.; those with very long buds and few lateral sub-budding will always refuse to do so, and their mutilation will never be anything but unpleasant. However, with care and discernment, most trees can be subjected to palisade shearing. Pinching. Pinching a bud means cutting off its tip with the nails, or a sharp instrument, before its final development. This operation is sometimes necessary, in fruit trees, to stop the sap flowing too abundantly at the tip, and to make it produce lambourdes, twigs or fruit-bearing branches on the sides. Pinching can be done at any stage of vegetation, and will always be useful when you don't need to extend a branch. Pinching that is well done, and followed exactly during the course of the two sap flows, can save a great deal of work when pruning, and has the added advantage of reducing sap loss to almost nothing. However, it must be done with care, to avoid the development of under-buds. In many circumstances, this operation is particularly useful for greenhouse shrubs. Several species, among those never taken out of the greenhouse, tend to grow out of proportion on thin, slender stems, incapable of supporting the weight of their branches. This unnatural growth, most often the result of a lack of air and light, must be stopped, and there is no better or easier way of doing this than pinching. As soon as their young shoots rise, pinch them at the tip, causing buds to develop on the sides, and diverting the sap to the lower branches. This operation is especially necessary during a plant's youth, to give it an even, regular shape, and above all to establish in all its parts a balance of strength and vegetation that it will retain throughout its life, provided it is well cared for. The lateral buds themselves would be pinched if they had too pronounced a tendency to rise; they would increase in strength, and the plant would be better furnished with them, because of the sub-budding they would produce. The purpose of pinching is not only to improve the habit and shape of greenhouse shrubs, but also to make them produce their flowers earlier and more abundantly, and to ensure that the seeds ripen. It is also useful for plants grown in vases, because it helps to restrict their growth and keep it in balance with 11 their roots. It's easy to see that, if left to their own devices, their heads would take on a great deal of growth, out of proportion to that which the roots can acquire, resulting in an irregular and unhealthy shape, because these heads, no longer receiving sufficiently abundant nourishment from the stem, would lose weight, and the branches would recede near their base, leaving only some thin foliage at their tips. The damage would gradually increase, and the tree would soon die of exhaustion. The only way to bring it back to health would be to cut back all its branches to their trunks; and, trained by experience, the new head would be managed according to the principles we have just given, but its enjoyment would still be delayed by several years. o THIRD SECTION. TRAINING FRUIT TREES. We call forming a fruit tree, giving it a particular shape, more or less distant from the one it would take on its own if left to nature. These shapes vary according to the species of each one, and even sometimes according to the varieties within the same species; so they are only arbitrary up to a certain point. All the shapes applied to fruit trees up to now are limited to those which we will present in a table, in order to give a better understanding of their analogies. C 1 E V. 2 5 b2 6 e E 4 49 chadoi 42 obliq la Aont ier ran nop :ayouvaqyona DE LA TAILLE. o anoz quox,tou NNRAASSONSSSCSOSSES 1° .° ... ... atre two opposite frameworks. ne single mother branch inclined inclined mother ches eaq xn ieur mother branches 3. secondary straight secondary ches arched perpendicular face orizontal face 5 -- 10 12 the 22 3 ent au que 1 tteig 28 no quoV 4 * vault irland development indriq "vale elongated ddopoa; ITe no fac 12P superp i-sphere eur era a ige 2 ut 9. ne . 2 1 Ai 1u, IIILV oogle 1. The natural espalier is a tree leaning against a wall, but to which no attempt has been made to give it a shape other than that which it owes to its nature and to chance; this is almost always the effect of the inexperience of the person who trained it in its youth. Moreover, we sometimes find trees of such indomitable sap, that we are obliged to abandon them in terms of form, but never in terms of fruiting. 2. The frame espalier (pl. 10, fig. 2) is designed to make peach, apricot and other fruit trees produce fruit in cold climates, where they would not ripen without special precautions. It consists of a palmette, or French espalier, supported by a framework inclined in a proportion calculated according to the height of the sun in the climate. In bad weather, the tree and frame are covered by a glass frame. 3. The horizontal espalier (pl. 8, figs. 1 and 2) is perfectly suited to pear and apple trees on franc and doucin, whose overly vigorous buds would be carried away by the wood, to the detriment of the fruit, if they were not inclined horizontally. The branches are trellised on a flat-roofed framework, parallel to the surface of the ground it shades. If the espalier is raised on a parasol-shaped stem, it can be framed with hoops, supported by light stakes, until the tree is formed and can stand on its own. 4. The oblique espalier (pl. 9, fig. 7 ) is suitable for all trees that lend themselves to the ordinary espalier shape. It is used when you want to fill in a wall that has a good exposure and is not very high, quickly and without gaps. It consists of a sloping main branch, topped with secondary branches, especially below. These espaliers overlap one another so that, when they grow too much, one is removed between two, and the wall remains perfectly lined from the second year of planting until the trees are destroyed, an advantage not offered by other methods. 5. The French espalier (pl. 9, fig. 6) is a tree leaning against a wall, and raised on three or five main branches. It is ideal for pear, apple, plum, apricot, cherry and peach trees. 6. The Montreuil espalier (pl. 9, fig. 5) is best suited to peach trees. It consists of two main branches, open in a V shape, at about a 90-degree angle at their origin, and evenly topped and bottomed with secondary and fruiting branches. This is the tree's most popular shape. 7. The palmette with straight branches (pl. 7 fig. 4.) consists of a single straight branch, raised perpendicularly, and throwing from distance to distance, on its sides, secondary branches, horizontally trellised, themselves furnished with tertiary and fruiting branches. This form is suitable for peach trees, plum trees, some species of cherry trees and pear trees. 8. The Chinese palmette (pl. 10, sig. 1) differs from the previous one only in that its secondary branches, instead of being straight, are shaped like a very pronounced arch, or rather a half cradle. It can be applied to the same species as the previous one, but only to the most vigorous and fruit-bearing ones. 9. The counter-espalier is a true natural espalier, either French or Montreuil style, but not leaning against a wall, and planted against stiles. It is only suitable for trees with seeded fruit, unless sheltered from the north by straw mats. 7 10. The goblet (pl. 8, fig. 3) is a French-style counter-pallet, whose sides round out in a circle, and join together to give the tree the shape of a vase hollowed out inside. No longer in common use, it was usually used for fruit trees. It grows on three, four, five, six or seven main branches. 11. The vase (pl. 11, fig. 1) belongs only to apple trees grafted on paradise. It differs from the goblet by its infinitely smaller dimensions, and by its irregularity, as it is not possible to form it regularly on main branches, with symmetrical limbs. It's simply a bush hollowed out inside to facilitate air circulation, with the only difference that it can have a small stem. They are used in quincunxes in small gardens. 12. The trellis (pl. 9, fig. 8 ) is a vine applied against a wall, and trellised on two, four, six, or even eight main and opposite branches, stretched horizontally and parallel to each other when there are more than two. 13. The cradle (pl. 11, fig. 3 ) may consist, if made of vines, of a trellis forming, on a framework, a horizontal curtain, flat or arched; if it is formed by other fruit trees, it is a true horizontal espalier whose plane is more or less arched. 14. The cordon (pl. 11, fig. 4) consists of a branch extending as far as possible over the jamb of a light frame, and trimming it lengthwise with a garland of foliage, flowers and fruit. It's sometimes made from trees with seeded fruit, but more usually from vines. The latter is often garlanded around a pillar, column, etc. (see pl. 11, fig. 5) O6 15. The cattail (pl. 8, fig. 4), of German origin, consists of a straight, vertical stem with secondary and tertiary branches from the bottom to the top, rising along the stem and forming a more or less open angle with it, depending on the species or variety. Suitable for seed trees and some plum and cherry trees. The horizontal espalier, shown in the plate, is only suitable when the overly vigorous sap of a pear or apple tree grafted onto a franc tree needs to be tamed. 16. The prramid (pl. 8, sig. 5) differs from the cattail only in that its more inclined main branches, especially those at the bottom, provide the greater thickness of the tree very close to the ground. It is also suitable for the same species as the cattail. 17. The girandole (pl. 8, fig. 6) differs from the pyramid and the cattail in that its stem is furnished with secondary branches, and consequently foliage, only at regular, calculated distances, so as to form several heads emerging from one another. It is suitable for the same species as the two preceding ones, but is more particularly suited to varieties whose fruits need more air and light to ripen properly. 18. The ball is a special shape for orange trees, especially those grown in boxes for ornamental as well as productive purposes. It consists in making a tree take on the perfect shape of a globe of greenery. 19. The plein-vent is a tree whose head, growing freely, is carried on a trunk as high as the nature of the tree allows. As this is the shape that belongs to nature, it is also the one to which all trees of large species are most inclined. It is therefore suitable for all varieties grafted onto wild or free-run trees, as well as for those grafted from seeds or cores. 20. The half-wind differs from the preceding only in that its less vigorous trunk does not reach the height of the other, nor its head as considerable in breadth. This form is very well suited to trees grafted on stumps, on subjects with less sap than the preceding ones, or which have already undergone some alteration through cultivation. Because of the large space they occupy and the shade they cast far enough away, the plein-vent and mi-vent are only used in orchards or large gardens. 21. The bush (pl. 11, fig. 2) is a tree that art or nature has deprived of a stem. Its main branches, starting from a graft placed near the root collar, take the direction ordered by nature, and are not subject to any particular shape. They are pruned only to remove useless wood and to set fruit. Individuals grafted on paradise and other similar subjects, i.e. those that produce little sap, are formed into bushes. These trees take up very little space and produce very fine fruit, and have become very fashionable in recent years. They are planted in staggered rows and given the name Normandie. We have now enumerated and defined all the usual forms to which fruit trees in general have been subjected; it remains for us to indicate the means by which we most easily succeed in giving them the form we choose, and to guide the amateur in this choice. O08 FIRST DIVISION. TRAINING AND PRUNING STONE FRUIT TREES. The section on stone fruit trees comprises 1° peach trees, 2° apricot trees, 3° almond trees, 4° plum trees and 5° cherry trees. We will deal separately with the pruning of these five species, starting with the peach tree, because not only is it the most important for the beauty and goodness of its fruit, it is also the most delicate and the most difficult to manage properly. Training and pruning peach trees. This precious tree only succeeds perfectly in espalier, in the Montreuil or French style, and in full or half wind in favorable climates. We have vainly tried to make it take shapes other than these, and have never obtained anything but highly unsatisfactory half-success; but, in climates other than Paris, we are convinced that this is due more to the inexperience of those who lead them than to the nature of the tree. We have trained trees into cattails which would always have given us a lot of fruit, if frosts (which are little or nothing to fear below 44 degrees Celsius) had not very often destroyed them. As full success in the training of these delicate trees depends very much on the nature of the subjects on which they are grown, we will indicate the necessary conditions without which they should not be chosen, and those they must meet to merit preference. Peach trees can be grafted onto almond, plum and peach trees; some varieties reproduce free from 008 seed. The most beautiful trees are those grafted onto almond trees, especially hard-shelled and sweet almond trees, but they only do well in light, deep, warm and slightly dry soils; they are also much less prone to gum than the others. Next in line are those grafted on plum trees; they do better than the former in strong, slightly cold and damp soils, or in light soils that are not deep enough for almond trees. Finally, those grafted on peach trees are the least esteemed, because they are very prone to gum and never grow vigorously. Those grown from seed, and therefore free-standing, are the best for full- and half-wind conditions, but unfortunately only a few varieties are available in this way. Once you have decided on one of these three types of trees, based on the nature of the terrain and the shape to be given to the trees, you need to see whether the other conditions are met. To do this, the graft should be placed four to six inches above the root collar for espalier trees, and four to six feet high on the stem for mid- or full-wind trees. A single, straight stem should emerge from the graft, with large, well-formed, vigorous lower eyes. The graft should never be more than one year old, and care should be taken to ensure that it has not been what the Montreuil growers call rebooted, i.e. cut the first year above the first eye, to obtain a more vigorous stem the second year. These subjects, being attacked from the start in their organization, rarely produce good trees and must be rigorously rejected. Finally, the roots should be scrupulously inspected to make sure they have not been broken or crushed when the trees were moved. When the ground is perfectly prepared to receive the young students, we plant them five or six inches from the wall, and bury them so that the graft is two or three inches above the surface of the soil. The roots will remain intact, unless some are spoiled or crumpled, and only these will be cut off. As for the distance to be set between each foot, this should be calculated according to the type of plant chosen, the quality of the soil, and the type of espalier to be used. This, being one of the most essential things, requires further development. If only peach trees are planted against a wall, they should be placed eighteen to twenty feet apart if they are on plum trees, and twenty-five to thirty feet apart if they are on almond trees. These variations in distance depend on the quality of the soil. If the espalier is formed with peach trees and apricot trees in between, the trees grafted on plum will be spaced twenty to twenty-five feet apart, which implies a peach tree first, then an apricot tree ten or twelve feet further on; another peach tree at the same distance, then a second apricot tree, and so on to the end of the wall. The apricot trees should be on stems, at least six feet high, and pruned so that the left side of their fan covers the right side of the fan of one peach tree, while the right side covers the left side of another. This method assumes a wall fifteen or eighteen feet high. If the trees were grafted onto almond trees, the peach trees would be spaced thirty to thirty-five feet apart, which would place them fifteen to seventeen feet apart. In excellent soil, you can also plant a vine between each peach tree, spacing them further apart, and raising them one or two rows of cords above the espaliers, right up to the coping of the wall; this presupposes a wall twenty to twenty-five feet high. But this method 3 should only be used in small gardens where space is at a premium, because it has its drawbacks. As autumn is the most favourable season for planting peach trees, if planting were carried out at this time, care should be taken to cut the stem of the graft; this operation, by making the transplanted individual more tired, would make it more sensitive to the cold, and you would be in danger of seeing it perish in a hard frost. It should therefore only be brought closer together in spring, and this is the first pruning operation. From espalier to Montreuil. The first year. Since this is the year of planting, very little work is required. The stem is cut eight or ten inches above the graft (Pl. 9, fig. 1, a), with the wound facing the wall. Remove any buds that may have sprouted (b), taking care not to damage the bark of the stem, or the small bead at the insertion of these buds, as this is where the young branches most essential to the formation of the tree will emerge. As the buds develop, remove those growing in front of and behind the stem, and trellis those on the sides as they lengthen. In the first year, it may be a good idea to leave all the well-placed buds to grow, to give the plant time to recover fully. This would not delay fruiting. At this point, you should decide which buds are to form the two mother branches (pl. 9, fig. 2, a, a), and trellis them accordingly, i.e. at an angle of around ninety degrees. In this case, remove the others, or incline them further so that they don't attract too much sap, to the detriment of the others. If the graft has produced only one vigorous bud, it is trained vertically, and the following year, it is operated on as we have just said for the stem, of which it becomes an extension by straightening it accordingly. The two buds that are to provide the mother-branches would then come from it, delaying the formation of the tree by a year. During this first year, the gardener's attention must be focused on the balance of vegetation to be established between the two buds. If he notices that one has more strength and vigour than the other, he will hasten to incline it further and straighten the weaker one. The latter will soon grow stronger; and, when equality is perfectly established, he will trellis them to the same height. If this essential operation were neglected for the first two years, all the sap would be carried to one side, and it would be impossible, or at least very difficult, to re-establish equality thereafter. When inclining the two mother branches in a very open V-shape, care must be taken to bend or arch them in the slightest way: this must be strictly observed throughout a tree's life. If you do otherwise, the secondary branches (1) will carry away all the sap and ruin the mother branches, even supposing you manage to form them, which seems highly doubtful to us. 2° Year. If one of the buds trellised the previous year to form the mother branches had died, pen(1) The main branches are indifferently called mother branches or first members. The branches that grow on them are called secondary, tertiary, etc. (second limbs, third limbs, etc.), depending on whether their insertion is directly on a main branch, or whether it is more or less close to it. In the winter, we would straighten the other, and we could still obtain a beautiful tree by treating it as we said for the first year; but, if this accident happened later, the tree would be disfigured forever. This year, the only thing to look for is the lower secondary branch (a, a, pl. 9, fig. 3), and the extension, 6, b, of the main branches. We therefore prune these two main branches very close to the stem (pl. 9, fig. a, b, b,), on two eyes, one of which, below and closest to the stem, will provide the lower secondary branch; and the other, above and closest to the cut, will provide the extension of the mother branch. The end of the stem (pl. 9, fig. 2, c), which was left above the two main buds the previous year, is cut off, and the wound is perfectly joined to allow it to cover easily. As they grow, the two buds provided by each branch should be trellised; the lower one almost horizontally, but raised rather than inclined, and the upper one in the exact direction of the mother branch, of which it forms an extension. Care should be taken not to bend or arch either of them, unless you need to give one of them this disposition to stop over-vigorous vegetation, which would destroy the balance of the sap. When trellising, all buds placed in front or behind should be strictly removed, but some of the weaker ones may be left on the branches, to attract more sap and make them grow in size and length; nevertheless, care should be taken to pinch them at the end. This is especially necessary for weak, delicate trees. The two fruiting branches, c,c, of sig. 3 can be kept if the tree is very vigorous. 3rd year. Spring disbudding can already be done advantageously. The mother branch is pruned to create an upper secondary branch (pl. 9, fig. 4, a, a), and to extend the main branch b, b. To do this, two good upper eyes are brought together (pl. 9, fig. 3, d, d); and if there are not two in a row, the lower one, placed between the other two, is disbudded. The tip bud will provide the extension of the mother branch, and will be trellised in its direction; the other bud will be inclined and trellised to form the first upper secondary branch. The inclination of the upper and lower secondary branches is calculated according to the space that the fruiting branches (fig. 4, c, c, c, etc.) must occupy in order to be trained regularly without overlapping each other. As these are usually eighteen inches to two feet long, this is also the space that must be left between the secondary branches and the main ones. If the gap were any smaller, fruiting branches could not be placed there without being crumpled or cut too short; if it were any larger, there would be a gap that could not be filled, which would be a very serious defect. It's easy to see that, to space these secondary branches gracefully and evenly, they need to be placed at regular intervals on the main branches. This is the stumbling block many gardeners come up against, because not all trees lend themselves equally well to acquiring beautiful shapes. For this, they must grow vigorously enough to provide a long, strong terminal bud each year, from which the desired length can be obtained between the birth of each branch, a length which must never be less than eighteen inches, and which can sometimes exceed two feet. On weak trees, it would be better to wait a year than to form a secondary branch too close to another. It's true that this method would delay the full development of the fan for more or less time, but the tree would be better off, and would bear no less fruit while it was being raised. It would also increase its life span. The secondary branch, formed the previous year, will produce fruiting branches this year, as well as wood buds. To obtain its extension, it should be trained in the same way as the main branch, i.e. pruned to a good wood eye (fig. 4, d, d), and left at a length in harmony with the other branches. As a rule, it should never be as long as the main branch, so as to be more or less level with it on the line formed by the circumference of the fan. This year, disbudding requires a great deal of care, attention and intelligence. Usually in May, when the buds are between ten inches and a foot long, we remove all the useless buds, leaving only those which will provide the wood necessary for the formation of the tree; they will be much more vigorous and produce more fruit-bearing branches. The operation is carried out as described in the article on disbudding, page 154. At the end of June, and even better in July, trellising should be carried out with all possible care, and according to the principles described on page 156. The gardener may be persuaded that this operation is almost as necessary as pruning, and cannot be postponed under any circumstances. In addition to the reasons we have given for delaying trellising, Butret gives another, which seems all the more plausible to us, as it is quite close to the apparent course of nature. He says: "Trellising is usually postponed until July, so as not to do it before the fruit is assured, which can only be known after the solstice, because it is during this time that nature, which only works for the fertility of sprouts, is busy forming the fruit kernel: all those whose kernels are vitiated fall at this time; we see many on the ground, which ignorance of the laws of nature so inappropriately attributes to bad winds and bad weather, whereas this fall only comes from the vice of the reproductive germs; which means that all these infertile fruits, abandoned by nature, which does not want to work for infertility, die and fall. Open all these runts, and you will see the truth of these just observations." From which he concludes that trellising should be delayed until the August shoot, in order to be able to judge which fruits to keep; this could not be done before then, or we would run the risk of removing those that would have held, and leaving those that must fall. 4 Year. The tree is trained as in the previous year, and the extension of the mother branch and the second lower secondary branch are obtained. When a tree reaches this age, it sometimes begins to lose its ability to produce buds as strong and long as in previous years; at other times, on the contrary, it is more vigorous, producing shoots four, five or even six feet long. When the wood is of ordinary strength, it is pruned from the strongest to the weakest point, i.e. where the wood begins to diminish in size. To be sure of the precise point, the bud is bent into a semicircle, if desired, and cut where it forms an appreciable bend. In the second case, if the tree is sufficiently vigorous, this pruning would be much too short; so we lengthen it, but still retain the beautiful forms, and we can even leave the under-buds on top, which sometimes form fruiting branches well furnished with good eyes, and which can be pruned according to their strength. This principle should be applied at all times, from a tree's second year through to full formation. In top-quality soil, and in a well-directed espalier, it is not uncommon to see young trees grow so vigorously that their shoots reach six, seven and even eight feet in length. This is particularly true of species grown from seed. In these fortunate circumstances, pruning can be extended prodigiously, and the mother branches can be lengthened by three to four feet each year; but then two secondary branches must be obtained on each pruning, which is not always easy. If you succeed, after five or six years you can have fans thirty feet long and ten to twelve high. On a sturdy tree, care must be taken not to cut off the vigorous buds growing vertically on the upper secondary branches; this would be the way to abort the lower eyes. When pruning, simply incline them almost horizontally. Disbudding and pruning are carried out in the same way as the previous year, but with greater care as the operation becomes more complicated. This is also the fourth year in which replacement takes on great importance: we'll deal with it in detail at the end of this article. More attention than in previous years will be paid to the fruiting branches. In the fifteenth precept, on page 148, we said that, to be productive, the peach tree fruit bud must be accompanied by a wood eye: so, whether the flower bud is single or double, before pruning on it, make sure it is accompanied by a wood eye. No more than four fruit buds should ever be left on a fruit-bearing branch, whatever its strength, and only two on those of ordinary vigor. The principle is always to prune as short as possible, i.e. on the buds closest to the insertion of the branch: but it sometimes happens that they are not accompanied by wood eyes, and then you are forced to lengthen your pruning on others that are further away and have them. This inconvenience can be avoided when trellising, if care is taken to keep only wood that is well nourished and therefore fruitful. If a fruit-bearing branch has flower buds but no wood buds next to them, it should be cut off without hesitation; however, when its removal creates a gap, it should be cut back onto the wood bud closest to its insertion, in order to obtain a new fruit-bearing branch for the following year. These little bunches of flowers, two or three inches long, topped by a good woody eye, which we have compared to the lambourdes of fruit trees with pepins, must remain intact wherever they are placed, even on the front of the branches; their fruits, sufficiently fed by the terminal bud, rarely fail, and almost always become the most beautiful. Once they have reached maturity, we remove the small branch that bore them. Finally, when two fruit-bearing branches are left next to each other, as described in the article on replacement, they should never be pruned on both, so as not to form an unpleasant fork; instead, the lower one should be pruned back. 2. 13 1 5° Year. Same management and care as for previous years. Prune the mother branches so as to obtain their extension, and the second, upper, secondary branch, according to the same principles as for the first, i.e., on two upper eyes. At all prunings, but particularly when the tree has already reached a certain stage of development, before beginning to cut any buds, it should be stripped of all ties holding it to the wall, and scrupulously inspected in all its parts, to make sure it has no cankers or diseases that can be remedied either by amputating the infected part, or by other means. Once this has been done, the tree is cleared of all the garbage that may have accumulated in the armpits of its large branches; in particular, it is cleaned of the mosses and lichens that form, albeit quite rarely, on the peach tree, either at the base of the main branches or at the collar of the fan; after which it is pruned. When you've finished the work of the serpette, all that's left to do is to repalish it and tie it up with wicker, keeping the branches in their original position or, if necessary, giving them a more or less pronounced inclination, depending on the urgency. We have said that the two mother branches must always be dominant; and it is on this that the gardener must, at all times, focus his solicitude. If, by chance, a superior secondary branch suddenly seizes the sap and manages to equal the size of the main branch, it will soon outstrip it and, if care is not taken, exhaust it and the secondary branches below it. To halt its growth, it should be inclined, even below the horizontal line if necessary, and you shouldn't be afraid to cross it over another, because this position, unpleasant to the eye, should only last as long as it takes for the mother-branch to regain its superiority. In addition, when trellising, place the mother branch on the strongest bud that has grown at the tip, while placing the secondary branch on a weaker bud. If these precautions don't work, leave a few flowering branches at the end of the secondary branch to keep the sap flowing. These can be removed when the tree is trained, or left until the fruit ripens if they have knotted. Finally, in the event of all these means being insufficient, there would remain only the resource of inclining this secondary branch on the same line as the main branch, whose end would become the lower secondary branch; while the gourmand would replace it in this part, and form its extension. 6° Year (pl. 9, fig. 5). Pruning is carried out in exactly the same way as the previous year, with the same care. The third lower secondary branch is obtained, and the tree can now be considered to be formed. In subsequent years, the focus is less on gaining secondary branches than on maintaining existing ones. If you have always chosen buds of the same strength to form the corresponding limbs; if you have trained them all in the same way and pruned them to the same length; if you have pruned the wood buds long and the fruit buds short; finally, if you have not sacrificed elegance of form for premature fruiting, you will have a superb fan, filling eighteen to twenty-five feet of wall, without the slightest gap. Figure 5 shows a trained tree, with each year's pruning marked in a, a, etc.. The Montreuil espalier is not based on an arbitrary shape, dictated only by taste or, if you like, whim, and consecrated because experience has shown its happy results. It has been indicated by the very nature of the tree subjected to it. Look at a peach tree growing freely in the vineyards of the Maconnais, Lyonnais or the south of France: a vigorous, straight stem forms the mother branch, and weaker branches grow around it, rising obliquely to form the secondary branches, which produce abundant fruit-bearing branches. When M. Thouin said that, in a well-pruned tree, each main branch and its branches should have the same disposition as a whole tree, he was giving the best precept to follow for assigning a beautiful shape to an espalier; and in fact, when it is pruned à la Montreuil, it is nothing other than two trees inclined in opposite directions, and welded at their base, or rather emerging from the same collar. Replacement. This operation is specific to peach trees. It consists in cutting off the branches that have borne fruit, to replace them with new buds, and is carried out as soon as the fruit has been picked. This is the result of our twelfth and fifteenth precepts. Many gardeners, lacking knowledge of the true laws of vegetation, prune the fruit-bearing branches of the peach tree very lazily; in addition, the following year, they keep the weak bud that has grown at their tip, prune it long, and thus leave these branches to grow excessively long for several years, until they dry out and die, which happens in the fourth year at the latest. As the fruit of the peach tree comes only from the current year's wood, three quarters of the fruit-bearing branch remain bare, forming a very unpleasant void in the tree; only weak buds grow at the tip, incapable of nourishing the fruit; But the most serious disadvantage is that the peach tree grows back with difficulty on its old wood, and when the branch is dead, the void in the tree can never be repaired. So, whenever a fruit-bearing branch has yielded its harvest, it should be cut from the two or three best buds, chosen as close as possible to its insertion into the mother branch. These buds will already have been preserved for this purpose, when, during disbudding and trellising, the other buds on the fruit-bearing branches are cut off. If we recommend leaving two or three, it's not because they have to stay the following year; they can be cut off at pruning to keep only one: but, as frosts often attack them and destroy their woody eyes, it's wiser to have to choose from three, in spring, in order to triple the chances of success. The replacement operation, carried out first after the fruit has been picked, allows the buds that are to replace the fruiting branches to benefit from the sap, and also makes pruning much easier. From the French Espalier. 1"* Year. Once the subject has been chosen and planted as for the previous form, cut the graft ten or twelve inches above the collar, lower if you are sure of having seven or eight good wood eyes (Pl. 9, fig. 1, a). As the buds develop, remove those at the front and back, but scrupulously retain those at the sides. However, if the top bud should prove strong and vigorous, it can always be kept with some advantage, because, as it is to be trained in a vertical position, it will never have to be bent into a basket handle, either in front of the stem of which it is to become the extension, or behind it. These buds should be trellised with a very slight inclination, and only to establish a perfect balance of sap between them, but only three, four or five should be kept at the time of this operation, to provide the main branches, and the others should be removed. If these buds are very vigorous, they may sprout sub-buds on their lohgueur; these should then be pinched off as they appear, but only at two or three eyes, because they will give the branches body by stopping the sap there, and preventing it from carrying excessively to the extremities. In autumn, small snags resulting from pinching should be cut off very closely, taking extreme care not to attack the bark of the branches. When one of the branches has been broken off by an accident of any kind, it should be swallowed up immediately on the strongest bud below the wound, and trellised vertically to try to give it strength, and bring it back into balance with its corresponding branch, which should be inclined accordingly. If, despite these means, we can't manage to restore sufficient vigor, we'll remove the branch entirely. If the tree had only three branches, we'd give up on making a French espalier, and take it to Montreuil. If it had four or five, the accident would be very easy to repair, by bringing together the two branches between which the removed one would have been placed, had it not been missing. 6 OF FISHING. 199 2nd year. After disbudding before sap, prepare for pruning. To do this, detach the three, four or five main branches, and reposition them. Place them at equal distances from each other, raising the middle one vertically if there are an odd number of branches. In all cases, the two lower branches are trellised in a very open V-shape, forming an angle of just over ninety degrees; the two upper branches are also trellised in a V-shape, but much less open. The distance between the vertical branch and the first upper branch should be equal to that between the first and second branches. Finally, the tree should have the exact shape of a two-thirds developed fan. If the branches are of good quality, they can become much longer when pruned; but if they are weak or mediocre, they are cut from strong to weak, i.e., at the point where they begin to thin out appreciably. They can therefore be from two to four feet long, more or less. Sometimes, in a vigorous tree, they grow a few small fruiting branches, which must be entirely removed, because by diverting the sap they would harm the vegetation of the buds destined to form the second limbs. Disbudding must be carried out with the utmost care, especially in the second year, when the first buds of the secondary branches are selected. We remove all those growing in front and behind, and keep two of the most vigorous on the sides of each branch, if they are four feet long; and only one on each side, if they are only two feet long. In any case, the secondary branches should be spaced two feet apart, and in an alternating position. G00 That is to say, if the first secondary branch on the right side originates one foot from the graft, the first secondary on the left will be two feet from it, the second on the right three feet, the second on the left four feet, the third on the right five feet, and so on. If two secondary branches were opposite each other, they would attract too much sap, and the upper end of the main branch could suffer. So make sure that the buds of the secondary branches have this arrangement, or at least come as close to it as possible, and remove the others. Attention should also be paid to the bud which is to provide the extension of the main branch; it should be chosen from among the most vigorous, and, if necessary, it would be better to reduce the end of this branch to a very strong bud, than to leave a weak one at the end. It's easy to see that, since it has to be trained straight, its distance from the last secondary branch doesn't need to be determined; however, it shouldn't be close enough to fork it, so that they don't have to compete for each other's sap. It doesn't really matter whether it's in front, behind or to the side, but it would be better if it were in front. As all the buds gain strength, they should be tied in the position they should have, i.e. those of the secondary branches should be inclined, and those of the extension should be made to take a straight direction parallel to that of the main branch. When the branches are trellised, they should be detached from the wall, and given their final position by being trellised again; 906 201 to achieve this, the lower main branches should be inclined almost horizontally, but raised enough to form the shape of an extremely open V, and to ensure that the lower secondary branches are perfectly horizontal, and never more inclined. It's by giving them this direction in the second year that they gain enough strength not to be starved by those whose position is more or less vertical. Fruit-bearing branches that have grown during the first sap will be spared, but only in small numbers, so as not to exhaust the tree before it has formed. They should be trained in the same way as for the Montreuil espalier. 3rd year. We prune the mother branches so as to obtain their extension, and to gain second limbs or secondary branches. Follow the same principles as the previous year. As peaches should already be available, we pay particular attention to the fruiting branches, and treat them in autumn by the replacement method. If there is a vertical mother branch, care should be taken to prevent it from taking over all the sap, favoured by its position. To avoid this serious inconvenience, prune on a weak bud, provided it is healthy, and choose the lowest one possible; keep more fruit-bearing branches than on the others, and lengthen their pruning more; when disbudding, leave a few under-buds on the sides, to amuse the sap and prevent it from reaching the tip. If all these precautions are not sufficient, arch the upper bud and straighten the second limbs. Finally, this main branch should be arranged in the same way as a palmette. Coo The arrangement of the secondary branches, and the place they should occupy so as not to harm or intertwine with each other, should be planned in advance. When distributing them between the two lines formed by the first limbs, great care must be taken to ensure that they do not meet; and, to achieve this, their insertions on the main branches must never be perpendicular to one another, but rather alternate. Suppose the second lower limbs of the second main branch are placed as follows: the first at one foot, the second at three, the third at five, etc.; the second upper limbs of the first main branch must be placed as follows: the first at two feet, the second at four, the third at six, and so on. Needless to say, the second lower limbs of the upper branch will be inclined a little below the horizontal line, and the second upper limbs of the lower branch inclined a little above. There must be enough space between them to trellis the fruiting branches in the same way, and above all without confusion. 4° Year. Pruning is carried out as in the previous year, but care must also be taken to extend the secondary branches, so as not to allow them to be stripped of fruit-bearing branches. If any are missing, the peach tree will no longer produce gems on the old wood, and the loss will be irreparable. The tree is then disbudded and pruned; finally, it is managed in the same way as it should be for the rest of its life. If it is not fully formed, it only lacks second limbs, which are obtained each year. However, as it ages and loses vigor, pruning will be shortened, and it will bear less fruit. The most important thing is to maintain as regular a shape as possible, because this is the key to perfect sap balance. We have shown (pl. 9, fig. 6) a French espalier, on which we indicate in a, a, a, etc., the annual pruning of the main branches B, B, etc., and in d, d, d, etc., the pruning of the secondary branches E, E, etc. From Espalier to chd̂ssis. The peach tree, being very sensitive to frost, reuses badly in the north of France, and can hardly be grown in the open ground at colder temperatures, unless special precautions are taken to ensure its preservation. It is also very sensitive to excessive heat, so that it does not do better in the south, in Italy for example, than in the north. In this ancient homeland of the masters of the earth, it produces only small, tasteless fruit, because it can only be grown in the open air; espaliered against a wall, it dries out and dies; or, if placed in a cool spot, the little fruit it yields is of less than mediocre quality. The apricot tree is in much the same situation. We have sought, for these two precious trees, the means to repair, by dint of art, the rigors with which nature has armed itself in certain climates; and we have the experience that, when we want to obtain good quality fruit wherever the temperature (too hot or too cold) seems to oppose it, we will succeed in overcoming its pernicious influences, by means of the espalier with frame, shown (pl. 10, fig. 2). In too hot a country, you need to be able to place. In too hot a country, the aim is to be able to place and manage an espaliered peach tree, without leaning it against a wall, and in such a way as to allow it to enjoy all atmospheric influences, principally air and light, without allowing the sun's rays to burn its blossom or dry out its fruit. To achieve this aim, a framework is established, more or less ineligible, formed by two planes, a, a, a, a, and b, 6, b, b, supported one on the other. These planes will offer their surface, one to the east, the other to the west; and their inclination will form, with the surface of the ground, an angle of 45 degrees, more or less. They will be ten to twelve feet long, from the ground to the top, and their width will be calculated according to the number of trees to be grown. These light frames will be made of planks no more than two or three inches wide, leaving at least the same width of empty space between them. Once these frames are solidly in place, we plant on each side, two or three inches from their base, the plants we have chosen accordingly; and this choice is not as arbitrary as you might think. In warm climates, preference should be given to trees grafted on to almond trees, because they are less afraid of drought, and their development, more considerable than that of plum trees, will be less embarrassing; the reason for this is that the framework, never having to be covered with glass frames, can be established in large proportions without many inconveniences. The tree can be given the form of a French espalier, but the palmette shape is more suitable, as it is more likely to be maintained in a space of limited size. In both cases, the tree should be trained according to the principles we've outlined, with the difference that it should be kept as tightly as possible, and the leaves should be kept in the shade when trellised, so that the wood and especially the fruit are shaded, at least until ripening begins. 4 To maintain freshness, water often, especially under the trellis, because humidity is more easily retained there, and evaporation between the gaps in the trellis and through the foliage brings an invigorating freshness maintained by the air, This air will not only circulate freely on both surfaces of the tree, but will also form currents through the interstices of the boards, balancing out the drying influences of the heat, and maintaining life and health in all parts of the tree. If, in the middle of the day and during the summer, the sun's rays, although striking obliquely on the foliage of the espalier, were to become sufficiently intense to be harmful to it, a cloth should be spread out every day, and at least for a few hours, to shade the tree. But it should be at least a few feet away from the tree, so as not to impede the free circulation of air, the primary agent of vegetation. If you want to grow peach trees in cold climates, you need to base your operations on much more meticulous considerations. The frame will be built in the same way, but without gaps between the boards, and in smaller dimensions, because it will have to be covered with glazed frames for part of the year, and as these frames have to offer a much larger surface than his own, it would be very-difficult to assemble them solidly if they were too long. When it comes to planting the tree, the choice becomes much more important than before. Whether it has been taken from a country not far away, or has been on the road for several days, its roots must be examined with the utmost care, in order to remove any fractured or dried-out parts. If there was the slightest doubt about its health, it would be planted in a basket, which would be immersed in a warm layer until it recovered perfectly. During this time, the season would advance, and we would soon have a degree of warmth in the open air sufficient to place it in its basket. It would be buried at the same distance from the framework as the previous one, but in such a way that the graft was only an inch or two above the surface of the ground; for, in this kind of espalier, you have to be stingy with space. Whether the tree is to be taken up in a basket, or placed immediately in the ground, the bud of the graft is cut, at the time of planting, over two, three or four good eyes at most. During its growth, it is trained and cared for in exactly the same way as other espaliers, i.e., by pinching off badly placed buds, and trellising the others according to the positions required by the shape adopted. During the summer months, this is all you need to do, but as soon as the nights start to get colder, you'll need to start putting up the glass frames. In excessively cold countries, where peach trees cannot withstand the winter, we'll build a kind of enclosure in planks two or three inches thick, and eighteen to twenty inches high. This casing will extend in front of and behind the espalier along its entire length, and will be far enough from the trees so that there will be a distance of at least one foot between the glasses and the peach trees, when the frames are placed on the casing, and supported one on top of the other according to the same principles as the framework. The difference, however, will be that they will be supported at the top on brackets attached to the frame, so that one can be opened as required without having to move the other on which it is supported. The sides of this kind of tarpaulin can be closed with boards or glazed frames. It's essential that the whole thing closes hermetically, so that air and consequently the cold can't get in. 1I Underneath the framework, and between the two rows of trees, we'll establish the passage of a furnace or stove pipe. When the cold becomes intense, we'll throw enough manure against the casing and outside to form a bed two feet thick and two feet wide all along the tarpaulin. Heat the stoves to keep the temperature at two or three degrees below zero at all times, so as not to provoke vegetation, and cover the frames with good doormats. During the fine days of winter, when it's not freezing and the sun's rays are showing, we'll provide air by opening the frames from above, as we see fit. Before closing, carefully remove any drops of water that may have adhered to the glass due to humidity. Bear in mind that frames and furnaces are not designed to keep out the cold, but only to ensure that it doesn't get any colder than ten or twelve degrees. So the difficulty lies in preventing the thermometer from falling any lower, without ever rising above freezing; for the heat would do more harm than two or three degrees more cold, unless we wanted to force the trees to bear fruit in a premature season; but then they would require special care that we need not concern ourselves with here. From the first days of spring, if the season is not too rigorous, it will be necessary to give light often by removing the straw mats, and air whenever this can be done without danger. The heat should then be turned up a little, to prepare the trees for vegetation. Once the first sap movement has been noticed, the peach tree should be inspected in all its parts, and any mildewed or even D6-suffering twigs should be removed without hesitation. This is the time to do the first disbudding to prepare the tree for pruning. Pruning is carried out a few days later, following the same principles as for espaliers. However, there is a difference in that, as the tree will only occupy a very limited space, far from trying to extend the branches, we'll try, on the contrary, to keep them in their smallest proportions, and we'll increase the number of fruit-bearing branches. This is not to say that you should leave all the fruiting branches, as the tree would be exhausted even more easily than one growing without care in a favourable climate; but, as there are many more chances for the ovaries to abort at the moment of fertilization, you should wait to cut off the overabundant fruiting branches until the peaches are perfectly knotted and secure. As the season warms up, reduce artificial heat, pinch off useless buds, and give air more often. Finally, when the cold and the slightest chill are no longer to be feared during the nights, and the thermometer remains constantly at six to ten degrees and above during the day, we remove the frames and replace them the following autumn. It's then that the trellising is done, and with all the more care as this is the best time to heal the wounds. For this reason, never leave a snag, and always cut back the bark. The replacement operation should only be carried out in spring, to prevent the wounds from gumming up, which would necessarily happen if the humidity of the frame remained on them over winter. For both apricot and peach trees, pruning should be combined in such a way as to avoid having to cut any branches or buds at any time other than when the trees are often enjoying the benefits of the open air. Finally, general cultivation should be combined according to needs and circumstances. In a region not cold enough to kill a peach tree in the ground, but where spring frosts would destroy its blossoms, we would use glass frames in the same way; but we would replace the heat pipes with a layer of warm manure, two or three feet wide, eighteen inches thick, and placed on the ground between the two planes of the espalier. During the winter, this layer is simply warmed up two or three times with new manure; but as soon as vegetation begins, it is renewed and completely redone every fortnight, and even more often if deemed appropriate. We then take advantage of every moment when the sun comes out to let in some air, and we take great care to wipe the moist steam provided by the manure from the glasses, as well as to remove, as soon as it appears, any mould that might have a tendency to take hold of a few branches. As soon as vegetation begins to appear, all diseased or just suffering branches are scrupulously pruned and removed, and the tree is cleaned of garbage and other foreign matter that may have collected at the branches' bifurcations. In all circumstances, we treat espalier trees with frames, according to the principles we have taught for Montreuil, French or palmette shapes. Palmette with straight branches. Against a very high wall and not very long, this shape is one of the most advantageous for peach trees. We have illustrated it, pl. 7, fig. 4. Year. The tree is selected and planted in the same way as for the Montreuil espalier; but if you wish, you can leave only four or five 2. 14 eyes by turning back the bud of the graft, so as to have two very vigorous lateral shoots to form the first two lower limbs. However, before cutting, make sure that the eyes are healthy and well placed. When they have developed, select the three strongest buds, one on the right, one on the left and one above, to form the first two lateral branches, and the vertical stem that will supply them all. The latter is planted as straight and perpendicular as possible; the other two are attached in a horizontal position, but only when they have acquired enough strength to compete with the first for sap, which sometimes happens only the following spring. All unnecessary buds should be removed. When establishing these two main branches, care should be taken to ensure that they are not placed opposite each other, but a little below each other, even if only a few inches apart. Without this precaution, they would compete for sap and harm each other. You'll also need to equalize their vegetation, by straightening the less vigorous one a little and tilting the other more. 2nd year. If the tree has grown vigorously, we'll take care of the second two main branches, and the secondary branches of the first two. To do this, prune the stem on three strong buds, one for its extension, the other two for branches. If the lower main branches have grown well-placed buds to provide second limbs, these buds should be kept and trellised accordingly, and the branches shortened to two well-placed eyes, to provide their extension and a second lower or upper limb, as required. 908 Keep a few fruiting branches, if you like, or at least bring them closer together over two lower wooded eyes, so as to have good ones the following year. The main and secondary branches should be trained in the same way as for an espalier à la Montreuil, with the difference that the first branches should always be trained horizontally, and the others should be trained a little above the parallel line of the first limbs when above, and a little below when below. 3rd year. New secondary branches are obtained, the extension of the main branches, and on the stem, the two third main branches, as well as the extension of the stem. It is easy to see that this vertical branch or stem, having much more sap than the others, should not be used to obtain limbs in the same way as secondary branches are obtained from the main branches. On the latter, only one is obtained every year, and on the other, two must be formed. However, as this requires the terminal shoot to reach at least three feet, so that the limbs are spaced two feet apart to provide space between them for the secondary and fruiting branches, it sometimes happens that, not reaching this length, we are forced to bring it much closer together and below the desired distance. In this case, we don't require any main branches, and are content to extend it, so as to have two good lateral buds the following year. If chance had provided sufficient stem length to space out and form a single main branch, we would take advantage of this, and prune for its extension and to obtain this branch, just as we prune the other branches to form their extension and a secondary branch... As for the rest of the operations, they are carried out in exactly the same way as for other espaliers. 4° Year. Disbudding is carried out very carefully in spring. Prune in the same way as the previous year, to obtain one or two main branches, and secondary branches. This year, attention should be focused on the fruiting branches, because if the tree has not been delayed by some particular cause, it should already be fruitful. Once the tree has acquired its shape, all that remains to be done in other years is to encourage its regular development, always following the same principles. Cattail. It is generally believed that peach trees do not lend themselves to this form, and this is wrong. Those who have fully understood our pruning principles will easily guess where this error comes from. As we have said, the peach tree only very rarely produces wood eyes on old wood, and never fruit buds; hence, if branches that are to be shortened are allowed to develop in length, they recede at the base, forming an unpleasant gap that is suitable for an espalier, and destructive of the fruit in a cattail. As this form of tree is, in all its beauty, only five to six feet in diameter at its thickest, it follows that the main branches, at their greatest growth, can only lengthen from three to three and a half feet, thanks to their obliquity; for, if they were to move horizontally away from the stem, they could only grow from two and a half to three feet at most. So far, gardeners with little training are not at fault; and, by dint of pruning the limbs, they maintain908 them easily enough in these proportions. Not knowing how to distinguish between the different kinds of branches, they preserve useless wood by damaging the good; and this is still only half a bad thing, because it can be repaired. But here's the reason why the cattail peach tree can't bear fruit in their hands: fruit-bearing branches in all trees, and particularly in the peach tree, rarely tend to grow vertically; more often they assume a horizontal position. The first year, they will grow eighteen inches, and will bear fruit along their entire length, or only at the tip; the ignorant gardener will be careful not to shorten them by the replacement method; on the contrary, he will let them lengthen another foot the following year: then they will be stripped of wood in three-quarters of their length; and we know that no means will be able to grow any more. What happens? They've reached the outer surface of the cattail, which they can't be allowed to extend beyond, and we're forced to cut them down. No new ones form, since the old wood doesn't produce any; and since we can't keep those that might grow at the end of the main branches, because they would exceed the shape of the tree, the result is that the peach tree remains sterile for its entire life. No matter how skilful a grower might be at this moment, he would have few means left to bring it back; he would try to graft it in escutcheon or in approach on all the places where there should be good fruit-bearing branches, if the tree had been formed with discernment; or, by bringing it close to the stem, he might be able to obtain new buds if the bark was not too old. But the tree would be no less spoiled, and it would take as long to restore it as it would to train a young tree. Now that we've explained the simple causes of a prejudice against the cattail peach tree, we'll show you how to bend it into this form, for which nature has prepared it as well, and perhaps better, than any other species of fruit tree, but which is perfectly suited only in countries where it doesn't have to fear the spring frosts which, in Paris, often destroy its flowers. 1 "st year. We plant a subject that has grown a straight, robust vertical shoot. This shoot is cut one foot from the graft, or even higher if it is vigorous. As the buds develop, the best placed and strongest are chosen to form the limbs, and the others are cut off. For these limbs to be flattened, the line that passes over their insertions must turn regularly in a spiral around the stem, starting at the insertion of the first limb, then passing over that of the second, then the third, and so on to the top of the tree. The branches must also be spaced so that the first is perfectly covered by another a foot away, the second by another at the same distance, and so on. If, as they grow, the buds show a tendency to rise vertically and get too close to the stem, they are kept apart by tying them to stilts; if, on the contrary, they move too far away, they are brought closer by the same means. Each must form an angle of about forty-eight degrees with the stem. The terminal bud should rise straight up, and should be maintained in this direction by means of a stake, if necessary. 2° Year. Spring disbudding can be carried out if you wish, and then all the eyes above and below the limbs should be removed, leaving only those on the sides, i.e. only the espaliers should be disbudded in the opposite direction. Here's the reason: all parts of the tree, and especially those closest to the stem, since these are the ones that will bear the fruit, as we'll say in a moment, must enjoy the influences of air and light, if we don't want to see them languish first, and then recede. The only way to let them enjoy this is to give each branch the flattened shape of a horizontal palm, so that the sun's rays and the air can easily penetrate between them. If this were not done, the tree would be nothing more than a thick mass of greenery; the shaded fruit would take on neither color nor fragrance, and the humidity, remaining on the bark of the stem, would soon encourage the growth of mosses, lichens and other parasitic plants. When pruning, if the lower branches are vigorous, leave the terminal bud of a certain length to obtain several limbs, in addition to its extension. If, on the other hand, they are weak, the upper bud of the stem should be cut back over two or three eyes at most, so that they can benefit from the portion of sap it would otherwise have taken. In all cases, the limbs should be pruned to a greater or lesser length, but always in such a way as to force the lower eyes to develop into fruit-bearing branches. We watch them for the first few days, to see whether they are growing or dormant; if they don't start, we force them to do so by pinching the upper buds, or even by lowering the whole branch if necessary. The fertility of the cattail, and therefore the success of pruning, depends on the development of these eyes into fruit-bearing branches. Disbudding is carried out at the same time as trellising of espaliers, and for this year, all care is limited to this. 3rd year. Disbudding is carried out as in the previous year, but without touching the fruit-bearing branches placed laterally on the limbs. Pruning is carried out to obtain an extension of the limbs and stem, as well as a few more branches at the top. All woody branches are cut back, because this type of shape doesn't want secondary limbs. Attention should be paid to fruiting branches in particular, as the future fertility of the tree will depend entirely on this pruning. The branches closest to the stem should be carefully preserved and, regardless of the quantity of fruit, pruned as short as possible, so as to determine the vegetation of their first woody eye, i.e. the one closest to their base. Let's explain: if the four lower flower buds were good, with their wood eye, we'd prune on them; if they were worthless, we wouldn't try to lengthen the branch any further, and we'd cut on the two or three wood eyes at the base, depending on whether they were more or less reliable. It's true, but it's much better for it not to bear fruit for one year, and then to bear fruit for twenty years, than to bear a few today, only to bear none, because it can't be replaced. When trellising, any limbs that deviate from their proper position should be re-attached to stiles, and disbudded as for espaliers. Once the fruit has been harvested, replacement will be carried out as described in the article on page 196, and with as much rigor as for the Montreuil espalier. 4° Year. Same conduct as previous year. 20e If a lot of woody branches have developed along the length of these limbs, those closest to the stem should always be given preference, so that they can be kept for a long time without reaching the outer surface of the tree. The same care as in other years will continue. Later, when the limbs have reached a sufficient length to form a cattail five or six feet in diameter, it will be necessary to maintain them in that proportion which this form of tree hardly allows to be exceeded, unless the subject has reached a considerable height. To achieve this, prune very short every year, removing the previous year's bud from a single eye. If, in spite of this care, the tree becomes thicker, the limbs are cut back on the first fruiting branch, and the latter is pruned on its lower wood eye. This gem, suddenly receiving a great abundance of sap, would develop entirely into a woody branch, and provide a new end to the limb. Conclusion: to force a peach cattail to bear fruit in abundance, all you have to do is keep the fruiting branches as close as possible to the tree trunk, so as to preserve them throughout the plant's life.

or keep them sterile, or cut them down, and there would be no way of obtaining new ones. Peach trees can only be grown as cattails in countries where they thrive in the open air, i.e. below forty-four degrees Celsius. Counterpallet. As the peach tree needs a lot of heat to ripen its fruit, it is never placed in a counter-espalier, 1 unless it is sheltered on the north side, by leaning against permanent straw mats. In this way, it's a real espalier set against a trellis or stiles, instead of against a wall. In Austria, and particularly around Vienna, peach trees are no longer grown against walls, because the sun's rays damage the fruit in summer. Instead, two solid, perpendicular frameworks are set up in the open air, forming two trellises leaning against each other, but separated by a gap of eight or ten inches. One side faces south, and the other north, which is rather awkward, as the espaliered trees would be equally well placed if one faced east and the other west. But even more clumsy is the fact that the trees are planted directly opposite each other, with the result that their roots, touching each other, are forced to compete for ground, which they exhaust in a very short time. It would be much better to alternate them to avoid this serious inconvenience. Despite this, they produce superb peaches. In all cases, sheltered or not, the counter-espalier can be used in the same way as the espalier à la Montreuil or à la française, depending on the taste of the grower. Full wind and half wind. It is particularly important to choose a robust tree, grafted on the subject most capable of providing abundant sap, when raising a high-stemmed or half-stemmed plein-vent tree. If the tree has been grafted on the spot, which is always the best method, the first year we take care of extending the bud of the graft, by disbudding as we shall say; but when it has been transplanted, we remove the graft on a good eye placed more or less high, depending on whether the roots of the tree have suffered during the transplanting and transportation. When the buds have reached part of their growth, choose the strongest one to continue the stem; trellis it as straight as possible, and pinch the others at six inches, to prevent them from seizing the sap. At this length, they will retain enough vegetation to force the nourishing fluids to stop in sufficient quantity in the stem, and encourage its development in size. This operation is called hook pruning. We also pinch off all buds growing on the hooks, and those growing on the extension bud. In autumn or the following spring, all the hooks are brought down to the stem, and if the latter is not yet the desired height, it is continued in the second year as it was the year before. If an accident should break the stem, or weaken its tip through disease, it should be lowered onto an eye or a vigorous bud placed below the ailment. If it bifurcated, we'd choose the strongest shoot, straighten it and keep it upright by means of a stake; we'd pinch the other, even tilt it if necessary, and remove it at the next pruning. As soon as the stem has acquired the desired length, we pinch off its terminal bud, if this is during vegetation; otherwise, we cut off its tip at pruning time. It's essential to keep a close eye on the buds that will develop at the tip to form the main branches, so as to select four or five of the most vigorous, and remove the others. As far as possible, keep those whose position is closest to the whorl, or, if you like, which move away from the axis of the stem in regularly spaced rays. From this moment on, you can leave the management of 208 the tree to nature; however, if you were to sacrifice a few more moments during the following two or three years, it could only gain a lot. In this case, we would treat each branch as we said in the cattail article, but with the difference that we would provide secondary branches, alternating with each other as for a French espalier. For the duration of the tree's life, which can extend to a century or more, depending on the species and the subject on which it is grafted, all that remains to be done is to remove the dead branches, bringing them down to the bare wood so that the wounds can heal, and to cut off those which, if badly placed or too vigorous, could draw all the sap to themselves, to the detriment of the others, which would destroy the balance of vegetation, deform the tree and hasten its old age. As for the branches known as "gourmands", if we manage to stop their vegetation by the means, already mentioned, of arching, etc., we will keep them preciously, because they will not take long to produce a lot of fruit; in the event that they find themselves untamable or ill-disposed to replace weaker ones, we will remove them entirely. Training at La Sieulle. We won't end the history of peach tree pruning without mentioning the training method invented by M. Sieulle, published by him in a small brochure entitled Avis aux Jardiniers, and approved by three reports from the Paris Agricultural Society, one in 1811, the second in 1813, and the third in 1820. M. Sieulle manages an espalier of peach trees at the Duc de Praslin's home in Vaux-Praslin, which we have already mentioned in one of our works as one of the finest in Europe. In twenty-five years, the trees cultivated by this skilful gardener have grown from sixty-five to seventy feet, which proves, whatever the quality of the soil, that his method is good and deserves to be known and used in favorable circumstances. Here's one of the passages from the last report made by the committee of the agricultural society: "The sight" of the espaliers at Vaux-Praslin made an impression on us, and "this impression was all the more striking, as all" these trees, without exception, presented us with "the most beautiful and richest vegetation. Beautiful " limbs, smooth bark, with no appearance " of snags, scars or gum, beautiful shoots, " broad dark-green leaves; such were " the peach trees of Mr. Sieulle. In general, all of them "seemed to us to cover equally the wall against which they are set". We did not notice, as "we had reason to fear from what we had been told", that their lower part was balding "or tending to baldness, etc.". This quotation is undoubtedly worth more than any reasoning in favor of his method. If you want to grow a peach tree à la Sieulle, the first and sometimes the second year, you direct it in the same way as the espalier à la Montreuil, from which it should more or less acquire the same shapes. The two mother branches are obtained by the same procedures (sig. 2, b, b, pl. 9). As soon as these first two limbs have been gained, we select, in spring before vegetation, two well-placed wood eyes to develop the first two lower and upper secondary branches: we leave them intact, and remove all the others with a sharp instrument, even cutting down to the small bead they have at their base and on which others could form. The bud's terminal eye is left to provide the branch's extension, and the operation is limited to this for the first year. As the eyes left grow and extend, they are bent into a V slightly more open than 45 degrees, because, as the tree will grow to very large dimensions, if the V were not open enough, the top of the branches would overtake the wall in very few years. If, by chance, we forgot to disbud a few eyes, we would pop them out as they appeared, because we should never be obliged to disbud either at the time of trellising, or at any other time; and it is this particularity, so to speak, which distinguishes M. Sieulle's method from all others; or at least the one which would seem to make it preferable, because there is no loss of sap and no useless vegetation. The following year, the two secondary branches are pruned to half-length, but the terminal bud of the main branch is never touched, because it is always through its last eye that it should be extended. Cut off all the eyes as in the previous year, leaving two more on the extension of the mother branch to provide two new second limbs. Secondary branches are trimmed in the same way, leaving two eyes for tertiary branches. Here we must point out that the two eyes left on each branch, which are renewed every year, are always accompanied by fruit buds, and are the only ones that should provide peaches, since all the others are removed, no distinction is made between woody and fruit-bearing branches, and consequently no replacement operation is carried out. However, when short branches loaded with flowers are encountered, they are left in their entirety, which increases the tree's yield a little. 08 Every year, the operation is carried out in the same way: 1° that the mother branches, never being pruned, extend rapidly and fill a large space in a short time; 2° that, never having any scars, because the wound made by the removal of the buds heals quickly and leaves no trace, the trees are not subject to gum or canker; 3° that, as no considerable amputations are made, there is almost no loss of organic substance, which maintains the tree's vigor and youthfulness; 4° that, as the subject has a much greater number of branches forming third, fourth, fifth limbs, etc.., the wall is much better furnished; 5° but also that, as there are never more than two flowers on each new branch, the peaches, although a little larger than on individuals otherwise trained, are in smaller quantity compared to the development of the espalier. We have said that secondary branches are cut back to half their original length, but the same cannot be said of tertiary branches and the others they supply. By cutting them back, for example, on the first two eyes with flower buds, we could keep them short for a very long time. We don't even see any problem in treating them by the replacement method, without removing the bud closest to the insertion of these branches. During trellising, we frequently find under-budding that has developed at the end of shoots that have grown since spring; we can leave them if we wish, because they will be removed at pruning time; but, if they deprive the fruit of air and light, they must be removed. In short, Sieulle training differs essentially from Montreuil training in only two respects: the mother branches are never shortened, and useless wood is prevented from growing rather than removed once it has formed. Apricot trees, and even trees with seeded fruit, can be treated in the same way. Apricot training and pruning. This species, being earlier than the peach, should also be pruned, disbudded and trellised first. The only forms to which it has so far been subjected are espalier and plein-vent. Espalier. The apricot differs from the peach in that it grows back easily on old wood, and it is this faculty alone that brings about some difference in its size; moreover, it behaves in the same way, whether trained in espalier à la Montreuil, à la française, en palmette, etc. We will therefore make only one comment on this subject. We will therefore only cover all these pruning methods in a single article, referring the reader to each particular form of peach tree. It would be futile to expect apricot trees to have the regularity and beautiful shapes so easy to give to peach trees; their wood, never growing very long, and rarely straight, naturally opposes them. So, we'll content ourselves with getting as close as possible to this, by turning our main attention to fruiting. The second essential aim of the gardener is to leave no gaps, without causing confusion. This will be easy to achieve, since there's nothing to stop him lengthening or shortening the pruning at will, since he's sure to get wood wherever it's needed. To achieve this, all he needs to do is prune back the old branches, and he'll soon see a host of buds emerge. 900 As the flower buds are grouped by five, six or even fourteen or fifteen together on small fruit-bearing branches, it will be necessary to prune these short, and sometimes even to remove part of the apricots when trellising. This tree is covered with small lambourdes, an inch or two long, which produce a quantity of good fruit; they should be left intact until they have fruited, after which any misplaced ones that might cause confusion should be removed. If an apricot tree has produced a lot of fruit one year, it is obvious that it should be pruned very short the following year, to prevent it from wearing out and becoming gummed, to which it is very prone. Its fruits, to acquire all their qualities, must receive the direct influences of the sun, like those of the sinner; but they are very delicate and, if they were suddenly uncovered, they would be burnt and fall. It is therefore only with great care that we thin out the leaves; and, as far as possible, we choose a rainy day, or at least a day when the sky is covered with clouds. First, lightly uncover, then a little more, two or three days later, and so on for several days, until they are fully exposed to the sun's rays. This is particularly important for espaliers facing south. Apricot trees and other stone fruit trees are not subject, like peach, to the replacement operation. Full wind. It can be raised like the peach tree, but if you want to keep it for a long time, it must be pruned every year according to the same principles as the espalier tree, otherwise it will rapidly lose its foliage in the lower parts, its branches will grow too long and the tips will be only slightly vegetated, and after a few years, you will be obliged to bring them up to the trunk, an operation which will inevitably cause considerable harm to a tree, by altering its health for ever. During the first few years, the pruning of a plein-vent tree can be lengthened a little more than that of an espalier. When the tree is in danger of thinning out, prune shorter, or even cut back to force the sap to flow back into the lower parts of the branches, and take care to avoid confusion so that air can circulate easily and freely inside the tree. Trees for espaliers can be grafted onto plum and almond trees, but the best for full-wind conditions are those grown from seeded pits. Training and pruning the almond tree. Only in very cold countries is this species subjected to espalier training; in this case, if the soil is damp, we choose trees grafted on plum. However, if the soil is dry and sandy, preference is given to those grown from seed, or grafted onto their own species. Espaliered almond trees are grown in the same way as peach trees. If the climate is unfavorable, it can be grown in the open air like an apricot tree. If the climate is unfavorable, it can be grown in the open air, after raising the stem as we have said for other open-air trees, and then left to nature. It grows back on old wood, which modifies its size accordingly. Plum tree training and pruning. Since plum trees only come into leaf after apricot and peach trees, they must also be pruned after them. So far, this tree has only been trained in espalier, D4 counter-espalier, cattail and full-wind. As its pruning differs only slightly from that of the two species we have just mentioned, we will limit ourselves to indicating the slight differences it requires. The choice of subject is rigorous. Grafted from seedlings are preferred for full-wind planting, and should be used for espaliers or counter-espaliers capable of filling a very large space. Those grafted on scions will be more suitable for forming cattails and espaliers in lesser proportions. The gardener's first task is to cut off the buds and shoots that rarely fail to grow, right down to the plum tree's roots. The closer the first buds are cut, the less they will show up, and the more you remove the small crown of bark that usually exists at their insertion, and which develops new gems with the greatest ease. These productions, by capturing a large part of the sap, are very harmful to the subject they exhaust. When pruning a branch, care should be taken to cut only on a bud with a wood eye, otherwise the branch will dry out and form an unpleasant snag. It's best to wait until the eyes start to develop, so as to be able to choose the right length and arrangement of wood. Pruning can be much longer than for peach trees, because they grow back very easily on old wood. Sometimes, plum trees produce far more fruit than they can feed while maintaining their vigor and health, with the result that exhausted branches dry out over the winter. It's better to have prevented them from forming by pruning fruit-bearing branches like those of the peach tree. Cherry training and pruning. This tree is most commonly grown as a full canopy; however, it is sometimes trained as a charming cattail, a girandole or an espalier. It is particularly the early cherry trees from England, etc., that are pruned. The choice of subjects on which to graft should be made as follows: For full-wind grafting, graft from stones; for half-wind grafting, from scions; for cattail grafting, from morello cherry; and for espalier grafting, from mahaleb or Sainte-Lucie. Individuals on offshoots are more delicate and, above all, more prone to gum. Full-wind cherry trees, especially when only grafted at stem height, could be left to nature, with the only precaution being to cut back the dead wood exactly; but it will always be more advantageous, in order to form a regular head, to subject it to pruning after three or four years, in which case it will be raised absolutely as we said on page 218, by lengthening the pruning a little more. As it grows very easily on old wood, when, through old age or an accident, its head becomes bald, its branches are removed, and they soon produce vigorous shoots which form a new head. In espaliers, it is much easier to manage than the previous species, because its long, flexible branches lend themselves to any shape, and bend to any position. Here, the artificial distinction between wood branches and fruit branches, which is essential in the peach tree, is of no use at all, because the cherry tree, even on fairly old wood, is filled with a considerable number of small shoots, which provide more than three-quarters of its harvest. The whole pruning operation should therefore be limited to removing misplaced branches, trellising the others so as to fill the wall without causing confusion, cutting back any buds or twigs that might protrude from the front and tend to increase the thickness of the espalier, and sparing all the small flowering clusters, wherever they may be. If there are any gaps, they can easily be filled by bringing the branches on the sides closer together. If a suffering branch threatens to perish, or at least never reach the vigor of the others, it should be cut back to a stump of a few inches; by this means, robust sprays capable of filling the empty space will soon be produced. Chinese palms. Several species of cherry have a tendency to let their branches hang down; these can be used to form Chinese palmettes (pl. 10, fig. 1), full of grace, with a very picturesque look, and capable of producing varied and piquant effects, if intermingled with other espaliers to destroy monotony. Overly vigorous trees, grafted on cores, can also be very advantageously subjected to this form, when it comes to taming their vegetation. To this end, they should be treated as described in the palmette article on page 209, but with the difference that all branches, buds and twigs should be arched as they develop, and disbudded with great care to prevent the eyes placed in the middle of the branches from attracting all the sap to the detriment of the tips. 008 SECOND DIVISION. PRUNING TREES WITH SEEDED FRUIT. We have seen, on page 143, thirteenth precept, that the fruiting of seeded trees is quite different from that of stone trees: they are not treated in the same way in this respect when pruning. As for their formation, there is little difference, except in the case of those which bear fruit at the tip of the branch, such as quince. Pruning and training the pear tree. The varieties of this precious species have multiplied astonishingly, and cultivation has so modified their nature that each of them prefers a particular exposure and shape in order to be completely successful; there are even a few that absolutely refuse to take forms to which the others submit with the greatest ease. So, before deciding whether to plant a particular garden species in a cattail, goblet, espalier or in the open air, we need to be sure not only that it is suitable, but also, from a production point of view, which of the shapes it can best adapt to. Pear trees can be trained in espalier, cattail, pyramid, girandole, goblet, high-stemmed and low-stemmed full-wind, and each of these forms requires that they be grafted onto suitable subjects. The plein-vent will be grafted on wild or on franc; the espalier, when it will have enough space to acquire a big development, will be also on franc, and in the contrary case on quince tree of Portugal; to cover a very-small extent of wall, it will be on the small quince tree. Cattails, girandoles, goblets and pyramids will be chosen from those grafted on franc, if you want them to be very large; on cognassier de Portugal, if you want them of ordinary proportions, and on petit cognassier, if you want them to be dwarf. However, the quality of the soil and climate should be taken into consideration, since in poor, shallow soil, it is sometimes necessary to graft on to a franc tree, to obtain trees of the same size as those grown on quince in soil rich in nutritive juices. What's more, several species that do not do well on quince can only be grown on franc, whatever the type of pruning to which they are subjected. We note that trees grafted on small quince are better suited to cold climates, because this type of tree is more robust and more resistant to the rigors of winter. For espaliers, exposure is not irrelevant either; in general, fruit grafted on quince trees are most at home in the east and west, and fear the south, because their bark is sensitive to the sun's rays during hot weather, and their roots, which are closer to the earth's surface, are also more prone to drying out. Facing east is particularly suitable for fruit that ripens in summer, but south is better for liver fruit. Before planting a young tree, check its roots as we did for the peach tree, and prepare the soil properly so that it can spread its new hair at ease. The graft should always be out of the ground, so that it cannot emit any roots, which would cause an unpleasant bulge, and even harm the quantity and quality of the fruit. 90 De l'Espalier. Rarely given the form of the Montreuil espalier, but usually that of the French espalier. Sometimes it is left to grow at will, with the only precaution of trellising it and spreading it on the surface, preventing it from becoming thicker; it then forms what we have called the natural espalier. Suppose you want to train it in the French style, here's how you'll do it. "e Year. If the grafted shoot has three, four or five vigorous buds, capable of providing the beginnings of three, four or five first limbs, they can be preserved by cutting them back to four or five good eyes. If not, the bud of the graft is cut back to seven or eight inches in length. During vegetation, we monitor the development and growth of the wood, by disbudding all misplaced shoots, i.e. those growing in front of and behind the branches. When the young shoots have acquired sufficient firmness to be inclined without breaking, they are inclined and palisaded according to the principles we gave in the peach tree article, and that's all there is to it for now. 2° Year. By this time, the main limbs should have formed the shape the espalier will have later on. The tree can then be treated à la Sieulle, i.e. by removing buds before they sprout. When pruning, if the tree has grown sufficiently, you should obtain a long extension of the first limbs, and when trellising, the first upper and lower secondary limbs. If vegetation has been weak, prune short, to obtain vigorous wood. 908 In the third and fourth years, the same principles apply, but always with second, third and fourth limbs, etc., an essential difference that characterizes trees with pepins. It's possible that twigs and shavings will have already shown up, as fruiting on these trees doesn't have a fixed, determined period like that of stone trees; it can be early or late, depending on the greater or lesser vigor of each individual. If no buds have yet developed, pruning is lengthened and, above all, disbudding on the front of the branches is stopped, as this is where the shoots will grow. The buds should be pinched to make them grow fruiting eyes, and when trellising, four or five eyes should be broken, as we said in the article on breaking. See pag. 163. If one of the main limbs seems to want to seize too much sap and dominate over the others, it should be detached from the wall, and its growth stopped by means of inclination and arching, at the same time as the weaker limbs are straightened. Finally, in terms of shape, these trees are trained according to the same principles as stone trees, the only difference being in the way they bear fruit. As a general rule, trees should be pruned short in the first few years, to form vigorous wood, and long in the remaining years, to set fruit. However, pruning length should always be calculated according to the health and condition of the tree. For example, if an extremely vigorous espalier has not fruited for a long time, not only do you lengthen the pruning, but you can also just cut or break off the tips of the branches, and wait until vegetation has begun; this is a sure way to reduce the most rebellious trees. If, on the other hand, the subject is weak, as is very often the case with those grafted on quince, we prune short, i.e. on three, four or five eyes, more or less, depending on circumstances. As there is not an eye on the pear tree that cannot provide, according to the will of the intelligent man who manages it, a lambourde, a twig or a branch for wood, we will always succeed in making fruitful an individual which, in the hands of an uneducated person, would have remained sterile for a large number of years. So any gardener who accuses a tree of sterility when it has been under his direction for two or three years is, in our eyes, merely denouncing his ignorance. When a tree is overloaded with twigs at the front, which increases its thickness and gives it a bad grace, when it has been left overloaded with branches and they cause confusion, finally when the tree is languishing for some particular reason, most usually due to exhaustion or old age, we shorten all its branches to renew them, or even cut them back to the first limbs; or, if the damage is great, we cut back these first limbs themselves more or less close to the collar, depending on whether the individual is more or less altered. A large number of buds will grow back on all parts of the old wood, and these should be managed in the same way as those of a young tree, but with the precaution of taking greater care of them. Finally, we'd like to point out that several varieties of pear trees, including the good summer Christian, which produce most of their fruit buds at or near the tip of the branches, should be trained in such a way that the branches don't have to be cut back until after fruiting. D Palmette pear trees, à la Montreuil, and natural espalier pear trees, can be trained in exactly the same way as above, except for the difference in shape. Du Contre-Espalier. This, being nothing other than an espalier, must, as a general rule, be operated in the same way. We work on both surfaces, as we do on only one in the previous one, and we disbud, according to the same principles, the misplaced wood growing on the sides of the branches, while nevertheless sparing the joists and twigs. As it is impossible to give a counter-espalier the same height as an espalier, because the eye must be able to see the garden over it, it is only ever trained on two main branches, according to the form used for espaliers à la Montreuil (pl. 9, fig. 5); and even then, so that the limbs never exceed four feet in height, the main branches must be in a much more open V-shape. To maintain the inclination of the limbs, they can be staked against stiles; or, if you prefer, they can be pruned short for two or three years, to give the main branches enough strength to stand on their own. In good soils, especially if you have neglected to choose trees grafted on small quince trees, it often happens that you cannot easily obtain fruit if you want to maintain the trees at the height indicated; you are then obliged to let them climb, and the view is obstructed. This disadvantage, combined with the fact that the shape of the espalier makes it very difficult to cultivate garden squares, as it impedes passage and makes flowerbeds awkward, is the reason why counter-espaliers are now rarely seen in well-kept cultivations. De l'Espalier oblique. If you want to enjoy a wall quickly and cover it within three or four years, no form is more suitable than the oblique espalier. Grafted quince trees are selected and planted as for an ordinary espalier, five or six feet apart. They are trained à la Montreuil, but only on a single inclined stem, with the head facing the east and the root facing the west, representing a single side of the espalier (pl. 9, fig. 7). In this way, the trees cover each other and, in a short space of time, cover the entire surface of the wall. As they grow taller and threaten to harm each other by crossing their branches, one is removed between two, leaving the espalier without any gaps. These trees are managed according to the same principles as the ordinary espalier; but, as they are much easier to fill in at the bottom, pruning can be lengthened considerably in the first few years, and consequently fruit can be obtained much sooner. The only thing you have to watch out for is that the upper secondary branch a, a, doesn't draw in too much sap as it gets closer to the vertical line. If, in spite of the means known to stop it, this cannot be achieved, it should be removed entirely, and its place filled by the b, b limbs of the neighbouring tree, which should be lengthened accordingly. All tree species suitable for espaliering lend themselves readily to this form, and are even much easier to manage in this way than in any other. Their yield is also greater, for the simple reason that the espalier is better furnished. In addition, this form is better suited to low walls. Goblet. This is used for trees whose branches extend from the root collar, and for others whose stems rise one, two, three or even four feet. In both cases, they behave in the same way. A goblet (pl. 8, fig. 3 ) is handled in exactly the same way as a counterpallet, with the difference that it is raised on three, four or five mother branches, the second limbs of which are supported on hoops, so that the tree takes the shape of an inverted cone, the inside of which is hollowed out like a vase. It should be no thicker than an ordinary espalier, and should be well lined with joists and twigs, both inside and out. When pruning and trellising, great care should be taken to remove any buds that might fill the vase as they develop inside. Another principle is to space the main branches evenly, so that none dominates the others. Moreover, the goblet, as advocated by ancient authors, is the most vicious shape that can be given to a tree, for several reasons. The first is that pruning it requires a great deal of care and time, to produce only the results of a half-wind left to nature; the second is that two of these trees placed opposite each other in two flowerbeds have, in a very few years, obstructed the passageway in an alley five or six feet long; finally, the fruit that grows in the interior and on the north side, being shaded for most of the day, never has the color and fragrance of that which ripens on the other points of its outer surface; in addition, the time of ripening can be significantly delayed. DC De la Quenouille. This form (pl. 8, fig. 4) is one of today's most fashionable, and also the most advantageous, in that it bears fruit very quickly, occupies very little space and causes no embarrassment in flowerbeds, and consequently offers a much greater variety of enjoyment by enclosing in a small space a far greater number of species and varieties of fruit. Cattails can be planted eight, ten or twelve feet apart, depending on the nature of the soil, either in rows in a flowerbed, in which case a paradise, a vine or a redcurrant is usually placed between two, or in staggered rows, in a chessboard, etc. When my father brought the cattail pruning method from Germany to France, in the royal gardens of Brunoy and Gros-Bois, it had the greatest difficulty in spreading during the first fifteen or twenty years. Routine gardeners argued that these trees would not last long, and that they would produce little. These two errors have been refuted by experience whenever trees have been in the hands of men who had some notion of the laws of vegetation, and they can now only be supported by ignorance and bad faith. It is certain that a tree a few feet high and thick cannot produce as much as a full wind; but if we calculate the shade cast by the latter and the amount of land it takes away from cultivation; if we establish as many cattails as it would take to compensate, we reply that these will produce three times as much as the other; in addition to which the fruit will be much more beautiful, of better quality, and of as many different species as we wish. If you want to grow cattails up to twenty-five feet tall or more, you'll need to choose trees grafted on franc; for medium-sized trees, you'll need to choose those grafted on quince. It must be assumed, however, that they should be placed in good soil; for, in very poor soil, those grafted on franc will only form ordinary trees, and those on quince may never exceed five or six feet in height. It's up to the gardener to study the quality of his land before making a decision; he must pay all the more attention to it, because otherwise he'll never achieve his goal. The subject grafted three or four inches above ground must have a strong, straight stem, well covered with branches, especially at the bottom; for most of the cattails found in all gardens have the great defect of being bare near the ground, and this is an irreparable defect. However, in cold, damp soils, the lower branches of a cattail often suffer considerably from the proximity of the soil surface; the flowers drop off every year, the branches are thin and etiolated, and the bark is covered with moss. In this case, which is an exception to the rule, far from keeping a cattail or a furnished pyramid close to the ground, it is raised on an eighteen-inch or two-foot stem. As it is very rare to have well-directed subjects in nurseries, we are going to put the amateur in the position of supervising his young trees himself until their third year of grafting, at which time they are put in place. 1" Year. The procedure will be absolutely the same as for the peach cattail. The inclination of the limbs should not be calculated so as to provide, as in the latter, an angle of forty-five degrees with the stem, because pear trees form, depending on the variety, an angle open to certain determined degrees, and it would be pointless to antagonize them in this respect. So, never trellis the limbs, and let them develop according to their nature. You should get two or three this first time, and a good terminal bud to form the extension of the stem. It's mainly this year that you need to keep an eye on these limbs, and give them every means of acquiring enough strength to always dominate over the others, and never be abandoned by the sap. It is on them alone that the beauty of the cattail will depend throughout its life; and, if they were to fail, it would be irreparably and forever defective, as we have said. To protect them in their development, we therefore carefully remove all buds which could harm them by attracting part of the sap. 2nd year. If the limbs are vigorous, we keep seven or eight eyes on the terminal bud, in order to obtain three or four new limbs, and we prune short those of the first year, to further increase their vigor. If the tree has only made a weak growth, the terminal bud should be cut back, to obtain this year only an extension, or at most one or two limbs. The same principle as for the previous year should be applied, i.e. in favor of the lower limbs, which should be left with all their buds to attract sap. 3rd year. At this third pruning, we could stop the terminal bud at one foot or eighteen inches, if the tree was vigorous, and by this means obtain four or five new limbs. If its vegetation was weak, we would continue to prune short. We don't need to tell you that limbs should be placed alternately on the stem; that the lower ones, being the oldest, should also be the longest and strongest, and that those obtained from year to year should decrease proportionally in length and strength. Quite often, a limb, thwarted in its growth by some particular circumstance, deviates from its position, which must always move regularly away from the stem like a ray from its axis. If it seems to want to throw itself to the left, it will be pruned on a bud placed on the right side, in order to regain its direction; if, on the contrary, it throws itself to the right, it will be pruned on a bud on the left. When the bud seems to want to leave the natural inclination of the variety, we do the same, i.e. we place it on an upper eye if it needs to be raised, or on a lower eye if it needs to be lowered. Sometimes, to make this procedure more effective, we prune seven or eight lines above the gem, to force the bud to turn away from the straight direction it could take by extending the branch, if it were not prevented from doing so by the small snag that we remove at the next pruning. 4° Year. We assume that the tree is in place. If it has been raised in the same soil, it should be moved and replanted immediately, in autumn, with the greatest care, and pruned in the same way, without cutting back too much, because we can be sure of a good recovery. If, on the other hand, the tree has travelled and its roots have suffered, pruning should be carried out much closer, but in the same shape. Finally, if the tree is already bald at the bottom, it should be cut back to within a foot of the graft, more or less, depending on the strength of the stem, and shaped in the same way as if it were grafted this year. We'll continue describing the operations as if the recovery were assured. We would prune the terminal bud and limbs as in the previous year; but, when disbudding, we would leave eyes to form twigs and 20 16 1 lambourdes, and we would always choose them placed on the sides, so that each limb remained entirely free of those placed above and below; Finally, air and light should be able to circulate easily in the interior, which is the only way to preserve the bark of the stem from the mosses, lichens and cankers that humidity would otherwise attract and maintain. 5th year. This is the second year of planting, and if the recovery has been good, the tree should already be producing fruit. It will be managed according to the same principles as in previous years, but in addition the twigs and joists will have to be watched over, according to the rules we set out earlier. From year to year, we'll act as we've just said, never losing sight of the fact that the tree must always remain well furnished at the bottom; that the stem must always rise perpendicularly and in as straight a line as possible; that the limbs must be regularly spaced, that they must not bear any secondary limbs, but only twigs; Finally, the greatest thickness of the tree should be at the end of the lower limbs; from this point to the top, the tree should decrease regularly and progressively in thickness, so as to form the shape of an elongated cone. A cattail pear tree, trained as we have just said, will remain vigorous for many years, and will produce fruit that is all the better for having received all atmospheric influences with the greatest ease, especially those resulting from the sun's rays. DC Prramid. This is nothing other than a cattail, the greatest thickness of which is close to the ground, and which has the regular shape of a cone, starting from its base. Moreover, the pyramid can be cut and driven like the cattail, without any difference, and offers the same advantageous results. When raised, it is a little more difficult to fill in the bottom, due to the inclination of the branches; but this is achieved by lengthening the pruning of the lower branches during the second and third years (pl. 8, fig. 5). This shape is particularly useful for setting fruit on stubborn species. It is also used on varieties whose branches have a natural tendency to form a forty-five degree angle with the stem. De la Girandole. In the Paris climate, we have species which, to ripen perfectly and acquire their full fragrance, need a greater quantity of air and light than the others; and it's because we can't distinguish between these species that it's been said that fruit grown on full wind is more fragrant than that harvested from other subjects. The girandole has the advantage of allowing the fruit to enjoy all atmospheric influences, to the same degree as full-wind trees, and can therefore replace them for the same purpose; but it has one quality over them, which is that, subjected to the same pruning and cultivation as the cattail and espalier, its fruit acquires the same volume as those of the latter. The girandole is pruned and trained in the same way as the cattail and pyramid, but differs in the way its limbs are inserted on the stem. We have said that, on the latter two, the branches should be alternate, and 908 that a line passing over the insertion of all of them would turn in a spiral around the stem; here, on the contrary, we obtain four or five members whose opposite insertions form, as far as possible, the whorl (pl. 8, fig. 6). The stem is then extended, without branches or twigs, up to eighteen inches in height if the limbs are inclined horizontally, and up to two feet if they are left at their natural inclination, as in the cattail. Here another whorl is placed; a third eighteen inches or two feet above, and so on to the end of the tree. We have fixed the distance between the whorls, assuming that the operation is carried out on a pear tree grafted on quince and in ordinary soil; but, in all other circumstances, it is up to the gardener to determine this distance, according to the presumed development of his trees. It can be set closer together for trees grafted onto small quince trees in poor soil, and much further apart for those grafted onto frankincense trees in good soil. Each whorl should also be set back from its neighbor in proportion to its size, and distances will become closer from base to top, following the proportional degradation of the whorls. It is possible, for example, to have three feet between the first whorl and the second; two and a half feet between the second and the third; two feet between the third and the fourth, and so on. Full-wind and half-wind. The full-wind is provided by a subject grafted on wild or on franc; the half-wind is provided by a subject grafted on quince tree of Portugal, in the excellent and hot grounds, and by a subject grafted on franc, in those which are mediocre or bad. The subject can be grafted at the top of the stem for either type, but it is better DOt that it be close to the ground, because if a gust of wind breaks it, you have the resource of reforming its head below the wound, without having to graft it again. The stem is raised and the tree formed in exactly the same way as the peach tree (vor. pag. 218), but the buds are pinched off a little longer, and the under-buds are pruned to no more than two inches in length. Once the tree is formed, it is left to nature, with the sole precaution of removing the dead wood and buds that develop along the stem every year. Should a branch seize the sap and threaten to destroy the balance of the vegetation, it can be prevented by the ordinary means of bowing, ring incision, etc. The tree is then left to its own devices. It would be a good idea to remove some of them when they have reached a quarter or a third of their size: those remaining would be larger, less gravelly and more fragrant, and a harvest for the following year would be assured. Apple tree training and pruning. The apple tree takes any shape you want, without exception, and succeeds equally well with all of them when properly trained; but, in order to adapt to each one, it must be grafted onto its own subject. 1° The longest-lasting and largest full-springs, those usually grown to produce cider apples, should be grafted onto wild cuttings taken from the woods, taking care to choose only those from seed, and not those from the stump: they are easily recognized by their roots. 08 2° To produce full-springs of good knife fruit, graft onto seedpods, i.e. onto subjects from cider apple seedpods sown and grown in the nursery. 3° To obtain mid-sprouts, large cattails, goblets, horizontal espaliers with stems, graft on subjects from good knife fruit seedlings, sown and cultivated as above. 4° If you want to form cattails and pyramids of ordinary size, or perpendicular and horizontal espaliers, graft on doucins. 5° Finally, for dwarf trees of the species, bushes, vases, very small cattails and pyramids, and espaliers three or four feet high, graft on paradise. Whatever the nature of the soil in which you plant, you must choose your subjects according to the indications we have just given, or you will never succeed in establishing, in trees subjected to pruning, a constant balance between fruiting and vegetation. For example, espalier trees grafted on wild or egin trees will never produce anything but wood, and if they do bear fruit, it will only be when old age diminishes their vigor. If, on the other hand, they are placed on paradise, in whatever way the gardener manages and spares his pruning, he will never succeed in giving them more than four or five feet of development; even then, they will only reach this size in top-quality soil. The Espalier. Depending on the wall space to be filled, a tree grafted on franc, doucin or paradis is chosen, and the tree is trained in the same way as the pear tree. There is, however, one difference: since apple trees often bear fruit on young wood, pruning should be done carefully, so as to preserve any buds from the previous year that may be showing signs of lagging; there is always time to shorten or remove them in autumn. It often happens that apple trees on hardwood or doucin have great difficulty setting fruit, especially when they have been pruned short and before vegetation. There's a simple way of reducing this problem: prune only when flowering begins, and prune very long. If that weren't enough, we'd arch all the branches without exception, and only break the tips. Horizontal espalier. This shape is perfectly suited to trees grafted on franc and doucin, to which we wish to give a picturesque appearance by increasing their yield. Several shapes are possible, but the parasol shape (pl. 8, fig. 1) seems to us to be one of the most attractive. According to drawings we have received from China, this type of tree is very fashionable in that country, and perhaps this is a recommendation, as the Chinese are known to be more advanced than we are in the cultivation of fruit trees, of which they make giants or pygmies at will (1). To form a parasol, we raise the stem as we have said for full wind trees, and stop it either by pinching in August, or by pruning in spring, at a height sufficient to allow us to pass easily under its head when it is formed. Four or five buds are obtained as close together as possible (1) The Chinese have tamed the vegetation of fruit trees to the point of keeping them all twelve or eighteen inches high, in vases seven or eight inches wide. These charming miniatures sc place on the table at dessert, and each guest is mat̂tre to pick at his or her choice the fruits with which they are laden. O of the others, so as to have like a whorl. These buds, destined to form the mother branches, are placed on a hoop supported by stakes, until the branches are strong enough to carry it themselves. These first limbs are trained as if to form an espalier, i.e. each year we obtain their extension and second limbs to garnish in between. Disbud carefully, allowing only the buds on the side of the branches to develop during the first two or three years of training, which is the opposite of disbudding in the perpendicular espalier. When the limbs have grown in length, new hoops are placed and supported in the same way as the first; but this one will no longer need a stake, which will already clear the underside of the tree. At this point, we'll stop disbudding the eyes on the upper surface, because we'll need to obtain some short twigs and strips; to do this, we'll pinch the buds at four or five inches, and break them off during pruning if necessary. Repeat this procedure year after year, until the tree has reached the necessary development. The branches will then be strong enough to hold themselves in position, and the stakes can be removed from the hoops, but the hoops should always remain to support the young shoots. One extremely important point is never to let a bud grow in a vertical position, as it would soon starve the others. If you want to stop a cattail growing and force it to set fruit, you can extend some of its lower branches in a horizontal espalier, as shown here (pl. 8, fig. 2). Trees trained in this way produce fruit of superior quality, as they enjoy the full benefit of the open air and sunshine. Cradles, alleys, avenues, etc., can be covered with this type of espalier, whose shape is more or less suitable for all fruit trees, except peach and apricot. In windy situations, simply raising the horizontal espalier two, three or four feet above the surface of the ground will ensure harvests that would be highly doubtful if the trees were given any other shape. Vase. This name is given to very small apple trees grafted on paradise, rarely reaching more than three feet in height. They are pruned and trained according to the same principles as the goblet; but, as they tend to grow very irregularly, it is difficult to give them a symmetrical shape. They are therefore simply trellised on one or two hoops (pl. 11, fig. 1), and hollowed out inside in the same way as the goblet. These small trees often bear fruit in their second year, in which case they can be spared from pruning. But when they start to wood and become untamable, there is no better way than to leave them for a year without pruning, and to simply break off all the woody branches at the end of May. Apple trees on paradise are more likely than any other species to produce flower buds on young wood. We recommend keeping these small strips until at least after the apple harvest. The vases take up very little space, and can be planted three or four feet apart without harming each other. They are planted in rows, often lining flowerbeds with one between each cattail, and even more often forming staggered or chessboard-shaped clumps, in which case the square containing them takes on the name of Normandy. These apple trees, commonly known as paradise, produce little fruit, but of surprising size and premium quality. Du Buisson. This is a tree grafted on paradise that is pruned solely for its fruiting, with no regard for its shape, which is left to chance and nature. Moreover, it is trained like a vase, and sometimes even called a paradise (pl. 11, fig. 2). It is intended to occupy the same places in the garden, and is also used to make normandies. If you wish to give the apple tree a form other than those we have just described, follow the same rules as for the species we have already mentioned, taking into account the differences that its particular mode of vegetation and fruiting necessarily entails. It is not uncommon to see a full-wind apple tree form such a bushy head that the lower branches are inclined to grow and develop their twigs in a more airy atmosphere; the result is that they prevent the air from circulating freely around the stem, causing the mosses, lichens and often cankers to which this species is quite prone. To avoid this inconvenience, low branches are pruned, but with the precautions we recommended in the article on lopping. (See pag. 169.) Cognassier pruning and training. This tree can hardly be pruned, for several reasons: the first is that, as it grows very irregularly, it would be very difficult to subject it to a regular shape; the second and more important reason is that, as it only bears fruit at the end of the branches, it would be impossible to preserve its crop by pruning it. However, it can be espaliered and cattailed; but to do this, it must be trained before it sprouts, the buds left behind must be trellised as they develop, and the pruning knife must only be used every two or three years once it has formed. If you do this, you'll lose most of the fruit every third year. To form a cattail or espalier, it can be obtained from cuttings; but to form a stem, it must be obtained from seedlings. It is not customary to graft it. "Pruning and training of the medlar. This tree, even more misshapen than the quince, like the quince, produces its fruit buds at the end of the branches; hence it is only pruned to put it on a stem, after which it is left to nature. The only care it needs is to clear it of dead wood, and to remove, in spring, the aborted fruit that has dried and remained at the end of a few branches. It absolutely refuses to take any regular shape. Pruning mountain ash. We're talking here only about the domestic mountain ash, whose very acerbic fruit is only edible when it has reached the state known as chard in pears and medlars. This tree is extremely valuable, but only for its wood, so it is always raised on a straight trunk and as high as possible. As it grows very slowly, it will take 908 several years to form a straight stem, which can be maintained in this position by means of a good stake. Pruning should be done in hooks, as for other trees; But as it takes several years to reach a sufficient height, i.e. ten to twelve feet, let three or four buds develop near the tip, to form a kind of dummy head, which we raise each year by cutting off the lowest branches as new ones form along the terminal bud, which we always care for and trellis vertically, so that the stem takes on body in proportion to its height. When it has reached the desired height, stop it as for other species, and leave the tree to grow freely, giving it only the care customary for all full-windows. Pruning and training. We need to consider the orange tree from several different angles: 1° as a fruit tree, in which case we'll show you how to prune it to obtain good fruit in favored climates, where it grows in the open ground; 2° as an ornamental tree, raised in boxes and kept in a greenhouse in winter to protect it from the rigors of frost, which would destroy it in our climates. In this case, it is important to consider whether it should be used solely for pleasure, or whether the harvesting of its flowers should combine the pleasurable with the useful. In each of these circumstances, it must be managed differently. In the south of France, in Italy and Spain, for example, whether you grow it on a stem or keep it in an espalier, it is quite common to graft it onto a lemon tree, or another species with sour fruit, to make it grow more quickly, and onto itself to make it more robust. In espaliers, we are content to let it take its natural shape; but on stems, we usually give it a regular head, and then we prune it as we shall see below. Only, as flowering is more regular in its periods, the time of pruning also varies much less. People who speculate both on its flower and its fruit, spare the winter pruning all the twigs that mark its flower, and only remove them when the fruit is assured, i.e., at disbudding time. They then leave only enough to ensure the following year's harvest: in addition, they prune according to the same principles as for other fruit trees, i.e., shorten the weak individuals, and long those that are very vigorous. In our countries, you mustn't touch the orange tree while it's in the greenhouse, because the humidity that might remain on the wounds would be more dangerous than the cold itself. During the winter, we must be content with scrupulously removing all moldy leaves, and wiping off mold wherever it occurs. In Paris, preference is given to orange trees grafted onto limoniers, as they grow much faster. Let's suppose that the subject is grafted six or eight inches from the ground, and that we want to raise it on a stem. Every year, when you take it out of the greenhouse, you will prune the lateral buds of the graft, but on four or five eyes, so that the stem can take on body; which would not happen if you did not stop the sap by means of hook pruning. When it reaches the desired height, we pinch off the terminal bud to obtain three or four main branches. If you have raised a wild tree in this way, you should wait to graft it until its stem is at least the size of a finger, so as to be able to place two escutcheons, one on one side, the other on the other. Whether you've brought an orange tree to this state yourself, or had it brought in from Genoa, you'd do as we're about to say. You prune the two grafts, each on two eyes, to obtain four buds to form the main branches, and you have a subject in the same state as the one we assumed above, grafted close to the ground. It is trained in the same way. If you want to obtain flowers and fruit quickly, you prune very long from the second year onwards, or even just pinch off the ends of the branches; in subsequent years, you let the tree grow as it pleases, and just pinch off the ends of branches that would tend to move too far away from the stem to form a ball-shaped head. After a very short time, the tree stops growing on its own and starts to bear fruit, especially if its roots are a little hindered. But if you're wiser and prefer a well-formed, healthy tree, you prune very short during the first three or four years, to give the head a regular shape, and the branches sufficient strength to maintain for centuries a balance of sap, without which the orange tree will never be truly beautiful. When disbudding, only useful, well-placed wood is left, and year after year the pruning is lengthened until the tree is finally ready to bear fruit. At this point, the orange tree is managed according to different principles, depending on whether fruit or flowers are to be harvested. In the first case, as soon as the tree is out of the greenhouse and accustomed to the open air, it is pruned without regard for the flowers, according to the same principles as other fruit trees. All weak branches and those that might have vegetated in the orangery are pruned short, and anything that looks etiolated is removed. Over-abundant twigs are cut back, and branches that would deviate from the spherical shape of the head are shortened. The interior is cleaned of rags and other misplaced branches that would intercept air circulation, and only vigorous, well-formed wood is left. When disbudding, only as much fruit as can be produced is left on the tree, and in the autumn, any useless buds that might have developed by misleading the grower are removed. If a few branches were to sap to the detriment of others, we'd have to see whether they could be used to replace languishing ones that we'd remove, or to fill a gap by directing them into the necessary position; in both these cases, we'd prune them very long, or even just pinch them at the end to stop them growing. If it is absolutely necessary to cut them off, care should be taken to cut them off at the bark insertion, to ensure that they do not grow back. If orange trees are to provide abundant harvests of flowers, other principles apply. Don't touch the trees once you've taken them out of the greenhouse, as you won't be able to prune them without removing some of the twigs on which the young flower buds are already appearing. Just cut off all the bad wood you can without touching the twigs, and wait until the harvest is over before pruning according to the same principles we have just described. However, there is always a serious disadvantage: as the season is very early when pruning begins, the young buds don't have time to gain strength before winter; they don't ripen their wood, and remain throughout the bad season in a kind of sap hesitation which makes them extremely sensitive to cold and humidity. 4 When an orange tree finds itself hampered in its box, which is easily recognized by the yellowish tint of its foliage and the weakness of its shoots, it must either be given a larger vase, or its roots brought closer together. The latter operation destroys the balance of sap so necessary to vegetation, and only pruning can restore it. In this circumstance, all branches are shortened, more or less according to the urgency of the situation, and the tree is directed in the same way as when it was first formed, until the balance is re-established and its new head begins to bear fruit. This pruning must be repeated each time the tree is repotted in the same vase. Grenadier pruning and training. This tree is in exactly the same situation as the orange tree, and should be pruned according to the same rules. However, there is less need to use a pruning knife, as it can be easily pruned by pinching. To grow it on a stem, you need to obtain it from seed; but as a bush, it works perfectly from cuttings or marcottes. To obtain good fruit, hollow it out internally, cut off all the weak branches in spring, which it multiplies profusely, and pinch it when its buds have reached half or two-thirds of their length, in order to bring it into flower. In countries where the pomegranate can overwinter in the open ground, it lends itself well to shearing, and can form charming palisades. THIRD DIVISION. PRUNING AND TRAINING OF BERRY TREES. This division includes trees and shrubs whose vegetation and fruiting vary greatly from one species to another, and therefore require completely different pruning methods. With the exception of grapevines and currants, none of them have been subjected to regular pruning, and are only pruned for education. Vine pruning. Whether the young tree has been obtained from marcotte or cuttings, or whether it has been grafted or not, when it is planted, only two or three buds should be left, in the first year, whatever shape you want to give the tree. Above the latitude of Paris, perfect ripening of the grapes can only be expected when the vines are espaliered against a wall facing south. Beyond the forty-eighth degree, only vigorous, early-ripening varieties can be grown. In the North, and particularly in England, they are grown only in purpose-built greenhouses; but in all cases, pruning is carried out according to the same principles: for the reason that, in climates that are favorable to the vine, its size varies as it does in greenhouses, according to its greater or lesser vigor. Remember that we have recommended never cutting too close to an eye, whenever we use the pruning knife on new wood, to avoid the mortality that always occurs a few lines below the wound; but to prune to about half an inch above the gem, in a bevel with the base opposite it (pl. 7, fig. 2), so that the 2. 908 flow of sap, which is very abundant in the vine, can easily escape without wetting the eye, which it could drown. The right time to prune is very important to know, although it varies from one climate to another. In countries where there is little or no frost, pruning is carried out at the beginning of winter. This is an excellent method, as the wounds have time to dry out before vegetation starts, so less sap is lost; the plant is therefore more vigorous, and vegetation is much earlier, which ensures the ripening of grapes that usually only ripen at the end of autumn. In countries where the weather is very cold, pruning is delayed to a greater or lesser extent, to ensure that there will be no more frost when the cut is made. If this were not the case, the moisture brought to the cut, either by the sap or by fog or rain, would form an ice cube which would disrupt the germ by the cold, or by causing the shoot to burst. In addition to this disadvantage, the buds, by developing much too early, would be more exposed to the white frosts that often last until the end of April. In the part of France below the latitude of Lyon, pruning can begin as early as the end of January; a little further north, the operation is delayed until the middle of February; it can rarely be carried out in the vicinity of Paris before March; and, if you are further north, it can be postponed until the end of April. It's up to the grower's intelligence to choose the most favorable time, according to the ordinary temperature of the climate he inhabits. De la Treille. This name is generally given to all vines that, like the espalier, have a surface that is not thick909 seur. The trellis is usually laid against a wall or against a cradle-forming framework; and, in both cases, it is directed in several ways, according to the taste of the person pruning; but there are some that are more advantageous than others, and we are going to describe these. To obtain a beautiful trellis (pl. 9, fig. 8) that perfectly covers a large expanse of wall, and provides an abundant harvest, preference should be given to the following method, adopted by the inhabitants of Thomery. Plant the plant against the wall, or better still, if you wish to follow the principles of cultivation of the inhabitants of the village mentioned above, three or four feet away, in the flowerbed, lying on the side of the wall. In the first year, only a single shoot is left, which is then buried again a foot deep, so that the tip only emerges six inches from the wall. Only then do we begin to direct it to form the trellis. "e Year. We prune on three or four eyes, which we leave to develop until the time of disbudding, which should take place in June and July, at least in the Paris climate. At this time, only one bud is kept, the most vigorous of the three, which is pruned vertically to obtain the c stem. 2° Year. Prune very long, so as to give the full height of the stem this very year, and disbud or pinch off all the lateral sarmens. If you wish to form a very tall stem, capable of spreading its lateral branches on espaliers, you will have to neglect the second limbs, and only deal with them the following spring; but, if you have a sufficiently tall stem, you can spare the three upper buds, in order to obtain the two lower lateral branches d, d, and the extension of the stem e. 3rd Year. We prune the vertical shoot to two feet in length, to obtain its extension h, and two new lateral branches f, f. However, if it is not very vigorous, it would be better to bring it closer together on its two lower eyes to obtain a new, more robust shoot, which we would prune the following year, as we have just said. The first two limbs d, d, can be left more or less long, depending on whether they are more or less vigorous; but it is always wiser to keep them at a maximum of one foot for this time. All unnecessary shoots are rigorously disbudded, but two, g, g, can be kept to provide the first two fruiting branches. Needless to say, this disbudding must be carried out every year, and at all times, from the time the fruit is knotted until maturity. In this operation, only the buds intended to provide the extension of the stem, lateral branches and fruiting branches should ever be spared; all the others should be removed without exception, and the same principles should be applied throughout the life of the plant. 4th year. If you want to form the trellis on several rows of cords, continue to extend the vertical shoot, and make it produce new lateral branches. If this is not the case, cut it off at the base of the bark, i.e. below its lower eye, so that it ceases to produce buds, which should be removed with great care. The extension of limbs d, d, f, f is obtained, and fruiting branches k, K, etc. are placed on top. Those e, e, obtained the previous year, are pruned over two eyes, which will form two new fruiting branches, which are trained almost vertically to fill the empty space, two feet wide, between the lateral branches. As a rule, fruiting branches should always be pruned over two eyes, so as to have only two branches, the taller of which is removed each year, and cut back to the lowest, in order to lengthen as little as possible the snag or spur o, o, etc., which supplies them. These spurs themselves are shortened when they provide a good bud capable of replacing them, and inserted close to the mother branch. The fruiting sarmen will be spaced more or less apart on the side branches, depending on whether they are more or less vigorous; but they will never be less than six inches apart, nor more than eighteen. They should be trained regularly, so as not to confuse or cross each other. All those that are weak or badly placed will be cut back. 5° Year. As with previous prunings, the main focus is on extending the lateral branches. To achieve this, select the most vigorous bud closest to the tip p, p; incline it horizontally, and prune it short or long according to its vigor, since it must be spared all the more as it is destined to provide wood to preserve, and fruit. If it is too short, it will produce a lot of superfluous wood and no grapes; if it is too long, it will produce many bunches, but they will be small and of inferior quality, and there will be no wood and the vine will soon be exhausted. This rule applies to all branches and all vines. 2 Finally, every year, we continue to manage the trellis as we have just said; and, when we want to stop it, at every pruning we bring the terminal shoot of the lateral branches p, p, closer together on a spur, as we have said for the fruit-bearing branches. Vine training should never begin until the fruit is well knotted, unless some of the sarmens are in danger of breaking, in which case they need to be supported. If the operation were carried out before this time, the sap from the buds that are removed would be carried into the bunches, lengthening them considerably into tendrils, and causing the grapes to abort. The effect is the same when pruning too short on very vigorous wood. It is also very important not to tie the vine shoots too tightly, so as not to hinder vegetation, which would allow sub-buds to develop before winter below the ligature, depriving the shoot of good eyes for the following year. Some time before the fruit ripens, a general disbudding is carried out, and the leaves that prevented the grapes from enjoying the sun and fresh air are removed. For vines, as for all other trees, we only remove as many leaves as are necessary to achieve our goal, and never more, as this would be dangerous for the plant, as we have already said. The buds growing at the bottom of the stems and on the roots will be removed right to the roots. A vine, trained in this way on two or three rows of cordons, can line a considerable length of wall, if the soil is perfectly suited to it. One vine in Holland, for example, is said to extend one hundred and twenty feet in length, while another in England forms a cordon one hundred and fifty feet long. Although we have said that this method was the one adopted in Thomery, some inhabitants modify it as follows: instead of forming four or five cords on the same stem, they form only one, which they extend to the right and left, and other vines provide the upper cords. In this way, they plant as many plants as they want to establish cords, and space them accordingly. The first vine 4 supplies the lower cordon at eight or ten inches high; the second supplies the second cordon eighteen inches above the first; the third vine supplies the third cordon as far from the second as this one is from the first, and so on, until they have covered the entire height of the wall. This type of trellis is very well suited to areas of mediocre depth, where a single vine would not be able to sink its roots far enough to provide vegetation for four or five rows of branches. Du Rerceau. The way in which vines are trained to cover cradles and other green rooms is rather arbitrary; however, you should always try to give them a regular shape (pl. 11, fig. 3), and prune them according to established principles. However, as there are fewer main limbs to be obtained, the pruning can be lengthened each year, so that the framework supporting it is covered earlier. This method is less advantageous than the others for the quality of the fruit, because the bunches, always hanging inside, have little air, heat and no sun at all. If we were to attempt to give them some by thinning out the leaves, we would fail entirely in our aim of providing shade when establishing these small arrangements. Du Cordon. This method of vine training is extremely advantageous for lining the coping of a wall against which an espalier is grown, and even better for forming a curtain in front of a flowerbed where you might be afraid of casting harmful shade on the trees in the espalier. - To establish a cordon under the coping of a wall, we plant as we said in the article on trellises; but if the land on the other side depended on the garden, it would be better, for the cordon as for the trellis, to plant on the other side and pass the stem through an oblique hole drilled in the wall for this purpose. The result would be that the roots of the vine and espalier could not harm each other. Even if the wall separated the garden from a paved courtyard, the same would still apply, since vines thrive equally well under paving stones and even flagstones. For the first few years, we'd raise the stem as we've said; then, when it reached the height of the coping, we'd stop it, leaving it to grow only one limb on the right and one on the left. These branches would be managed in the same way as the cords of the trellis, so as to extend them and obtain fruit; but, as there would only be one row, the pruning would be much longer, without fear of exhausting the stock. In our pl. 11, sig. 3, a, we have illustrated, against a cradle, a vine branch developed into a cordon; there is this difference: instead of trellising the fruit-bearing branches on a framework, as in the figure, they will be inclined more so that they do not overhang the wall, and they will be attached to the rag, on the coping below. If you wish to establish the cordon in the open air, or, to explain more clearly, to form a counter-pallet, you plant stakes in a line along a bed, spaced eight or ten feet apart, and support them with a crossbeam, which should only be three and a half or four feet high at most. Next to each stake is planted a tree which is raised to the height of the crossbeam, and trained on it; it can be trained straight (pl. 11, fig. 4), in which case the fruiting branches are bent around the crossbeam; or it can be trained spirally around the crossbeam, in which case the fruiting branches are trained straight, but always inclined horizontally. If you wish to have a better supplied counter espalier, establish two rows of cords, one two feet high on a first crossbeam, the other four feet high on a second crossbeam. In both cases, the vine is pruned and governed in the same way as the trellis, and the length of the training pruning is calculated according to the vigor of the stock and the quality of the soil. This method is used for large-scale cultivation in some cantons of the Mâconnais, Beaujolais and Lyonnais regions. Each row of vines is spaced twenty or twenty-five feet apart, with cereals grown in between. Only white wine is harvested from the cordons called hautains by the inhabitants of these countries. Pillars, columns and the like (pl. 11, fig. 5) may need to be trimmed. The same principles apply as for the cords we have just described, with the difference that the stem must always embrace the body around which it is to extend its branches. It must therefore be driven in a spiral. But, if the column were very large, two or more vines would be needed to fill it everywhere; then the stems could be extended in opposite spirals, as we have illustrated, and at each turn they would cross each other; or they could be spiralized in the same direction, in which case care should be taken to space the two stems always in the same proportion from the bottom to the top. In any case, fruiting branches should be trained vertically. We'd now like to talk about the pruning of vines grown singly in gardens, or in open fields to produce wine harvests. Pruning varies considerably from place to place and from custom to custom; but, as its principles are always based on the laws of vegetation, you can't go wrong if you've fully understood what we've said above, and taken into consideration the few general rules we're going to add here. 1° As the vine can only produce wood of a certain size in a year, never or at least very rarely exceeding that of an inch, it can be kept in small proportions, or made to cover a large space, at will, by bringing the pruning closer together or lengthening it. It produces equally well in either case, if its roots can be balanced with its head. This means that it can be kept very short in all soils, but cannot be made to grow very large in shallow soils. 2° Since vines are always more vigorous in good soils than in mediocre ones, pruning can be made longer in the former than in the latter, regardless of soil depth. 3° Since vines grow more vigorously in hot climates than in cold ones, pruning should be lengthened the closer you get to the south, and shortened a lot in the north. 4° Too much heat dries out the fruit, making it difficult to ripen; too little heat prevents it from ripening. Shade its branches in very hot climates, and don't blame the inhabitants of the south, who mingle its branches through the foliage of the elms around which they grow their vines. In temperate climates, i.e. below 44 degrees Celsius, they can be grown at any exposure; closer to the north, they can be grown at midday, planted on slopes that are sufficiently inclined to receive the sun's rays more or less perpendicularly. The consequences of this principle for pruning are very important. We know that the earth reflects the sun's rays and heat; that the closer an object is to its surface (when it is not damp), the more heat it experiences. Thus, in very hot climates, vines are cultivated at a high elevation, as they are in the south of France; in temperate climates, they are raised only a few feet, and in colder climates, such as around Paris, they are kept very low. 5° The lower the vine, the fewer buds are left on it; and this is the natural consequence of the principles we have just established. We have illustrated (pl. 11, fig. 6) a vine stock pruned as it should be in temperate countries, from 44 degrees to 46 degrees and beyond; but modifying the pruning according to exposure, resulting temperature and quality of soil: a, is the stem raised only a few inches; b, b, b, are three limbs that are lengthened as little as possible: in a very-favorable temperature and in excellent soil, four limbs can be kept; in cold climates and in mediocre soil, it would be better to have only two. c, c, c, etc., are fruiting branches pruned over two eyes; they are carried on very short spurs, which are often renewed. Each of these horns will provide two fruiting branches, the upper of which will be cut off at the next pruning, so as not to increase the number of spurs, which would otherwise be doubled every year. A vine stock such as the one shown here, if pruned and de-budded as described above, will produce twelve fruiting branches, each of which can easily provide two beautiful bunches; in total, twenty-four grapes, which would provide an enormous harvest of wine, if each vine stock in a vineyard produced as many. When trellising, follow the established principles, tying the sarmens to stiles, and thin out the leaves in season. II Pruning the Olive Tree. This precious tree can only be grown in the open air, and pruning is only customary for the first three or four years, after which it is left to nature to prune out dead, defective or misplaced branches. The result is that it often bears a large quantity of small, poorly nourished fruit, becomes exhausted, and remains sterile the following year. We believe that if it were subjected to regular, reasoned pruning, based on the laws of its vegetation, the balance would be restored in its harvests, which would be all the better for it, because the size and quality of the fruit would compensate sufficiently for the quantity, especially if we took the decision to multiply it by sowing and grafting. It can be treated in the same way as other stone trees. Fig tree pruning. We never try to give this tree a regular shape, because the large quantity of sap it loses every time we make an amputation makes pruning dangerous. In spring, just before sap flow, we simply remove dead and sterile branches. You should never cut more than half an inch above an eye, because mortality would overtake it, as in the vine, if you cut above it. For the same reason, a branch should never be felled by cutting it back to the trunk. When you want to raise it to a stem, you manage it like any other tree; but it's better to pinch it than to cut it, and even better to prune it. By subjecting it to the latter practice, we can train it without exhausting it too much. 008 Mulberry pruning. It is rarely pruned regularly, unless it is to form avenues, covered walkways, etc., in which case it is sheared (see page 173) as with other ornamental trees. If pruning is carried out, it is only to remove dead wood and useless branches, or to rejuvenate the tree when it is too old or its fruit has degenerated. In this case, the procedure is as described in the lopping article on page 169. Brusetrees can be pruned in the same way. Pruning and training currant bushes. This charming shrub (the species with bunches) lends itself with the greatest ease to any shape you wish to give it. Placed in a flowerbed between cattails, it can be trained into bushes, cattails, swirls and balls. Along a wall, it forms very pretty espaliers; finally, it can be used to make very pleasant palisades to divide flowerbeds and other small arrangements. Pruning takes place in February, and regardless of the regular shape you wish to give it, dead wood should be removed, and old branches that will soon cease to bear fruit should be cut back. Other pruning operations should be carried out according to the general principles of vegetation. Raspberry pruning. The raspberry tree only ever bears fruit on the previous year's wood, and this is what the gardener should focus on when pruning. When planted in suitable soil, it produces vigorous shoots every year, three or four feet long or more, which are invaluable for renewal. We select 009 the most vigorous of these young shoots, prune them by the end, and bend them into a half-bucket at the tip. In the upper third of their length, they will soon produce a number of small twigs covered with flowers, and later with fruit. When you have enough of these offshoots to line the palisade you're making with the raspberry bush, you remove to the ground the stems that bore fruit the previous year; if there weren't enough of them, you'd bring the old stems closer to the most vigorous bud, which you'd arch and trellis like the offshoots. Both are bent in the same direction and in a single line, to form the symmetrical figure of a hoop trellis. The offshoots, too small to bear fruit within the year, are pruned to fifteen or eighteen inches in length, in order to obtain fruitful buds for the following year. Pruning the Vinettier. Barberry is rarely pruned other than to form hedges that become impenetrable in a very short space of time. This is done with shears, as mentioned in the article on shearing. However, with a little care, and by simply removing branches that cause confusion, or those that are too vigorous and draw a large portion of sap to themselves, thereby destroying the balance of the vegetation, we can always succeed in increasing its yield. p08 PRUNING OF ENVELOPED FRUIT TREES. This division includes walnut, hazelnut and chestnut trees. As none of these trees have been subjected to a regular form, we will only deal with them in one article. Walnut is grown for both its fruit and its wood. To obtain the first result in the most advantageous way, it must be grafted, in order to increase the number, size and quality of the nuts. In the second case, we simply raise it from seed. If we wanted to obtain both wood and fruit quality, we would raise it from seed until its stem was formed, and then graft it at the top to form its head. Whichever way you decide, you raise the young tree as you would other fruit trees, that is, by pruning in hooks until the stem has reached the desired length; then you stop it: and, whether you graft it or not, you leave the tree to its nature. All that remains is to remove the dead branches, and to bring it closer together, by means of delimbing, when it becomes old and the stems are too long.

its branches begin to dry out at the tips. If you want top-quality wood, it's best to cut it down at this time. Chestnuts grow like walnuts, but as they form their head, they are prone to growing greedy branches, which must be cut back to preserve some regularity, as well as twigs and weak branches. As it begins to age, it often happens that the vegetation abandons the ends of the branches to a certain extent, in order to move to their insertion and develop suckers. The three branches 271 bend and become very good fruiting branches, with much larger chestnuts than before, though fewer in number. This operation can be repeated two or three times or more, until the tree dies of old age and exhaustion. Hazel remains a bush if left to grow freely, but if pruned for the first three or four years, it can easily be raised to a stem, and become quite a pretty tree. It can be treated in the same way as the two preceding trees, the only difference being that it needs to be cleaned of offshoots, which grow at the base much more easily than with the others. There are also some fruit trees, such as jujube, pistachio, etc., which we have not included in this treatise on pruning, because, at least in France, they belong more to the ornamental tree section than to the fruit tree section. However, if you were to care for a few of them, of whatever species, by directing them according to the general principles we have given under the name of precepts, you would be sure to succeed in bringing them to fruit, and to bend them into the shape you would like them to take if their nature did not oppose it. O soccece:cosceccccoceccc--e--c.e--o----e.c--.cee.c."-cecec-e--.-..c.caoDU JARDIN- POTAGER. IN dealing with this important branch of horticulture, we have had to consider it from all its points of usefulness; we have not, therefore, confined ourselves to teaching the cultivation of only those plants used in cooking, but of all those that enter into the planting of a vegetable garden... Aromatic plants, which do not belong exclusively to the field of medicine, but are of daily use in the domestic economy, naturally had to be included in our framework. Some trees and shrubs seem to belong more particularly to this division than to fruit trees: for example, the caper, whose flowers are preserved in vinegar before they blossom; the laurel, whose leaf is used to flavour stews; the cherry-cherry, which cooks so carelessly use to impart an almond-like flavour to boiled milk, etc. However, we have included them neither in our list of aromatic plants, nor in that of fruit trees. However, we haven't included them in either the vegetable garden or the orchard, because we would be repeating ourselves if we were obliged to describe them and teach their cultivation in the family histories that make up the final volumes of this work. Some of our readers may be astonished to find our vegetable plants arranged in alphabetical order, whereas most authors who have written before us on this subject have endeavoured to classify them methodically in the order of their asfinities, either in use or in cultivation. Our naive reply to this is that the task has been beyond our powers, and that we even believe that a rigorously analytical2. 18 208 rigorously analytical classification is impossible; our readers will perhaps be convinced of this, as we are, when they learn that the Jardin des Plantes in Paris has been looking for such a classification for over fifty years, without yet having been able to find a satisfactory one. Let us cite an example of the difficulties encountered at every step. Let's suppose that cabbage, the most widespread and useful plant in our vegetable gardens, has to keep us busy trying to find a classification for it. Have you adopted a method based on the use to which each plant is put? You'll find that 1° in kohlrabi, only the root collar is eaten; 2° in cabbage, only the leaves; 3° in cauliflower, only the stem and flowers; 4° in colza, only the seed is used to make oil. Will you include cabbage among plants with edible roots? edible leaves? edible flowers? etc.? Most vegetable plants fall into this category. But if you want to classify plants according to their cultivation analogies, the thing becomes even more impracticable; for the cultivation of the same plant varies according to the use you want to make of it, the time when you want to harvest it, the climates where you grow it, the quality of the soil where you tend it, and the variety to which it belongs. It has been suggested that vegetable plants should be grouped in Jussieu's order of natural families; but when this classification is attempted, such bizarre comparisons are made in terms of use and cultivation, that we are forced to abandon it. Besides, let's agree on one thing: a scientific classification of the vegetable garden is completely useless, and serves only to satisfy the mind without teaching the grower anything. What's more, it has the serious disadvantage of making research difficult in a book, and is impractical in the field. However, to satisfy I all classes of amateurs, and to show students the road on which all growers have been shipwrecked, without excepting my late friend the learned professor M. Thouin, we will give the table of its classification by order of use, then another table in which we have endeavoured to arrange vegetable plants in an order based on their cultivation analogies, and finally a third in which they are classified, month by month, according to the times at which they are planted or sown. CLASSIFICATION OF VEGETABLE PLANTS IN ORDER OF USE. FIRST DIVISION. PLANTS WHOSE LEAVES, RIBS OR STEMS ARE EDIBLE. FIRST SECTION. THOSE TO BE EATEN COOKED. 1°. Alone, or with seasonings. Mushroom, asparagus, hops, purslane, cardoon, celeriac, periwinkle, rhubarb, kohlrabi, cabbage, lettuce, chicory, sorrel, spinach, baselle, tetragone; 2°. Aszaisonnement. Mushroom, arrowroot, celery, chicory, tarragon, lettuce, cabbage, sorrel, parsley, periwinkle, purslane, fennel, savory, sage, chervil, leek. SECOND SECTION. THOSE TO BE EATEN RAW. 1°. In salads. Celery, chicory, lettuce, cabbage, watercress, lamb's lettuce, picridie; 2°. As a garnish. Celery, chervil, cornucopia, watercress, tarragon, mustard, trique-madame, stonewort, parsley, salad burnet, purslane, rocket, spilanthe, hallelujah, basil, cochlearia, mint, tansy-balsam, fennel (its young stalks blanched). SECOND DIVISION. THOSE WHOSE FLOWERS ARE EDIBLE IN WHOLE OR IN PART. 1°. Cooked. Artichoke, cauliflower, broccoli; 2°. Raw and used as a salad. Nasturtium, borage, bugloss. THIRD DIVISION. EDIBLE FRUITS. FIRST SECTION. FLESHY FRUITS, SUCCULENTS. 1°. Those eaten raw. Pineapple, strawberry, pepper, cucumber, watermelon, melon; 2°. Those eaten cooked. Squash, cucumber, tomato, pepper, melon; 3°. Those to be preserved in vinegar. Cucumber, melon, pepper. 1°. Those with floury seeds. Peanut, cowpea, broad bean, chickling pea, bean, lentil, mace, corn, pea, white vetch. 2°. Dry and aromatic seeds. Anise, coriander, fennel, mustard. FOURTH DIVISION. PLANTS WITH BULBS, ONIONS OR EDIBLE ROOTS. 1°. Those whose bulbs and onions are eaten. Onions, garlic, spring onions, chives, shallots, leeks; 2°. Those whose tubers are eaten. Orchis, Jerusalem artichoke, potato, nutsedge, truffle; 3°. Those whose roots are eaten. Potato, beet, carrot, parsnip, celeriac, cabbage, chervil, turnip, horseradish, raiponce, turnip, salsify, scorzonera. FIFTH DIVISION. AROMATIC PLANTS. 1°. Those taken as theiform infusions. Wormwood, ragweed, sage, lemon balm, angelica, hyssop; 2°. Those candied in sugar, or used to make liqueurs. Absinthe, angelica, anise, coriander, peppermint, fennel; 3°. Those used as spices or seasoning. Basil, coriander, cochlearia de Bretagne, fennel, savory, thyme, sage, anise, mint; 277 DU JARDIN 6°. Those distilled to prepare health-giving waters. Ilyssum, lavender, lemon balm, rosemary; 5°. Anti-acorbutic. Cochlearia, cress, watercress. TABLE OF CULTIVATION ANALOGIES. FIRST DIVISION. PLANTS GROWN AND HARVESTED BETWEEN SPRING AND WINTER. FIRST SECTION. PLANTS THAT ARE PROPAGATED ANNUALLY FROM SEED. 1°. Those sown in water. Floating macer; 2°. Those sown and cultivated on soil. Mushroom, okra, melongene, melon; 3°. Cucumbers, pumpkins, tomatoes, hot peppers; (B. Ordinary exposure; plants that are mounded or tied to blanch, and from which only the leaves are harvested). Cardoon, celery, chicory, lettuce; (C. Ordinary exposure; plants that are not blanched.) Cabbage, basil; 4°. Plants sown in the open ground in furrows or broadcast. (A. Furrow sowing in very loose, very deep soil to facilitate root development). Turnip, rabe, beet, carrot, parsnip, chervis; (B. Broadcast sowing. Plant cultivated for seed only.) Mustard; (C. Regularly spaced sowing in furrows. Plants with a tendency to climb, most of which must be rowed). Bean, pea, lentil, chickling vetch, white vetch, broad bean, nasturtium; (D. Sow in furrows, lightly covered. Non-climbing plants, so do not row). Watercress, rocket, picridie, chervil, purslane, stag's horn, trique-madame, spilanthe, lamb's lettuce, arroche, pear, spinach, tetragonia, spring onion, peanut, borage. SECOND SECTION. THOSE PROPAGATED ANNUALLY FROM ROOTS OR BULBS. 1°. Those planted in the open ground: (A. Bulb or bulblet multiplication.) Garlic, shallot; (B. Tuber multiplication.) Potato, Jerusalem artichoke, nutsedge; 2°. Those planted in layers. Potato. PLANTS WHICH MUST REMAIN IN THE GROUND FOR ONE OR MORE WINTERS, AND WHICH REQUIRE SPECIAL CARE DURING THE BAD SEASON. FIRST SECTION. ORDINARY PROPAGATION BY ROOTS OR EYELETS. 1e. Those grown year-round on hot beds and pineapples; under chd̂ssis. 2°. Those grown in the open ground. ( A. Root and seed propagation.) Asparagus, bugloss; (B. Carnation propagation.) Strawberry, artichoke; (C. Cuttings and sprouts propagation.) Tarragon. SECOND SECTION. ORDINARY SEED PROPAGATION. 1°. Those which are perennial, or remain for several years in the same place. Fennel, parsley, salad burnet, stonewort, crambe, sorrel, angelica: 2°. Those that spend one or two winters in the ground: (A. Sowing on a bed.) Baselle; (B. Sowing in the ground.) Rhubarb, raiponce, parsnip, salsify, anise. 280 MONTHLY PLANTING AND SOWING CHART. Nora. We will not say in this table whether the plantings or seedlings indicated are to be done under a frame, on a bed or in the open ground, because all these details can be found in the particular cultivation articles. IANVIER. Sow: early peas, broad beans, onions, lettuce, wild chicory, endive, watercress, purslane, cauliflower, radish, early turnip, melon, cucumber, watermelon, melon, early beans, cardoon, carrot, celery, spring onion, leek. FEBRUARY. Sow: Early lettuce, onion, leek, spring onion, artichoke, carrot, parsnip, spinach, parsley, peas, broad bean, radish, horseradish, turnip, large Vertus cabbage, savoy cabbage, cabbage, asparagus, melon, cucumber, watermelon, melongene, basil, celery, wild chicory, endive, lentil, okra, stonewort, chili pepper, purslane, rocket, spilanthe, tomato, salsify, scorzonera, tetragonia, white vetch. Plant: garlic, rocambole, civet, shallot, hyssop, lavender. MARCH. Sow : Early and late kale, cauliflower, angelica, arrowroot, artichoke, basil, beet, celery, spring onion, squash, cucumber, melon, watermelon, melongene, hot pepper, fennel, onion, parsnip, percepierre, pea, purslane, anise, asparagus, carrot, chervil, chervil, wild chicory, cardoon, civet, stag's horn, coriander, spinach, endive, fava bean, white chard, bean, lettuce, lavender, lentil, mint, mustard, turnip, sorrel, parsley, salad burnet, leek, pear, turnip, radish, horseradish, rocket, salsify, scorsonera, spilanthe, 908 tetragonia, tomato, white vetch. Cutting: Tarragon. Plant: Potato, nutsedge, potato, garlic, rocket, artichoke, asparagus, shallot, lemon balm. APRIL. Sow: Beet, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, kohlrabi, turnips, kohlrabi, kale, northern kale, anise, asparagus, lentil, melon, peas, squash, purslane, peanut, basil, nasturtium, cardoon, carrot, celery, chervil, wild chicory, chives, watermelon, deerhorn, spinach, chicory, endive, broad bean, white chard, bean, corn, mint, mustard, turnip, parsley, chilli pepper, salad burnet, pear, turnip, radish, tetragona, trique-madame, horseradish, rocket, salsify, scorzonera, tomato. Plant: garlic, rocambole, asparagus, tarragon, artichoke, sorrel, potato, potato-stem. MAY. Sow : Cauliflower, large-ribbed cabbage, and all non-head cabbage, savoy cabbage, Brussels sprouts, white broccoli, purple broccoli; peas, Clamart peas, Marly peas, white squares, black-bottomed squares; peanut, artichoke, basil, beet, celery, chervil, chicory, spring onion, spinach, endive, fennel, beans, corn, melon, parsley, pear, turnip, radish, rocket, trique-madame. Plant: tarragon, mint. JUNE. Sow: Cauliflower, broccoli, turnips, rutabaga, kohlrabi, large-ribbed cabbage, wild chicory, escarole, head lettuce, romaine, Swiss beans and flageolet, autumn peas, Clamart peas, celery, fennel, chervil, spinach, endive, parsley, pear, raiponce, Augsburg rabe, radish, watercress. JULY. Sow: kohlrabi, broccoli, leek, spring onion, 008 white onion, large cabbage, green beans, spinach, endive, parsley, periwinkle, scorsonera. AUGUST. Sow: white onion, turnip, winter lettuces and romaine, black radish, sorrel, spinach, raiponce, large head and cabbage, Yorck cabbage, sugarloaf cabbage, carrot, parsnip, lamb's lettuce, green beans, scorzonera, chervil, parsley, white vetch. SEPTEMBER. Sow: everything listed for July and August; cauliflower, Yorck cabbage, early cabbage, large head cabbage, angelica, carrot, chervil, chives, endive, lettuce, lamb's lettuce, parsnip, turnip, rabe, horseradish, arugula. Plant: artichoke, strawberry, Jerusalem artichoke. OCTOBER. Sow: Chickpea, lamb's lettuce, spinach, chervil, crepe lettuce, passion lettuce, shell lettuce, gotte, early romaine, artichoke, asparagus, spring onion, coriander, parsnip, salad burnet, turnip, horseradish, radish, rocket. Plant: hyssop, lavender, sorrel, Jerusalem artichoke. NOVEMBER. Sow: michaux peas, lettuce, watercress, radish, turnip, chives, parsnips; in the south sow asparagus, and plant garlic and rocambola. DECEMBER. Sow: radishes, turnips, watercress, lettuce, broad beans, parsnips, peas. In the vegetable garden, as throughout this book, we will indicate annual plants by this sign Q; biennials, by this one o; perennials, 209 by this other Z, and finally those that are woody, by this one D. ABSINTHE (GRANDE), ABSINTHE ROMAINE, ALUINE. (Artemisia absinthium; L.) 2. Indigenous. This aromatic plant is used every day; it is used to make liqueurs and is taken as an infusion in many circumstances. It thrives in all soils and withstands the harshest winters; but to preserve its full aroma, it must be placed in a warm location, where it lasts for fifteen to twenty years. It can be propagated from seed, but more easily from splinters or rooted shoots, which are separated and planted in autumn or spring. PETITE ABSINTHE or ABSINTHE PONTIQUE (artemisia pontica, L.) is native to Italy and the shores of the Black Sea. It is suitable for the same uses, and is cultivated like the other. GARLIC. (Allium sativum; L.) 2. this bulbous plant, like the following one, belongs to the Liliaceae family, originating in Sicily and southern France, and has been cultivated since antiquity. Little used in Paris and northern France, it is widely consumed in the south, in Italy, Spain and even Germany. However, the strong odor it imparts to the breath of those who have eaten it makes many people reject it, and almost everywhere it is relegated to the kitchen of the poor and the country dweller. Garlic grows well in all soils, but prefers those that are light and a little sandy, substantial and warm. It very rarely bears seed; more often than not, the pistil metamorphoses into soboles or bulbils, which are planted and treated like cloves, but only produce beautiful heads in the second year. If you were to collect seed by chance, sowing it would undoubtedly produce a more robust race, but you'd have to wait longer. The usual way to multiply this plant is to separate the cloves and treat them as we shall see. In the cold, damp lands of northern France, we plant towards the end of March and even the beginning of April, and we barely cover with soil to avoid rotting; in the south, we plant in November, and even better in February; in the vicinity of Paris, and in most of France, at the end of February or in March. You plant them in beds and rays, four or five inches apart in all directions, and one, two or three inches deep, or in borders, but in soil that has been loosened and amended, if necessary, with a vegetable fertilizer or at least one that is very well-consumed. They are left to grow in this way without any care other than weeding and destroying the weeds, and are removed when their leaves turn yellow and begin to dry out. Before putting them into botillons, they are left on the ground for some time: the soil separates from them, and the air and heat complete their ripening by removing the moisture which might otherwise cause the head to rot, especially if the botillons were not placed in a dry place to keep them until spring. SPANISH GARLIC, ROCAMBOLE. (Allium scorodoprasum; L.) 7. This species, less widespread than the preceding one, differs mainly in its less flat, almost cylindrical leaves, its tortuous stem and its stronger odor. Few gardeners can claim to have seen its seed; it is almost always replaced by bulblets, which serve to multiply it. It can be grown in exactly the same way as its predecessor, and is used for the same purposes. In medicine, the ancients attributed a large number of virtues to this plant, almost all of which have since fallen into disuse. ALLELUIA, OXALID, LITTLE CUCKLE, CUCKLOO (oxalis acetosella L.). 2 Found in shady woods throughout most of France. In the kitchen, this little plant is used only to make salad supplies; but in the arts, it is more important, because it is from it that sorrel salt is extracted. However, poor country folk eat it in the same way as sorrel, although it is much more acidic. It grows in good, light, shady soil, amended with leaf compost, and is propagated from seed in spring, or by bursting the roots. The roots are bulbous and much sought-after by mice, which must be protected. This plant also thrives in warm, open locations, but requires a lot of watering. AMBROISIE, CHENOPODE AMBROISIE ( chenopodium ambrosoïdes L.). O From Mexico. Its sweet scent makes it ideal for infusions. Sow in spring in any soil, but in a warm location. When the plant is strong enough, it can be transplanted if it has not been sown in place. All other care consists of weeding and watering as needed. CURNOW ANANAS ( bromelia ananas L.). 2 Found in India, Africa and South America. The fruit of this beautiful plant is one of the best known, and none can compare with it in terms of fragrance, not even the strawberry. As it is still little cultivated in the provinces, we feel we should give a brief description. The pineapple is a fat plant, that is, with a fleshy substance that is more or less succulent in all its parts, which means that humidity is extremely unfavorable to it, as it rots very easily. A thick, short stem is surrounded at its base by narrow, gutter-folded leaves, one to two feet long or even longer, with short, sharp spines at their edges; their color is a more or less glaucous green. The spike at the end of the stem is tightly packed and ovoid, with a large number of bluish flowers. These flowers are followed by red, yellow, purple or black berries, so tightly packed together that they appear to form a single fruit, roughly the shape and regularity of a pine cone. The stem extends into the interior of the fruit, ending at the top in a rosette or crown of short leaves. The pineapple has a strong but pleasant odor, unique to it and unrelated to any other fruit; its flavor is acidic and sweet, and the juice of the berries is so caustic that it partially oxidizes the blade of a knife implanted in it in a very short time. If eaten a lot, it can scald, but we've never seen it ulcerate the tongue or palate, as it's said to do. Several varieties are grown, differing in shape, color, size and fragrance. Here is a list of those that are the most successful in our gardens. 1° RED LEAF ANANAS (ananas rubra). Oval fruit, very elongated, same color as the foliage, turning a pleasant yellow when ripe; its berries are of average size, and we have seen as many as sixteen and eighteen on each spiral row, giving the fruit fifteen to sixteen inches in length. It has been cultivated for a very long time, but has remained rare, because it is more delicate and has fewer eyelets than the others. 2° AvANAS PITTE or GREEN (ananas viridis). Small fruit, 909 but much more fragrant than the larger species. Its ripeness can only be recognized by its very strong odor, and a slight yellowish tint. Still rare. 3° PINEAPPINES WITH LARGE PURPLE FRUITS (ananas macrocama violacea). Very large berries, few in number, which gives the fruit a rounded shape, acidic, not very fragrant, sometimes developing into seedlings of which we have noticed up to seven on a single apple, which greatly reduces its size. This very vigorous plant is not very hardy, because it can be multiplied by its seedlings; moreover, its beauty alone would be enough to make it cultivated as a pleasure plant. 4° ANANAS NOUVEAU A CROS FRUITS (ananas nova macrocarpa). We have recently been growing this new variety, whose fruit is said to grow so large that it sometimes weighs eighteen to twenty pounds. As ours have not yet borne fruit, we cannot guarantee this. Its leaves resemble those of the apple pineapple, but are larger and wider. 5° ANANAS GÉANT (pineapple gigantea). Its leaves, reaching four to six feet in length, are soft green, not covered with glaucous dust, deeply canaliculated, and with teeth spaced far apart. A stem two and a half to three feet long bears a fruit that is lemon-yellow when ripe, with probing flesh, sweet, but less fragrant than in other species; the berries, about an inch in diameter, sometimes number up to ten in each row, making the fruit nine to ten inches high. We recommend this beautiful plant to pineapple lovers, as it is less delicate and easier to grow than the others. 6° ANANAS DE LA PROVIDENCE (ananas providentialis ). This variety, rare in France and very common in England, has leaves slightly tinted violet when young, and broader than those of the other species. The fruit is very large, yellow when ripe, often weighing five to six pounds, and the flesh is not as fine as the others. 7° ANANAS EN PAIN DE SUCRE (ananas prramidalis). One of the *OCI most cultivated in France, because of the beauty and fragrance of its excellent fruit, elongated, yellow, with berries smaller than those of the reinette apple pineapple. 8° PYRAMIDAL ANANAS WITH PANCHED LEAVES (ananas prramidalis variegata). A sub-variety of the preceding one, to which it resembles the fruit, but its leaves are alternately striped red, green and yellowish. It is very rare. 9° -ANANANAS WITHOUT SPINES (ananas inermis ). Rounded fruit, f a pale saffron color, washed with pale violet, good, but a little stringy and tart. Rare. 10° ANANAS PEU ÉPINEUX (pineapple vix spinosa). Rounded fruit, whose berries are larger than the previous one, but have the defect of sometimes splitting when ripe; they are lemon-yellow. This pineapple is not very fragrant, and its flesh is a little stringy. It is still rare. 11° ANANAS PONIME DE REINETTE (ananas rotunda). Its fruit, one of the best, is rounded, with fairly large, yellow berries. Its leaves are whitish, gutter-shaped and not very spiny. It is generally cultivated. 12° PANCHED LEAF ANANAS (ananas variegata). The fruit of this sub-variety of the preceding one is slightly smaller, less fragrant, and never acquires such a brilliant yellow color. Leaves are variegated with white or yellow. Rare. 13° ANANAS NEGRE (pineapple nigra). Its fruit, initially very black, turns a little yellow as it ripens. It has the same shape as the pineapple pomine de reinette, but its berries are smaller and a little less fragrant. This variety is very rare. 14° ANANAS A FAUIT BLANC (ananas alba). Mentioned by Dumont de Courset and all his copyists, but we have never seen it. 15° ANANAS DE MONSERRAT (ananas flava). We have never seen its fruit. The compilers have still indicated a YELLOW ANANAS AFRUIT, pineapple aurea, because the above-mentioned author mentioned it; but as its name suits 2. 10 2000 almost all pineapples, we think that this variety duplicates one of those we have described; perhaps with the pineapple pomme de reinette, whose berries are golden yellow. Some gardeners in Paris claim that the pineapple has become somewhat acclimatized since it was first cultivated in France, i.e. in the last century or so. This is an error that no doubt stems from the fact that they began growing them with delicate varieties, which they have since replaced with more robust ones. As for me, having been brought up in the vegetable gardens of the Royal Gardens at Brunoy, where my father, who ran them for nearly 40 years, raised six thousand pineapple plants every year, I can confirm, from his experience and my own, that this plant is as delicate and as difficult to grow today as it was when it was first introduced to France. The first thing to take care of when growing pineapples is to obtain: 1° suitable soil; 2° pots of the right proportions; 3° frames; 4° a tarpaulin if you don't have a greenhouse; 5° layers; 6° a barrel, split on one side, which you place in one of the corners of the greenhouse or tarpaulin, and in which you leave the water to warm up for three or four days before using it. When water is used, it should always be at the temperature of the greenhouse, or at least at eight or ten degrees on a thermometer immersed in it. The most suitable soils for this type of cultivation are: 1° free soil; 2° amended garden soil; 3° heather soil. They are prepared a year in advance by placing them in piles, which are stirred and remade three or four times a year. The older they are, the better they are. The fertilizers you mix into them must be highly consumed; they consist of potting soils, 1° from 00 horses; 2° from cows; 3° from sheep; 4° from leaves; 5° in colombine; 6° in poudrette. These soils and potting soils should be placed in a shed, sheltered from the rain but exposed to all atmospheric influences. Mixtures should be made as described above, and never used as trophumides. However, if you don't have access to all these materials, you shouldn't give up on this interesting culture, as you could still succeed with a mixture, in equal portions, of good garden soil, horse potting soil and heather soil. If you didn't have the latter, you could replace it almost as advantageously with leaf compost. Pineapple pots, see pl. 12, fig. 1 and a, should be of a more elongated shape than the pots usually used for other plants; they should be no wider at the opening than at the bottom, which should be pierced with five round holes, and five slits around the perimeter, as shown in fig. 2. They should come in three sizes: the first will be from three to five inches in diameter; they will be used to hold eyelets, seedlings and crowns. The second will be seven to eight inches in diameter, to hold plants. The third will be eight to nine inches in diameter, and will be used for plants in good standing. For circumstances that may arise, it's a good idea to have some in between. A tarpaulin may suffice, at a pinch, to cultivate these precious plants and guide them from their first planting to the ripening of the fruit; but the result is that, as the fruit all ripens at the same time, there is a lot of it in one season, and a shortage during the rest of the year. So, as we've said, it's better to have frames, a tarpaulin and a greenhouse. 9O6 Here's how to build the tarpaulin. Choose a spot in the part of the garden where the soil will be the least humid, and open a trench four feet deep and seven and a half feet wide. Its length, from east to west, is indeterminate: it will depend on the number of plants you wish to grow. A wall one foot thick will be erected to support the walls of the trench, coy. pl. 12, fig. 3, A,A; it will be four feet high on the front, which will face south, B, and six and a half feet high on the back, i.e., on the north side, C; necessarily, the inside of the tarpaulin will be five and a half feet wide, which is the most advantageous proportion. On one of the sides facing east or west, there will be a small door, b, eighteen inches wide, reached by a staircase that will need to be covered with a roof, to divert rainwater, which would otherwise carry moisture into the tarpaulin. If we wanted to build a stove, which is essential for people who don't have a greenhouse, we'd build it according to the principles we taught in our first volume, and the pipe, H, would pass under the pathway. The tarpaulin is completed by covering it with glass panels, D, like the greenhouse. On the inside, an eighteen-inch-wide pathway, E, is cut in the front, leaving only four feet for the bed, F, which is separated from the pathway by a field brick, G, L, or by a three-foot-high plank partition. All that remains is to prepare the layers. These are made with warm donkey, horse or mule manure, mixed with old manure or hornbeam or oak leaves, depending on the circumstances. - 00 Beds are made from this, which are trodden and trampled on as much as possible to give them strength, and are raised, as indicated in I, I, to two-thirds or three-quarters of the height of the bed. We cover these beds with enough tan, K, K, to be able to push the pots into them, a, a, a, without their bottoms touching the manure. Sometimes new tan is used, i.e. tan that has not yet been used as a bed; sometimes a mixture of new and old is used. This depends on the circumstances described below. The frame will be six feet long and four feet wide. Its trunk will be proportionate to the height of the plants, and the inclination of the stained-glass windows will be the same as that of the tarpaulin we have illustrated. As for the hot greenhouse, as its shape is nothing special, we refer to its article in our first volume. MULTIPLICATION. Pineapples multiply by the offshoots that grow at the foot of old stems, by the crown that tops the fruit, and sometimes by the seedlings that the berries provide. To obtain sturdy offshoots, as soon as the fruit has been cut from old plants, the base should be cleaned of any heavy leaves that might shade the offshoots or drain them of sap; they should be left attached to the stump, and instead of removing it, it should be plunged back into the bed, which should be warmed by adding a third of new tan well mixed with the old. These old stumps should be managed in the same way as other plants, so that the eyelets are not separated until spring. However, this method, which increases cultivation costs, should only be used for shoots that are too young to be detached immediately; those that are strong enough should be removed with care; look to see if they have any 908 damaged parts, and if so, remove anything that is diseased, cutting to the quick; also remove the leaves closest to the collar, but only when they may interfere with planting. To detach the crowns, twist them as close as possible to the fruit, unite the wound by cutting away any tears the twisting may have caused, and then treat them in the same way as the eyelets. Place them in a dry, shady spot and leave them there for eight or fifteen days, more or less, until the wounds are perfectly dry; without this precaution, the plant would rot. PLANTING. Pineapples need to be planted twice: once to get them going again, and again to prepare them for fruiting. We assume that it will bear fruit in the second year; otherwise, if it is kept longer, it must be transplanted every year. It is never the age of a plant that determines whether or not it will bear fruit, but rather its strength. However, it is usually ready to bear fruit in the third year. Planting eyelets, crowns and seedlings. This is done at the time when the fruit is eaten, usually from June to October, or in spring for carnations that were too weak the previous year, i.e. from February to May. Pots are available from three inches in diameter up to seven, and are chosen in proportion to the size of the individuals. A bed of coarse sand or coarsely crushed oyster shells, from four lines to an inch thick, depending on the size of the pot, is placed at the bottom; a handful of cow potting soil mixed with a third of poudrette is thrown on top, then the pot is filled with a compound soil in proportion to the strength of the plants. For weak crowns, seedlings and O0 carnations, mix equal portions of soil and fertilizer as follows: 1° one-third frank soil, one-third garden soil and one-third heather soil; 2° for the fertilizer, half horse potting soil, one-quarter cow potting soil, one-quarter sheep potting soil, or leaf potting soil, or pigeon potting soil. For stronger grommets, two-thirds of the mixture will be frank soil, one-sixth garden soil and the same amount of heather soil. Fertilizer remains the same. Using all five fingers, we make a hole in the middle of the pot into which we throw very fine, very dry sand; into this sand we press the eyelets or crowns up to the birth of the first leaves, i.e. to a depth of one inch or fifteen lines, and we press the earth around the collar so that the plant is firmly held. The pots of young pineapples are placed in this layer, with the precaution of spacing them far enough apart so that they don't wither, and of placing them as close as possible to the stained-glass windows, which greatly helps their recovery; However, care must be taken to ensure that their leaves do not touch the glass, as this would cause them to receive the moisture that the vapour from the coating deposits against the glass during the night; the drops of water would run into the heart of the plant and cause it to rot. With the help of cloths and mats, which are removed or placed according to how hot the sun is, a temperature of eighteen to twenty-four degrees is constantly maintained until the plants recover. It's only twenty days after planting that we give them their first moderate watering; but before doing so, we need to make sure that the plants already have roots, because we never wet them before, unless the soil is absolutely dry. Watering is increased as the roots become stronger. In other words, once they have recovered, they should be given air, gradually at first, and then, once they have become accustomed to it, whenever the weather permits. When the sun is too hot, cover the frame with canvas or straw mats, otherwise the leaves will turn red; and once a plant has taken on this color, which is a sign of disease, it is very difficult to make it green again. Young plants should be protected from the sun until they recover. They should be treated as described above until mid-November, when they are taken out of the frame and transported to the tarpaulin or greenhouse. Planting trained plants. This is nothing more than a kind of repotting. It can be done month by month, from January 15th to April 15th, and is the best way to avoid bringing all the plants forward at the same time, and thus extend the fruiting season. Weak carnations from the previous year are also planted during this period. Formed plants can be planted in one of three ways: 1° bare-bottomed; 2° with roots; 3° with a root ball. For bare-bottom planting, the pineapple is unfolded, all the soil is shaken from the roots, and the roots are cut off at the collar, removing any parts that are rotten or too long or too woody. The plant is then exposed to the sun in a dry place to heal the wounds, where it is left for twenty-four hours to five or six days, depending on the degree of desiccation of the atmosphere. Pineapples that are to be planted with roots are removed and cleaned of all soil like the previous ones, but instead of cutting the roots, we simply remove those that are dead or diseased, and take care not to touch the others: they must be replanted immediately. Those planted in clods are removed from their pots, taking care not to break the clod of earth surrounding their roots, which must also be left intact. The top of the soil is peeled off, and the soil removed is replaced by a more substantial one. Rooted and mounded planting can only be used on pineapples that are already marking. The first of these three methods delays them considerably, the second less, and the third little. In all cases, before replanting, the leaves must be scrupulously cleaned of any garbage they may contain, and peeled to remove any that are rotten or dry, as well as those which, because of their poor position, would interfere with the planting. Lice and bedbugs are removed with a small flat stick, dropped into a vase and burned. Peelings containing any of these insects should also be burned, or at least removed from the garden. The cleaning operation should be carried out in a place far enough away from the tarpaulin so that the insects can't get inside. The leaves should not be washed with a sponge, as some authors say, as this would remove the glaucous dust that covers them, and the plants would suffer as a result. Instead, a fine rain should be sprayed on them, using a sprayer riddled with a very large number of small holes. The best specific measures we have used to prevent the damage caused by these extremely harmful animals are frequent basins, and a mixture of ash and sulphur flower sprinkled on the plant, which the humidity fixes on the leaves. O6 Pots are then chosen in suitable proportions, i.e. from seven inches to nine; they are filled as we have already said, and the pineapples are placed in them in the same way. If planting early, it is essential to sow the pots two or three days in advance in the tannin of the bed, in order to warm the soil with which they have been filled. Rooted and clodded plants are planted in the same way as other delicate plants. The latter should be watered moderately, if the soil is dry; if it is damp, watering should be dispensed with; but those planted with a bare root ball should be watered only after the roots have formed, as we have already said. A fortnight or three weeks in advance, a layer of one third new manure, one third old manure and one third dry leaves, well mixed and crushed, is prepared in the tarpaulin. We wait until the layer has lost its excessive heat before covering it with tan, in which we place the pots when it has reached the required degree of heat. To be sure, we probe the layer from time to time; if it is too hot, we run the risk of burning the young roots of pineapples that have not been planted bare-bottomed. So probe with a thermometer sunk a foot deep into the tan, and don't put the pots in until the heat has dropped to thirty or thirty-five degrees. The temperature of the tarpaulin must be maintained at twelve or fifteen degrees; and recovery will take place in twenty days. Stained-glass windows are covered with canvas while the sun is blazing, to avoid reddening. Every evening, until June, doormats are laid over the windows to prevent the cool night air from penetrating the interior, and light sprinklings are given from time to time without wetting the leaves. When the recovery is perfect, i.e. during June, July and August, we use the fine-hole sheaf fitted to the end of a syringe: and we water the whole plant to clean and refresh its leaves; we continue this operation until the first days of September, when we must begin to stop wetting the foliage. PINEAPPLE MANAGEMENT. This consists in giving them the care they need: 1° to keep them healthy and vigorous; 2° to bring them to fruit. To preserve them, they require two different types of management: summer and winter. Summer management. We have already described how to manage crowns, seedlings and carnations, from their planting to the first frosts, but only when they have been planted from July to August; those planted since spring can be managed in the same way as we have described for trained plants. Here's how to care for them in general. Whenever the weather permits, air is given. From time to time, we probe the layers to see if they retain sufficient heat. Moisture is prevented as far as possible from penetrating the tarpaulin, and if it does, plenty of air is given during the heat of the day to wipe it out. We keep an eye on the plants to destroy parasitic insects as they appear, and to promptly remedy those that are suffering. As soon as a pineapple is found to be diseased, it is stripped, its roots and neck scrupulously inspected, and any parts attacked by rot are removed to the bone. The wounds are left to dry, and the plants are replanted bare-assed. In August, a little earlier or a little later, depending on whether the layers have retained their warmth, all the pineapples are lifted to warm the layers. If this operation is carried out at the beginning of August or even earlier, half of the new tan is added, which is mixed perfectly with the old, and the heat is maintained for two and a half to three months; if they are renewed in the middle of the month or later, only a third or a quarter of the new tan is added, which keeps them warm for one and a half to two months. These changes must be made very quickly, so that the plants don't have time to suffer. If you fear that the layers will close too much, which could burn the roots, you should only push the pots in halfway until they have regained the degree of heat we have indicated. Winter management. At the end of September, or the beginning of October, choose a day when the sun's rays still have some warmth, and transport the pineapples from the frames and tarpaulin to a warm greenhouse, where they are given the same care as other delicate succulents: when you bring them in, take extreme care to drain them well. If you don't have a greenhouse, you can replace them in the tarpaulin on a new layer made as follows, and fifteen to twenty days in advance. Take new, dry, soft manure, mix in a third or half of dry leaves to capture the moisture, and prepare the layer very high, because it will sag quite a bit during the winter. Cover with a layer of new and old tan, half by half, which has been left to dry for some time in the sun, or by laying it out in a ventilated shed if bad weather has prevented it from being put outside. Water in such a way as never to wet the leaves, especially the heart of the plant, which would inevitably cause it to rot. To do this, use a watering can with a very long, very narrow neck, or a small, portable runner that you fit over each pot as you want to direct the water into it. As soon as the frosts start to make themselves felt and you can no longer give air to the plants on a daily basis, you stop watering them, and only give them water, in very small quantities, when the soil threatens to dry out completely. Two or three sprinklings are usually enough for one winter. Keep a thermometer in the tarpaulin, which should be consulted regularly twice every twenty-four hours, and which should be kept at eight or ten degrees for mature plants, and twelve or fifteen degrees for fruiting plants. If the warmth of the beds is not enough to maintain this temperature, turn on the furnace. In the Paris climate, there are often days during the winter when the thermometer rises to six, seven or eight degrees for a few hours. It's a good idea to take advantage of this to renew the air in the pineapples. Needless to say, during the coldest weather, the stained-glass windows will remain covered with a thick bed of litter, which will be removed and replaced whenever necessary. Every evening, until the spring planting, and even beyond, we spread this litter or straw mats over the glass. Training for fruiting. Any trained plant, whether one or three years old, can bear fruit within the year if cultivated accordingly. In March, a bed is prepared, either in a tarpaulin or in a frame, in the same way as we said for winter management, but the warmest manure is used, and it is covered absolutely with new tan. In this way, we keep it at a temperature of thirty to thirty-five degrees; and, if the layer were not sufficient for this, we would heat it by means of the furnace. It doesn't take long for the plants to start flowering. During the flowering period, we water from the neck up, scrupulously maintaining the same temperature level at twenty-five or thirty degrees; but when the flowering period is over and the fruiting is assured, we resume the sheaf watering that we were able to start in mid-May, with the precaution, however, of wetting the bed as little as possible so as not to cool it. When the season gets hot, and you can give air more often, you increase the number of sprinklings. Especially when you want to bring pineapples to fruit, it's essential to use lukewarm water in the greenhouse. When you see that the fruit is approaching maturity, i.e. a fortnight or three weeks ahead of time, you need to take care with the watering so as not to make them too watery and rob them of some of their fragrance. If you were afraid of having too many fruits at once, despite the precautions taken when transplanting, you could bring some forward and delay others with the greatest of ease. All you need to do is give fifteen degrees of heat to the ones you want to delay, shade them with straw mats during very hot spells, give them air more often, and place a few suction cups in the layer to make it evaporate some of its heat. If you want to bring them forward, do the opposite of what we've just said, and keep the temperature at eighteen degrees. You can tell when a pineapple is perfectly ripe by its color, and even more by its smell. ANGELICA (Angelica archangelica, L.) g. Grows spontaneously in the Alps, Austria and Lapland. It sometimes lives for three years. Its young stems and leaf ribs are preserved in sugar, and its seeds and leaves are used to make sugared almonds and liqueurs. It does well in all types of soil; however, it prefers free, substantial, moist soil, where it often reaches five or six feet in height. It is usually self-sown, but when brought into a garden, its seeds are thrown into the ground in March or September, with the precaution of covering them very lightly. If it has been sown in a nursery, it is transplanted into very loose, loamy soil as soon as the plant is strong enough; it is weeded a few times, especially when young, and watered in dry summers; if it has been sown in situ, it requires less care. As winter approaches, when its stems have dried out, we cover it with a little compost. In May or June of the second year, we begin to cut it back to the ground and bevel it, taking care to leave a stem to provide seed. ANISE, BOUcAGE. (Pimpinella anisum, L.) g. Native to the Orient. Only the seed is used, which confectioners use to make dragées called Anis in the trade; it is also used to make liqueurs. This plant likes light, warm, well-disturbed soil, in which to sow it in March or April, in beds or borders. Wet the soil to help germination, thin out the plant when it is strong enough, weed as needed and water in dry weather. The seed is collected in August from the stems, which are cut to the ground, left to dry in the sun for a few days and then beaten to detach them. The following spring, the plant sprouts new shoots that produce a new crop, and then perishes. The seed keeps well for three years. PEANUT, PISTÁCHE DE FERRE. (Arachys hypogœa, L.) O. of Mexico. Its seed, resembling a large bean, is eaten cooked in water or under hot ashes; it yields an excellent oil, comparable to the best olive oil. This plant was brought over about twenty-five years ago from the Spanish colonies, where it is widely cultivated; it was very successful in the Landes department, but the difficulty of disposing of its products, which are unknown in the trade, has almost generally led to its abandonment. - Peanuts do very well in light, sandy, warm soils; but the peculiar way in which they ripen their seeds will always prevent them from being grown in strong, compact or stony soils. After flowering, the pods incline towards the ground, sink into it, grow and reach their half-mature point. As it grows quite rapidly, we think it could be grown advantageously in all parts of France where corn ripens. In spring, when the soil is warm enough to germinate the seeds entrusted to it, we prepare and loosen the soil as well as possible, and at a good exposure; we amend it, if necessary, with well-consumed potting soil, or even better with plant debris, well decomposed and matured in piles for several years. Sow by broadcasting if you're growing in a large area; but in a garden, it's better to make furrows two inches deep and one foot apart. Throw the seeds in one by one; at fifteen-inch intervals, cover with soil and compost, and water lightly. To hasten germination, soak the seed in water for forty-eight hours before sowing. To make it easier for the pod to sink in, the soil should be kept very loose, and hoeing carried out a little before flowering. Weeds are weeded and removed. Harvesting is very easy; all you have to do is pull the kernels out of the ground, with or without the pod. ARROCHE DES JARDINS, IRIBLE, BONNE-DAME, BELLEDAME, FOLLETTE, CHOU D'AMOUR ou D'ARMOU. (Atriplex hortensis; L.) Q. Native to Tartary. This plant is rarely grown in gardens, except to sweeten the acidity of sorrel with its insipidity. There are three varieties; the first has yellowish 00-green leaves, the second pale red and the third dark red. All three grow to three or four feet, or more in good soil, and have broad, toothed, triangular leaves. As it is usually used in the kitchen as a substitute for pear, it should be sown in early spring, to be enjoyed before the latter produces its leaves. It thrives in all types of soil, but requires some watering in dry, light soils. In any case, it requires no further care, and usually reseeds itself. Its seed is very light, and would be easily scattered by the winds if we waited until it was ripe before picking it; we must therefore cut the stems as soon as the first seeds ripen, dry them in a sheltered place, and shake them on a cloth to collect the seeds. Some authors, struck by the speed with which arroche grows, have suggested that it can provide green fodder at the start of winter and in spring. It remains to be seen whether livestock would do well with its stalks, which harden quickly. COMMON ARTICHOKE. (Cynara scolymus, L.) 7. From Barbary. Everyone knows the use of this beautiful plant, of which several varieties are cultivated. The most widespread and the best are: 1° The GREEN one, of medium size, a little flattened at the top, with very open leaves or scales (or leaflets of the involucre). It is quite tender, but its cultivation has been almost entirely abandoned in favor of the following variety. 2° GROS VERT DE LAON, the most widely grown around Paris, and the best of all. It resembles the previous variety in shape, but with proper cultivation in good, well-watered soil, it becomes very large, reaching up to five inches in diameter. 3° GROS CAmUS DE BRETACNE, earlier, flatter and 2. 20 009 a few months wider than the previous one, but paler green. We owe this variety to M. Féburier of Versailles. 4° Le BLANC, even earlier than the previous one, quite tender, but very small. Not only is it flattened, but the middle of its head is even sunken; its scales end in a sharp, prickly point. This variety has become very rare. 5° The VIOLET, of mediocre size, early, with green scales, washed with violet-red at their tips, and fitted with a spine. Its shape is more elongated. It is most commonly grown in the provinces. It is excellent raw, eaten with pepper. 6° ROUCE, thought to be a sub-variety of the previous one. It is purple-red on the outside, but has a yellow heart. Its shape is the same as that of the violet, but it is much smaller. Eaten raw, it is the most delicate of all when young; if left to grow, its flesh becomes hard and indigestible. 7° GENESE SUGAR. Like the red, it is only good raw, but is even more delicate. It is very small, bristling with spines; its flesh is yellow, and its scales pale green. We don't grow it much, because it degenerates quickly, and we have to bring in carnations from Genoa every two years if we want to have it at its best. Artichokes like open, deep soil. They can be propagated from seed, but as the varieties do not keep well by sowing, it is customary to propagate them by eyelet. We will describe how to operate and cultivate in both cases. Propagation by sowing. To obtain seed, the best artichoke heads are left to flower, with care taken to prevent moisture from penetrating the scales and rotting the seeds; to do this, they are sheltered by some means during the rain, or they are simply tilted little by little and secured in this position, so that water runs down the sides without penetrating to the receptacle. When you see them about to detach themselves, you cut off the heads and squeeze them in a dry place; thus preserved on their receptacle, the seeds remain good for seven or eight years. In the climate of Paris, good seeds are only available in warm years, but in more southerly countries they are available every year. In February or March, prepare a warm bed; sow in pots or on compost, and cover with a frame; in May or June, transplant the young plant in the open ground, as we shall say for carnations. If sowing in the ground, wait until late April or early May. After ploughing and loosening the soil, and giving it the fertilizer it needs, line up the furrows and throw the seeds in fairly close together, as it would be better to have to thin out the plant than to run out if not all the seeds sprouted. We cover the furrows with half an inch of soil, and finish filling them with an inch of compost. Water, weed if necessary and, when the young plants are strong enough to withstand the trausplantation, carefully lift them and treat them like eyelets. If you want to sow in place, work the soil accordingly, i.e. break it up and amend it with good fertilizer in autumn, and plough and loosen it in spring before sowing. Three feet apart in all directions, make four or five small holes one inch deep and two or three inches apart, place a seed in each one, cover with potting soil and water; when the plant has risen, leave only one in each place, and pull out the others to transplant where they are missing. Plants sown in pots almost always bear fruit in autumn, and this happens quite often to those sown in the ground, especially when the year has been 1 hot and they have not been given enough water. This method of propagation would therefore be advantageous, because the artichokes are more vigorous; but unfortunately one runs the risk of having only mediocre or even bad fruit, after having chosen the best seed. The safest thing to do is to obtain carnations of a good variety, and plant them as we shall say. Multiplication by eyelets. As soon as the artichokes have grown sufficiently to be easily distinguished from the mothers destined to bear fruit, which usually happens in April, we dig up the stalks a little, but without penetrating to the roots; then, passing the hand or a wooden pallet between the stump and the sucker, we detach the latter without injuring it; we remove all those which are there, good and bad, to rid the mother and prevent a loss of sap detrimental to the size of its fruit. We choose from among these carnations those whose neck is formed by a kind of bead called a nut, and especially, by preference, those which have already put down some roots. The others are discarded as being of dubious quality. This operation, as well as planting, can also be carried out in September; but artichokes that are too young are more sensitive to frost, and rot more easily in wet winters. If you don't already have artichokes, you can buy carnations at the market or elsewhere, but be careful to choose them as we have said, as those without nuts don't produce until four or five months later, when you manage to get them to recover. Once the soil has been prepared, as for sowing in place, choose a rainy day and plant the eyelets two and a half feet apart in slightly thin soils, and three feet apart in those where vigorous vegetation is expected. Place two of them six inches apart, so as to always have a well-stocked square in case some of them die. Care should be taken not to bury them too deeply, to avoid rotting, and to press the soil tightly around the nut, to fix them firmly in the ground. Only cut off the tips of the leaves when the plants have suffered, and water as necessary, sheltering them for a few days from the sun's scorching rays. If spring frosts are still to be feared, they should be protected with a large bedding plant. Cultivated, weeded and watered sufficiently, a good proportion of these carnations will bear fruit in autumn, and all will bear abundant fruit the following spring. Artichokes fear cold and rot to about the same degree, which makes them very difficult to store over winter. In dry soils, it's enough to butter the plants and cover the leaves with dry leaves or litter, but this isn't enough in wet soils. In wet soils, you need to open gutters between each row of artichokes, and use the soil removed to butter the plants. Cover the entire square, with the exception of the gutters, with a layer of dry manure, which is made thicker around each plant; taking care not to put the manure in contact with the plants, which are placed as if at the bottom of a funnel: cover this funnel with dry litter during frosts, and comb the straw from the litter so as to keep rainwater away from the plants. Whenever the weather gets milder and the sun comes out, we remove the litter and replace it before dark. No matter how you manage the artichokes during the winter, it's rare that they haven't turned a little white. To prevent them from being caught by the sun's rays, they should be gradually uncovered and sheltered from the sun until they have regained their normal color: the covers should not be removed entirely until the slightest frost is no longer to be feared. In the south of France, particularly around Montpellier, when an artichoke head has reached a quarter or a third of its size, the stalk is split five or six inches below the head, and a piece of wood is inserted from one end to the other, holding the two halves of the stem apart. It is claimed that this method considerably enlarges the apple. Artichoke leaf ribs can be used in place of cardoons, and are even more delicate; thus, when you want to destroy a square, you can still obtain this product by delaying its destruction for three weeks, which is enough time to blanch the ribs by treating them absolutely like cardoons. See this article. COMMON ASPARAGUS (Asparagus officinalis; L.) g. Native. Everyone knows how this plant is used. In the past, there were three varieties: large, medium and wild, but these distinctions are completely arbitrary, and all the more ill-founded in that only the more or less careful cultivation of this excellent plant can produce these differences, which are not transmitted by the seed, or even by the roots. The same is true of the Dutch or white asparagus, the violet and the green, which some people still mistakenly regard as three varieties. Asparagus can be propagated in two ways: by sowing and by planting their roots, known as pates or claws. They like light, substantial soil. Sowing. They can be sown in nurseries or in the field. For the former, prepare the soil by ploughing, mixing fertilizer, hoeing and loosening. In October or November in countries where winter is not severe, and when sowing in dry, light soil, in March or April in the Paris area and in heavy, damp soil, we broadcast the seeds and cover them with half an inch of compost. The young plant is raised after forty days, weeded and watered as needed, and thinned out if too thick. In autumn, cut off all stems and cover the seedling with three inches of compost or light soil. The following year, the same care is taken, if the plant has not already been uprooted in spring and replanted in situ. Sowing in place is done in a completely different way. The ground is prepared in the same way as for planting, and in the places marked for the claws a small hole one inch deep is made, in which four or five seeds are sown and covered with compost. As soon as the plant has sprouted, we pull out part of it, so as to leave only one plant in each spot. The first year is treated like a seedling in a nursery, and the following years like a plantation. This method is advantageous, because it produces stronger asparagus; but you can't start cutting them until a year later than those planted. Planting. This is done in March for the Paris climate, earlier or later in warmer or colder countries, in beds or squares, prepared the previous autumn. The first method is more advantageous when you have a large plot of land, and the second is more suitable for small gardens. We'll describe them both below. Before planting, if you haven't sown your own seedlings, it's a good idea to get some claws. They should be selected as freshly plucked as possible, and preference should be given to those that are two years old. Younger plants suffer more from replanting, especially when they have to travel; older plants do not do well. The best ones have long, loose, white roots. Before planting, they should be carefully inspected, and any damaged or fractured roots cut off. For planting in beds, four-foot-wide beds are drawn along the length of the land. The first will be dug into a pit, and the soil from the excavation thrown over the second; the third will also be dug, the fourth will form an ados like the second; and so on. Each pit is given a depth of two feet in dry land, and three in wet; this excess is filled with rubble, plaster, gravel and other materials capable of sanitizing the soil and allowing water to run off easily. A foot-thick bed of cow manure, or other good fertilizer, is thrown into the bottom of the pit, and well tamped down so that it sinks as little as possible. We prepare the soil from the excavation by passing it over a rack, and mixing it with much-consumed fertilizers, of which we will use a greater or lesser proportion, depending on whether the soil is stronger or weaker, as the essential thing is to make it light and substantial. A three-inch-thick bed is spread out and raked together. Four or five months in advance, you draw three equally-spaced lines with a chalk line, and place the claws in staggered rows, fifteen or eighteen inches apart, with the precaution of placing them on a small mound of potting soil, so as to elevate the eye and spread the roots by tilting them a little. The whole bed is then covered with three inches of soil prepared in the same way as the one below, and taken from ados that can be grown as salads, supplies, etc. We water, pull out the weeds and, in November, after cutting the stems, we cover with a new layer of soil three inches thick. The following spring, hoe carefully to avoid cutting the roots, weed and water. When autumn arrives, we cover with three or four fingers of good, well-consumed manure, which we bury the following year by hoeing in spring and reloading in autumn with two or three inches of soil. Each asparagus claw lasts only three years, but a new one forms during this interval, and always above the old one it is intended to replace; so that, if you don't take the precaution of replenishing the soil each year, it will soon be at the surface, unable to form any more, and the plant will be lost. If you want the asparagus to be constantly beautiful for the duration of the asparagus plantation, i.e. for fifteen or twenty years, take the precaution of giving it a layer of good, well-consumed manure every two years, buried as we have said. In cold, compact soils, horse manure mixed with a little colombine or poudrette is ideal; in hot, dry soils, cow manure is preferable. Leached ashes work very well in all soils. An asparagus plant begins to produce in the third year; but this first time, only the largest asparagus should be cut, leaving all the others so as not to exhaust the plants. In the fourth year, more asparagus is cut, and by the fifth they are in full production. Always cut with great care, so as not to injure the young shoots still hidden underground. 10 Use a knife with a blade curved at the end and a saw-toothed edge. Once the asparagus pits are level with the ground, they should not be filled with new soil each year; simply remove a three- or four-inch layer every year, and replace it with another mixed with suitable fertilizers. Planting in squares has, as we have said, the advantage of producing a greater number of asparagus plants, because, as there are no ados, all the land can be put to good use. As early as August, prepare a square of indeterminate size, using manures suited to the soil type. If the soil is hard or compact, we try to make it light by mixing in leached ashes, or sand, or even better, if available, heather soil. In the following month of March, the soil is divided into planks five feet wide, and a spade-head of earth is removed from the top of the first plank and thrown on top of the second plank; by this means, the second plank has already been dug eight to nine inches; the trench continues to be opened until it is two feet deep in dry ground, and two and a half feet deep in wet ground. The soil from this excavation is taken to a storage area. If two and a half feet have been dug in wet soil, a six-inch bed of gravel or coarse sand is placed at the bottom of the pit; in both cases, a layer of consumed manure, or any other fertilizer suitable for growing asparagus, is placed so as to replace the soil from the second dig, i.e. the pit is filled to within eight inches. The remaining eight inches will be used for planting in the same way as for the planks, i.e. first put four inches of the soil from the second plank, place the claws, and cover with the remaining four inches of the same soil. Even though it was prepared the previous autumn, we'll still add some new fertilizer. The first bed thus planted is level with the ground. We move on to the second bed, which we treat in the same way, throwing the soil on top of the third. When it's planted, you move on to the third, then the fourth, and so on to the end of the square. Treatment and cultivation are absolutely the same as for bedded asparagus. In the first year, the fertilizer settles sufficiently for the square to be reloaded with three inches of soil without heightening it; but this will not be the case in subsequent years, so the soil should be loaded as little as possible, i.e. by two or three fingers each time. The soil to be used for this purpose should be excavated and mixed with the potting soils indicated. It sometimes happens that a well-exposed asparagus plant begins to show young shoots as early as April, and that late frosts can surprise them. You can avoid this inconvenience by throwing down a large amount of bedding when you realize that the atmosphere is getting cooler. Asparagus is cut as soon as it begins to appear, and continues to be harvested until July, when cutting is stopped to avoid exhausting the plants and causing them to perish. However, from the first days of May, the most beautiful stems should be left if you want to harvest seeds; as they develop, you keep an eye on them to protect them from accidents that could harm them. The asparagus beetle, for example, is an insect that will eat them away completely if they are not protected from it. This is why we look for it and its black eggs, symmetrically arranged on the stems, and crush them. It is said that a few feet of hemp sown near asparagus plants keep these insects away, because they fear the smell. The larvae of the beetle, commonly known as the white worm, attack their roots: as soon as this is noticed, a few lettuces are sown across the beds; the larvae, which are very fond of them, leave the asparagus to attack it; and as soon as the leaves are seen to wither, a search is made at the foot of the plant, the worm is found and killed. When the asparagus seed is ripe, it turns a beautiful red; then the stalks are cut and the berries removed, which are left in a heap for two weeks to ripen. They are then crushed with the hands, and washed in a vase filled with water; the seeds sink to the bottom, where they are collected to dry in the shade and air. The asparagus with the best reputation are those from Besançon, Marchiennes, Mons, Vendôme, Gravelines, Ghent, Saar-Louis, Strasbourg, Darmstadt, Ulm, etc. These are the cities where asparagus is grown. These are the cities from which the best seeds and plants are obtained. PRIMEUR. Forced asparagus, i.e. asparagus grown at a time other than that indicated by nature, has little flavor and cannot be compared in any way to spring asparagus. However, it is sought-after because it is rare, and especially in winter, when little greenery is eaten. There are several ways of forcing asparagus; we're going to teach those that are both the safest and the least expensive. Asparagus can be forced on the spot or on a bed, with the same results; but those obtained on the spot cost less than the others, and the plants can be used several times; we therefore advise giving preference to this method. Forcing in situ. Whether you want to sow or plant, you divide your land into plots four feet wide, or only three feet wide in cold countries. A pathway two to two and a half feet wide is left between each plank. We plant with two-year-old claws, or sow exactly as we said, but space the plants less; we put them in three or four rows a foot apart, which leaves six inches on the sides, and ten inches apart along the length of the rows. For the first three years, the plantation is managed in the same way as any other. It's only when the asparagus are in full production that you can start heating them, if you don't want to risk losing your asparagus plant in a short time, which would happen if you exhausted the plants in their early youth. From November to March, depending on whether you want to have asparagus earlier or later, you dig the paths around the beds, eighteen to twenty inches deep and across their entire width. If you have portable frames, you remove the soil from the excavation; but if you don't have one, you throw it on the boards, so as to cover them by at least eight to ten inches. The earth around the edges is beaten to hold it in place, and the trenches are filled with warm horse manure, well trodden and trampled, raised five or six inches above the level of the plank, which is itself raised by the earth from the path. Six inches of hot, dry manure are placed on top of the plank, and a bed of dry litter is placed on top. The soil soon warms up, and after a fortnight or three weeks the asparagus appears. The manure is lifted and cut, then the trail stoves are reshaped, or even remade with new manure if the first has lost its heat. Every two - days we visit and cut, and every two weeks we remake the stoves. If it's a rainy winter, we change the manure covering the bed whenever it gets wet; but if it's only snowing, we can be satisfied with replacing only the bedding cover. When the weather permits, the manure cover is lifted to give the plants air; but when, on the contrary, the cold is very intense, its thickness must be increased. A bed treated in this way can produce asparagus for a month and a half or two months, after which time all the manure must be removed, the soil put back into the paths, and the asparagus left to nature's care. When spring arrives, they will grow back weakly; the following year they will recover, if not cut back, and you can start heating them again in November. In this way, a board can be heated every two years, and therefore produce alternately every other year, for eight to ten years. Those who have frames will modify their cultivation as follows: when digging paths, soil will be removed instead of being thrown onto the beds. Stoves will first be raised to ground level, then the frames will be placed, and then the stoves will continue to be raised against their chests. Only a light bed of very dry manure should be placed on the ground beneath the frames. Whenever the weather permits, air should be provided; and at night, or when it's freezing, the glasses should be covered with thick straw mats or heavy bedding. Forced bedding. At the same times as for the other on-site cultivation, we prepare layers of warm manure, eighteen to twenty inches high and four or five inches wide. When they are at their hottest, they are covered with ten inches of compost 1, to which one third of light soil has been mixed. On top of this, six inches apart, we place claws aged four years or more, on top of which we spread a two-inch bed of the same compost, and on top of this a little hot manure. Leave the bed in this state for a few days, and when you think the asparagus are about to start growing, remove the manure and replace it with three inches of new compost, after which the frames are placed. The heat of the bed is renewed by means of stoves, which are changed every time they are needed, and the frames are governed as described above. After twelve or fifteen days, the asparagus begins to produce, and we cut for as long as it lasts, i.e. for about a month, more or less. When the asparagus stops producing, the layers are destroyed and the claws discarded, as they are burnt and useless. Old claws are used for this purpose, when they can be obtained by destroying used asparagus plants. Asparagus obtained in this way lacks not only fragrance, but also color. The latter is restored once they have been cut, by tying them into bundles and burying half of them in the manure of the stoves, and covering them with a transparent cloche. Light turns them green in two or three days, especially if it's sunny. BASELLE ROUGE, BASELLE BLANCHE, ÉPINARD DU MAlabar (Basella rubra and Basella alba; L.) g. Indies. These two climbing plants, with thick, large, oval leaves, are excellent substitutes for spinach, because they have the same qualities and produce more. They are grown as annuals, as they do not like the cold. In March, they are sown on a warm bed, under a bell or frame, in light soil amended with 11 compost, either in small pots or on the bed itself. In May, or when late frosts are no longer a concern, they are transplanted to the ground, at the foot of a south-facing wall, against a trellis where their long white or red stems can cling. Weed them and give them plenty of water during hot spells. When the leaves are harvested, those of the most vigorous plant are left to provide the seeds that will ripen perfectly during the year. In the space of a summer, each plant can provide three or four dishes. COMMON or KITCHEN BASIL. (Ocymum basilicum; L.)O. Native to Persia. It and its large-leafed, curly-leafed or purple varieties are used in seasonings, and rarely as a salad ingredient, because its strong, aromatic flavor is not to everyone's taste. Some people cut it before flowering, dry it in an airy place, grind it to a powder and store it in a tin for use with spices. In the Paris climate, basil is sown on a bed in February and March. When the young plant has six leaves, it is planted out in soft, terra-cotta soil, in a warm spot; it is protected from the sun's rays until it is fully established, and is given copious watering throughout. In the south of France, it can be sown in the open ground, but only in April or May. The seed ripens from August to October, and the first to ripen should be harvested first, as autumn rains frequently abort those of September and October. BETTERAVE COMMUNE (Beta vulgaris; L.)g. This plant, native to southern Europe, is all the more valuable today as the sugar produced by the factories it supplies competes favorably for price and quality with that imported from the colonies. Everyone knows about its nutritional properties. It has produced several varieties, the main ones being: 1° GROSSE ROUGE, the most widespread and the oldest cultivated. It is blood-red both inside and out, and quite elongated in shape. 2° PETiTE ROUCE, formerly known as Castelnaudari; smaller than the previous variety, with the same color and milder flavor. It is also much earlier, and can be harvested as early as August. 3° ROUCE RONDE; of the same quality and color as the previous one, also early, but rounded. 4° JAUNE; same shape and color as the large red, but much sweeter in flavor. 5° La BLaNCHE (large and small); more tender, more delicate than the others, but a little less decisive in taste. 6° CHAMPÈTRE or starvation root; now grown almost exclusively as fodder. Beets like deep, well-developed, warm, light soil, and smoked the previous year, or at least with well-consumed compost. However, they do well in all types of soil, provided they are well loosened and amended. After two good ploughings, to a depth of at least one foot, they are broadcast, in rays or in borders, in March and early April in warm soils, in April and May in other soils; they germinate in ten or twelve days, if the season is favorable. However, it's wise to sow a little late, so that they don't have time to bolt before autumn. When the plant has six leaves, thin it out and replant in places where it is lacking, taking care to leave the roots intact. Arrange the plants so that they are spaced from one foot to eighteen inches apart, depending on the 2. 21 ★08 quality of the soil. Weed, hoe two or three times, and water deeply if necessary. We should point out that this plant fears transplanting, and that consequently, when transplanting, it should be kept out of the ground for as little time as possible, taking advantage of rainy weather to do so. Towards the end of October, or at the beginning of November, we pull them out of the ground; we cut off the leaves that can be fed to livestock, we clean them of the soil attached to them, we leave them to dry out in the air for twenty-four or forty-eight hours; and, when their surface has lost all its moisture, we clamp them in a dry place away from the slightest frost. Although they fear rotting, they keep quite well in a healthy cellar. We leave some of the most vigorous ones in the ground to obtain seeds, taking care to protect them from the cold by means of dry leaves covered with litter to prevent rain from penetrating and rotting them. Despite these precautions, we don't always succeed in preserving them. In this case, in February or March, we replant a few of those removed in the autumn. As the stems develop, they are supported with stakes; and when the seed begins to ripen, the stems are cut and hung in a dry, airy place. When they are completely dry, we collect the seeds, which are good for two or three years. BOURRACHE COMMUNE (Borrago officinalis, L.) O. It is more widely used for cooking in Italy than in France. Here, only its blue, white or purplish flowers are used to dress salads. It grows well in all types of soil, and can be sown at any time. Its fine seed doesn't need to be covered much with soil, and if you want the plant to rise 08 quickly, all you have to do is give it a few sprinklings. In any case, it is quite self-sowing. To collect its seeds, cut the stems a little before maturity, dry them on a cloth and then collect the seeds, which will detach themselves as they ripen. BUGLOSA OR BUGLOSA OFFICINALE. (Anchusa ossi cinalis; L.) 2. native to France, this plant is cultivated more for the medicinal virtues attributed to it, than for cooking, where only its flowers are used to garnish salads. It can be grown in any soil, provided it has been well tilled. It is propagated from seed, which is sown in March, or from offshoots, which are separated and planted in spring and autumn. Its seeds are collected like those of borage. CAPUCINE (GRANDE), CESSON OF THE INDIES, MEXICO, PERU (Tropœolum majus; L.) 7. From Peru like the following, PeTiTe CAPUCINE ( tropœolum minus; L.) Z, which differs only in its smaller size. The flowers of both are used to pear salads. The flower buds and seeds, picked long before maturity, can be preserved in vinegar and used in place of capers. Although these two plants are perennials in their own countries, they are grown here as annuals, because their seeds ripen well during the year. They can often be resown on their own, but it's safest to sow them in April, in clean, light, substantial soil with a warm exposure. If they don't climb a trellis, the first seed is raked out, and frequent watering is given during hot spells. The seed is good for two or three years. CARDON, CARDE (Crnara cardunculus, L.) 2. native to Barbary, this plant has long been cultivated in France, although it is rather delicate and fears the cold. Its leaf ribs and root are eaten cooked. Its flowers, like those of the artichoke, are used to curdle milk. We have obtained several varieties, which we will list in the order of their age. 1° CARDON COMMON or Spanish; thornless, with thin, slightly hard, white ribs. It climbs very quickly. 2° CARDON DE TOURS; extremely thorny, with wider, more delicate, slightly reddish ribs. Rises less quickly. 3° FULL AND SPINELESS CARDON; has the same qualities as the preceding one, but its white ribs are not armed with prickles. 4° CARDON WITH ARTICHAL LEAVES; an excellent variety with very smooth, thornless ribs. Cardoons multiply only from seed; they like light, deep soil, and frequent watering during hot spells; moreover, their cultivation is very similar to that of artichokes. In April and May, in perfectly cleared, amended and loosened soil, dig holes eighteen inches wide and twelve or fifteen deep, three feet apart, and keep the soil around the holes, filling them with well-consumed horse potting soil mixed with a little poudrette or colombine. Three or four seeds are sown an inch deep, leaving only one plant when they germinate, and water frequently until the plant has developed enough to be blanched, which usually happens in October. Then we mound it, bringing the soil closer to the diggings, and bind it with wicker or rushes, so that we can cover it with a kind of thick cap of long litter, which we tighten around the leaves, taking care not to injure them. 1008 After a fortnight, the rib is white and must be eaten, or it will rot. This is a good indication that you should only butter and cover plants as needed. When frost approaches, remove the rootballs and place them either in a dry, well-ventilated greenhouse, or in trenches if you don't have a greenhouse. In the first case, all the leaves are lifted and bound, but loosely, so that air can circulate inside the plants, which are then buried in fresh sand. Whenever possible, air is given, and it's not uncommon to keep them this way until spring. If you have little space to devote to them, simply lean them against a wall; but then you must take care to visit them often, to remove any rotting leaves. Whichever way you place them, they will blanch without covering, and the most advanced ones will be chosen for consumption. People who don't have a greenhouse open a trench in dry ground, three feet deep, four wide and of indeterminate length. They place a bed of straw against the sides of the trench, i.e., a good thickness of long straw laid upright; they lean one or two rows of cardoons against this bed, then put a new bed of straw against them, a second row of plants, and so on until the trench is full. Note that the ends of the leaves must be left exposed to the air. The pit is rigorously protected from the slightest rain, and the plants are covered with a large layer of dry litter, which is removed whenever it doesn't freeze. To obtain seed, we leave a few plants in the ground; when the cold comes, we cut off all the leaves a few inches from the ground, and we gap0e rantitate the plautes from frost, as we said for artichokes, but with much more care, because they are more sensitive to it. The seed is collected in the same way, and retains its germinative powers for more than ten years. Plants that have produced seed are no longer good for blanching, but they are no less valuable because, being less sensitive to cold, they can produce seed for six or eight years without requiring much care. Primeur. From January onwards, seed is sown in pots in a warm layer under a frame. When the plant has two leaves, it is placed in a larger pot and on a new layer; finally, when it is strong enough, it is placed on a dull layer, covered with a foot of compost, mixed with a quarter of good soil. We cover with the frame, and in May we can already blanch for consumption. As they are usually quick to bolt, in March we transplant some of the plants sown in January into the open ground, shelter them from the cool nights with cloches, and manage them like those sown in the open ground. They start to bind well in June and July, but many bolt. CARROT, PASTONADE, PASTENADE. (Daucus carotta; L.) g. This southern European plant has been cultivated since antiquity. Its uses in cooking are well known. It has produced several varieties. 1° JAunE; the most widespread of all. It is elongated in shape, or rounded in the yellow-round sub-variety. It is still perhaps the best of all, despite the new acquisitions made in recent years. 2° The WHITE; less cultivated and less good. Its shape is elongated, and like the previous variety, it has a white-round sub-variety. d 3° COURTE DE HOLLANDE; rounded in shape. It is highly prized. 4° ROUGE; round

elongated, and rounded in the red-round sub-variety. It is very good and highly cultivated in Germany, but has been little accepted in France, because it turns the broth and stews in which it is used red. 5° The YELLOW ORANGE; which appears to be a sub-variety of the yellow variety, of which it has the same qualities. 6° E SPANISH VIOLET; very large, very sweet, but prone to bolting if sown early, it has the same disadvantage as the red variety. Carrots like deep soil, rather light than strong, well loosened by ploughing in autumn and spring. They like fertilizer, but it must be applied at least three or four months in advance, otherwise the roots fork. From the end of February to June, after the soil has been thoroughly loosened, seed is broadcast or sown in rays spaced ten inches apart. Only lightly cover with a rake, then cover with a finger of compost to prevent the soil from being beaten up by frequent watering and weeding. As they emerge, we visit them and destroy the slugs and insects that are so eager to eat them. If there are any missing in a few places, we lift them in clods without touching the roots, and transplant them with the greatest care. Choose rainy weather for this operation, and take advantage of the moment when the carrot has only two leaves in addition to its cotyledons. Thinning is carried out wherever the plant is too thick, and in such a way as to leave, for this first time, four or five inches between each plant. Continue to weed and keep the soil moist, but not too wet, and when the carrots are finger-sized, begin to pull out 2008 for use. We take one between two, leaving eight to ten inches between each plant. Before the frosts, we harvest the carrots, pulling them out with a fork to cut less. Their heads are cut off at the collar to prevent them from growing back, and they are fed to the livestock. They are washed, left to dry out, and kept in an airy greenhouse, impenetrable to frost, where they are placed side by side, heads out. It goes without saying that we don't cut off the collar of those we intend to set seed the following year. If you don't have a greenhouse, open a trench as we said for cardoons; spread a good bed of sablesec at the bottom of the pit, and place heads of long straw against the sides of the hole; once this is done, spread a bed of carrots, roots turned against the sides of the pit, then cover with a layer of sand; new bed of carrots, new bed of sand, and so on until the trench is filled. Then we cover the whole with straw, and throw back the earth from the pit, which we raise into a cone to keep out the rainwater. But preserved carrots never have the flavor of those eaten fresh and young. They should therefore be sown in September and treated, as we have said, with the precaution of covering them with litter during the winter to protect them from the rigors of frost. They will produce until the spring sowings begin to give. To obtain seed, you can keep plants in the ground, protecting them from the cold; but it's safer to replant them in spring, fifteen or eighteen inches apart, in good, loose, well-soiled soil, from roots kept in the greenhouse or simply in a cellar. They come up in May, and the seed is harvested in August, with the stems cut off and left to dry. The seed is not removed from its umbels until it's time to sow, and is cleaned of hairs by rubbing it in the hands with a little sand or ash. It's good for two years. CULTIVATED CELERY, API, ACHE DOUX. (Apium graveolens, L.) g. This plant grows spontaneously in the marshes of southern France, where it has a pungent, aromatic and bitter flavor, which cultivation has corrected. Its ribs and roots are used both cooked and raw. Several varieties have been obtained. 1° CELERI-RAVE BLANC; very large, elongated root, or round in a sub-variety. 2° RED CELERY; similar to the previous one, but with red or purple veins on the root. 3° HOLLOW CELERY, or small celery; its short, almost creeping leaves are used as salad greens. 4° GROS VIOLET DE TOURS; the largest of all, with purplish-pink ribs. 5° PLEIN BLANC; one of the most widely grown, with very fleshy ribs. 6° TURKISH OR PRUSSIAN CELERY; a sub-variety of the above, but larger. 7° FULL RED CELERY; another sub-variety with 8° FRESH DARK CELERY; very tender, brittle, used for supplies. Celery is sown on bedding from January to March, and on soil in the open ground from April to June. With these different sowings, celery is available all year round. On a layer of six inches of compost, sow fairly lightly, water and cover with cloches or a frame. Once the plant has emerged, air it as often as possible. As soon as it 3008 has three leaves, we transplant it onto a new layer, and place the plants two or three fingers apart, so that they don't wilt. It is treated and secured in the same way, and left there until it is strong enough to be put in the ground, which is done at the beginning of April. In light, loose soil, a bed can be prepared in different ways, depending on how dry the soil is, as celery is very water-loving; the more the soil retains its moisture, the less need there is for repeated watering. Celery is planted in rays spaced eight inches apart; this gives the bed more or less width, depending on whether you want to plant more or fewer rows. In very hot soils, the bed is dug six inches deep, and the soil is thrown back onto the paths, which are left with a bottom, smoked, and the celery is planted there, mounded when necessary with the soil from the paths. On ordinary land, we set up four- or five-foot planks, leaving an equal space between each one where we grow lettuce or other small plants so as not to lose space. The celery is then suitably loosened and fined, and planted in rows and staggered. When it comes to buttering, we use soil taken from between the beds. In any case, the plants should be placed eight to nine inches apart, and watered immediately to help them take root. If the weather is dry, they should be watered every other day, and weeded if necessary. When the plant is strong enough, first tie it with straw or rushes near the root, then with straw or rushes near the middle of the plant, and finally with straw or rushes near the tip. Then wrap the plant entirely in straw or litter, or bury it near the tip of its longest leaves. Within a fortnight, it turns white and can be used for cooking. Celery treated in this way starts to yield in June if sown in January, in July if sown in February, and in August if sown in March. Celery sown in the open ground in April, May and June provides yield for all the other months of the year, and even all winter, if not left to rot. It is sown very lightly, the plant is thinned out, and it is only transplanted into the ground, where it is treated as we have said. As it yields, we bleach it by pulling it out, tying it up and burying it in old layers or potting soil, taking care to leave the tips of its leaves in the air. With a large planting tool, you make a hole, push it in along its entire length, and don't bind it, i.e. don't squeeze the soil around it. Cover it with bedding, and it quickly turns white; it can be kept for a month at most, after which it rots. If you prefer, you can mound it; but this applies to celery that supplies until October, as late-season celery must be mounded before the hard frosts. Celery can also be kept in greenhouses, in which case it is treated in much the same way as cardoons, by burying it in sand. A few plants are left in the ground to provide seed. In March, they are removed from the ground, and soon start to grow. The seed is harvested in September and keeps well for three or four years; the newest is always the best. Celeriac is grown in the same way as the other varieties, but does not need to be tied or ridged. Just pull it up like the turnip, and bury it a few inches above the crown in the greenhouse sand. The stalks, kept in the ground to set seed, are protected from the cold by a blanket of litter. CERFEUIL. (Scandix cerefolium; L.)O. Native aromatic plant, cultivated for salad and seasoning. It has given rise to a pretty variety, CREEPED CERFEUIL, which can be grown in the same way and used for the same purposes. It adapts well to all soils and can be sown in all seasons; you even need to sow it every fortnight if you want to keep it tender, as it grows very quickly. From March to May, it is sown at the foot of a wall with good exposure; during hot weather, it is placed in the north and in the shade, and in autumn it is sown again with southern exposure. The one sown in October is the last to grow, and is ready to supply in spring. Seeds are collected in June and keep for two or three years, but the newest are the best. CERFEUIL MUSQUÉ, d'ESPAGNE, FOUGÈRE MUSQUÉ, (scandix odorata; L.) 2, native to the country whose name it bears, is used like the previous one; but it has a particular flavor that not everyone finds pleasant. Its root is very good in soup and gives it a very good taste. It is sown as soon as the seeds are collected, otherwise they take a very long time, even several months, to sprout; they are only good for one year. MUSHROOMS. Everyone knows the harmful qualities of most mushrooms, and how difficult it is to distinguish between poisonous and non-poisonous species. They should therefore only be used with great circumspection, and we should never eat those found in the fields unless we know them inside out. M. Boitard, my former collaborator in the Bon jar1 dinier, is preparing an interesting work on this subject which will be truly useful, because all the innocent and edible species will not only be described and compared with the harmful ones which have some analogy with them, but also drawn and colored with care. He indicates that the best counterpoison is an emetic taken in a dose of three or four grains if a large quantity has been eaten, and if the accidents are serious. If the pain is not very severe, drinking a quantity of very strong vinegar, or sulphuric acid diluted in water, will suffice to halt the progress of the disease. We feel it necessary to describe cultivated mushrooms, in order to avoid mistakes as far as possible, while warning our readers that all species, without exception, become dangerous as they age. The cultivated mushroom is Linnea's edible agaric (Agaricus edulis). It is round, a little flattened at the top, with a short, thick pedicel. As the edges of its cap are attached to the stem when it emerges from the ground, they tear during its development, making them look fringed; a few fragments also remain on the stem. The top of the cap is never perfectly smooth, and its color is more or less dirty white towards the center, sometimes gray or grayish red. It is covered with a film that is easily removed by lifting it from the edges to the center. The underside is lined with a large number of very thin leaflets, first white when the mushroom is very young, then a beautiful pink, and finally gradually turning dark black. When this last color is reached, the mushroom becomes suspect and must be discarded. The flesh is spongy, opaque white, never turning blue in the air, nor green when rubbed; its own juice is limpid and never milky. Numerous experiments carried out by the aforementioned author show that all species whose flesh turns from white to blue or green when exposed to the air, those whose own juices are milky, and those whose odor is virulent and nauseating, are lethal to most animals and to man. All mushrooms are indigestible to anyone with a delicate stomach, or who eats a certain quantity. Let's move on to how to propagate this singular plant, which has only been available at will for a hundred years at most, thanks to ingenious methods. For a long time, mushroom beds were created without any certainty as to the results they would produce, for two reasons: firstly, the preparation and selection of the manure from which they were built was neglected; secondly, the beds were not seeded, and their production was left to chance. Today, if we act as we're about to say, we can be sure of success. Mushroom spawn are small white filaments, resembling mold at first glance, found on soil, manure or compost on which mushrooms have grown, particularly around their base. The first thing to do is to see if you can get hold of some, as otherwise the operation would be of dubious success. This white fungus can be found by dismantling old millstones, as we shall see below, or by building layers for it, or by looking for it around the mushrooms that grow spontaneously in the fields, and transporting it with the soil in which it is found. First, we'll assume that you have some, and deal with the grinding stone where you'll put it to obtain certain harvests, after which we'll come back to the bed to obtain some if you didn't have any, and if you were too far from the gardeners engaged in this culture to be able to obtain some from them. The mushroom wheel. Its success depends largely on the choice and quality of the manure. Market gardeners even give preference to manure from horses fed on oats, and reject it when it comes from horses fed on bran, or from brewers. The most important thing is that it should be short, well soaked with urine and mixed with dung, and that it should not be taken out of the stable until it has been used as bedding for at least a week. Take a quantity calculated according to the number of millstones you wish to establish, and place it on dry ground, away from farmyard animals. It is then placed in a sort of toisé, as wide or as long as you like, but never more or less than two feet thick. While it's being forked in this way, great care is taken to remove hay, dry straw, and generally any foreign matter that might be mixed in. As it is placed in beds, it is walked on and trampled to make the pile as compact as possible. If the weather is very dry and hot, we water it, but not too abundantly, to encourage fermentation rather than prevent it, which would happen if it were too wet. In ordinary weather, we don't water it, and even if it rains too heavily, it would be very good to be able to shelter it from it. After eight to ten days, we'll look inside to see if it has fermented properly, which can be recognized by the whitish color it will have taken on inside. Then the whole heap is taken out and stirred again, after which it is reshuffled, with the precaution of placing in the middle of the heap the manure that was on 009 the edges and on the surface, to bring it to the same degree of fermentation. Leave it in this state for a further eight to ten days, then see if it has acquired the necessary qualities to be used straight away to form the grindstone. This point is so essential that, if we fail to obtain good mushroom harvests, we shouldn't attribute it to other causes. For it to be as good as one could wish, it must be brownish in color, neither too dry nor too wet, but soft and unctuous, well bound and soft to the touch. If it were too dry, we'd put it back in a heap, and bring it to the desired point by means of a few sprinklings; but if, on the contrary, it were too damp, if we drained the water by pressing it into our hands, its heat would be gone forever, and we'd have no chance of success. In that case, we'd have to start all over again with new manure, or give up on making millstones; and this decision would be even better than wasting a lot of time and care to achieve nothing. All that's left is to prepare the millstone, which can be done at any time of year, but most advantageously in spring and autumn. It can be set up outside, in a greenhouse, or in a cellar, and all three locations bring with them a few minor details of their own. 1° When it comes to setting up outside, you need to choose the healthiest location, i.e. the one with the least humidity and where water cannot get in. It must be far from any gutters or other obstructions that could collect water during a rainstorm. If the site is chosen in spring or summer, it should be in the shade, but in autumn or winter, the millstone should be placed at midday. If the ground is not of a nature to absorb moisture quickly, it should be broken up to a foot or eighteen inches deep and two to two and a half feet wide, and the earth removed and replaced by gravel, plaster or rubble. A layer of earth should be placed on top and trampled down a little, just to give it solidity. Once the ground has been prepared to receive the millstone, lay a bed of manure twenty inches to two feet wide, and trample it down; on top of the first bed, lay a second, a little less wide, which is trampled down in the same way to unite it perfectly with the first; on top of this, lay a third, then a fourth, always reducing their width, so as to give the layer the shape of a humpback, with a height in the middle equal to its width. After consolidating the layer by beating on the sides with a palette knife or spade, the surface is evened out by combing it from top to bottom with a large rake, and removing any excessively long strands of straw. Then place a shirt over it, i.e. a large, dry bedding cover about three fingers thick. Let the grindstone warm up in this state for a few days, and if you fear that dryness will harm fermentation, increase its activity with a few moderate sprinklings. To find out how hot it is, stick a stick into it, and after an hour or two, you can easily tell by touching it with your hand whether it's at the right temperature. Now it's time to larder, in other words, to place the mushroom spawn. The earthen cakes that contain it are cut into three- or four-inch pieces, and inserted into small openings of the same size, made with the fingers on the sides of the grinding wheel. These pieces of white are placed at a height of four inches from the base of the layer, and ten or twelve inches apart in the 2. 22 8 longitudinal direction of the grinding wheel. Make two or three rows, depending on the width of the sides, placing them five or six inches from the first row. The white must be flush with the manure, and perfectly bonded with it. Once the millstone has been larded, it is covered with its liner; the white cakes are left to soak up the humidity of the manure for two or three days; then, using a palette knife, they are gently pressed down to incorporate them well with the manure, and covered. Eight days later, remove the jacket and check whether the spawn has set. This can be easily recognized by a kind of mold, with the appearance of small white threads, which spread over the manure around the lardons. If these fillets don't form within a fortnight, the spawn is worthless, and you need to replace them with better ones, which you push into the holes between the first ones. When the white has set, the grinding wheel is gopted. If necessary, firm it up, as mentioned above, or even beat it lightly with a palette knife or the back of a wooden shovel. If the weather is dry, a light sprinkling is given; then a very light layer of soil is applied over the whole surface, often mixed with fine sand, or even pure potting soil, but much consumed and reduced to dust. Some gardeners even sift the soil and potting compost together. The whole is covered with three inches of new manure, except towards the top of the millstone, which is left almost uncovered. Eight days later, a new layer of new manure is applied in the same way as the first, and a further eight days later, the soil is completely uncovered. We clean the millstone of any garbage the manure may have left behind, and arrange a new layer of long, finger-thick bedding on top, the straw of which should be inclined to facilitate the drainage of rainwater. If the operation is carried out in autumn and cold weather, three good inches of warm manure prepared eight days in advance, as we said for making the grinding stone, are thrown on top of the shirt, and covered again with the manure just removed before putting on the shirt. Fifteen days later, harvesting begins. If the season is fine, as the millstone is only covered by the shirt, we uncover the layer in front of us, remove the mushrooms with the precaution of filling in any holes we might make in the layer, give it a light watering and cover it immediately; but if the weather is cold, we are obliged to uncover the whole layer at once, and immediately cover it, placing more or less new manure on the shirt, depending on how cold it is. Picking is repeated every three days, and can last for more than three months. 2° When you place a millstone in a sheltered place, such as a greenhouse, you don't need to dig the soil at its base to sanitize it, because there's no presumption of humidity. The layer is made in exactly the same way as above, with the difference that no manure is placed on it after it has been gopted, and it is simply covered with the liner. 3° In a cellar, the grindstone can be made into a square or a humpback with the same advantage; and, after gopting it, you don't need to cover it with either manure or a shirt. However, the cellar's window wells must be tightly sealed, so that neither air nor light can penetrate. If you set up a mushroom bed in a small cellar, you'd have to be wary of the carbon the manure would release through fermentation. To do this, you'd enter with caution and a lit candle; if you suddenly saw the flame diminish in volume, flicker or go out, you'd have to withdraw immediately, or run the risk of being asphyxiated. Leave the door open for a few moments, and after a very short time there would be no danger. Mushroom beds. These are always done outdoors, and can be set up as early as September. The main thing is to place them in dry soil, which absorbs moisture quickly so as not to cool or rot the base of the beds, which are intended to last a long time. We start by digging a pit two feet wide and five or six inches deep, because the base of the layer must be buried, which is not necessary for the grinding wheel. Horse, mule or donkey manure is prepared as described above; the bed is raised in the same way, and immediately gopted with the earth from the hole. Without further precaution, it is left in this state until April, when it is covered with a shirt of large litter, three fingers thick. If the season is favorable, the following month, or June at the latest, it is covered with mushrooms, which are collected every two days by lifting the liner, which is then replaced immediately after a light watering. If these beds are on dry, sandy soil, and if they have been made with good, well-prepared manure, they will last four months or more. If, on the other hand, they are set in strong, greasy soil, they will take longer to establish themselves, and will last much less: in the latter case, you are obliged to put gravel in the pit, which you dig deeper; and, to gopter it, you mix fine sand or potting soil with the soil from the excavation. 2 When a layer has finished producing, break it up and set aside the mushroom spawn, which is removed in the form of small cakes and placed in a dry place for storage. It can be kept for up to two years if stored in a place protected from frost and the slightest humidity. When old millstones are dismantled, the white they once produced is also preserved. In England and Russia, champi gnons are grown in greenhouses made in this way: the ground is dug eighteen inches deep, and a vault eight feet high is built of thick masonry. The interior of this type of cellar must be seven feet wide by an indeterminate length. No windows or other openings are left, and the door is hermetically sealed. Shelves or shelves two and a half feet wide, in three rows, are built all around the walls, so that they are spaced two feet apart, one above the other. We make a millstone on the ground, in the same way as we said for a cellar; see page 339, n° 3, and we drive it absolutely in the same way. A second grinding wheel is made on the first spoke, a third on the second, and a fourth on the third. They are raised in such a way that they can produce mushrooms on the side of the wall where there is an empty space, as well as on the side of the road. In our climates, where the temperature is warmer and the air more desiccating, it might be necessary to bury the cellar, cover its vault with a certain thickness of earth, or at least place it under the shade of a few trees. We also think that this construction could be improved by making it wider, which would make it easier to leave a path behind the shelves. We should also make two doors separated by a small cabinet, as we do for our hot greenhouses. TRUFFLE (Lycoperdon tuber; L.) is a species of mushroom that grows underground. It consists of an irregularly rounded, spindly tuber with a chapped, chagrined surface, having no leaves, stems, roots or gems. Its color is black on the outside, mottled black or grayish, or even white on the inside. Its fragrance and flavor are generally pleasing, and it is used extensively in delicate cuisine. Truffles are preserved in olive oil after cooking in a court-bouillon, or simply dried and powdered. They are found in almost every province of France, but those from Périgord are the most highly prized. As pigs are extremely fond of them, they are quite often used to discover them; however, these animals can be replaced with great advantage by dogs that have been trained for this kind of search. In light, black soil, at the foot of oak and hornbeam trees, and always facing north, they are found buried from two inches to six inches deep, and never more. We've noticed that the soil above them remains barren, and is almost constantly covered with small winged insects, no doubt attracted by the scent of truffles. We believe, however, that it is possible, and we urge amateurs to try this experiment, which we ourselves would have tried if work of another kind had given us the time. We believe that by analyzing the soil of a natural truffle field, in order to create an analogous one, by mixing with it roots of oaks and hornbeams whose truffles are perhaps parasites, by watering with water in which the truffles would have been washed when collected, or even using the soil removed from around their tubers, and combining all these means with others derived from our knowledge of cryptogam vegetation, we believe we can achieve satisfactory results. CHERVIS, GIROLLES, CHIRUIS, CHIROUIS. (Sium sisarum; L.) 2. The roots of this native plant are tuberous, fleshy and sweet; they are rarely eaten except fried. Sow in March or September in clean, well-disturbed, fresh or even slightly damp soil; hoe, weed and, above all, give frequent watering if you want the roots to have any delicacy. From November onwards, we start to dig up the plants for use, and the harvest continues throughout the winter. It goes to seed in the first year, but it has been observed that its first seeds are rarely fertile, so we wait until a few plants are two years old before harvesting seed; it is ripe in September, and keeps well for two or three years. This plant can also be propagated by root bursts, but these are less delicate in this case than when taken from a seedling of the same year. CATERPILLARS. (Scorpiurus vermiculata; L.) Q. From southern France. Its spiral-rolled pods, bristling with small tubencules and hairs, look rather like caterpillars, hence their name and the use made of them on salads to surprise people who see them for the first time. They are also preserved in vinegar. This plant can be sown in March or April, at the foot of a wall in the south, and is not fussy about the quality of the soil. When you want to preserve its seeds, pick them and throw them into the vinegar as they form, or at least before they are hard. CHICORY SAUVACE. (Cichorium intybus; L.)2. Found everywhere along roadsides, it can be eaten as a salad when very young, or after blanching. It has three varieties: 1° COMMON, which can be grown as it is found in the wild. 2° PANACHÉE, whose leaves have a few reddish veins, which turn bright red when blanched. 3° CHICORÉE A CArÉ, whose leaves are used in the same way as those above, and whose fleshy roots are calcined and pulverized to imitate or lengthen coffee. Chicory can be sown on a bed as early as January, but as autumn chicory lasts until spring, it is more usual to sow it in light soil at the end of April, and later in stronger soil every two weeks, so as to always have some good to cut. Sow thickly if you want to eat the young leaves, and more lightly in rays if you want to blanch it. The only care it requires is to be weeded as needed and sometimes watered. When large, the leaves are fed to livestock. From October to January, we pull it up to bleach it. To do this, a layer of sandy earth or potting soil is laid down in a cellar or other warm, dark place; first, a bed of earth two feet wide and two inches thick is made; its length is indeterminate. This is then covered with a second bed of two inches of soil and a new row of roots, and so on up to a suitable height; if the soil is too dry, a light sprinkling is given, and soon long, thin, etiolated leaves sprout from each collar, which are cut off, or pulled out with the root, so that they can be tied into bunches. This is the type of salad that market gardeners sell under the 009 name of peasant's hair or capuchin's beard. Another method is used to obtain the same result: a barrel is knocked down, and rows of holes are made in it with a crankshaft, two or three inches apart; a first bed of sand is placed at the bottom, followed by a row of roots whose necks emerge through the holes, a second bed of sand and roots, and so on; the chicories grow in the same way, and are cut several times until they are exhausted and no longer produce leaves. Sand, like topsoil, needs to be watered lightly if it threatens to dry out. Other people, mainly market gardeners, don't take such a close look; they are content to bind chicory in bundles as they pull it out, and bury it in hot manure, or even leave it on the ground, covering it with dry manure; they remove the bundles as they turn white. To collect seeds, simply leave a few plants in the ground, where they overwinter, come up in spring and ripen their seeds in September. They keep for ten years or more. WHITE CHICORY or ERDIVE. (Cichorium endivia, L.)O. From India. This plant, eaten raw in salads or cooked in a variety of ways, has given rise to several varieties and sub-varieties. 1° CRICORÉE FRISÉE or large endive; the most common, grown almost exclusively in the départemens. 2° CHICORÉE DE MEAUX or endive; almost as widely grown, although it has the disadvantage of rising if over-watered; it rises less if sown a little late. It is a sub-variety of the previous one. 3° CHICORÉE FINE D'ITALIE, CHICORÉE D'ÉTÉ; rises less 000 easily than the other, which means it can be sown early. It is more delicate and garnishes more quickly. 4° CHICORÉE ALWAYS WHITE; as it doesn't garnish much, it is cut young. 5° CHICORÉE SCAROLE, scarolle, scariole, or small lettuce; same cultivation and use as large endive. Resembles lettuce somewhat in its broad leaves. 6° CHICORÉE GRANDE SCAROLE, or escarole de Hollande; a sub-variety of the preceding one, differing only in its longer leaves. 7° CHICORÉE SCAROLE RONDE; another sub-variety whose smaller, rounded leaves tend to peel. 8° CHICORÉE SCAROLE BLONDE; a third sub-variety that differs from the others in that its leaves are yellowish in color at birth. 9° CHICORÉE COURTE ou célestine; the earliest of all. It doesn't climb much, is very tender, but very small. All these varieties degenerate rapidly if not cultivated with care. From January to March, seed is sown on beds, under cloches or in trays. January seedlings are transplanted to a new bed when the plant has four leaves, to wait for the moment when they can be planted in the ground; the others are transplanted when the plants are strong enough. Around the middle of March, we start sowing in loose soil, well mulched to prevent rain or watering from beating it, and we can continue sowing all year round. Transplant to a bed and stagger the plants, ten inches or a foot apart, and give them a good watering. Weeds are weeded and removed, and the plants are wetted if necessary, especially in hot weather, to prevent them from bolting. Once the chicory has reached its full strength, it is time to blanch. When the weather is dry, raise the plant and bind it close to the ground with a first 1008 straw tie; a few days later, when the heart leaves have elongated, place a second tie, then a third. From this point onwards, you should only water at the neck, to avoid wetting the plant's leaves, which would cause it to rot. You can cover the plant with straw or a flowerpot, if you want to speed it up; but in any case, it takes no more than a fortnight or three weeks to blanch. A few plants of the first sown are kept to collect seed, which ripens in autumn and keeps well for six or seven years. The oldest is the best, because the plants it supplies grow more slowly. CABBAGE. (Brassica oleracea, L.) g. Native. Everyone knows its many uses. This plant has given rise to a large number of varieties and sub-varieties, all of which can be divided into five main types: Head cabbage, savoy cabbage, green cabbage, cauliflower and kohlrabi. CABBAGES. These form hard, tightly packed heads, sometimes with a musky odor that is not to everyone's liking. Cabbages from this division are used to make sauerkraut. 1° CHOUX D'YORCK; highly prized, small, elongated. a. Cabage, or superfin hátif; very -small and very -early. b. Nain hatif; also early, with lower stem and less elongated head. c. Gros d'Yorck; less early, larger. 2° HATIF EN PAIN DE SUCRE cabbage; very good; elongated, hooded, sometimes in the shape of an inverted cone, a little blond, not very prone to splitting. 3° BOEUr cabbage; excellent: fairly widespread. a. Small; early. 008 b. Medium; larger and less early. c. Large; more rounded. 4° CHOUX POMMÉS ou GROS CABUS BLANCS; larger, more rounded and more widely grown than the preceding varieties. a. Chou de Saint-Denis ou chou blanc de Bonneuil; large, flattened or round, glaucous, with a very short stem. b. Cabus d'Alsace; early, large, rounded or flat; rounded, slightly hooded leaves; slightly high stem. c. Gros chou d'Allemagne, d'Alsace, chou quintal; huge in good soils; slightly scalloped, paler green leaves; short, large stem. d. Large late German cabbage; medium-sized stalk, but very large; dark green leaves with coarse, whitish veins: tender and good. e. Large German cabbage with purple ribs; even later than the previous one, from which it differs only in the color of its ribs. f. Large Scottish cabbage; hardier and better-keeping. g. Large Dutch cabbage. h. Large Brunswick cabbage. i. Red cabbage; large, eaten in salads; low stem; leaves first dark green, then red; ribs reddish-brown. j. Utrecht black cabbage; small, valued in the North; used medicinally; higher stem; tighter, darker sanguine head. k. Red cabbage from Germany; stronger stem and larger head; same color as above. MILAN COUCH OR CUCUMBER. Less prone to muskiness, more tender, with looser heads. a. Very-hdtif Ulm cabbage; medium size; slightly high stem; very-prompt to eat; excellent. b. Hatif cabbage; lower stem; same qualities; beautiful green leaves. 008 c. Short or dwarf or stocky cabbage; very dark green, slightly slatey; early; tender and very good. d. Milan ordinaire or gros chou Milan; larger than the preceding ones, tender green; very good. e. Pancalier de Touraine; low-growing, very dark green; large ribs with prominent veins; very short leaves, puckered at the edges; very good, withstands frost well, like the preceding one. f. Pancalier blond; similar to the preceding one, but of a more yellowish green: it is less resistant to cold. g. Milan à téte longue; small, pointed apple; very cracked, blistered, dark-green leaves; tender and excellent. h. Milan doré or de Savoie; round, medium-sized apple, not very tight, turning yellow in winter; blond-green, very curly leaves; low stem: excellent and not afraid of cold. i. Milan des vertus, or gros chéte; large, pointed apple; very cracked, dark-green leaves; tender and excellent. Milan des vertus, or large German curly cabbage; apple the size of a large white cabbage; leaves slightly blistered, slightly curled, sometimes glaucous: hardy and not afraid of the cold. j. Second-season German milfoil; smaller apple, white inside; fairly thick stem; dark green leaves: tender and very good. L. Milan d'automne, large Saint-Denis kale; very large, less round head; slightly blistered, pale-green, broad, rounded leaves; large, fairly high stem: hardy and good. l. Rosette cabbage, Brussels sprouts; two- or three-foot stem, producing small curly apples in the leaf axils. CHOUXVERTS. These do not pomace, are more resistant to cold, and are good to eat only when frost has softened them. We eat the leaves, which we detach in winter without tearing up the plant, and the new shoots, which we break off in spring before flowering. They are grown more as fodder than in the kitchen garden. O08 a. Chou cavalier, chou à vache, chou en arbre; stems five to six feet long; large, plain leaves. b. Chou moellier; differs from the preceding only in its stem, which increases in size from the middle to the tip. c. Chou caulet de Flandre, similar to variety a, but red. d. Chou branchu du Poitou, or chou mille tétes; less tall, and furnished from the stem with numerous, strong sprays. .e. Daubenton's perennial cabbage; differs from the preceding one in that its lower branches lengthen, incline and sometimes take root in the ground. f. Large green northern kale; similar to the cavalier, but with elegantly cut leaves: it is more resistant to cold. g. Large red kale; like the preceding one, but red. h. Fringed or Scottish kale; with narrow, fringed cuts. i. variegated cabbage; much smaller; leaves variegated yellowish-white, red and green. j. Proliferative leaves; leaf veins give rise to leafy expansions. k. Palm cabbage; long, narrow, blistered leaves, gathered in a rosette at the end of the stem. l. Naples cabbage; thick, short stem; flat leaves, fringed at the edge. m. Green cabbage, broad-ribbed; low-growing; large, smooth, green, rounded leaves, with a broad, full, fleshy pedicel: little fear of cold, it needs heavy frosts to acquire its full quality. n. Blonde cabbage, broad-ribbed; differs from the preceding by the blond color of its leaves: more tender, milder flavor. o. Cabbage with broad ribs and fringed edges; its name indicates how it differs from the two preceding varieties. CAULIFLOWER. This variety, whose use is fairly well known, can be divided into two breeds: 1° CROUX-TLEURS proper; they grow less tall than 1008 broccoli, are earlier, and have a white color tending more or less to yellowish. a. The tender or há̂tif; plant less strong; apple less tight; thresholds more united, straighter, less wide than in the others. b. The hard; thicker, shorter stem; later, fatter, tighter apple; larger, folded, wavy leaves. c. Semi-hard; in shape and quality, it occupies the middle ground between the two preceding varieties. 2° BROCOLIS; they differ from cauliflower in what we have said, and in their more wavy leaves. a. White; apple: preferred with purple over all other varieties. b. Purple; like the previous one. c. Dwarf purple; apples like the previous two. d. Green; does not head, but produces sprays like the following. e. Yellow. f. Red. CAULIES. These varieties are grown for their leaves and neck, which is large and fleshy, and is used in cooking like turnips. There are three main varieties. 1° SIAM CROUX-RAVES; swollen stem above the ground, forming a ball from which the leaves emerge. a. White; the latest of the three. b. Violet; purple stem; ribs and veins of thresholds tinted this color. c. Hátif dwarf; small, few leaves. 2° CHOUX - NAVETS, TURNEP DE LAPONIE; oblong, large, fleshy root, same flavor as kohlrabi: more resistant to hard frosts. a. Ordinary white kohlrabi. c.Red-necked; ribs and veins dyed this color. 3° RUTABACA or SWEDISH KALE; similar to the above, but yellowish, quicker to produce and infinitely better for cooking. GROWING. Cabbages like clean, slightly strong, well-smoked and naturally fresh soil. They grow to enormous size in newly cleared soil. They can be propagated from seed in all seasons, in loose, light soil, with a little shade when sown in summer. During their youth and after transplanting, until they have fully recovered, they are given frequent watering, which is continued if the season requires, but less abundantly. As far as possible, choose rainy weather for transplanting, as this is more reliable and faster, and aphids wreak less havoc. When planting a young cabbage, the soil should be perfectly loosened so that the planter doesn't compress it too much; the root should be buried without crumpling, and so that the eye or collar is slightly buried rather than raised. The plant must be neither too weak nor too strong; in the former case, it languishes and more easily falls prey to insects; in the latter, it is prone to climbing, knotting and hardening. Stakes are the scourge of young plants; they can be removed from seedlings by sprinkling them with ashes. Later on, cabbages are devoured by caterpillars, if you don't visit them night and morning, and crush them with a small wooden spatula. Slugs and red bugs attack them at all times; the only way to keep them at bay is to look for these pests and crush them. When transplanting, we visit the neck of the plant: if we find a small tumour, we open it by cutting off half of it, and find a larva or worm, which we remove. To obtain good seed, choose the strongest plants, with the most straightforward and best characterized varieties, and let them overwinter, taking care to protect delicate plants from frost. Care should also be taken to ensure that seedbeds of different varieties are not too close together, to prevent the mixing of fertilizing dust, which would produce hybrid and degenerate individuals. In spring, if the apples don't open up to allow the stems to pass through, they are split slightly in four; or, if they are a little spoiled by rain or frost, the rotten parts are removed by cutting right through. The seed obtained from the sprouts of a cabbage from which the head has been cut off is also good. When ripe, cut off the stalks, dry them on a cloth, thresh them and, after cleaning, store them in a dry place. It retains its vegetative quality for seven or eight years, with the exception of cauliflower seed, which largely ceases to sprout when over five years old. Cabbages are sown: 1° from August 15 to September 15; Yorck cabbages are sown at the end of August and transplanted in October. The others are also transplanted in situ, or in nurseries, to be planted permanently in February or March. The distance between plants varies from fifteen inches to three feet, depending on their size. They form their buds from the end of April to August. 2° They are sown on beds in February, to be transplanted in late March or early April. 3° At the end of February, they can be sown in the ground, but well potted and at the foot of a wall with a southern exposure. 4° In the open ground, in March and at the beginning of April, to be transplanted, like the previous ones, as soon as 2. 23 008 they are strong enough. The last three seedlings start to bolt in the first days of September, and produce until December. Savoy cabbages can be sown in August and September, but are best grown from the end of February to May. Milan des Vertus can be sown in April at the latest. The latest sprout in June and the others at the beginning of winter, to be eaten until March. Those whose heads are not fully formed, the pancaliers and ordinary kites, are left outside and only gain from frost, unless the cold is excessive. It is quite common to protect cabbages and kites from the effects of frost by burying them in place. The cabbage is dug at the foot, on the north side, tilted, and the soil from the hole is placed on its roots. That's all there is to it. Green cabbages are extremely easy to grow. They are sown in nurseries in July and August, or in March and April, and transplanted in the field, the former from September to November, the latter from April to May. They produce leaves throughout the winter and into their second year. Palmetto and Naples cabbages, originally from Italy, are less hardy than the others, fear the cold more, and are more winter hardy when sown in July and August. Broad-ribbed cabbages are sown from May 15 to the end of June, and transplanted in July and August. Cauliflowers, which are much more delicate than all the other species, therefore require lighter, better smoked soil, and much more watering. Hard cabbages are very sensitive to drought, so they are more difficult to grow in summer than other varieties. They are sown: 1° Every day in September, in potting soil or, better still, in old potting soil. 906 Twenty days after the young plant has emerged, it is planted out in a bed against a wall facing south, in four inches of good potting soil that has been thrown on top of the soil. When the frosts arrive, cloches are placed on the plants, spaced so that they can hold fifteen to twenty under each one. At first, these bells are only put on in the evening, and as the season advances, air is given whenever the weather permits. If the cabbages continue to grow rapidly, they should be stopped by lifting them up and replanting them immediately in the same place. When the frost becomes heavy, and you fear that it will penetrate under the glass, surround and cover them with litter, and if necessary, throw mats over them. The most important thing is to remember to give them air whenever you can. In March, earlier or later, depending on the temperature, we transplant into the ground, and the cauliflowers produce from the sin of May to the beginning of July. Hard and semi-hard varieties are particularly suitable for this sowing. 2° Sow at the end of August or beginning of September, and overwinter the plant in a frame, spacing it four inches apart. At the beginning of February, we prepare a dull layer, made of half hot manure and half dry leaves, placed bed by bed, fifteen to eighteen inches thick, and covered with nine to ten inches of potting soil and earth mixed in half. When the soil is at its hottest, the cabbages are planted twenty inches apart, covered with bells, and bedded, as we said, if necessary. After transplanting, air is gradually added, and the cloches are removed in March. These cauliflowers produce in April. 3° From the end of January to February 15th, sow on a warm bed under a frame or cloches. Transplant to a new bed a fortnight after emergence, and protect from cold as above. In March or April, cauliflowers are replanted in the ground, and produce in June and July. 4° Sow in the first fortnight of March, and work as for the previous sowing. If you had sown very lightly, you could leave the plant in place and only transplant it into the ground in April. It produces in July. 5° Finally, from April 15 to May 15, you can sow in well-soiled soil and only lift the young plant to put it in place. These cauliflowers do not do as well as the others, because they have to fear drought, especially in hot summers. Semi-hard cabbages are more suitable for this season. 6° Sow in the shade from June 10 to 25 and transplant in July. They are grown in the same way as ordinary cabbages, but with much more watering, as the soil must always be moist if you want to be sure of success. Cauliflowers produce from the end of August to November. The last cauliflowers sown can last until February if you know how to store them. All you have to do is cut them three inches below the head, clean them of all their small leaves and bracts, and hang them in a dry, airy place where frost cannot penetrate. As for those that have not made their apples when the cold arrives, strip them of most of their leaves, remove them with the root ball, and bury them either in a cellar, or in a trench where bedding debris has been thrown, and which is covered with a frame; they make small apples, but quite good, and sometimes succeed one another until March. Broccoli is sown in May and June, and dwarf violet 1 in July. They are treated in exactly the same way as cauliflower, crop no. 6, but are planted two and a half feet apart, and mounded when the cold comes. A small pit is dug at the base, the plant is tilted, or rather laid down, and covered with soil, leaving the tip of the head exposed to the air. When the frosts become severe, we cover it with dry litter, which we remove whenever the weather is fine. You can also raise it in a clump, make a hole in the ground and stick it in, protecting it from the cold as we said. They produce their apples at the end of winter and the beginning of spring. Cauliflower seeds are harvested in the same way as ordinary cabbages, from sturdy plants sown in autumn and sheltered over winter under cloches or a frame. SEA CABBAGE, CRAMBE MARITIMA. (Crambe maritima; L.) 2. native. This plant, whose young stalks are eaten cooked and seasoned in various ways after blanching, is all the more valuable for its availability in February and March, when no other vegetables are available. In March or August, loosen a bed, draw lines two feet apart, and make small holes equally spaced on each; throw in a handful of potting soil, and sow three or four crambe seeds, leaving only the most vigorous plant when they have germinated. Water, weed and keep the ticks away. If you already have this plant, it is more expedient to propagate it by eyelets or by sections of its roots, which you plant in spring; either way, you leave the plants to grow strong for the first two years, and it's not until the third shoot that you start cutting: to do this, you cover the young shoots as they appear, i.e. from February to March, with a pot or a straw hive. These shoots, consisting of the young leaves pressed together, and roughly shaped like very long pine cones, quickly turn white and are cut off near the collar when they are six or eight inches long. The plant lasts a very long time, but for this reason it must not be too exhausted, and a few stems are left to develop. When the stump perishes, it is naturally replaced by the eyelets. If you want to obtain early crambe, from December onwards, place pots and hives on the plants, and fill the gaps with a good thickness of large litter; in very cold weather, cover the whole with straw or dry leaves. This plant is still not very widespread in France, but is widely consumed in England. CIBOULE ORDINAIRE, ONIONETTE. (Allium fissile, L.) g. in one variety, and Z in the other. It is thought to be a degenerate onion, or, if you prefer, a variety of onion; whatever the case, it has the same taste and is used for much the same purposes, and as a salad garnish. The first variety, being an annual, is sown in light, substantial, earthy soil. Sowing times vary according to the time of year you want to harvest, and the climate in which you grow it. In the jatdins of Paris, we sow 1° in February and March, for replanting in April and May; 2° from the fifteenth to the thirtieth of July, for replanting in September and harvesting in April and May of the following spring. In more temperate climates, you can start sowing as early as the sin of January and the beginning of February, and if these initial sowings are unsuccessful, start again in March. As chives are more delicate the newer they are, some gardeners are in the habit of sowing them every month, and growing them across their salad beds. The seed is broadcast, fairly thickly; it is covered with a rake and, if the soil is strong, a more or less thick bed of compost is spread over it; it is weeded and wetted if necessary. Whatever the time of sowing, the plants should be transplanted, two or three at a time, in borders or rays, six inches apart and four deep. They soon form thick clumps that will produce until the frosts, and even until spring if the winter is not too harsh. Moreover, cultivation is not difficult, as the plant only needs to be purged of weeds. The best seeds are harvested from old, replanted plants, whose stems are supported by sticks and light hoops. The umbels are not cut until they are fully ripe, which can be recognized when they are ready to fall off; they are gathered into botillons, left to dry in the sun, and then hung in a dry, airy place. Seed kept in its capsules is good for three years; if it is removed, it must be sown the following year. The sub-varieties of ordinary spring onions are white spring onions and early spring onions, which can be grown in the same way. Perennial chives almost never produce seeds, which makes it necessary to propagate them only by bursting their clumps in spring or autumn, and replanting them seven or eight inches apart, as they expand greatly. It can also be propagated from cloves, but this method is inefficient. This variety, hardier than the previous one, requires some watering during hot spells; it is more spring-like. If you want to have chives during the rigors of winter, pull up a certain quantity as frost approaches; and, if you don't have a tarpaulin or greenhouse, just place it, close by, in an open trench twelve to eighteen inches deep; cover it with a sufficient quantity of dry litter to prevent frost from penetrating; this precaution alone is sufficient to have some when needed. CIBOULETTE, CIVE, CIVETTE, APPÉTIT. (Allium schœnoprasum; L.) 2. originates from Siberia, and is used for salad supplies, sometimes in seasonings. Its flavor is similar to that of the spring onion. As it varies quite easily in size, depending on the suitability of the soil, it was thought to provide three varieties to which the names civette, cive d'Angleterre and cive de Portugal were given. This error has now been corrected. This plant could multiply from seed, but to avoid a long wait, it is customary to separate its large clumps every three years: in February or March, break off three or four cloves and leave them together, then plant them seven to nine inches apart, in beds or borders, in loose, substantial, light soil with a warm exposure. In a short space of time, they form large tufts of leaves somewhat similar to those of the chive, but smaller; they are all the more tender and grow back all the better for being cut more often. Chives can be kept in the same place for four or five years, with the precaution of weeding if necessary, purging it of weeds, and watering it sufficiently during hot spells. It's a good idea to give it two or three hoeings, especially in spring. As soon as winter approaches, cut its leaves back to the ground, let their bases dry out for a while, and cover with a good inch of perfectly-consumed compost. COCHLEARIA OFFICINAL, CRANSON, HERBE A LA CUILLER (Cochlearia officinalis, L.) g. Native. This plant is grown 1 in every garden for its pungent flavor and anti-scorbutic properties. It grows well in all soils, but prefers fresh, light, substantial ones: it is sown in spring, and watered a lot during droughts. COCHLEARIA DE BRETAGNE, CRANSON RUSTIQUE, CRAN, RAIFORT SAUVAGE, GRAND RAIFORT (Cochlearia armoracia; L.) Z. Native. Its scraped root is used to sprinkle on boiled dishes; it has a very pungent flavor, approaching that of mustard. This plant is propagated by bursting the roots in autumn, or from seed in spring; it grows well in all soils, with ordinary exposure. Its seed, like that of the previous plant, is good for two years. CULTIVATED CUCUMBER, CORNICRON, (Cucumis sativus; L.) Q. From Africa. The fruits of this plant are eaten cooked in various ways; before they have reached their full size, they are candied in vinegar, when they are called gherkins. Several varieties are grown. 1° BLANC LONG; one of the most esteemed in Paris; widely grown, as are the following two varieties; elongated and round at both ends. 2° BLANC HATIF; same shape: grown in trays. 3° CROS BLANC DE BONNEUIL; same shape, but larger. 4° HATIr DE HOLLANDE; same shape; first white, then yellow; grown under glass. 5° Jaune LoNG; often bends into a bow. 6° PeTiT VERT; most commonly used for gherkins. 7° VERT LoNC; more elongated than the previous one; same use. 8° NoIR; white cucumber shape; but brown rind, sometimes striped with yellowish white. 9° CONCOMBREA BOUQUET, Russian migvon; the earliest 000 of all; fruits are small, almost round, gathered in bunches of three or four. 10° CONCOMBRE ARADA; rarely reaching more than two inches in length; delicate, but producing much when successful. Only suitable for preserving. Cucumbers are grown in the same way as melons, but some varieties can be sown later, especially those that need to be picked before ripening for pickling. 1° Early varieties are sown in pots, on a warm bed and under a bell or frame, in December and January. Air is let in whenever the weather permits, and the soil is covered with litter or straw mats only when the cold is so intense that frost is likely to penetrate even the young plants. A month later, or rather if the layer has lost its warmth, we put them in larger pots, and place them on a new layer. A fortnight later, we place them on a third layer, on which we've spread seven or eight inches of compost mixed with a third of light soil. We cover them with frames, and keep them warm with heaters. 2° From February to March, sow on a bed like melons, and replant in April on a soft bed. 3° From April 15 to May 15, sow in eighteen-inch-deep holes filled with manure and covered with six inches of compost. Cucumbers intended for gherkins are not sown until this time, as it would be pointless to do so earlier. Cucumbers are pruned like melons; they like warmth and watering. To collect the seed, leave a standing fruit to rot, collect the seeds, wash them and dry them in the shade. They keep well for ten to twelve years, or even longer. OC4 The snake cucumber or LUFFA (cucumis flexuosus, L.) Q, from the Indies, is hardly cultivated except as an object of curiosity; however, it is candied in vinegar. It is very long, smooth and pale green. It is grown in the same way as the previous varieties. CULTIVATED CORIANDER. (Coriandrum sativum, L.) O. From the Orient. This aromatic plant is used to make white beer, in ratafias and sweets, and its seeds are used to spice stews. The Egyptians use it extensively as a seasoning in almost all their foods. It prefers light, warm soil, although it grows well everywhere. It is sown in March, and the seeds are harvested in August and September. They keep well for two years. CORNE-DE-CERF, PLANTAIN. (Plantago coronopus, L.) O. Indigenous. This rather insignificant-tasting plant is used only for salad supplies. Only the leaves are used, which are cut as needed and grow back very quickly, provided that copious watering is given, especially in the plant's early stages. Sow in light, well-amended soil in spring, and harvest from September to October. SQUASH, PUMPKIN, PEPON. (Cuourbita pepo) Q. From India. This plant, the largest of its kind, covers a very large area of land. Its fruits, sometimes reaching an enormous size, can be eaten in a variety of ways; but they are even more valuable in large-scale cultivation than in the kitchen garden, because they provide abundant, healthy food for livestock. Two varieties and several sub-varieties are grown. 1° JAUnE (luteus); the most widely grown around Paris. 2° VeRr (viridis); almost as widespread. D09 3° NoiR; highly cultivated in Bresse. 4° BLaNC; rare around Paris. 5° VERRUQUEUX or brodé, believed to have firmer flesh. 6° POTIRON D'ESPACNE, said to be the best of all. These plants like warmth and watering, but not damp soil. In the North, in March, their seeds are set to germinate in pots which are placed in a warm layer and covered with cloches. When frosts are no longer to be feared, a hole is dug with good exposure; a little fertilizer is thrown in, and the plant is placed in it after having been removed from the soil. In the Paris area, it is sometimes sufficient to make a hole at the beginning of April, fill the bottom with manure, throw eight or ten inches of compost over it, and plant three seeds, leaving only the strongest foot when they have sprouted. In either case, water often. To obtain good seeds, choose the first-knotted and best-formed fruit, keep it for as long as possible, and only extract the seeds when it begins to rot. Those sown on the bed bear fruit in August; the others from the beginning of September until winter. When the frosts start to set in, they are picked and stored in a dry place away from the cold, where they can be kept for varying lengths of time. The MELOPEPON PUMPKIN (cucurbita melopepo, L.) O, native to the same country, provides several edible varieties, some of which are preferred for their firmer, less bland flesh. 1° CIRAUMON TURBAN; firmer, sweeter flesh than pumpkin. 2008 2° BONNET D'ÉLECTEUR, pâtisson, (melopepo clypeatus); same quality. 3° L'ARTICHAUT DE JÉRUSALEX (melopepo radiatus); same quality. 4° MELONATED OR MUSKED CURRANT; highly prized in the south of France. 5° CIRAUMON NOIR. 6° CIRAUMON LONG DE BARBARIE or longuc squash. 7° COURGE A LA MOELLE, whose flesh is very sweet. 8° MELOPEPON TUBERCULEUX (melopepo verrucosus). 9° MELOPEPON ORANGE (melopepo aurantiiformie). 10° MELOPEPON PYRIFORME (melopepo prriformis). All can be grown like pumpkins. The WHITE-FLOWERED PUMPKIN (cucurbita leucantha, L.), O of South America, produces unusually shaped fruit with a hard, limp rind and peregrine gourds. Its most remarkable varieties are: 1° COUGOURDE or bottle (leucantha lagenaria). 2° GOURDE (leucantha latior). 3° POiRE A POUDRE (leucantha prrotheca). 4° CaLEbaSsE or club (leucantha longa). These are grown like the others, but as their fruits are lighter, it is customary to row the plants to make their stems climb. CRESSON DEFONTAINE (Sisymbrium nasturtium, L.) 2. native. This plant, used medicinally as an anti-scorbutic and in cooking for salads and supplies, grows only in clear water. If you have a piece of water in your garden that is always transparent and pure, or even better, a stream, by throwing a few cress roots on its banks 008, they will soon spread and grow stems every year that can be cut tender until the worst frosts, provided they are not allowed to go to seed. If you don't have a pond, take a large tub, dump six or eight inches of soil in the bottom and fill with water. The watercress roots planted in it will produce quite well if you take care to renew the water from time to time, so that it doesn't corrode or even heat up. If you wish, you can multiply it by its seeds, but this is a long and risky process when cultivating in a tub. CRESS ALÉNOIS, NASITOR, PASSERAGE CULTIVÉ. (Lepidium sativum; L.) Q. From Persia. Its young, tender shoots are eaten in salads and as a garnish. Three varieties are grown: ordinary, broad-leaved or golden, and curly-leaved. As this little plant goes to seed very quickly, it has to be sown every two weeks, in spring on old bedding soil, and in summer in the open ground and in the shade. Sometimes, autumn-sown plants can withstand the cold until the spring sowings begin to produce cuttings. Seedlings are sown in rays and a little thickly. They need watering, especially during hot spells. EARTH CESSON, VIVACE CESSON, BARBARED VEGETABLE, LYRUS LEAF ERYSIMUM (Erysimum barbarea, L.) 2. native. Used to replace watercress, from which it takes on some of the flavor. It is sown lighter than watercress, in rays, in light, slightly moist, open soil. Meadow cress (Cardamine pratensis, L.) 2. native. Like the above, it has the same uses as watercress, with its pungent flavor. It is grown like watercress. It is sown in spring, and lasts for several years if grown in open, damp or even marshy soil. PARA CESSON (Spilanthus oleracea; L.) O. Indies. This creeping plant is used in supplies and seasoning because of its pungent flavor. In February or March, sow on beds and under frames or cloches, and avoid letting the coldest weather reach the young plant. When the season is assured and the seedlings are strong enough, transplant them into light, warm soil in a south-facing position. They are watered to keep the soil constantly moist. You can also sow in the open ground at the beginning of May, with good exposure and only lightly covering the seeds with Gn potting soil. BRAZIL CRESSON (spilanthus brasiliana, L.) O. is cultivated in the same way and used for the same purposes as the preceding plant. Both sometimes self-sow, when the soil and exposure are favorable. DANDELION. (Taraxacum dens leonis; Lam, leontodon taraxacum, L.) 2. native. It is very common in meadows, where it is collected in the first days of spring to be eaten as a salad. Cultivation is highly advantageous, as it causes it to lose some of its bitterness. In spring, on any type of soil, but best on fresh, open ground, it is sown a little thickly, watered and harvested. As it occupies the soil for a year, it can be sown as a border plant, if desired. In the following spring, as soon as it begins to appear, it needs to be covered to whiten it; for this, you can use flower pots that are tipped over, dry litter, etc.; but the best is to cover it with four fingers of loam or even well loosened 0 earth. It is cut off at the root collar when it has pierced the layer of compost, and the tips of its leaves can be seen poking out. Its seeds are collected as soon as they ripen, so that the wind doesn't scatter them. DOLIC ONGUICULÉ, MONGETTE, BANNETTE. (Dolichos unguiculatus; L.) Q. West Indies. A species of bean widely grown in southern France, with pods much longer than those of our ordinary beans. Other species are also grown: 1° DOliC Lablar or Egrpte bean (dolichos lablab, L.) O, from Egypt, and its white-flowered variety; this is grown in ornamental gardens. 2° DOLIC A LONGUES GOUSSES, or asparagus bean (dolichos sesquipedalis, L.) O, from the West Indies, whose fleshy, narrow and very long pods are, like those of the preceding varieties, excellent in green. Dolics are very sensitive to cold; they like open, light, warm soil. In April, they are sown in pots in a warm layer under a bell or under a frame; in May, they are planted with the rootball, in a well-exposed spot. In May, they can also be sown in the open ground at the foot of a wall facing south, but if the seasons are not right, the fruit will not ripen. In any case, they are rowed and cultivated like beans. ECHALOTTE. (Allium as calonicum, L.) 4. This garlic, native to Palestine, is more widely used than the others, because of its milder flavor and less strong odor. It is a little more delicate, and has a greater fear of rotting. For this reason, it is only grown with great success in light, substantial, warm soils. It multiplies from cloves, which are planted in February and March, and sometimes before winter, in countries where frost is unlikely. They are planted in beds or borders, three or four inches apart, with the extreme precaution of covering them very lightly with soil to avoid the dampness that would inevitably rot them; they should even be dethatched if the season is wet, and especially some time before ripening. From the end of May onwards, they can be used for cooking, but they should not be harvested until the leaves have dried out, at which point they should be plucked, left to dry in the sun for two or three days, and stored in a dry place away from frost. My colleague and friend, Mr. Vilmorin, believes that the variety known as GROSSE ÉCHALOTE is simply the result of cultivation in better soil. If you didn't have suitable soil, you could lighten it by mixing in a sufficient quantity of sand. Few gardeners have ever seen shallots go to seed. The thinnest and longest cloves produce the most beautiful bulbs. SPINACH (Spinacia oleracea, L.) Q. From northern Asia. Two varieties of this plant are grown, and everyone knows its uses. One has bristly seeds, the other (S. oleracea lœvis) smooth. Each has a sub-variety with broad leaves. Spinach is sown broadcast, or in rays six inches apart, every month from March to the end of October; as it remains in the ground for only a short time, it can be planted in beds to be used for another crop six weeks or two months later. To produce high yields, it requires very loose, well-smoked soil and copious watering. Heat makes it rise very quickly, so place it in cool, shady soil during the summer. The seed is collected from spring seedlings, and to get the best of it, we pull out the male plants as soon as fertilization has taken place; the females benefit from greater space, and the seed is better nourished; we support them with sticks to prevent the seed from escaping. It keeps well for two or three years. 2. 24 ESTRAGON, SERPENTINE, DRAGONNE (Artemisia dracunculus; L.) 2. From Tartary. Its young shoots are used for supplies and seasoning, and are pickled in vinegar with gherkins. It is seldom propagated other than by sprouting in spring, rarely by cuttings taken in spring and summer, and even more rarely by seed, as these are difficult to obtain. It likes clean, light, loose soil that's not too damp. Its shoots can be picked every two weeks, but care must be taken not to tear them off, as they don't hold up well in the ground. FENNEL. (Anethum fœniculum; L.) 2. native. The leaves are sometimes used as seasoning; the seeds are used to make sweets and flavor liqueurs. Sow in March in light, warm soil with good exposure; water and weed while the plant is young, then leave it to nature; it is hardy and usually resows itself. SWEET FENNEL, or PARIS ANISE (A. fœniculum dulce) is a much lower, softer and milder variety, whose roots and stalks are used in cooking like celery. It is highly prized in Spain and Italy. It is grown in exactly the same way as celery, and blanched in the same way. MARSH BEAN (Faba vulgaris; Moencn, Vicia faba; L.) Q. From Persia. Its floury seeds are considered less indigestible than those of other legumes. Several varieties are grown. 1° Rève, de Marais or grosse seve ordinaire (faba vulgaris major); its stems are two feet high, and its seeds very large. A smaller sub-variety is called seve picarde. 2° FÈVE DE WINOSOR, or large round sap; its stems are large and strong; its pods are larger and wider than those of the other varieties, but usually contain only two beans. 3° The HATIVE NAINE BEAN, brought from the coasts of Africa by the English, who gave it the name mazagane. Its branching stem, forming a bush, rises to a maximum of one foot. It is very productive and can be grown as an early plant under glass. As it degenerates easily, it is best to choose seed-bearing plants with the most prominent characteristics of the variety. 4° PETTTE FÈVE, julienne, séverole (faba vulgaris minor); very early and high yielding. 5° FÈVE D'HÉLIGOLAND; also productive, but less early. 6° rÉveRolle D'HIVER; hardier and better able to withstand the cold. These last two seem to be sub-varieties of the petite feve. All three are grown extensively for livestock feed, mainly for horses. -Faba viridis is native to China and produces a lot, but is a little late. It remains green as it dries. 8° FÈVE A LONGUES cossts; its long pods contain more seeds than the other varieties; it is quite stodgy. All fava beans like substantial, soft, well-smoked soil. They are sown broadcast in fields, in rays, in clumps, and in beds in gardens, in February, March or April at the latest, because they fear heat and especially drought. However, if you want to enjoy them all year round, sow in May, June and even early July, but in cool, shady spots, and in December and January for spring. When sowing in clumps, make shallow holes a foot apart, and throw in three or four beans. When they are a few inches high, we hoe them, and put soil back into the holes, so that the young plant is stopped by an inch or two; a fortnight later we put soil back against its foot; and we hoe it again a third time when it 4009 has grown a little taller. The result is that the base of the stem emits new roots, which increase the plant's vigor. If the seed has been sown in rays, the soil from the edges of the furrow is hoeed in the same way; but if the seed has been sown broadcast and in the open field to provide fodder, simply weed without hoeing. Once the beans have passed the flower, the ends of the branches and stems are pinched to force the sap to concentrate on the fruit, which then becomes larger and ripens more quickly. If you want to eat green beans, you pick them when they are about a quarter of the size; then you can cut the stem down to the ground, and if the season is right, it will grow new shoots, which will produce a second harvest. The seed is harvested when it is perfectly ripe, from plants of very strong varieties, chosen from among the sturdiest and first sown. If kept in their pods, they can remain good for five or six years. When the beans begin to degenerate, it is absolutely necessary to change the soil, and even the climate if possible. ~ (Fragaria) 2. native. This plant, highly prized for the sweet fragrance and delicate flavor of its fruit, has given rise to such a large number of varieties that it would be impossible today to recognize the type, indigenous or exotic, to which each may belong; hybrid fertilization has made this impossible. 1° COMMON STRAWBERRY (fragaria vesca, L.), too well known to describe. In the field, it naturally provides the following variety; large-flowered woodland strawberry (fragaria vesca grandiflora.) Petals larger than the calyx, flowers often dioecious. All have red, fragrant fruit, but give only once, in spring. a. White-fruited (f. vesca alba); similar to the above, but with white fruit. b. Threadless, or bush strawberry (f. vesca eflagellis); less productive, but very convenient for borders. c. Large wood strawberry (f. vesca magna); high stems; flowers often dioecious; fruit similar to common wood strawberry. d. One-leaf strawberry (f. vesca monophrlla); fruit of the same quality as the preceding strawberry, from which it differs only in its single-lobed leaf; it regains three lobes if cultivation is neglected. 2° FRAISIER DES ALPES (f. vesca semperflorens. ) Less productive, but supplies until frost; its smaller, more elongated fruits are the most fragrant of the genus. a. Alpine strawberry with white fruit; fruit of same size, but rounded; plant also productive. b. Alpine strawberry sana filets or Gaillon strawberry; fruit slightly smaller. Plant does not produce coulans. c. Strawberry from the Alps without nets and with white fruit; superior to the preceding one for the abundance and quality of its fruit. 3° FRAISIER DES JARDINS, DE MONTREUIL (f. vesca hortensis); its fruit is fairly large, elongated, often compressed and terminated by two nipples. It produces only once. a. De Bargemont or majaufe (f. vesca cœesalpina, aut bifera); smaller than the preceding one and with two seasons. Its fruit is very good, but its musky flavor means it is not to everyone's taste. We found it growing naturally near Coulange-sur-Yonne. 4° FRAISIER VERT D'ANGLETERRE, FRAISIER DE CHAMPAGNE (f. vesca viridis); its fruit is very watery, brownish on the sunny side and whitish on the other; mediocre quality. 5° CAPERON, CAPITON, CHAPERON (f.vesca moschata); large fruit, of very mediocre quality. a. Caperon with elongated fruit; better than the previous one. b. Apricot caperon; very good. c. Raspberry caperon; good, but a little watery. d. Male caperon; few hermaphroditic flowers; produces few fruits. 2008 e. Prolific Hautboy; very large, sun-colored, very smoky fruit. This variety comes from England, where we brought it back this year. We have kept its English name, along with two other new varieties. 6° ANANAS (f. ananassa); very large, attractive fruit, not very fragrant and watery. -° ÉCARLATE OR VIRCINIA STRAWBERRY (f. virginiana); early, crimson-red fruit, grows well under frame; it is good, fragrant, and fruits twice a year. a. Strawberry with pink fruit; fruit is very pale red, of medium size and pleasant flavor. 8° FRAISIER DE LA CAROLINE (f. caroliniana); fruit is shiny, colorful, fairly large and very good. This species is the most widely grown in England. a. Bath strawberry (f. caloliniana milleri); fruit very large, not very colorful and not very fragrant. b. Imperial hean's strawberry; fruit almost as large as the Chilean strawberry, quite bright red on the sunny side, and very pleasant flavor. c. Pine scarlet strawberry; fruit of medium size, bright red, very smoky. d. Strawberry prince noir; fairly large, dark purple fruit; very pleasant flavor. 9° FRAISIER DU CHILI, FRUTILLER (f. chiloensis); this species is dioecious and therefore only produces when both male and female are present. Its fruit is very large, but not very pleasant and not very fragrant. a. Fertile Chilean strawberry; flowers all hermaphrodite; fruit smaller than the preceding ones, more abundant, with a more pleasant flavor. 10° FRAISIER DES INDES (f. indica); yellow flowers; oval, rounded, brilliant-red fruit of very poor quality; seeds spaced and protruding, revealing the smooth, shiny pulpy body between them; calyx borne on an involucre with five very large, crenellated lobes, forming a collar around the fruit, and contrasting pleasantly with the strawberry's color by its beautiful green 3008. This plant loves humidity. We still have many new varieties sent to us from various countries, but we refrain from talking about them because we have not yet seen their fruit. Five-threshold, double-flowered, Swedish dwarf and single-leaved Versailles strawberries are grown as ornamental plants. All strawberry plants multiply by seed, splinters or by their creeping, rooted stems, known as coulans or nets. They do well in all soils and at all exposures, but prefer light, warm, half-shaded soil. As soon as the strawberries have reached perfect ripeness, they are picked and placed on a plank in a draught to dry out quickly. The seeds are removed by rubbing and loosening with the hand. You can also crush the strawberries, wash them in various waters, and collect the seeds that precipitate to the bottom. Immediately sow them in a terrine full of heather soil, mixed with a third of highly consumed potting compost. The seed is not buried, but simply pressed against the soil with a wooden pallet or your hand. Some people cover the seedling with chopped moss, and water over it with a very fine sheaf. If you wish, you can leave it uncovered and water from underneath, dipping the base of the bowl into a tub of water. Seedlings of any kind should always be kept in the shade, until the little plants have grown strong enough to brave the sun's rays. You can also sow in light, loose soil, or wait until spring to sow in a terrine; but in the first case, very few plants germinate, and in the second, the seed takes a very long time to germinate, and much of it is lost. The seedling will germinate in less than a month, and when the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted into well-tilled, top-soiled soil, spacing the plants six or eight inches apart, a little more if you have sown the broad-leaved varieties. We hoe and water often, especially when the plant is young, and we scrupulously remove its runners, so as not to let it become sluggish, especially in the early stages. When you have a bed of strawberry plants, whether you have propagated them from seed or by sprouting, every year at the start of winter, cover the bed with a fingerful of consumed manure, just as it is when you undo a layer; In spring, we bury it by hoeing and replace it with finely chopped straw, covering the soil to prevent it from being beaten up by rain and watering, to preserve its humidity, and to prevent the strawberries from getting dirty by touching the soil. This precaution also keeps slugs away. Every two or three years, in spring, or better still in autumn, the strawberry plants are removed, the rooted eyelets are separated, the stumps are broken up, and, after spading and smoking the bed where they were, they are carefully replanted; they are watered and sheltered from the sun by mats supported on poles and stakes, until they recover perfectly. Autumn planting is more prone to melting than spring planting, but it also produces as early as the following spring. If the multiplication of a precious plant were more important than its fruit, we'd leave it its coulans, and each rosette of leaves it provided would put down roots and form a new plant. To obtain early strawberries, we take 1 plants from the previous sowing, or, if we haven't sown them, early varieties such as the Alpine strawberry, n° 2, and the Virginia strawberry, n° 7; we put three of them in a pot in August, and let them recover in the shade, with moderate watering so as not to etiolate them. In September, place them in a temperate layer under a frame, and keep them warm with heaters. If they are given adequate air and watering, they will start to produce fruit in January, and continue to do so until you have strawberries in the ground. They can also be planted in the open ground with good exposure, and covered with a frame in February to produce strawberries in April. In England, the Horticultural Society is working hard to perfect the cultivation of this delicious fruit, of which it has obtained a large number of new varieties. They plant from one to two feet apart, depending on the size of the plant. Precious species are lightly buttressed once flowering has passed; they are mulched as we have said, or slates or tiles are laid under each foot to support or keep clean the fruit, which their weight drags to the ground. These different methods avoid the inconvenience of washing strawberries, which takes away some of their fragrance. strawberry, spanish lentil. (Lathyrus sativus; L.) O. Indigenous. This plant has been given almost as many names as there are provinces where it is grown: poisgesse, pois carré, pois breton, lentille carrée, garoute, garousse, gesse-blanche, etc. Its seeds are eaten while still green at the end of the day. The seeds are eaten while still green, like peas, and when dry, they make quite good purées. But it's especially when grown in large quantities as fodder that this plant really comes into its own. It does fairly well in all soils, provided they are not very2 damp. In southern France, it can be sown in autumn, and in temperate climates in March and April. In gardens, it is grown in exactly the same way as peas. OKRA, EDIBLE KETMIA. (Hibiscus esculentus; L.) Q. From India. Its flowers are quite similar to those of the marshmallow. This plant, widely used in America, is beginning to be cultivated advantageously in France, especially in the south, where its seeds ripen every year. Its young shoots and still-green fruit are used in cooking. In February, we sow it in pots placed on a warm layer under a frame; in March, we put it on a new layer, and in May, we unpack it and plant it with the rootball at the foot of a wall in the south, in a very warm spot. Take care of it, and above all, water it abundantly. COMMON BEAN. (Phaseolus vulgaris, L.) O. From India. We know enough about the qualities and uses of beans to make it unnecessary to talk about them here. An infinite number of varieties are grown, but most of these are due to differences in soil and climate. We will therefore only mention the selection made by our colleague M. Vilmorin (1), adding a few varieties we think are of interest. 1° HARICOTS WITH RAMES; these are climbers, and we are obliged to support their stems with poles, which is called rowing. A. Those with white seeds: a. From Soissons; large and flat, very good dry, but not acquiring in Paris the qualities it has in Soissons. (1) We invite amateurs and gardeners who wish to be sure of the quality of their seeds, and especially to receive the varieties requested, to apply for all vegetable plants, cereals and forages, to Maison Vilmorin, quai de la Mégisserie, Paris. 1008 b. Sabre d'Allemagne, podded; medium size, flattened; its broad pods are excellent when green, and still good when semi-dry; the seed, dry or green, is the best of all bean varieties; its stems rise very high. c. Prédome, prudhomme, white prodommet without parchment; its pod is excellent when green, good when semi-dry; the grain is valued when dry. d. Sophie; medium size; good in green, flat, thick-skinned and hard, of mediocre quality. e. Riz; very small and oblong; good in green, newly shelled, and dry. f. De Lima; thick, large, dirty white; it produces a lot, but is late and delicate, and rarely ripens in the Paris climate unless it has been advanced in pots and on layers. g. Hatif; of medium size, the earliest of all; very good in green, but a little hard-skinned when dry. h. De Picardie or de Liancourt; very large, flattened; high yield, but a little hard-skinned when dry; resembles Soissons, but larger and taller. i. Round or pea bean; soft and tasty; numerous pods, good when green; very small, rounded, russet-white beans, very good when dry. j. Gigantic; larger than the Picardy bean, resembling it but producing less; needs oars of eight to nine feet. B. Colored grains: k. Prudhomme jaune; similar to white except for color, but less prized. l. De Prague, or red pea; round, violet-red; late, but high yielding; good in green; dry, it has

The skin is a little thick, but it is floury and has a pleasant flavor similar to that of chestnuts. m. Prague bicolor; round and variegated; same qualities. n. Belly of doe; tawny yellow; less rounded; good in green and dry. o. Grivelé; flax grey with black speckles; good in green, very008 productive; dyes the water in which it is cooked black. p. Purpurin marbled; reddish with brown speckles; good in green. q. Pink; good in green and dry: but low yield. r. Red; good green and dry; must be paddled high to produce much. s. Cardinal; white with a broad purple crown around the germ; good green; very large, flattened kernels; ripens late and with difficulty. 2° DARK BEANS; self-supporting and therefore do not need to be branched. In wet soils, in free soil, and during rainy years, dwarf trees tend to climb like those with oars. To keep them free, they should be sown as much as possible in dry, light or sandy soil. A. Those with white grains: a. Hatif de Hollande; its long, narrow pod is excellent for green cultivation; it is one of the earliest of the dwarfs, and does well under sowing frames. b. Hátif de Laon or flageolet; long, cylindrical, very hasty, very widespread, preferred for sowing under sowing frames; excellent for green cultivation and quite good for dry cultivation. c. De Soissons, or gros-pied; very hasty, flattened, of medium size; excellent freshly shelled, and for dry cultivation. la d. White without parchment; flattened, small, very good green and dry. e. Sabre dwarf; similar to the previous one, but with a wider pod; it has the same qualities. These two varieties form large, low, branched clumps, whose very long pods sometimes drag on the ground and rot if they come into contact with moisture. Two or three seeds per clump should therefore be sown in dry soil. f. Blanc d'Amérique; small, slightly elongated, very good dry, productive; its pod, large and slightly arched, is colored reddish-brown at both ends. g. Deux à la tousfe; very productive, no parchment, good in green and freshly shelled graius. 1008 h. Hdtif d'Argenson; similar to the early dwarf from Holland, but even earlier. i. Swiss; elongated, cylindrical, russet-white; excellent green, very poor dry; fairly early. B. Those with colored seeds: j. Red Swiss; same shape as above, but with red grain, mottled with different colors depending on the soil; good for green and dry growing. k. Grey Swiss; same shape; blackish-red grain, inlaid with white; excellent in fresh or dried pods for winter storage. l. Suisse gris de Bagnolet; grayish background, spotted with black and brown; same qualities as above. Both are widely grown around Paris. m. Swiss belly, same shape as above; more prone to bolting; good in green; mediocre in dry, but makes excellent purée. n. Black or negro; small, similar to Swiss; early, high yielding; excellent in green. o. Rouge d'Orléans; red, small, flattened; excellent dry. p. Jaune du Canada; very small plant; rounded, pale yellow kernel with a small brown crown around the umbilicus; very early, no parchment; good green. q. Brown-yellow; round, medium size; productive; good dry. r. From China; fairly large, rounded, pale sulfur-colored; very productive; excellent dry and freshly shelled. s. Yellow without parchment; small, oval, very early, arched pod; excellent green and dry. It is very prone to rising and consequently to degeneration. When it rises, the grain turns from yellow to black. t. Yellow with parchment; even earlier than the previous variety; high yielding; good dry. u. Red without parchment; large clump, very productive; good green and dry; excellent for purée. We have indicated the qualities of the varieties we have just mentioned, but amateurs will do well to stick to the species recognized as the best in their 2009 province, as the change of climate has such an effect on beans that those we have indicated as excellent could become mediocre, and vice versa. However, this does not always happen. The SPANISH BEAN (phaseolus coccineus, ENCYCL; multiflorus, willp.) O, from the West Indies, is a species that was first cultivated for ornamental purposes, but which was transferred to the vegetable garden as soon as its qualities were known. It has two varieties, grown like pole beans. 1° With scarlet flowers; of mediocre quality; large, flax-gray speckled with black. 2° With white flowers; same shape and size; mealy, bark a little thick, but good dry. Produces a lot. In general, beans like light, slightly cool, very loose soil, amended with consumed fertilizers. In clay and oily soils, sow later, smoke more and cover the seed less. Sow from April to May for dry harvesting, and to July for green eating. As they are very sensitive to cold, this is the plant to choose for each country and terrain. In the same climate, it is sometimes necessary to delay sowing by fifteen or twenty days in cold, damp soils, and to bring it forward by the same amount in warm, dry soils with good exposure. Sow in clumps in light soils, to shade the plants and keep them moist, or in rays in heavy soils. In the first case, holes two or three inches deep are made in a chessboard pattern, eighteen inches apart. Five or six beans are thrown in, and covered with an inch of very fine soil, or better still, potting compost. If humidity or cold weather (4000°C) made you fear that not all the beans would rise, you would throw more into each hole, but with the precaution, when they do rise, of leaving only the number we have mentioned. To sow in rows or rays, twelve or fifteen inches apart, open furrows with the hoe, and throw grains in one by one, spaced about three or four inches apart. Cover as described. If rain or sprinkling beats the soil, the crust is broken with a two-pronged trowel, to facilitate bean emergence, otherwise the seed will perish between two plots. Fifteen days after sowing, they should all have emerged. When the plants are a month old, they have already been hoeed once, and we give them a second hoeing by ridging them; for this last operation, we pull the soil left at the edge of the holes or on the sides of the sowing furrows together around the feet, we row them, and everything is kept there until harvest, unless rain or other circumstances have caused weeds to grow, which we pull out by hand as they appear. To obtain seeds, choose the most honest and first-sown plants. If they are pole beans, we pick the pods as they ripen; but if they are bush beans, we leave them all to ripen on the plant, then pull off the stalks, which we bundle together and hang in a sheltered spot. Seeds kept in their pods are good for four years; shelled, they stop germinating in the third year. Early market. Green beans can be purchased from May until the full beans are ready to bear, and without much care. All you need to do is choose the earliest dwarf species, sow them in February in pots on a warm layer and under a frame; at the end of April, carefully remove the seeds and plant them at the foot of a wall with good exposure. They are quick to produce, especially if covered at night with glass cages or straw hives, etc. If you want green beans over winter, sow in the same way, but in December and January; a month after sowing, put the plants back in larger pots and on a new bed. When the beans are ready to bloom, they are carried to a deaf layer, planted in eight or ten inches of well-consumed compost mixed with half light earth, covered with trays and given air whenever possible. At the same time, beans are sown in pots large enough for the plants to develop fully, and placed on the shelves of a greenhouse near the stained-glass windows, where they are left until harvest. Finally, the method most commonly used in Paris consists of sowing them in tarpaulin, in eight or ten inches of potting soil spread on a layer prepared with one third old manure and two thirds new, and cultivating them in the same way as those grown in the open ground. Sow in January and February, and heat when necessary. CULTIVATED HOPS. (Humulus lupulus, L.) 2. native. This plant is widely cultivated, because its flowers are used to make beer; in cooking, only its young shoots are used, which are prepared in the same way as asparagus. We mention it here only because it is found in many gardens, where it has been brought to cover arbors, cradles, palisades, etc., and we could make use of the surplus of its shoots. It can be propagated with root flakes in spring or autumn, and planted three or four inches deep in light, loose soil amended with fertilizer. HYSSOP OFFICINALIS. (Hyssopus officinalis; L.) 6. This plant from southern France has several varieties, with white, pink, red or blue flowers and variegated leaves. Its sweet, aromatic scent has long been used to form borders in the kitchen garden. It likes substantial, open, light soil and sunny exposure. It can be propagated from seed sown in March, from cuttings taken in summer, or even better from cuttings taken in autumn. When planted in borders, it must be replanted every two years, or it will spread and form unpleasant gaps. LETTUCE. (Lactuca sativa; L.) Q. From Asia. It has given rise to two garden species, the PUMPKIN LETTUCE and the ROMAN LETTUCE, from which we have obtained more than fifty varieties, but which can be reduced to an infinitely smaller number if we consider this plant only in terms of its usefulness in the vegetable garden. I. HEAD LETTUCES. A. Spring. a. La gotte or gau; small, blond, quick to head and rising likewise; excellent for early sowing; white seed. b. Gotte with black seed; also early, better for head. c. Slow to head; rises even more slowly; black seed. d. Red yellow; medium-sized, peels well, soft, tender, with a very yellow heart; round outer leaves, almost plain, of a soft green whipped with red; black seed. e. Red-edged or red cord; a little larger than the preceding ones; quick to peel, but rising fast; white seed. f. Dauphine; very large, a little flattened, fairly smooth, a little reddish on the apple; early, rising slowly; black seed. 2. 25 008 g. Chicory lettuce; crested leaves, imitating those of chicory; does not head and is only good for cutting. h. Spinach lettuce; its leaves are cut in much the same way as oak leaves, growing back as they are cut, but do not head. It is therefore only used like the previous variety. B. D'été. a. From Versailles; whitish blond; large, a little haunting; quick to bud and difficult to climb; white grai ne. b. La cocasse; shiny green; very large, with a few freckles; very blistered leaves. These characteristics distinguish it from the previous variety, with which it has often been confused. It keeps its apple very long; white seed. c. Blonde with black seeds; yellowish blond; medium size. d. Blonde de Berlin; very large; tender green, slightly reddish at the edges. Apples quickly; black seed. e. Royale with black seed; greener than the preceding one; very large; apples slowly, but holds well. f. Blonde paresseuse, or summer yellow; apple a little flat, ringed, holds well; leaves plain and very round; white seed. g. Blonde trapue; apple very flat, holds even better than the preceding one; leaves wrinkled; white seed. h. Batavia blond or Silesia; the largest of all, with very wrinkled leaves, undulating at the edge which is slightly tinted red, light green; slightly concave apple, whitening imperfectly: excellent in light soils, but becomes a little bitter in strong soils; white seed. i. Maltese; similar to the above, but paler and plainer green; white seed. j. Cabbage, or yellow Batavia; very large apple, better cooked than raw; brownish-green leaves; white seed. k. Turque; very large, tight, excellent head; large, almost smooth, dull green leaves; black seed. 1. L'impériale or grosse allemande; same qualities as the preceding one, from which it differs only in its white seed. m. De Génes. Four varieties are known. 1° La donte, with smooth leaves, flattened buds, reddish at the top, forming quickly and holding well; black seed. 2° Blonde, with smooth leaves, a slightly pointed head and white seeds. 3° Green, with green, curly leaves and a hard, yellow apple, larger than the previous one; white seed. 4° Rousse, with curly, russet leaves spotted with brown; it dries out well; its seed is black. n. Méterelle; greenish-blond; large, slow-growing, very difficult-to-rising apple; white seed. o. Grosse hrune laesseuse or grosse grise; grayish-green leaves, spotted with pale brown; very large head, reddish at the top, very slow to form and rising quickly; black seed. p. Palatine rousse, brun hollandaise, or petite brune; smooth, reddish-tinted leaves; medium-sized head; black seed; hardy variety. q. Flagellée à graine blanche, or sanguine; green leaves with reddish variegation, pleasant effect. It rises easily in hot weather, so is best suited to spring and autumn. 1 r. Sanguine with black seed; quite similar to the previous one, but more variegated and better maintained. s. Grosse crépe; yellowish-green, very curly; peels well, but rises quickly. It is very soft and very tender; white seed. t. Round crepe, bagnolet, small, short, spring-like, declining; earlier than the preceding one, yellowish-green, very fragrant under cloche without needing air; white seed. u. Big George; blond, smooth leaves; tight, very tender apple. Succeeds very well under bell if given air and watering, but rises quickly; white seed. v. White George; blond, brittle leaves, not very curly; large, tender, very good apple, but rises quickly; white seed. 2008 x. Aubervilliers; very-small, peeling well and long-lasting; yellow apple; smooth, coarse-green outer leaves; white seed. Although very good, it is little cultivated because of its small size. y. Perpignane green; smooth leaves, with a large rib; very large, very yellow, tender, bitter-free apple. It doesn't climb easily and holds up well in dry soils and hot weather; white seed. z. Perpignane mouchetée; similar to the previous variety, but with green leaves spotted with yellow; same qualities; white seed. a. Bapaume; large, blond, well-supported; its head is full and tight at the bottom, but not so much at the top; black seed. b. D'Italie; fine, tender green leaves, edged with red; tight, excellent apple; black seed. c. Grosse rouge; very large; round, almost even outer leaves, black green, shaded with a coarse dull red; yellow apple; orange, sweet, tender, excellent; black seed. d. Royale à graine blanche; glossy green outer leaves, a little blistered; tender, good apple, very long-lasting; white seed. C. Winter. a. Shell with white seed; round leaves, more green than yellow, united. Hard, bitter and only eaten cooked. All its merit lies in the fact that it is more resistant to cold than the other species. b. Black-seeded shell; differs from the preceding one only in the color of its seeds, and is not much better. c. Passion; green leaves, blistered, slightly spotted with red; medium-sized head; a little better than the preceding ones, but still only good cooked, like all winter lettuces; white seed. d. Passion speckled; similar to the preceding one, but leaves entirely speckled with red; white seed. e. Morine; leaves less developed, greener; head as large, maintains itself better; white seed. 3008 f. Petite crépe; difficult to peel, but grows well under bell during the winter; black seed. g. Petite noire; similar to the preceding one, but has the merit of growing well under bell without having to be given air; black seed. II. ROMAN LAITUES, or CHICONS. a. Romaine hdtive or green hdtive; has the invaluable advantage of being capped under a bell; fairly large, flat, filled head; yellowish-green leaves, pointed at the tip; white seed. b. Chicon vert, romaine verte maraîchère; this is the most commonly cultivated, because it is larger and hardier than the others, in addition to the fact that it caps itself, i.e., without needing to be tied. It is flattened and lengthens as it degenerates; black seed. c. Chicon gris, large gray romaine; resembles the previous one, but is darker green. It is valued more for its milder flavor; white seed. d. Chicon blond, romaine blonde maralchère; yellowish-green leaves, a little pointed at the tip; large, flat, full head, rising rapidly. This variety is more delicate to eat than the preceding ones; white seed. e. Chicon rouge, winter red romaine; red outer leaves, yellow heart, very tender, but prone to melting as soon as it is bound if the soil is not suitable; black seed. f. Chicon panaché, flagellé; Silesian lettuce; sanguine romaine; red variegated leaves; tender, soft, excellent heart; black seed. g. Chicon panaché d'Angleterre; its outer leaves are less variegated than in the preceding variety, but those of the heart are more variegated, and they often stand alone; otherwise, same qualities; white seed. h. Alphange; narrow, pointed, thin, smooth, pale green leaves, slightly tinted red at the top; excellent variety, but with the defect of rotting or rising too easily; white seed. 2008 i. Alphange blonde; very large variety, with fat, thick, yellow leaves; black seed. j. Romaine verte d'hiver; similar to chicon vert, but smaller and more difficult to top; white seed. We could have expanded the list of lettuces by many more varieties, but as most of them fall within those we have described in terms of use, quality and the times at which they can be cut, we felt that more quotations would be as tedious as they would be useless. We must also point out that each variety has its own particular terrain, where it succeeds very well, while in the others it loses its qualities, shape and color. So, to make a choice, you should base your decision less on what we have said here than on your experience of your soil, and stick to the varieties that do best there, after having tried them out. CULTIVATION. Cultivation varies according to variety and period, but can be generalized as follows: 1° Spring lettuces. Sow in February and March, on a bed or in the compost of a flowerbed facing south. In April, if the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted into a bed of soft, well-smoked soil. The rows are spaced more or less apart, depending on the size of the variety, but the interval between each lettuce can be no less than seven to eight inches. When planting, care should be taken not to press the heart of the plant into the ground, and to press the soil only moderately around the stalks. Water immediately afterwards, and moisten whenever necessary. When the lettuces have recovered, they are given facons with a serfouette, and the pores of the soil are kept open by weeding until they are ready to be cut. 2° Summer lettuces. They should be sown in the same way as spring lettuces, starting in the first days of April and sowing again every two weeks, so that the lettuces follow one another throughout the season. We don't stop sowing until July. Give them the care we mentioned above, and don't spare the watering if you want them to be tender and sweet. 3° Winter lettuces. We start sowing them immediately after summer lettuces, and continue until mid-September. At the end of October, they are transplanted into a bed at the foot of a south-facing wall, and protected from frost and snow by covering with straw mats or dry litter, which is removed whenever the weather permits. Romaine lettuces can be sown and cultivated in exactly the same way as head lettuces, with the only difference being that to blanch them, the species that don't cover themselves are tied with one or two bundles of straw. Bind only when the weather is dry and the leaves have no moisture. From then on, you should refrain from watering the leaves. To obtain good lettuce seed, you need to choose the least degenerate plants as carriers, offering all the characteristics of the variety. As soon as the seed is seen to be crowned with its aigrette and the leaves of the plants turn yellow, the stalks are removed and exposed to the sun, standing upright against a wall, for a few days, which completes the ripening of the seeds. The stems are beaten up, the seed is winnowed and stored for three or four years. Two-year-old lettuces are always the best to sow if you want plants that pump easily. A number of lettuces require special care, which we shall now explain. Dolphin will grow well in any soil, but it needs a lot of water, and the suckers it grows around its first leaves must be removed. The 1 batavia only works well in light, free soil, and needs frequent watering, but in the evening and morning, because if you wet it during the day it will stain and rot. Flagellates and black seeded bloodroot do well only in soft soils, and only flower in spring. Green Genoa lettuce needs watering only when it's badly needed, but wants to be hoeing often. Big red lettuce acquires all its qualities only in oily soil, where it apples in all seasons. Italy, on the other hand, requires thin, light soil and little water. La royale requires a lot of watering. Cocasse should be grown in soils that are neither too strong nor too light, unless it is given a lot of fertilizer and watering; by planting it, it sinks a little deeper than the others, which causes it to fade. We won't go into further details, which must be learned from experience. PRIMEUR. By means of special cultivation, lettuces can be grown all winter long, choosing for each seedling the varieties best suited to the season. If you just want lettuce for cutting, sow pancakes, gotte and other small early lettuces, as well as chicory and spinach, all winter long on a bed under a frame or cloches. Small crepes and small black lettuces are preferred for peeling. From the end of August, we sow them on teens in a south-facing position, then transplant them on beds, where they head in December. The second sowing is done on a bed at the beginning of November, transplanting once when the plant has two leaves, then a third time in place on another bed; these lettuces head in January. Finally, the third sowing is done in December and continues until March, but with special care. The layers should be covered with four inches of potting soil, into which the seed is only placed when the most intense heat has passed, and with the precaution of covering the seed very little with soil and placing cloches or frames over it. A few days later, the seedlings sprout, and as soon as the first leaf (in addition to the cotyledons) begins to develop, transplant under other cloches, spacing the seedlings an inch or two apart, and reheat the bed if it has lost heat. As far as possible, lettuce beds should be kept in a state of tepidness, never more and never less, as excess heat and the slightest cold melt plants equally. Cover the frames or cloches with bedding and straw mats, so as never to let the frost penetrate to the plants, and provide air whenever the temperature allows. When the plant has four or five leaves, it is transplanted again onto another layer filled with six inches of potting soil, and spaced out sufficiently to allow it to grow unhindered. Give it the same care as before, and place heaters around the bed to keep it warm. When the apple begins to form, remove any low yellowing leaves, and press the soil against the base, making it grow more quickly. By sowing every two weeks and cultivating as described above, you can obtain head lettuces from December to February, and even later if you wish. Gotte can be grown in the same way, but with the precaution of giving it frequent airing when it is three-quarters done and ready to head, which crepe and petite noire can do without. COMMON LAVENDER (Lavendula spica; L. )b. From southern France. It is grown as a border plant in all gardens because of its aromatic scent: it is used in cleansing baths, along with a related species, LAVENDULA A LARGES FEUILLES, NARD, ou Aspic (lavendula latifolia, HoRT. PaRIS.) B, evergreen. Both like light, warm soil, and rarely multiply from seed sown in spring, but more usually from seedlings sown in spring or September. They are planted fairly deeply in the ground to ensure a good start, and the borders are re-done every three years. These plants are easily propagated from cuttings on a warm bed and planted in the ground once they have fully recovered. LENTIL, CULTIVATED, COMMON, LARGE, BLOND. (Ervum lens, L.) Q. From southern France. Highly cultivated, especially near Paris, either in open fields or in gardens. Its variety LENTILLE A LA REINE, LENTILLE ROUCE (ervum lens minor), much smaller, russet and rounded, is more highly esteemed, as is its sub-variety, which is slightly smaller and less russet. All three like light, dry, sandy soil; they thrive in strong soils, but produce few seeds. At the end of March or beginning of April, or in autumn in countries where frosts are not very severe, prepare the soil with a good ploughing if it is light, with two or three ploughings if it is strong, and sow in clumps, or in rays, or broadcast. If in rays, space them twelve to eighteen inches apart; if in clumps, place them ten or fifteen inches apart in all directions. If broadcast sowing, thirty pounds is enough for one acre. Simply cover the seeds with a harrow or rake, and weed them once or twice until it's time to harvest. When the stems turn yellow and the pods take on a dark color, the plant is cut or pulled up and left to dry for two or three days in the sun before being bundled and tightened. It is beaten to ex96 milk the seed as it is consumed, and in this way it can be kept very well for two years, either to eat or to sow. MACK, DOUCETTE, BOURSETTE, BLANCHETTE, SALADE DES BLÉS (Valerianella locusta olitoria, L.) Q. Indigenous. This small plant is eaten all winter long as a salad, along with its larger variety, mâche ronde, and the one known as grande mâche, grosse mâche, mâche d'Italie, whose leaves are covered with a short fuzz that is quite unpleasant for many people. Lamb's lettuce likes soft, loose, well-amended soil. As it bolts quickly, sow it every eight to ten days, from August 15th to the end of October. Don't be afraid to sow it thickly, as the most advanced can be picked as they are consumed, thus thinning out the plant sufficiently. Cover the seed lightly with a rake, and water if the soil is dry. That's all the care you need. The one sown in October will be very good in spring, and the others will provide for winter. As the seeds detach themselves as soon as they ripen, to avoid losing them, we occasionally shake the seed holders on paper or a cloth, and the seeds obtained in this way will always be the best. Then, when the leaves turn yellow, carefully pull off the stalks and pile them up in a cool, poorly ventilated place, to ferment them for two weeks, which is useful for the seed, which detaches itself by shaking them with a fork. It is then collected, air-dried for a few days, winnowed and stored for seven to eight years. It should be noted that this year's crop is difficult and late to raise, so it is better to sow the two- or three-year-old variety. MACREFLOTTANTE, CORNUE, CORNUELLE, TRUFFE D'EAU, CHATAIGNE D'EAU. (Trapa natans, L.) 7. From France, 1 where it is found in stagnant waters with rosette-shaped leaves covering the surface. In autumn, it produces a black, angular fruit with four hard, prickly points, whose excessively hard shell encloses a white pulp, quite pleasant to the taste and approaching the flavor of a chestnut. This fruit is eaten cooked in water or under hot ashes. As soon as it's ripe, it's thrown into the basins where you want to propagate the plant; and the only care left is to pick up the fruit as soon as it's ripe, otherwise it will fall to the bottom. If you want to keep them over winter and only sow them in spring, you'll need to keep them in a vase filled with water. corn, turkish wheat, spanish wheat, indian wheat, large millet (zea corn; L.)Q). From Peru. The benefits of corn seeds for domestic use are well known, but their use in cooking is less widespread. Corn is picked off the cob while the kernels are still soft and milky, and roasted over coals. In America, it is cooked whole in water and served hot on the table; fresh butter is spread over it, and the kernels are removed with a spoon. Several varieties are grown. 1° ORDINARY CORN; stems from five to seven feet long; very large ears, yellow, white, red, purple, or variegated with two of these colors. It is grown extensively throughout France below the 45th degree of latitude; further north, it ripens only rarely, and only in gardens. 2° MAÏS QUARANTAIN; much smaller and less productive than the previous variety, but with the advantage of being earlier, which means it can be grown a little further north. 3° MAÏS A POULET; only 15 to 18 inches tall, it produces even less, but is also earlier. Its ears are the size of thumbs, and its seeds are perfect for fattening poultry. (d In gardens, corn is sown in rays, from the fifteenth of April to the fifteenth of May. Ordinary corn should be planted two and a half to three feet apart, quarantine corn eighteen inches to two feet apart, and chicken corn one foot to fifteen inches apart. The seeds are placed closer together, but when they have risen, the excess seeds are removed. As the plants gain strength, they are stubbed out, and any buds that might grow at the bottom of the stem are cut off. Weed often. When the pistil-like hair on top of the spike begins to dry out, cut off the end of the stem where the male flowers are located. When the husk of the ear turns yellow and dries out, we take advantage of dry weather to harvest it; we break the pedicel to detach it from the stem; we bundle the ears after uncovering the seeds, and store them hanging from poles in an airy attic. Shear only when necessary. Corn likes strong, warm, calcareous soil, and especially well-smoked soil. LEMONGRASS, LEMONWOOD, LEMON HERB (Melissa officinalis, L.) 7. indigenous. These last two names derive from its aromatic scent. Some people include its young shoots in salad supplies and omelettes, to replace parsley, but it is not generally used in cooking. It is used to make eau de mélissse, formerly eau des carmes, and is taken as an infusion for certain illnesses. It thrives in light, warm soil, and multiplies by seed in spring, or by sprouting in autumn. Every year, its stems are cut back to the ground at the first frost, and this simple method keeps it vigorous in the same place for a very long time. There are several varieties for the ornamental garden. MELON (Cucumis melo, L.) Q. From Asia. We won't repeat 4 DU JARDIN what has been said a thousand times about the excellence of this fruit, because there isn't one of our readers who hasn't been able to judge it. Palladius, who lived in the fifth century, left us some fairly good details on its cultivation; but this should be understood as referring only to the market garden or broccoli melon, for it was only in the fifteenth century that the cantaloupe was brought from Armenia to Italy, from where Charles VIII brought it in 1495. The first green-fleshed melon grown in France was brought from Africa in 1777 by a monk from Grammont, near Rouen. The other varieties were obtained by cultivation and by mixing their pollen. The number of melon varieties is so considerable that it would be extremely difficult to unravel their synonymy. For the past three years, we have been collecting and cultivating them all in our establishment, with the intention of publishing a monograph in which each variety will be described and illustrated. In the meantime, we're going to tell our readers which are the most widespread. The best are marked with an asterisk (*). I. BRODEN MELONS (C. M. Saccharinus) a. MELON MARAÎCHER, French, morin, common. It is round, or sometimes depressed from the umbilicus to the stalk, very crinkled, of medium size and without ribs; mediocre and febrile in the late season. Only a few years ago, it was the most widely grown variety in the Paris area. b. TOURS SUGAR; very crinkled, with red, firm and fairly sweet flesh. It varies in shape and size, resulting in three sub-varieties. 1° Small, round, with green rind and very sweet flesh. Sometimes no bigger than an orange. 2° The large, round, with faint but regular embroidery, 908 and fairly pronounced ribs; pleasant, vinous flesh. The long one, similar to the previous one, but elongated. C. SUCRIN WITH SMALL SEEDS; round, small, with red flesh; it is early and does very well under frame. * d. SUCRIN A UHAIR BLANCHE ; quite similar to the previous one, except for the color of the flesh; it is very melting and sweet. * e. DES CARMES; two varieties: one long, larger than the other, which is round. Their flesh is pale, but melting and vinous. The ribs are quite visible. * f. DE HONTLEUR: very large, elongated, with wide, pronounced ribs. Although its flesh is not very melting, it is vinous and tasty. g. DE LANGEAIS; elongated, of medium size, with ribs that are not very prominent and only slightly embroidered; its flesh is red, vinous and sweet. It has a smaller, slightly earlier variety. h. D'ANGERS; mediocre embroidery, variable shape and medium size; sweet and vinous. j. DE LA GRAVE; long, green, finely embroidered, evenly ribbed, medium size; flesh not very melting, very sweet. L. D'AVIGNON; sub-variety of the above; less long, larger, also sweet. * I. DE COULOMMIERS; very large; green, irregularly rounded shape; good quality. m. DÉSART; bright yellow, finely embroidered, with pronounced ribs; sweet flesh. n. DE RUGONNANT; two varieties, the long, the round, with blackish-green, well embroidered rind; fairly melting and sweet. To. DE MINORQUE; medium size, fine embroidery. II. MELORS CANTALOUPS. (C. M. Cantaloup.) ★ a. ORANCE, small, round, ribbed, light green or brown; orange-red flesh, hence its name, a little firm, but good; the earliest of all. * b. FIN HATIF; smaller and more compressed; ribs more prominent, a little scabby or embroidered; flesh red and good; as early as the preceding one. C. BaULOT HATIF; sub-variety of the preceding one, with higher, embroidered ribs. O08 * d. NoIR DES CARMES; round, blackish-green, without scabs, slightly ribbed; red flesh, vinous, melting, very good. *C. PETIT PREScOTT ou HATIr; small, slightly compressed, blackish or brown, with well-marked and scabby ribs, with a small point at the umbilicus; red flesh, excellent. It has two sub-varieties: the small rosé and the small renegade. * f. GROS PRESCOTT; two sub-varieties, one with blackish bark, the other whitish; similar to the previous one, but larger and more compressed; almost as early and as good. *g. HATI DE VINGT-HUITS; round, low ribs, light green; quite good and early; very common in Germany. * h. SIAM BALL; medium size; very compressed; blackish, scabby bark, with wide, pronounced ribs, narrow crown; mediocre flesh. i. ASTRACAN; large; raised ribs; delicate, melting orange flesh. *j. Mocol; two sub-varieties with green or white flesh, with large or small scabs. They are oblong with blackish bark. * k. GROS CANTALOUP NOIR DE HOLLANDE; one of the largest of all, with black, scabby rind; red, delicate flesh. *1. GALEOUS NOIR OR DES SAINTS; blackish-green, round, small; mangy, with red, sweet flesh; does not yellow as it ripens. * m. GOLDEN; very yellow, tuberous rind; fairly good, red flesh. *n. SILVER; medium size, whitish rind; compressed shape; pronounced crown; flesh a little firm, but good. *0. D'Aniou; medium size; black, tubercular, very scabby rind; brittle, vinous flesh. III. SMOOTH BRAND MELONS (C. M. viridis.) * a. DE MALTE A CHAIR BLANCHE; elongated, medium-sized, with green rind; melting, sweet flesh. Precocious. * b. DE MALTE A CHAIR ROUGE; differs only in flesh color, but is earlier. 1008 c. MUSCADE DES ÉTATS-Unis; very -small with melting green flesh. d. DE MORÉE, de Candie, de Malte d'hiver; fairly large and elongated; smooth rind; melting, fragrant green flesh. It is stored over winter on straw in a dry, sheltered place. e. SMYANE; small, oval, brownish-green dotted with yellowish; flesh white to greenish, mediocre. f. CRYPRE MELON; small, elongated, hairy until ripe, very thin rind, not embroidered, marbled; flesh very bright red, full, to the point that its seeds, small and elongated, are embedded in it: this makes it the heaviest of melons, of which it is also the best. It ripens in thirty or forty days, and wants to be eaten as soon as the sun hits it. It is the only species that never produces bad ones. It was sent from Cyprus in 1786 to the royal gardens at Brunoy. My father was entrusted by the governor, Mr. Cromot de Fougy, to care for it specially for the king's table. g. FROM PERU; medium size; thin, blackish-green rind; very white, melting, sweet flesh. b. DE PERSE or Odessa; very long; green rind with yellow stripes; green flesh: can be kept in winter. The authors also mention several varieties of melon, but they do not describe them, and we suspect that they are used twice. Melons de Fleuray, de la Caille, cramoisi (we believe Descombe mistook a watermelon, cucurbita citrullus, for a melon, and Génes, de Naples, de Florence ou Zatta; d'Espagne, monstrueux de Portugal, de Minorque, Succado, cantaloup noir hatif, cantaloup de Sèvres, id. du Querci, id. de Castelnaudari, id. de Pézénas, id. de Côte-Rôtie, id. de Bouvert, id. ananas, id. plat, id. turbiné, id. bossu, id. long; melons vert, d'eau (obviously a watermelon), d'Angoury, de Saint-Domingue, brodé, grand Mogol, etc. CULTIVATION. Cultivation varies according to the climate and the time of year you want the fruit, and we'll look at it from these different angles. 2. 26 O08 1° Cultivation in the open ground. It is only perfectly successful below latitude 43°. In warm, light soil with good exposure, small pits are dug ten or twelve feet apart, eighteen inches deep and as wide; at the bottom, a foot of consumed manure is placed, covered with six inches of soil, into which five or six melon seeds are sown, planted one to one-and-a-half inches apart. This operation should be carried out in March, April or the first few days of May, depending on the climate. When the seeds have risen, only two plants are left in each hole, and they are driven as described in the following article. 2° Growing around Honfleur. We dig comine pits for cultivation in the open ground, but give them a depth of two feet by two and a half feet, and make a sort of muted layer by filling them with hot manure, over which we spread nine inches of light, substantial soil. The beds are covered with cloches, and left to warm up for two weeks: then, around the middle of April, a few seeds are sown at a distance of four inches from each other; when the plants have three or four leaves, only two are left in each pit, and we continue to grow them under glass, as we will teach you for those sown on beds. 3° Growing around Paris. In March, good hot manure is used to prepare beds two and a half feet thick, four or five wide, and of indeterminate length. These are covered with eight to nine inches of potting soil, into which one third of light earth has been mixed, or two thirds of light and free earth for large species, and sown as we have said. Water lightly, and cover the seedling with frames, cloches, or verrines, over which litter and straw mats are thrown to prevent the layers from getting wet from rain or frost, which would chill them. As soon as the seedlings have risen, they are accustomed to the light by removing the mats; but the cloches and verrines must remain surrounded by litter until the temperature has become milder, and there is no inconvenience in giving them air, which is done by lifting the cloches a little on the opposite side to where the wind comes from. Every evening, we put everything back in place to avoid the night's chill. It's also important to protect young plants from the rays of too much hot sun. When the plant has four leaves, not including the cotyledons, we pinch the top of the stem, cutting it cleanly below the armpits of the last two leaves, and force it to grow two or three main branches. You then need to give the plant a little more air by raising the bells two or three inches, water it sufficiently, and continue to shelter it with litter and straw mats. The main branches soon overtake the cloches, which are then lifted and kept suspended on the plants by means of racks. It's important to note that sap doesn't get carried away in one branch more than in the other; if it does, we try to re-establish the balance as soon as we realize it, either by cutting the cotyledon on the more vigorous side, or by giving the greedy branch a tortuous position capable of hindering the circulation of sap; the weak branches, on the other hand, rest in a straight direction. If the whole plant seems to want to burst into useless branches, it can be stopped by removing the two cotyledons; but this extreme method should only be used to the utmost rigor, as it considerably weakens the vegetation. The main branches soon give 1 secondary branches and flower. Melon is a monoecious plant, meaning it produces both male and female flowers on the same plant. The former can be recognized by the presence of stamens without pistils, and by the base of the flower resting directly on a peduncle without ovaries or young fruit. Females have only pistils and are placed on a small, highly recognizable melon. Care must be taken to remove male or sterile flowers before fertilization has taken place, and to ensure this, they are not cut until they have wilted. A fruit is certain to be knotted when, with its flower dried out, it continues to grow. Only well-placed secondary branches should be kept, which can grow without tangling or crossing over each other. When the first fruits have set, prune the main branches, keeping them short or long, depending on their vigor. Only one fruit is ever left on the weakest ones, and two on the strongest; but for this to happen, the plant must be extraordinarily vigorous. The end of the branch is cut off two knots above the last fruit, taking care to keep the most beautiful ones, especially those closest to the stump. When these wounds have healed, i.e. five or six days after this operation, we repeat it on the secondary branches, and oh remove those that have no fruit: as for the others, we leave them with only one. In all cases, the best fruit should always be left: but if there were only one on a branch, and it was rounded on one side but not on the other, we would make two or three longitudinal incisions in the bark on the flat side only, and it would soon become rounded. Eight days later, the tips of the fruit-bearing branches are cut off, and almost all the others removed; this operation should be repeated whenever necessary. When the melons have reached a certain size, and the pruning begins, the season is usually warm enough to keep the plants uncovered for most of the day. If this were not the case, they should be given air as often as possible, in order to facilitate the healing of wounds and the development of fruit. We water often and little at a time, taking care not to wet the leaves, and we use pond water or well water, deposited forty-eight hours in advance in barrels, to give it the warmth of the atmosphere. As the fruit approaches maturity, only the essential watering is given, so as not to diminish its fragrance, and it is placed on a tile or piece of board to protect it from humidity. If you wish to hasten their maturity, you can cover them with a bell. 4° Growing around Lyon. Sow at the end of April or beginning of May, in the open ground and in capots. Capots are holes ten inches wide and as deep, filled with a mixture of two-thirds light, very substantial earth and one-third compost. Sow three or four seeds, cover with a bell, and surround with hot manure until the plants have gained strength. Then remove the cloches, some time after the manure, and cultivate according to the rules taught. PRIMERS. At the end of December, we prepare beds in tarpaulins or frames, and wait for the right heat to bury small pots filled with very lightly trodden potting soil. Two seeds are placed in each pot, and the frames are covered with straw mats to concentrate the heat and hasten germination. When the seeds have sprouted, leave just one seedling in each pot, and gradually accustom them to the light by lifting the mats, which are then removed and put back only at night and when it freezes. If you're growing under canvas, you keep the layers warm by reshuffling them in the usual way, and loading them with new tan; if you're growing under stretchers, you put in heaters from time to time. When the temperature permits, the panels are lifted an inch or two to give them a little air, but only for a few hours, and with extreme care to prevent any moisture from penetrating; this time is used to wipe off any moisture attached to the glass. When the plant has two leaves, not including the cotyledons, we pinch the stem above the second leaf, to obtain the lateral branches. Prepare new layers with good new manure, incline them slightly to the south, and cover them with compost mixed with one-sixth light earth; place the frames on top, if you haven't made them in a tarpaulin. As soon as the wounds have healed, make two holes in the potting soil for each frame panel, unstack the plants without breaking the rootballs, and push one into each hole, taking care to bury the stem a little and put on shoes to encourage it to grow new roots. From this moment on, treat the melons as we said above, taking care to keep the layers constantly warm, and to let in air whenever it's safe to do so, especially during flowering. For early cultivation, choose small, early species such as sucrin à petites graines, cantalouprouge, cantaloup sin hâtif, id. brûlot hâtif, id. noir des carmes, id. petit orange, id. petit prescott, which is one of the most successful, etc. Whether you're growing early or naturally, you need to keep melon varieties strictly separated from one another, so that their fertile dusts don't mix, causing them to degenerate. Even more scrupulously, they should be kept away from other plants belonging to the Cucurbitaceae family, especially cucumbers. However, when these plants do not flower at the same time as melons, there is nothing to fear. Melon ripeness is very difficult to recognize, but here are the signs you can most rely on. 1° Most of them ripen a few days early, which means they change color or hue. 2° The quene rims and tears as if it were about to fall off. 3° The fruit gives off a pleasant smell, especially in the morning. In spite of all these signs, we are often mistaken, because the quality of a melon depends on a precise point of ripeness, which for some types lasts only a few hours. A melon is judged to be of good quality when the characteristics of its variety are well indicated, when it is heavy, firm under the finger, well shaped, and when its stem is short and thick. Seed selection. Throughout the cultivation process, choose the melons that are the most straightforward in their varieties and the most beautiful. Let them ripen without picking, or even let them rot on the spot; collect the seeds, clean them, and dry them in the shade and in a draught. You can even collect the seeds of an excellent melon as you eat it. They retain their germinative properties for many years, but are usually kept for only twelve or fifteen years. You don't sow the previous year's seed, as it is more likely than the old one to produce over-vigorous plants that take on branches to the detriment of the fruit. Some people soak the seed twenty-four hours before sowing. The choice of seeds and how to prepare them have always given rise to ridiculous prejudices. Fifteen hundred years ago, Palladius (1) said: Odorati autem fiunt, si eorum seminamultis diebus inter rose folia sicca mergantur; and today, Lord Nynn's old gardener never sows his melon seed without first wearing it for a year in his trouser belt, which is hardly the same thing. WATERMELON, PASTEQUE, PASTEQUE CITROUILLE, (Cucurbita citrullus; L.) Q. Oriental. Two main varieties of this groovy fruit are grown, with smooth rind and sweet, melting, bland flesh that does not please everyone. 1° PASTEQUE D'ITALIE or Provence; round, very large, with green rind; red flesh and black seeds. 2° PASTEQUE D'AMÉRIQUE; smaller, slightly oval, with bark striped or spotted with greenish yellow, so as to represent ribs; whitish flesh, red seeds. These plants can be easily distinguished from melons by their rough, sharply-cut leaves. They are grown in the same way, the only difference being that they are no longer pruned once they have sufficient branches, and no fruit is removed. MELONGENE, EGGPLANT, MERANGENE, MAYENNE, VIÉDAZE. (Solanum esculentum, Dunal. )C). From South America. The fruit of this plant is eaten cooked between two dishes or on the grill, stuffed or with herbs, fried or in stews; its taste is weak and bland. Several varieties are known, not to be confused with the egg plant (Solanum ovigerum), which is unhealthy. 1° MELONGÈNE ROUGE A FRUIT LONG; fruit about the shape and size of a cucumber, dirty purple. 2° MELONGÈNE ROUGE A PRUIT ROUOND; very-small, round, compressed fruit, about the size of a finger; same color. 3° MELONGÈNE ROUGE A RUITOVALE; fruit less large than the first, paler, large at the base. (1) De Re rusticd, lib.4, cap. 9. 4° MELONCÈNE JAUNE A FRUIT OVALE; fruit pale yellow, oval, shortened. 5° MELONGÈNE JAUNE A FRUIT LONG; fruit of medium size, elongated, green when young, pulsing white, and yellow when ripe. All like heat and water. In the south of France, melongene is sown in March in light, warm soil, then transplanted to good, loose soil and planting beds, where it requires only watering to succeed. In Paris gardens, however, it requires more care. As early as February or the beginning of March, it is sown on warm soil under a frame or cloche. When the plant has emerged, it is transplanted into pots, which are immersed in warm layers until the temperature allows it to be placed in the ground, in a warm bed, at the foot of a wall facing south. Scrupulously remove weeds and water frequently. When the plant has emerged, it can also be pricked out in staggered rows, eighteen inches apart, on top of a muted layer of compost. This will ensure that you get good seed, which does not always ripen when cultivated using the first method. PEPPERMINT (Mentha sativa, L.) 4. native. PEPPERMINT (mentha piperita; L.) 2. English. These are the two species most commonly grown in vegetable gardens. The young stems of the former are used as salad greens, while the latter is used to flavor liqueurs and pastilles. They can be propagated by sowing in the shade and in light soil in March or April, or by suckering in spring, or by sprouting in autumn. They do very well in all types of soil, and are harder to destroy than to preserve. BLACK MUSTARD, MUSTARD SEED, ASH MUSTARD. (Sinapis nit.4 gra; L.) Q. Native. Its seeds are ground into flour to make mustard for our tables, and its young shoots are eaten in salads. It is sown in March, very lightly, in smoked soil loosened by two good ploughings. It is particularly successful in sandy soils and woodland clearings, in places where coal has been made. The plants should be uprooted as they turn yellow, which usually happens in September, packed in a dry place, and crushed only with a rod, so as not to crush the seeds, which keep well for four years. Oil of mediocre quality can be extracted. WHITE MUSTARD, WHITE SEED (Sinapis alba; L.) Q. Indigenous. Cultivated in the same way and used for the same purposes. NAVET. (Brassica napus; L.) g. Native. This plant, whose uses are well known to all, offers almost as many varieties as there are villages where it is grown. We will therefore indicate only a few, warning readers that, if their land is not suitable for those they choose, they will degenerate entirely within two or three years at the latest. We will adopt M. Vilmorin's divisions here. I. DRY NAVETS, with fine flesh that does not delaminate when cookedThey only succeed in lean, sandy, soft soils. a. Petit de Freneuse; half-long. b. Gros de Freneuse; longer. Le gros de Freneuse; larger and less good. c. Le Meaux; very long, tapered. d. Saulieu; same strength, blackish bark. e. Petit Berlin or Tellau. f. Baubry; the size of a feather pipe, long, brown. g. Cherouble, similar to the previous one, slightly larger. The last two are highly prized in the Lyon area. = II. NAvers TeNDars (called raves in most of our provinces). Less firm than the preceding ones, of mediocre quality, but less difficult on the quality of the soil. a. Des vertus; very-white, oblong, early and good. b. Des sablons; white, half-white, oblong. Des sablons; white, half-round, very good. c. Rose du Palatinat, pink collar; tender, sweet flesh. d. Gros long d'Alsace, enormous size; mediocre. e. De Clair-Fontaine; very long, half out of the ground. f. Blanc-plat hatif; compressed, mediocre, but early. g. Rouge-plat hátif, mediocre; similar to the preceding one. h. Gris-plat; very large; fairly good. i. From Limousin, rave, rabiole, turneps; large, mediocre, grown for livestock. j. Rave blanche de Bresse; longuc, large, mediocre. L. Rave longue de Bresse; very long, red at the neck, very swollen at the root, mediocre; grown for livestock. All these turnips do better than others in strong soils. III. half-tenor turnips. They are less firm than the first, more so than the second, and thrive in light, soft soil. a. Jaune de Hollande; round; yellow rind and flesh. b. Jaune d'Ecosse; similar to the preceding, but more resistant to frost. c. Noir d'Alsace; long, sweet and good. d. Gris de Morigny; obrond. e. Jaune long de Lyon; large, elongated, with yellow flesh and rind: good. CULTIVATION. All turnips like sandy soil. In fine, substantial, soft sands, they become large and lose some of their quality, which on the contrary increases in quartz and granitic soils, where the soil seems to be composed of nothing but debris from primitive rocks: but then they diminish in size. In free-flowing and very substantial soils, they take on enormous proportions, but are only good for livestock. 008 If sown in spring, they rarely succeed, despite the precaution of sowing only old seeds; but from the fifteenth of June to the fifteenth of August, sowings are excellent, and can even be extended into September for early species. The soil is prepared just before sowing, and broadcast as much as possible in rainy or overcast weather. The plants are thinned out to leave four to eight inches between each one, depending on the size of the variety; weeds are weeded and removed. When the turnips have reached their full size, they are hand-picked, the tops removed and fed to the livestock, and placed in a dry place to be used as needed. In large-scale cultivation, we simply make a deep hole in the ground, pile them in, and cover them with thatch to prevent rain and frost from penetrating. In March, the best turnips are replanted to produce seeds, which are harvested in August. Turnips keep well for two years. OGNON. (Allium cepa; L.) g. This plant, one of the oldest cultivated, is native to Africa. It was almost the main staple of the diet of the peoples of ancient Egypt, who esteemed it to the point of deifying it and using it as currency. Everyone knows its use. Onions, whatever their variety, like a substantial free soil, rather strong than light, amended a year in advance, because fresh manure causes them to rot: a well-consumed compost cannot harm them, even if it is spread only a short time before sowing. The soil should be well loosened by two or three ploughings, but the last one should be done at least fifteen or twenty days before sowing, as they fear freshly disturbed soil. As a general rule, onions are sown in January and February in the south of France, from January 15th to March 15th around Paris, and from March 1st to April 1st in the north. In the latter climates, you should always wait until the soil begins to warm up, and the fine weather is perfectly assured. In light soils, we walk or roll the soil to firm it up, then broadcast the seed a little thickly; we harrow with the fork, rake, or, which is better when we can do it, cover the seed with a good finger of compost. If you wish, you can use the roller only when the seed has been thrown. As the seedling rises, which happens after three weeks, you water it to help germination, especially if there's the slightest drought. If, on the other hand, there's a threat of snow or severe cold, we cover the young plant with litter or dry leaves. As it grows, thin it out in places where it is too thick, and transplant it in places where it is lacking, at least three inches apart. Some time before maturity, i.e. when the plant has more or less reached its full size, we cut and twist the stalk a little above the ground, either with our hands or by rolling, in order to interrupt the course of the sap, and to fix in the onion what would have been carried in the leaves. However, this operation is not essential, especially in good soils. As soon as the leaves turn yellow, a little before they dry out, the onions are dug up and left on the ground for eight to ten days to ripen, but in a place sheltered from the rain, although exposed to the open air and the sun's rays. In the Saône et Loire department, and particularly in the commune of Senozan, where this crop is grown on a large scale, the tops are preserved and, when they are dry, they are braided together to form chains of varying length and width, whose two ends are joined together. They are then hung from poles placed horizontally in the attic, a simple way of ensuring their preservation. Those to be used as seedbeds are chosen from among the finest and sharpest in their variety. In spring, in wet soils, and in November and December for other soils, they are planted seven or eight inches apart, two inches deep, and in August they set seed at the end of long stems supported by stakes. The seeds are collected as for the porreau, and keep for the same length of time. Onions come in several varieties that are grown in much the same way. In listing them, we will describe the slight differences in care required. 1° DARK RED ONION. It is grown in gardens as we have just said; but in the open ground, it is sown after the wheat harvest on a single ploughing, and left to nature, so to speak, with the only precaution of weeding to destroy weeds. Four pounds of seed are sufficient for one acre. 2° PALE RED OGNON. Same cultivation. These two varieties have given rise to the sub-varieties known as prriform or pear-shaped onions, red or white, depending on whether they come from the former or the latter. The latter is sweeter. 3° L'OGNON D'ESPACNE or de Catalogne; red, very large, pointed at the root and neck. In the south of France, it is very sweet, but loses its quality around Paris. Same cultivation. White sub-varieties. 4° WHITE ONION. Two sub-varieties. The coarse white, and the hátif white. The first is sown in February and March 1009; its shape is much coarser than that of the second, which is sown from July to mid-September and transplanted a month later, or better still the following March. It is covered in winter to protect it from extreme cold. It is weeded and watered a lot. These onions are very popular in Paris kitchens, where they are preferred to reds because they are milder. It has been noted that those sown in July never do as well as those sown in August. The early white onion has two origins: in one case, it is considered to be produced by the large white onion; in the other, it is taken from Cairo, and bears its name, but it is nonetheless the same onion, apart from very slight differences. 5° YELLOW ONIONS. Cultivation of the former. 6° L'oCNOX BLANC D'ITALIE ou de Provence. The smallest of all, hardly larger than a hazelnut. It is very soft and tender, and can be eaten green or preserved in vinegar. We sow it thickly and at different times of the year, so as to have it available at all times. Same cultivation, but more watering. 7° L'OGNON D'ÉGXPTE or bulbifere, differs from the others in that it more often produces bulbs than flowers on its stem, resulting in a different mode of reproduction. In other respects, it is cultivated in the same way. 8° OGNON PaTaTE or potato, rarely produces seeds or bulbils; it is propagated by planting, in May, an inch deep and eight or ten centimetres apart, the round and fairly numerous cloves that grow around its root. ORCHIS MALE, SATYRION, SALEP, SALAT. (Orchis morio, L.) 2. Native plant, which Dr. Marillac's experiments have led us to classify as a vegetable plant, along with ORCHIS FEMELLE; (orchis femina; L.). These two species grow abundantly in all meadows and damp places in the mountainous regions of France. Their spikes of white or purplish flowers are more or less tightly packed, and terminate on a straight, round, fluted stem five to eight inches high. When the plant has set seed, the two fleshy tubers that form the root are pulled out and left to dry in a heap on the ground. We then remove the film that envelops them, and wash them in various waters until they are perfectly clean. They are then boiled for five minutes in river water, and dried in a curry house or oven after the bread has been extracted. Stir them often, and put them back into the oven several times until they are perfectly dry. In this state, they can be kept for several years without spoiling. When you're ready to use them, grind them to the finest powder possible, pass the flour through a sieve, and use it as you would potato starch. The weight of one kilo is enough to prepare eight ounces of soup, giving it the consistency of ordinary rice cream. To date, we have not succeeded in cultivating orchises perfectly, and it is above all their multiplication that presents difficulties. However, by placing them in light, fresh, substantial and deep soil, similar to that in which they are found, and by using the same precautions to sow their very fine seeds as are recommended for those of auricula primroses and other plants that are delicate to raise, especially by sowing them as soon as they are collected, we may perhaps achieve more satisfactory success than we have so far. ORIGAN MARJOLAINE (Origanum majoranoïdes; Willd. Sp.) 6. From the Orient. This aromatic plant is used as a seasoning in some stews, and another species is cultivated for the same purpose: ORIGAN A COQUILLE or MARJOLAINE GENTILLE. (Origanum œegyptiacum; L.) From the East. This is an orangery plant. Marjoram does well in all soils; 08 is usually planted in borders, which are renewed every two or three years. Both species are propagated from seeds sown in spring, from cuttings taken in the shade in summer, and from splinters of the stems. ORPIN BLANC, TRIQUE ou TRIPE-MADAME, GROS-RAZINÉ. (Sedum album; L.) Q. Native. This greasy, rather tasteless plant is used as a salad ingredient. It can be propagated from seeds sown in spring in sandy soil with a warm exposure; it should be watered often if you wish to obtain a more tender plant. It can also be propagated from offshoots and cuttings. We grow three species: 1° Des Prés, which we have just named and which has given us the Belleville sorrel variety, with wider, less acidic leaves, and the larger, blister-leaf sorrel. 2° L'OSEILLE VIERGE, DE MONTAGNE, (Rumex arifolius; ALL.) 2. From the Alps. It rarely goes to seed, and its leaves are broader and less acidic. 3° ROUND SORREL. (Rumex scutatus; HoRT. PARIS.) 2. From Provence. Its rounded or heart-shaped, glaucous-green leaves are more acidic than those of the preceding varieties. All are cultivated in the same way, and do well in all types of soil; however, they prefer light, deep soil that is cooler than dry. They are sown in spring, in rays, borders or beds, in very loose soil, as their fine seeds would not germinate if they encountered the slightest obstacle. The seed is covered with half an inch of earth, on top of which a little potting soil is thrown to prevent it from fighting. You can cut them, or better still, pick their leaves, always taking the ones that are on the outside, six weeks after they have been sown. Those that don't 2. 2 D6 bear seeds multiply in spring by splintering. As heat greatly increases their acidity, we grow a few plants in a cool, shady spot, for use in summer. They can be stored for ten to twelve years. PRIMEUR. In the first days of November, prepare a warm layer of soil, on which you spread eight to ten inches of potting soil, in which you plant vigorous sonches that you remove with a little clod; or cover the plant with cloches, and give it air as often as possible. For forcing, choose virgin sorrel or Belleville sorrel. If they are completely deprived of air and light, their leaves wither and lose their acidity and taste. Seeds are collected from July to August in the same way as spinach seeds, and keep well for three or four years if left in their husks. CULTIVATED PARSNIP. (Pastinaca sativa; L.) g. Indigenous. The grossc, sweet, aromatic root of this plant is used to flavour soups. It is also sometimes eaten fried. There are three varieties. 1° LoNG; a long, white root of almost equal size throughout its length. 2° ROND or ROYAL; similar to a round turnip; earlier, and does well in shallow soil. 3° Le BATARD or DE SIAM; a little yellowish, holding, qoant the shape ¿ the middle between the round and the long. It is the most highly esteemed. Parsnips like deep, substantial, cool soil, especially well-developed, so that their roots can rotate at ease. They are grown in the same way as carrots, but the plant is thinned out more because the tops are much wider. As they have no fear of frost, they are left in the ground over winter, to be removed only as needed. In March, roots destined to provide seed are immediately removed and replanted in other soil, eighteen inches apart. It ripens at the end of August, and is good for only one year. SWEET POTATO, BATATE. (Convolvulus batatas; L.) 2. From the West Indies. This creeping plant produces large, long, soft, very sweet roots, with a slight pink taste, especially when they begin to fade; they are eaten cooked in butter or prepared like scorsonères. Their cultivation, very easy and widespread in America, is beginning to penetrate the south of France, where they can be planted in the ground. Paris has three varieties. I° A RACINES BLANCHES; small and mediocre. 2° A RACINES JAUNES; a little larger, but also little appreciated. 3° A RACINES ROUGES; very large, excellent, providing tubers weighing from five to twenty ounces. In Santo Domingo, they weigh up to ten pounds. CULTIVATION. In early spring, a warm bed is prepared in the same way as for melons, over which a six-inch-thick bed of light soil is spread. In mid-April, when the soil is only moderately warm, cut potato roots into one-inch-long sections and plant them on the bed two inches deep and eight inches apart. When the sprays have reached eight to ten inches in length, carefully unfold them, cut off all their leaves except those at the end of the stem; then plant them as we shall say. In the south, break up a plank four feet wide, and loosen the 008 soil perfectly. Draw two lines two feet apart with a chalk line, and open them into furrows, in which you lay the young plants obliquely, so that their roots are three or four inches deep, and only the end of the stem emerges from the ground. Space them two feet apart, so that they form a chessboard. If the soil is dry, water, weed and pull out weeds. No further care is required until harvest, which takes place in mid-October, except to water the plants generously whenever necessary. In the Paris area, to obtain a greater yield, they are planted in the same way, but on a muted layer covered with ten inches of good, light soil, mixed in equal portions with well-consumed compost. Finally, there's a more advantageous planting method for temperate climates. A sort of mound, two and a half feet high and as wide, is raised in the shape of a humpback. The potato roots are planted at the top, and the whole is surrounded with good warm manure stoves, which are renewed as often as necessary. When the young shoots are a foot long, cut off the leaves as we've said, tilt them and cover them with six inches of good prepared soil, but don't move them, and place new stoves, which are maintained until harvest. When you dig up the potatoes, you must do so with great care, as those that are a little crumpled will rot on the spot. The potatoes are then placed in a dry place, neither too hot nor too cold, to be eaten when they begin to give off a sweet pink odor, a sure sign that decomposition is imminent. The great difficulty with this crop is to keep the tubers to be replanted intact until spring. However, this can be achieved by selecting from among the most beautiful those that won't have the slightest scratch, and by burying them in beds, but isolated from each other, in fine, very dry sand, in a box that is protected from the slightest frost, the slightest humidity, and heat capable of making them grow. To do this, wrap the first box in very dry straw, place it in a second, and place the whole in a pile of broken straw or dry litter, which maintains a suitable temperature at the same level at all times. PIERCE-PIERRE, PASSE-PIERRE, BACILE, CRISTE MARINE, CRÊTE MARINE, FENOUIL MARIN, HERBE SAINT-PIERRE. (Crithmum maritimum, L.) 7. native. Little use is made of this plant, which grows naturally by the sea. Its leaves are preserved in vinegar and used as a seasoning. It is sown on a bed in March, or, as soon as the seed is ripe, in light soil, which is kept constantly moist and well exposed. Those sown on a bed can be planted at the foot of a wall facing south or east, or, better still, in holes in old walls or stone cracks, with the same exposure. It is covered with dry litter during winter, as it is delicate and sensitive to frost. Its leaves are collected in late summer. Its seeds do not germinate after the following spring. PERSIL. (Apium petroselinum; L.) g. From Sardinia. This is one of the most widely used plants in cooking for seasoning and garnishing. There are several varieties. 1° COmUN (vulgare), which everyone knows. 2° FRISÉ, or CRÉPU (crispum), whose seeds often produce ordinary parsley. 3° MaiN TRèS-FRISÉ; very slow to bolt. t 4° Panaché (variegatum); freezes easily; yellowish-white leaves. 6° WITH LARGE LEAVES (latifolium); prone to abortion. 6° WITH BIG ROOTS (tuberosum); the root is eaten. 7° OF NAPLES OR PERSIL-CÉLERI; much larger than the other varieties, and the ribs are eaten when blanched like celery. Parsley can be sown from March to August, in any kind of soil, provided it has been well loosened, in rays, beds, borders or broadcast. Its seeds will sprout in three weeks if watered, which should continue to be done until it is strong enough to be left to nature. The Naples and large-rooted varieties should be thinned out so that they are about a foot apart. The first should be ridged as winter approaches, and the other pulled out to keep in the greenhouse. Seeds are good for two years. PICRIDIE COMMUNE, CULTIVATED, PLASTERED EARTH). Picridium vulgare, H. P.) Q. This native plant, frequently used in Italy, has been naturalized in our vegetable gardens by M. Vilmorin. It is sown in April in light, warm soil, and given frequent watering as soon as it begins to gain strength. While young and green, its leaves can be cut daily and eaten as a salad. ANNUAL PEPPER, CHERRY PEPPER, LONG PEPPER, SWEET BELL PEPPER, GARDEN CORAL, INDIAN PEPPER, GUINEA PEPPER, BRAZIL PEPPER. (Capsicum annuum, L.) (S. The fruits of this plant native to India can be preserved in vinegar, with or like gherkins, before they are ripe. When ripe, they are dried in the sun or oven, pulverized and used to replace pepper. For this last use, if you want to give it the appearance of real pepper, here's how it's done. When the fruit is still soft, we open it and scrupulously remove the seeds, cut it into slices and knead it in rye paste; we leave this paste to ferment for twenty-four hours, then put it in an oven, not to cook it, but only to dry it out. When it is hard and dry, it is ground to dust in a mortar, and served in salt shakers on the table. Pepper prepared in this way is known in the trade as indigenous pepper. Several varieties of this plant are grown, and are more widely used in the south of France than in the north; the main ones are the ordinary, round and large Spanish sweet peppers, all three with red fruit, and the tomato pepper, with yellow, sweet, tomato-like fruit. In the Paris climate, they are sown on beds in February or March, for transplanting in May, in good soil with a southern exposure, at a distance of one foot from each other. In the south of France, they are sown in beds from the first days of February, and put in the ground when the cold is no longer to be feared. Seeds keep well for several years. LITTLE PIMPRENELLE (Poterium sanguisorba; L.) 2. Grows spontaneously in almost all meadows in France, and is used only as a salad ingredient. In spring or autumn, it can be sown in rows or broadcast, in all soils, but best in light, dry soil; it can be weeded if necessary, and watered a little during hot spells. It can also be propagated by splintering old plants and replanting them six or eight inches apart, but this method is not as good as the first. It requires no care, and grows back the more often it is cut. Its seed is good for two or three years. PEAR, CHARD, RLETE. (Beta vulgaris; L.) g. From southern Europe. Two varieties are grown: the ordinary 9, whose insipid leaves are mixed with sorrel to correct its acidity, and the cardoon variety, whose thick, white, succulent ribs are used in cooking like those of cardoons. Poirée grows well in all types of loose, suitably prepared soil. The ordinary variety can be sown in rows or broadcast from March to August, and can already be cut six weeks after sowing, if it has been weeded and sufficiently watered. We note that the March plant does best in light soils, and the April plant in strong soils. As for chard, while not more difficult to grow, it does require some care. It is sown in March and April for autumn and winter production, and from late June to early August for spring production. Sowing is done very lightly, and is even thinned out if necessary, so that the plants are fifteen inches apart. Sometimes, plants sown in June and July are transplanted at this distance. The main thing is to water a lot if you want big, tender ribs. During severe frosts, we cover the plant with dry litter, and in spring we uncover it little by little so as not to let the sun overtake it; it usually starts to produce in mid-May. The seedbeds must be supported by stilts to prevent the wind from knocking them over; and when the seed has been harvested at its perfect point of maturity, i.e. when it turns from green to an ashen or russet hue, which usually happens in September, it can be kept for nine or ten years. PEAS. (Pisum sativum; L.) Q. Indigenous. A large number of varieties are grown, divided into: 1° parchment peas, i.e. peas whose pods cannot be eaten; 2° peas without parchment, whose pods can be eaten. Each of these divisions is subdivided into two sections, the first containing dwarf peas, the second those that must be rowed. We will limit ourselves to citing the varieties indicated by M. Vilmorin. I°. PARCHMENT PEAS. A. Dwarf peas, which therefore do not need to be rowed. a. The hative dwarf; eighteen inches to two feet high; the earliest of those in its section. Its flowers appear from the second or third node, and are followed by a small pod of fairly good quality. It can be sown from January for the first season. It does well under chassis. b. Nain de Hollande; smaller, producing as much, but less early: good for chassis, because it never rises. c. Nain de Bretagne; it rises only five or six inches. d. Large, sweet seeds; excellent; very productive, but late. e. Small green dwarf; very small seeds. f. Green Prussian dwarf; similar to the above, but very productive. g. Small Blois pea; rises from fifteen to eighteen inches. Its grain is good, small and smooth; early. B. Climbing peas, to be rowed. a. Pois michaux, Paris peas; excellent; very early. Sow before winter at the foot of a wall in the south; pinch at three or four blossoms. b. Michaux de Ruelle, also good; earlier, and slightly larger pods: same cultivation. c. Michaux de Hollande, Frankfurt pea; earlier still than the preceding ones, but more difficult to cultivate. Fears cold and damp soils. Sow in February or early March. If pinched, it can be grown without oars, like the two previous varieties. O08 d. Black-eyed michaux; very good, a little more hasty than ordinary michaux, and its grain is a little larger. e. Hátif à la moelle, English pea; very good; higher and with larger pods than michaux, to which it succeeds. f. Dominé; similar to the above, but with less rounded pods. g. De Marly; very large, but late. h. De Clamart, fine square; large, very productive, sweet; suitable for sowing in the late season. i. Carré blanc; tender, soft, unevenly shaped, more square than round; a little late and rising very high. In good soils, it produces only wood. j. Carré à œil noir; same qualities and defects as the preceding one; its foliage is a little less vigorous, but its flowers fear fog. L. Fèvo; very large, with mediocre quality seeds, though large; it is late. l. Géant; larger than the previous variety; very large seeds, not very sweet. m. Gros vert normand; late and large; very good dry. n. Ridé ou de Knight. This variety, named after Mr. Knight, President of the London Horticultural Society, is excellent but late. The pod is large and long, and the grain large, square and wrinkled. o. Sans-pareil; late, but yields long and abundantly; soft, very sweet kernels, good in green. p. Suisse; very large, very long pod, but few kernels; good. q. Laurent; less early than the dominé which it resembles. r. Grosse cosse hdtif; similar to the above, but stronger stem and more rounded pod; productive and of good quality. s. Baron; quite similar to michaux de Hollande, but higher. 2°. PEAS WITHOUT PARCHMENT, or EAT-ALL. A. Dwarfs. a. Hatif; a little high, but still cu chassis. 008 b. Ordinary; pods smaller, but more numerous than in the preceding one, very tender and esteemed. c. Fan-shaped; stems not rising more than a foot; late, not very productive. B. Sickle peas. .a. White with large pods, belier's horn, sickle pea; curved pods, very large and very tender; late, very productive in good soils; rises very high. b. Without parchment with half-stalks; as productive as the preceding one, less late and rising less high; pods less large, with tighter grains. c. With red flowers or eye peas. Red-flowered or pea with a wart-eye; grows to seven or eight feet, and produces a lot, but is very late; its pod is large and hooked, tender and sweet; its grain is greenish-red, speckled with violet, round, large and even. d. Turc or crowned; very tall; its numerous pods are tender and sweet. e. Turc with purple flowers; very attractive; same qualities as the previous one. It should be noted that our classification of peas into dwarf and row peas is not rigorous, as the lowest varieties can become climbers if grown in excellent soil, just as in poor soil and by pinching the ends of the stems, most of the other varieties can be maintained at a very low height. CULTIVATION. Peas do fairly well in all types of soil, provided they are not sown in the same place for two years running. It is even a good idea to let the soil that has produced them rest for two or three years. Fertilizers are harmful in that they make them produce a lot of foliage to the detriment of the fruit. They can be sown in clumps or in rays, like beans. In the first case, hollows are made a foot apart, and five or six seeds are thrown in; in the second, a furrow is opened with a hoe, and the seeds are thrown in two by two, about eight inches apart. Cover with two inches of 2009 soil, and eight or ten days later the seed sprouts. Water and remove weeds whenever necessary. When the plants are five to six inches high, they are re-shod, i.e. a little earth is brought up against their roots, and they are rowed. Early peas are sown in November in free soils, and at the beginning of December in light soils. Place them on a hillside facing south, or at the foot of a wall with a similar exposure. If the soil is dry and light, they are walked on, then covered with soil, and a little colombine is spread over them, making them stronger against frosts. From December 25th to 30th, you need to start sheltering them, at least during the nights. To do this, we use large pieces of bedding or straw mats, which we support at the right height using poles and stakes. As the cold increases, we thicken the blankets, but still provide air and light whenever the weather permits. If the peas are frozen, we have to be careful not to expose them to the sun's rays, which would kill them immediately; we have to wait for them to thaw. They are uncovered when the temperature warms up, but always leave the blankets close by to be used if necessary. In February, remove all the bedding or straw mats, crimp them, shoe them and, when they flower, pinch them above the third flower if you want to hasten their maturity. If the season is favorable, the same varieties can be sown in January, February and March; then continue with others, sowing for the second and third seasons. Finally, using Clamart peas, you can extend sowing into July, and even into mid-August; but these are likely to be surprised p by October frosts, at which time they begin to bear fruit. PRIMEUR. Sow in the first days of November, earlier or later depending on when you want to harvest, in baskets seven to eight inches high and ten to twelve inches in diameter, filled with a mixture of equal parts of soil and well-consumed loam. Twenty to twenty-five grains are placed in each basket, and after covering them with the soil indicated, an inch of crumbled croutin is spread over them. In this state, they are left to germinate and grow outside, in a warm spot, with the precaution of leaving the baskets buried, or at least keeping the soil constantly moist. When the frosts become severe, remove the baskets from the ground and bring them into a cold greenhouse, where they can be easily ventilated. As far as possible, keep the temperature of the greenhouse at zero, because it's enough if it doesn't freeze. More heat would make the peas grow and wither. Once the season has warmed up, we take them out as often as possible. In February, we place them on muffled beds prepared for good exposure, and in the manure of which we have mixed a little tannin to increase and maintain heat. The baskets should be buried in the soil of the bed, and spaced six inches apart. Needless to say, before placing them in the baskets, let the high heat pass through, as this could burn the roots. It won't be long before they bloom, and to hasten them even more, pinch them at two or three blossoms. In the event of frost, they can be covered with straw mats, which can be vaulted using barrel hoops and a few laths. If managed with care, they will bear fruit as early as the first days of April. For late-season peas, michaux should be sown in baskets at the end of August or in the first days of September, and trained as we have said, taking care to water them every other day if the season is dry. When they are five to six inches old, we'll bring them in, and when the frosts start, we'll take them out of the greenhouse whenever the weather permits. They will bear fruit from the first days of November to the end of December. Everything we have just said is in favor of people who don't own either a tarpaulin or a frame; as for those who do, they will find it much less difficult to obtain early fruit in all seasons. If you have a tarpaulin, prepare a warm layer which you cover with light earth and potting soil, into which you mix a small quantity of poudrette. Sow in November, and later pinch out three or four flowers. If you only have trays, sow in September in baskets as described above. When the cold arrives, or when you want to bring the plants forward, you transport the baskets in a warm layer of potting soil, and cover with trays. You can still sow thickly in December and January on the warm layer, then transplant to a new warm layer when the plants are three or four inches old. Plant them in rows six to seven inches apart, put two plants together, and space the holes four inches apart on the rows. Peas are grown under tarpaulin and frame in the same way as other early crops, i.e. they are given air whenever it is safe to do so. When picking peas for seed, choose the best varieties if you don't want them to degenerate quickly. Kept in the pod, they retain their germinative qualities for four or five years. CHICHE, CORNU or POINTU, CISERON, GARVANCHE, SEIRON. (Cicer arietinum; L.) Q. Oriental. In southern France, Spain and Italy, it is widely used in purées, soups and lentils. Three varieties are grown. I° YELLOW SEEDS; white flowers; fairly large seeds. 2° WITH WHITE SEEDS; white flowers; small seeds. 3° WITH RED SEEDS: pink flowers; medium-sized seeds. Sow broadcast or in rows from May to June or July, in perfectly loosened, well-smoked soil. They are covered and cultivated like regular peas, but the plants must be spaced further apart, as they spread out more. They are harvested when the pods are yellowish and almost

Then they are threshed, but the grain must be perfectly dry, otherwise it will crush under the flail. It retains its germinative qualities for two or three years. This plant could be grown in large quantities to provide fodder much appreciated by livestock. TER'RE APPLE, PARMENTIÈRE, TRUFFLE. (Solanum tuberosum; L.) 2. From Peru. A large number of varieties have been obtained. 1°. REDS. a. Truffe d'aotlt; round, red, pale, good and early. b. Ronde de Lalle; late, but very productive. c. Tardive d'Irlande or Américaine, or pomme de terre zuisse; round, excellent, keeping, without growing, until the next harvest. d. Corne de bique; long, very productive, but growing easily in the greenhouse. e. Descroizille; long, pink, keeping very well; excellent. 1008 f. Vitelotte; long, good, keeps fairly well. g. Rouge longue de Hollande; very good, but not very productive. h. Pelure d'ognon, langue de bœuf; the earliest of all, although it only flowers when the others do: good and hardy. i. Red long marbled; very similar to cow's white, but marbled with white and red; its tubers form a large cluster at the base of the stem. j. Red oblong; from Long Island; very fine, excellent flavor; does well in strong soils. 2°. YELLOW. a. Yellow gherkin, yellow holland; long, floury and very good. b. Chave or shaw; obround, large and very early; productive. c. Early dwarf; round, small, but even earlier than the preceding one. d. Yellow patraque; pale yellow, very large, mediocre; produces fairly well. e. Round-flat; sent from New-Yorck; floury and very good. 3°. VIOLETES. a. Round; very productive, fairly good. b. Black; round, not very productive, with a fairly strong odor. c. Dutch violet; oblong, with purple and yellowish spots on the surface: good, but not very productive. 4°. WHITES. a. Gros du Charollais; very productive; mealy and good. b. Patraque blanche; very large, productive, mediocre. c. For cows, wild, hardy, large white; the most commonly grown in the départemens. It is the hardiest and most fertile, and therefore belongs more particularly to large-scale cultivation. d. BLANCHE-LONGUE or Irish; not as large, but very productive and excellent. e. Souris or corne de vache; long, pointed at one end, rounded at the other, a little flattened; very white flesh, excellent: a little early. f. PETTTE BLANCHE, petite chinoise, sucrée d'Hanovre; small, irregularly round; not very productive, but very good. As for quality, these varieties are nothing if not consistent, as they depend largely on the nature of the soil. In sandy or light soils, and especially in dry soils, potatoes grow less large, but they degenerate less quickly and are much better; in strong, damp soils, their volume is greater, but they are more watery and pungent. CULTIVATION. At the end of March or beginning of April, sow in very light rays spaced fifteen to eighteen inches apart and dug in deep gullies. Cover with half an inch of compost and water. When the plant has risen, it is thinned out and the weeds pulled out by hand; then, when it is eight to ten inches high, the soil left on the edges of the gullies is poured around its stem; it is thinned out again if necessary, so that the plants are spaced about a foot apart. They are then ridged again. When their stems have acquired a foot to fifteen inches, they are ridged a third time. If the soil is substantial and light, the harvest will provide many tubers of ordinary size, and the others will be the size of walnuts. More generally, potatoes are propagated by planting whole tubers, or only cut pieces with eyes; large whole tubers are the most productive: at the same time as for sowing, holes or gullies are made, into which the potatoes are planted, either whole or in sections, on manure spread at the bottom of the holes; they are lightly covered with soil; and, when they have sprouted, they are cultivated and ridged like seed potatoes. It is essential to pull them up as soon as they are ripe, because if it rains, they will turn green again and lose all their qualities. PRIMEUR. From the first days of February, plant whole tubers of early varieties in a plant bed facing south, and cover with three or four inches of earth, on which five or six fingers of manure are spread. Once the plant has risen, it is protected from frosts that may occur, by throwing large dry litter over it every night, and sheltering it, if necessary during the day, with straw mats. If you want to have them in winter, in autumn you prepare a soil with equal parts of well-consumed loam and pure sand. Make a bed six inches thick in a warm cellar, and lay whole tubers on top. Oh cover with a new bed of sand, then place more tubers, and so on, until the layer is two feet high. It doesn't take long for the potatoes to sprout long, etiolated stems, which cover the bed and need to be cared for. Make a hole in the bed, and check whether the tubers are large enough to be used in cooking; then start pulling them out, attacking the bed on one side, and continuing each day to pull them out towards the other end. If planted in December, new potatoes will be available in February, and will follow one another until the harvest of those grown in the open ground, but the same qualities should not be expected. PORREAU, LEEK. (Allium porrum; L.) g. Native to the mountains of France and Switzerland. It is used only to give flavor to broths, purées, etc. Two varieties are known: the long leek and the short leek. Two varieties are known: the long variety, which is more widely cultivated because it yields more; and the short variety, which is more resistant to heavy frosts. This garlic likes light, substantial, well loosened soil that has not been smoked for two or three years. In February and March, sow thickly and broadcast, then walk if the soil is very light; rake and water from time to time, if necessary, to facilitate germination. When the plant has grown to the size of a feather-pipe, which usually happens at the end of June, take advantage of a rainy day to carefully remove it, or in the absence of rain, water it heavily and transplant it into beds six inches apart. The time of sowing, and therefore transplanting, can vary according to climate. For example, in the south of France, you can sow as early as January, while in the north, sowing is sometimes delayed until April 15th. When transplanting, which is done in six-inch-deep holes, roots and leaves are left intact if the young plant has not suffered; if the plant has suffered, only what is necessary to re-establish the balance of sap and vegetation is removed from one or the other; i.e., if the roots have suffered, the diseased tips are removed, and the leaves are shortened accordingly. Weed and water often, especially during the summer; this is the best way to hasten vegetation, and to have fairly large plants by July. As winter approaches, if you've grown a long porreau, pull it out and put it safely in the greenhouse, or place it in an open trench at the foot of a south-facing wall, and plant its feet in dry sand close together, but without letting them touch. Cover with dry litter to prevent the cold from penetrating to the feet. The short porreau can be left in place for use, but the plants intended to supply the seed should be carefully sheltered. In March, we carefully replant the seed-bearing plants, chosen from among the healthiest and most vigorous; they go up in May; and, when the seeds are ripe and threaten to fall, we cut off the umbels and let them ripen by placing them on a cloth, where we shake them from time to time. The seeds that fall off first are always the best and keep well for two years; those that remain in the capsules, if you only take them out to sow them, can retain their germinative virtue for three or four years; but they need to be sown much more densely, because they don't all germinate. As porreau wears out the soil a great deal, and perhaps also because the soil in which it is planted must not have been fertilized for a long time, it must be properly fertilized before any other crop is planted. CURED PURSLANE. (Portulaca oleracea, L.) O. From southern France. This bland, fleshy plant has given rise to a variety known as golden purslane, but which often reverts to its type, regaining its green color. Both can be used as salad greens when young; when a little older, they can be eaten cooked; sometimes they can be preserved in vinegar. At the end of April, in warm years, or in May, loosen light soil along a wall facing south, and sow lightly, barely burying the seed with a rake, or even better, just covering it with a light layer of compost. Water abundantly, especially when cutting, and always at the height of heat to preserve its golden color; this is also the best way to obtain more tender stems. For early plants, we sow in layers, under cloches or frames, from January to March, taking every precaution to avoid the slightest cold which would kill the young plants. In this case, the seed is thrown very lightly onto the soil of the bed, and is not buried: simply press it down with the back of the spade or a board. The seed should be collected from the most vigorous and first-sown plants. As soon as the seed capsules begin to open, carefully cut off the stems and dry them on a cloth for a few days, to allow the seeds to mature. They retain their germinative power for seven or eight years. RAIFORT SAUVACE, CRANSON RUSTIQUE, CRAN, GRAND RAIFORT, CRAN DE BRETAGNE. (Cochlearia armoracia; L.) 7. From France. The roots of this plant, grated and soaked in vinegar, are used to replace mustard; they have an extremely pungent flavor and contain starch. Horseradish grows well in all types of soil, but prefers slightly damp ones. It can be sown in spring, or its roots removed in autumn. It's only good in its first and second years; as it ages, the roots harden and become almost woody. Its seed keeps for two years. RAIPONCE. (Campanula rapunculus, L.) 2. This bellflower, which grows spontaneously in meadows and hedges, has been accepted in the kitchen garden because of its fleshy, tender root, with a very mild flavor. It is usually eaten as a salad, and sometimes cooked. Two varieties are grown, one hairy and the other hairless. This plant likes fresh, light, slightly shaded soil; it does well in soil amended with leaf compost. Sow in June, in a well loosened bed, then cover lightly with fine compost and water often until the plant has emerged. Weed it and give it a few more sprinklings during droughts. It overwinters without any care, and is used from February until it goes to seed, which happens in May. The seeds ripen in July and are good for three years. CAmPANUlE MIROIR DE VÉNUS (prismatocarpus speculum, LuéR.) O, is used for the same purposes and is grown in the same way, but in sandy soil, which is less cool and less shaded; it is best suited to potting soils made from animal matter. CAMPANULE GANTELÉE (campanula trachelium, L.) 7, is grown and used in the same way as the first; shade and coolness are favorable; and, if you want it to be very good, cover its seedling with moss and damp leaves instead of compost. RABE, RADISH, PETITE RAVE. (Raphanus sativus, L.) O. From China. Several varieties are grown, divided as follows: 1° RADISH. Round roots. a. The small gray radish; sown light, it holds up well all summer. b. Yellow; same cultivation, same qualities. c. Ordinary white. d. Petit noir; excellent for summer and autumn. e. Gros noir, or horseradish; can be sown from June to August, and will keep all winter if buried in sand or earth and protected from frost. Its flesh is dry and hard, with a very pungent flavor. f. Large white Augsburg; sown very lightly from May to the end of August. It requires a lot of watering. Except for the color, it resembles the other, but is less pungent. g. The hdtif white, good for sowing on bedding; on soil it is less delicate. POTAGER. i. Small pink or salmon. Id. j. Violet. Id. k. Red-pd̂le. Id. 1. soft red. Id. m. Red inside or red-fleshed. These last six varieties have many similarities, and are of excellent quality. 2° RAVES. Long roots. a. Long red or coral rabe; sow outdoors. b. Petite hd̂tive; particularly suitable for sowing in beds; red. c. White; not as sweet as the above. d. La tortillée du Mans; sow lighter than the others in soft, deep soil. e. La rave couleur de rose ou saumonée. Turnips can be sown and harvested every month of the year, but spring turnips are infinitely better than the others. As early as October, layers of hot manure are prepared, over which eight to nine inches of compost are spread. When the heat has passed, the early varieties are sown on top, taking care to walk on the compost if you want them to be round. When they have emerged, we thin them out. If it's freezing, cover the young plant with cloches, and throw litter over it as the cold deepens. It's essential to provide air whenever possible, because if radishes lack it, they wither and fail to form roots. Continue to sow in beds throughout the winter, using heaters if the cold makes this necessary. In February, you can dispense with covering with cloches, and in March sow in light, well loosened soil, covered with an inch of compost. When the summer heat begins to make itself felt, turnips usually become pi000 quantes or hollow; to prevent this, sow them in the shade, with a northern exposure, and water them a lot. If you don't care about raising beds for this little crop, you can sow radishes at the end of September, pull them out in November and replant them very close together on an ados of potting soil facing south; bury them up to the collar, and cover them with litter during frosts. Rabe seed can be harvested from the best varieties, and can last up to six years. WAVY RHUBARB. (Rheum undulatum, L.) 2. From China; and RHUBARBE RInEs ou GROSEILLE, (Rheum ribes) 2. From Asia. The ribs of these two plants, peeled and cut into sections, are used in cooking to replace the fruit sometimes used in pastries. The second species in particular is highly prized in England. They thrive in light, deep, slightly dry soil with a sunny exposure. They are propagated from seed, sown as soon as they reach maturity, or, more easily, from suckers separated in spring and planted three or four feet apart. Weed, hoe and care for the crop the first year, but in subsequent years, just give it a light ploughing in spring. If you want to harvest the root for medicinal use, wait until it is four or five years old; then pull it out in autumn, cut it into two-inch trunks, and dry it out in an oven at moderate heat. All that remains to be done is to join the pieces with a wood rasp, round off their angles and roll them in a barrel with their rasp. ROSEMARY OFFICINALIS. ( Rosmarinus officinalis, L.) b. Indigenous. Although this shrub is not used in cooking, it is found in all vegetable gardens, either because of its pleasant, aromatic scent, or because of the uses to which it is put. It is used, for example, to prepare water for the Queen of Hungary. We grow a variegated variety in white and another in yellow, both sensitive to heavy frosts. It thrives in light, warm, sheltered soil. It is propagated by cuttings, marcottes and splinters, rarely by seed, as this method is Iong. It is often planted in borders, which can be maintained for a long time in the same place, especially if mowed and watered. In countries above the latitude of Paris, it is wise to stuff it in winter. ROQUETTE. (Brassica eruca, L.) O. Indigenous. The young shoots of this small plant are used in salad supplies; but as it grows, its leaves become so pungent that few people can use them. It is first sown in spring, and then continued each month to ensure a year-round supply; summer sowing is done in damp soil and in the shade: moreover, it adapts to any soil and only requires weeding, thinning and watering as needed; watering in particular greatly reduces its pungency. The seed is harvested in July and August from plants sown in spring; it keeps for three or four years, and can be used to make oil. SALSIFIS, PORRIFLEAF CERCIFIS, WHITE or COMMON SALSIFIS. (Tragopogon porrifolius; L.) &. Indigenous. Its long root, white on the outside and inside, is larger than that of scorsonera and less prone to forking; moreover, it serves the same purposes. In substantial soil, well loosened and loosened, but not smoked, it is broadcast in March, April, May and even early June, and watered abundantly to help germination. A few hoeings are given, and in November we start to pull up roots for use. You can pull them up all winter long; if you're worried about the ground freezing too deep, you can pull them up at the end of December, place them in a greenhouse in fresh sand, or bury them in an open trench in the garden, covering them well during frosts. Those left in place can still be good in spring, until they go to seed. Seeds ripen in July, and germinate well only in the first year. GARDEN SAVORY, SAVORY, SAVORY, SADREA. (Satureia hortensis, L.) Q. From Italy. This plant is only used in cooking as a seasoning for marsh beans, peas and sauerkraut. The Dutch pluck it before flowering, bind it in bundles and dry them in the shade, thus preserving it for winter use. It does very well in all soils, where there is no need to sow any more once it has been sown, thanks to its ability to resow itself. It requires no care. It is cut and dried on the floor as soon as the seeds begin to ripen; preserved in their capsules, they retain their germinative qualities for four or five years. Mountain savory (satureia montana, L.), for the same purposes, and is propagated from good seeds for two years, or by sprouting in spring. SAGE OFFICINALE, FRANCHE. (Salvia officinalis; L.) 7. native. This plant, O in Paris kitchens, is used only to flavor hams and fresh pork; but in northern France and Holland, it is used in almost all seasonings. It thrives in all types of soil and exposure, although it prefers light, warm, slightly dry soil. It can be propagated from seed or cuttings, but it is generally preferable to burst the plants in spring and autumn, as this is the safest and easiest way. Care should be taken to replant them in a trough seven to eight inches deep, and to firm the plants by pressing the soil around the root collar. Seedlings are sown on a bed in spring, and when the young plants are strong enough, they are removed with the rootball and placed, usually in a border. Cuttings are taken in the same way, in spring and on a bed, with the precaution of watering them copiously until they are fully established; then they are planted with the root ball, in the same way as the cuttings. Sage stays in the same place for a very long time, but as it is easily stripped and forms unpleasant gaps in borders, it is usually replanted every three or four years. The PETITE SAUGE OU SAUGE DE PROVENCE (salvia tenuior, L..), grows in the same way and is used for the same purposes. These two species have given us the tricolored, variegated, small-leaved, narrow-leaved, waffled and curly varieties. To maintain their unique characteristics, grow them in lean, light soil. spanish scorzonera, black salsifis, spanish salsifis. (Scorzonera hispanica; L.) g. Its root is black on the outside, which distinguishes it from salsify; it can be eaten with white sauce, fried, etc. Scorzonera is sown in February, March and April, 9 or in late July and August, and is grown in the same way as salsify. It goes to seed quickly, but its root is no less tender. In very soft soils, it may grow large enough to be eaten in the year of sowing, but is usually only pulled up in the second year. Once the plant has come up and its seeds are ripe, the stems are cut back to the ground, and the collars immediately produce new leaves; the following year, the plant can still be preserved by the same method, and its roots, just as delicate, will be much larger. The best seed is harvested from two-year-old individuals; it is only good for one year. EDIBLE NUTSEDGE, GROUND ALMOND. (Cyperus esculentus; L.) 2 This plant, native to the marshy meadows of Spain, produces numerous tubers at its roots which, in many countries, provide a healthy food, a pleasant liqueur and oil. Its cultivation is somewhat similar to that of the potato. In March, in light, damp soil, furrows are dug six inches deep; the tubers are planted, having been soaked in water since the previous day, to swell them and hasten their growth. Cover with soil, and all the care is limited to a few weedings to destroy weeds. In October and November, the new tubers are removed from the ground, and those destined for replanting the following year are kept like potatoes. SPILANTHE CRESSON DE PARA, ABECEDARY (Spilanthus oleracea; S. VEG.) Q. Des Indes; and SPiLanTI CRESSON DU BRÉSIL. (Spilanthus brasiliana) Q. From South America. These two small, creeping plants have a pungent flavor that makes them useful in cooking as a seasoning. They are sown in beds in spring, and when the plant has reached a certain strength, it is transplanted into light, warm soil with a southern exposure. They require a lot of watering. They can also be sown in very loose soil, covered with half an inch of compost, against a wall facing south; but if the season is not favorable, they risk being surprised by frost before their seeds have ripened. TANAISIE-BAUME, MENTHE-cOQ. (Tanacetum balsamita; L.) 2. From southern France. The young stems of this aromatic plant are rarely used for salad dressing. It multiplies from seed in spring, more easily through its numerous suckers. It is planted in open soil in a warm location. TANAISIE COMNUNE (tanacetum vulgare, L.) 2, indigenous and used medicinally, can be grown in the same way, as can its curly variety. STALLED TETRAGON or CORN. (Tetragonia aut cornutia expansa; DESF. et Banx.) QQ. We owe this plant to Cook's voyages to the South Sea islands, where it originated. Joseph Banks brought it to Europe in 1772. It is used in cooking in the same way as spinach. In February or March, it is sown on a bed and under a frame; and when the frosts, to which tetragonia is very sensitive, are no longer feared, it is transplanted into good, light, fresh soil, against a wall facing south, spacing the plants eighteen inches apart. It also works well if sown in mid-April in open soil and good exposure. Maintain the soil in a constant state of moisture with daily watering. It can be cut up to four times during the summer, taking care to spare the hardiest plants intended to supply grainc. Seeds ripen in autumn. O8 DU JARDIV COMMON THYME. (Thymus vulgaris; L.) 2. this miniature shrub is native to Spain; it is used in cooking to flavor various dishes. Three varieties are grown: The common or narrow-leaved, the broad-leaved, and the variegated, which is cut at the time of flowering and dried for use as needed. Thyme from seed and its varieties from cuttings could be multiplied, but as it is much easier and quicker to do so by sprouting plants in spring, only the latter method is used. It can be planted in clumps, or used to form borders that are easy to clump, and renewed every three or four years. It likes light, warm soil and requires no care. LEMON SMELL SERPOLET, LEMON THYME (thymus serpillum citratum) is a closely related species, differing essentially only in scent. It is used for the same purposes and cultivated in the same way. TOMATO, LOVE APPLE, (Solanum Iycopersicum, L.) Q. From South America. Today, everyone knows the use of its red fruit, round or oval, plain or furrowed, depending on the variety. In February, it is sown in warm soil, and when the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted into light soil at midday, and watered abundantly during the heat. Plants of the large variety are planted two feet apart; those of the small variety, fifteen or eighteen inches apart. When the stems have reached fifteen or twenty inches in height, they are stopped by pinching. As a result, the fruit ripens earlier and better, and the plant needs less support. A few days later, we also pinch off the secondary branches above the flowers. When the fruits are about half their size, we remove the new buds that are developing, and remove a few leaves to let in the air and sunshine. Later, as the tomatoes begin to turn red, we remove all the leaves from the fruit. We note that, in the Paris climate, the large variety ripens with difficulty unless sown very early, whereas the small variety always succeeds, even when sown in the ground. JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE, EARTH PEAR, TUFTED EARTH, TARTOUFFE. (Helianthus tuberosus; L.) 2. From Brazil. The root of this plant produces large red or yellow tubers, depending on the variety, which are eaten boiled and prepared in a variety of ways. The stems, leaves and flowers resemble those of a sunflower. It is multiplied by its tubers, which are planted in March in the same way as potatoes. It does well in all types of soil, but prefers free-flowing, substantial soil, in which its roots can be left all winter to be pulled up as and when needed. The Jerusalem artichoke spreads very quickly, and is very difficult to destroy in the place where it is planted. If you want to collect seeds, you need to obtain tubers that have recently arrived from America, as the plants formerly cultivated in France no longer bear them. nigella sativa, pear or cultivated. (Nigella sativa, L.) Q. From the Orient. Its very aromatic seeds are used in cooking like spices, particularly in Italy and southern France. This plant requires light, warm soil and southern exposure. It is sown in April, thinned out so that each plant is eight inches apart, and watered frequently until flowering has passed. Its seeds keep well for several years. NIGELLE DE DAMAS, OU CHEVEUX DE PAYSAN, Ou PATE D'ARAIGNÉE, (nigella damascena, L.) O, from southern France, is still grown in the same way and for the same purpose, but its seeds are less aromatic. WHITE VETCH, LENTIL. (Vicia sativa; L. var. alba) Q. Indigenous. Its white grain is larger than that of the ordinary species; it is used to make purées, and its flour is mixed with wheat flour to make bread. It is grown like lentils, but is less sensitive to cold. It is sown in rows or broadcast at the end of February or beginning of March, and in southern France at the end of August. In all cases, hoe and weed, ridge young stems, especially when sown in autumn, and water if necessary. The seed is not collected until the pods turn yellow, and is dried in bunches before threshing. Seed collected from overwintered plants is always the best. setocococobecoecececececececeoteccccecececececececececesccceceso. OF THE FRUIT GARDEN. Nature has covered every part of the earth with a large number of species of fruit trees; each climate has its own, which can only succeed in the places where they originate. For example, date palms, coconut palms, litchis and banana trees will never ripen their delicious fruit under French skies, while our apple, pear and plum trees will not succeed in the hot zones where the former grow. A work dealing with the natural history and cultivation of all the trees whose fruit is eaten in every country on the globe would be extremely interesting in many respects, but it would go beyond the framework we have drawn up for ourselves whenever it deals with a species that can only thrive in Europe in a greenhouse. Considering trees here from the point of view of their usefulness, we have only to deal with those that succeed in the open ground in most European orchards. We have classified them as follows: TABLE OF FRUIT TREES. FIRST CLASS. TREES THAT DO NOT FEAR THE COLD, AND RIPEN THEIR FRUIT IN ALL TEMPERATE CLIMATES. FIRST DIVISION. FRUITS WITH NON-PULPING ENVELOPES. a. Silique envelopes......... Carob. 2. 29 208 b. Cone-shaped shell.......... Pinion pine. c. Spiky envelope; first-growth trees. . . . . .......... Hetre. Chestnut. d. Not bristly; shrub. Sweet poppy. e. Membranous casing....... Pistachio. SECOND DIVISION. FRUITS WITH PULPING HALF-ENVELOPE, BUT CORIACE. a. First-growth tree. ..... Chenc. b. Tree of third size...... Hazelnut. THIRD DIVISION. FRUTIS WITH PULP, DRY OR ANERATED ENVELOPE. a. Tree of first size...... Walnut. b. Medium-sized tree...... Almond tree. FOURTH DIVISION. FRUITS WITH NOELS AND SOFT, SUCCULENT PULP. a. Third-sized trees...... Peach tree. Apricot. b. Medium-sized trees...... Plum. c. First-growth trees...... Cherry. Hackberry. d. Large shrub........... Dogwood. FIFTH DIVISION. FRUITS WITH SEEDS AND MORE OR LESS CLOSE CHAIR. a. Medium-sized trees...... Cognassier. b. Trees of third size, with seeds Poirier. Apple tree. Mountain ash. . . . . . . . . ........ Beech. Bibacier. Azerolier. Alisier. SIXTH DIVISION. BERRY-SHAPED FRUIT WITH MORE OR LESS LIQUID POLISH. A. Berries agglomerated into an epherical or oval head. a. Medium-sized trees..... Mulberry. Brush tree. b. Third-growth trees...... Arbutus. c. Shrubs... . . . . . . . . .. .. . Raspberry. Bramble. B. Berries solitary, or in clusters. a. Medium-sized tree...... Plaqueminier. b. Climbing shrub. Vine. c. Shrubs forming bushes...... Currants. SECOND CLASS. Barberry. Mrrtille. SHRUBS FEARING COLD, AND ONLY SUCCESSFUL IN THE FIELD BELOW 43 DEGREES OF LATITUDE. a. Stone fruit. ... ..... ... . .. Olive. Jujube. b. Pome fruit. . . .......... Guava. Orange tree. Pomegranate. c. Berries. . ........... Fig tree. Eugenia. FIRST CLASS. FIRST DIVISION. Fruits with non-pulpy shells. COMMON CARUBEAN, SILICON CARUBEAN (Ceratonia siliqua; L.) 5. From southern France. This third-generation tree produces small, dark purple flowers in axillary spikes in August. These are followed by a foot-long, flat, fleshy, multi-located silique containing flat seeds. The seeds are encased in a sweet, reddish pulp that is good to eat when dry, but slightly laxative. GROWING. The carob tree likes open, warm, amended soil, and a south-facing exposure to a wall, where it must also be sheltered during winter by covering it with litter and long straw arranged in a hood. Despite these precautions, it sometimes freezes during harsh winters, so it's a good idea to have a few plants in orangeries in the Paris climate. It is propagated from seed, which is sown in spring in pots sunk in a warm layer and covered with a bell or frame. When the seedling is strong enough to withstand being planted in the ground, it is removed from the soil and planted without breaking up the root ball or touching the roots. Water moderately, unless the heat is very strong and the soil absolutely dry. It can still be propagated by strangling marcottes, but these are long and difficult to regrow. The fruit rarely ripens in Paris, so this tree is only widely cultivated in the south of France. Its extremely hard wood is considered incorruptible. PINYON PINE, CULTIVATED PINE, PINE-PINE, FRANC-PIN. (Pinus pinea, L.) 7. From southern France. The trunk of this very tall tree divides at the top into many horizontally spread, diffuse branches. Its cones are solitary, sometimes reaching four inches in diameter by four and a half inches in length. Their kernels are large, eight to ten lines long, and enclosed in large, hard pine nuts. They are very good to eat, either raw or as pralines or sweets; but they quickly go rancid, and in this state they are harmful. They yield a 1 very mild oil, comparable to almond oil, and are said to have several medicinal virtues. In some countries, they are served on the table with dessert. To remove them from the cones, the latter are exposed for some time to the heat of an oven, which causes the scales to crack; but it should be noted that once treated in this way, they are worthless for sowing. If you want to use them for sowing, wait until the scales have opened by themselves due to the temperature of the atmosphere, or better still, place them under glass cloches in the sun. The wood of this species of pine is fairly white, not very resinous, light and suitable only for shipbuilding. CULTIVATION. This tree, with its attractive evergreen foliage, is one of the most delicate of its kind; however, it does well in all soils, although it prefers light, sandy or slightly damp soils. Like the others, it does not like high, cold places. In the south of France, we sow its seeds as soon as they are harvested, in the ground, barely scraped, in beds, or in a sunny spot, so that the summer heat doesn't harm the young plants. It's even a good idea to shade them by sowing vegetable plants and annuals next to them, whose high foliage will protect them from the sun's rays. If the sowing is too thick, it can be thinned out the following year in April and May, and any surplus seedlings can be transplanted in places where they are lacking. Weed and water. In the second year, it is planted in a nursery or in the field, but always with the extreme precaution of cutting neither its branches nor its roots, and removing it with the root ball. It can be cared for in the same way as other trees, except that it does not suffer from pruning. In the climate of Paris, it is a little more difficult to grow, as it fears the cold for the first two or three years. It is sown in heather soil and terrines, which are constantly kept slightly moist and in a shady spot. The first year, it overwinters in the orangery, and the second year, it is de-potted, the soil divided into as many clods as there are plants, but with the precaution of breaking rather than cutting it. Litter the plant to protect it from extreme cold, and when it's strong enough, plant it out. It then becomes hardier and less afraid of frosts, and can be left to nature. PEA BEECH, FAYARD, FAU, FOUTEAU. (Fagus rrlvatica; L.) b. Indigenous. We only mention this superb tree, eighty to one hundred feet tall and so common in our woods, because of the great services its fruit renders to the inhabitants of the countryside where it is found. It ripens in October, and its flavor is similar to that of the filbert. It produces a very sweet oil, very similar to hazelnut oil, but with the singularity that it acquires quality as it ages, instead of losing it and going rancid like the others. It is used in cooking for lighting, and in perfumery. In addition to its oil, beech is also used to feed and fatten domestic animals, especially pigs. Beech wood is light and fairly hard, and is used for a variety of purposes. CULTIVATION. This tree grows well in all soils, but acquires enormous size in granitic, light, deep and slightly damp soils; it even succeeds in chalky soils and pure sand. It is propagated from seeds sown as soon as they ripen, either broadcast or in furrows, in soil loosened by good ploughing. It is soaked for twenty-four hours in manure water, to give it an unpleasant taste that will deter field mice, who are very fond of it. It is mixed with oats or barley, so that these plants keep the young plant in the shade during its early youth. This should be understood only for large, on-site sowings. If you have sown small seedlings, in order to obtain subjects for grafting ornamental varieties, weed and water them as needed; then transplant them to the nursery when they are a foot tall. Varieties are grafted using procedures nos. 13, 14, 5, 3 and 1; then, when recovery is certain, they are planted. Young beech trees can also be obtained by finding seedlings in the forest, always choosing the smallest, as they recover much more easily. CHESTNUT CONMUN. (Fagus castanea, L. Castanea vesca, WILD.) b. Native. This large, tap-rooted tree produces a fruit that is too well-known for us to waste time describing it. In some provinces, country dwellers use it as their main source of nourishment. Its wood is used for carpentry and joinery; better than any other, it can be preserved in water. Its young stems are used to make hoops and stiles. Several varieties are known, many of which seem to be solely the result of the terroir. A. LES MARRONS; rounder fruit, much larger and more fragrant than chestnuts. a. DE LYON, d'Aubray, d'Agen, de Luc, the largest and best of all. It has several sub-varieties, differing in size. B. CHATAIGNES. a. L'ÉGALADE; very large, flattened, excellent. D. POURTALONNE; large, benne; productive tree. 008 e. La VERTE DU LIMOUSIN; large, good; keeps very well. d. La PRINTANIÈRE; mediocre in size and quality, but early. e. La ROYALE HÉLÈNE; large, smooth, viscous on the outside. f. La ROYALE BLANCHE; large, good; almost as early as the preceding one, yellowish. g. La CAMaudE; very large and very good. It is remarkable for the fuzz it retains at the tip. h. GRANDE ÉPINE; whose shell is covered with very long spines. There are still several varieties, but all are inferior in quality to those just mentioned. CULTIVATION. To succeed, this tree requires clean, light soil, either granitic or sandy, but a little dry. In greasy, cool or even chalky soils, it perishes or vegetates thinly without bearing fruit. The species is multiplied by sowing, and the varieties by pollination. When you want to sow, you keep the best chestnuts in their shells until they come out themselves by shaking them a little; or, better still, you choose the biggest ones that have fallen naturally from the trees. Let them dry a little in the shade, then stratify them in sand, or simply in an eighteen-inch-deep hole dug in the driest part of the garden. If you don't have to worry about field mice and rats, it may be better to plant them in autumn, even though fewer of them will come up. In February or March, loosen the soil, but don't smoke it, unless you're using well-consumed street mud that's been ripening in a heap for at least a year. Furrows are made at two-foot intervals, and chestnuts are planted three inches deep and eighteen inches apart. If you're planting in a warm location, be sure to align the rows from north to south, so that the young plants can shade each other. Hoe the first year, then lightly plough in subsequent years. If you don't want to stratify, you can sow in autumn in the same way as above, but place two or three chestnuts in each hole, two inches apart, so that you'll always have a well-stocked nursery in case any are missing; once they've grown, carefully remove any that are too many, and transplant them where there are none. The plants are raised on a stem of varying height, as required, and are not put in place until they have reached wrist size. In the Bugey region, which supplies Lyon's famous chestnuts, holes five feet wide and four feet deep are dug one or two years in advance, and rainwater is channeled into them, depositing silt that is excellent for these trees. In autumn or spring, the tree is planted in these holes; a little mounding is done to help it withstand the forces of the wind, and the lateral branches are cut back. To ensure good growth, it's a good idea in the first year to keep the soil moist by covering it with straw, fern or thatch. The year after planting, it is grafted onto the top of the stem, or onto the main branches, using the budding bud grafting method (n° 2) and the flute grafting method (n° 63, 64 and 65). It is then treated as described in the article on pruning: see page 271. The distance at which chestnut trees should be placed from one another depends on the quality of the soil in which they are planted, and is calculated on the presumed size they will acquire one day; it is sufficient that their branches cannot overlap, as those underneath would not produce fruit. Chestnuts are usually harvested a little before they reach maturity, because the trees are often 9 far from dwellings, and the fruit falls by itself as soon as it is ripe, exposing it to theft. To cut them down, long gaules are used, which cause a great deal of damage to the branches, breaking their young shoots and destroying a good part of the next harvest. But this is a necessary evil that can only be partly remedied by sparing the trees as much as possible. Chestnuts are kept in their husks until they have fully ripened, and are thus kept for two months in a place exposed to a conrant of air. They are then separated from their shells and dried in the sun on racks. In some provinces, to ensure their preservation, smoke is passed between the racks on which they are laid, or they are stripped of their skin and dried in an oven. The CHINCAPIN, or AMERICAN CHESTNUT ( castanea, pumila, MiCH.), produces a very small fruit that is highly prized in its country. It can be grown in the same way, but is not well suited to the cold climate of Paris. It is usually propagated from seed, but by grafting onto the common chestnut tree, more satisfactory results could be obtained in the south of France. SWEET PAVIER, LARGE SPIKES, DWARF. (Æsculus macrostachya, Micn. Pavia dulcis, Poir.) 4. From North America. This shrub, which is very similar to the horse chestnut, produces fragrant white flowers in clusters in July and August. These are followed by small chestnuts, which are delicious eaten raw or roasted. The pavier likes fresh, light soil, although it does well in all types of soil. If possible, give it a mid-sun exposure, and its more numerous fruits are also better. This shrub can be propagated from seedlings, root offshoots and seed. The first are made in spring by incision or strangulation; they recover quite easily; the second are detached in autumn or spring. If propagated by root, a section about the size of a little finger and seven to eight inches long is cut in spring; it is planted vertically in light, cool, shady soil, covered with a little litter, and soon starts to sprout. Sowing is done in the same way as for ordinary chestnuts, i.e. the chestnuts are stratified in autumn, and planted in a nursery in spring. The following year, we separate the young plants, leaving a small clod of earth for each, and put them in place, where they require no more than ordinary care. However, it is wise to protect them from frost by covering them with litter for at least the first two winters. As sweet pavier produces its flowers at the end of the branches, it cannot be pruned regularly without reducing its yield. CULTIVATED PISTACHIO. (Pistacia vera aut trifolia; L.) b. From Syria. This tree, about twenty feet high, is naturalized in France and could be more widespread in the Paris climate, where it is fairly frost-resistant. It flowers in May; its male flowers are on one individual and its female flowers on another, so that both must be present to obtain a harvest. The fruit consists of a small nut the size and shape of an olive, with a greenish, oily kernel that is quite pleasant to the taste; it is known commercially as a pistachio and is used to make sweets, sugared almonds, etc. CULTIVATION. The ungrafted pistachio likes open, light soil and a warm, south-facing wall, where it can be trained in espaliers without being pruned. Grafted on terebinth (pistacia terebinthus, L.), it is much more vigorous, its fruit is larger and it can grow in any kind of soil. It can also be propagated from marcottes, and much more advantageously from seed. As soon as the fruit is ripe, sow it in pots or trays, bury in a warm layer and cover with a frame if you want to hasten germination. When the young plants have reached a certain strength, separate them with the rootball, and plant them either in the open ground if you're growing in the south of France, or in larger pots if you're growing in the Paris climate; in this case, keep them in an orangery for the first three or four years, after which they can be planted in the open ground, but take care to cover them with straw during very cold weather. A single male can fertilize many females, but he must be close enough to them to allow the wind to carry the dust from his stamens. In Sicily, farmers use artificial fertilization to obtain more abundant harvests. When the flowers of the male pistachio tree are about to open, they pick them and prick their stalks in damp earth, filling a vase with them; they hang this apparatus from the branches of the female pistachio trees, and leave it until the flowers have dried out completely. Or they fill small, light-colored canvas bags with male flowers, and shake them over the female flowers as they bloom. We have often compared the pistachios harvested in our plant with those from the south of France, and have never seen the slightest difference in quality or size. It would therefore be advantageous in the Paris area to multiply this tree further. C00 SECOND DIVISION. Fruits with a pulpy but tough half-shell. 1° CHÉNEA GLANDS DOUX Ou BALLOTTE. (Quercus ballota; DESF. ). B. Native to the Algiers region. In the Pyrenees and in Spain, acorns of this species are served for dessert; they are sweet, mucilaginous, and taste rather like hazelnuts. However, other species could be cultivated, whose fruit would not be inferior in flavor; here are the main ones: 2° YEAR OAK OR GREEN OAK (quercus ilex; L. ); from southern France; sweet acorns, but of mediocre quality. Around Paris, this tree sometimes suffers from frosts. 3° WHITE OAK (quercus alba; L. ); from America. Very large tree; soft, fairly large acorns. Performs well in the poorest soils. 4° STAR OAK (quercus stellata; Willp.); American. Medium-sized tree; mediocre acorn size, sweet and good. 5° CHESTNUT OAK (quercus castanea; WILLD.); American. Very large tree; acorns sweet and good, but small. 6° BICOLOR OAK (quercus bicolor; Willp.); American. Slightly smaller than the preceding tree; fairly large, brownish, sweet, fairly good acorns. Grows in damp soils. 7° PRINCE OAK (quercus prinus; L.); American. It likes damp soils, but sometimes fears frost in the Paris region; acorns of mediocre size, quite good. There are still a few species whose acorns are sweet, but of such mediocre flavor that they can scarcely be included in the nomenclature of food substances. In any case, they are all listed in the article "Chene" in the fourth volume of this book. CULTIVATION. Oaks are tap-rooted trees; they therefore like deep soil. They can be propagated from seed, and by approach and cleft pruning; but these latter methods are only used for rare species, whose fruit is difficult to obtain. We choose the most beautiful and ripest acorns, and give preference to those that have fallen naturally, especially when they are heavy and colorful. Sow in place or in a nursery. In the first case, after the ground has been well excavated or even mined, furrows are made into which the acorns are thrown in autumn, or only in February if they have been stratified, which is more advantageous for rare species, because less is lost to rot or field mice. If you want a thick coppice, space the furrows four or five feet apart, and place the acorns two or three feet apart on each line; you are then free to thin out and replant where they have been missed, using the transplanting method we'll teach below. Once sown, cover with three inches of soil. If you sow in a nursery, the operation is quite different. Beds are dug about a foot deep, and a bed of planks or anything else that roots can't penetrate is established. Eight to ten inches of good, loose soil is thrown on top of this bed, and sown in it in spring, covering the acorns as we said, and spacing them a foot apart, so that they can be left there for three or four years, the age at which they are best able to withstand transplanting. In this way, when the young oaks are moved to another location, all their roots can be easily removed, without having to break the pivot, which is usually the reason why the tree never develops well. Goc In all cases, whenever you want to transplant a young oak tree, the hole in which it is to be placed should be made in advance, so that you don't have to leave its roots exposed to the air for as little time as possible; you should move it with great care so as not to injure or break them, and above all you shouldn't cut any of them under any pretext whatsoever, unless they are diseased or fractured. If you can remove the plants with the root ball, you'll be much more certain of success. Place in the holes, and slide very loose soil around the roots, pressing them down a little with your feet to leave no gaps, but carefully, so as to break as little of the hair as possible; then water abundantly. Planting should take place in autumn; however, in greasy, damp soils, especially where there is a risk of water pooling in the holes, delay planting until February or even March. Choose a rainy day, or at least one that's dark and overcast, and avoid the cold. The recovery of these trees is difficult in the Paris area, but in Flanders and some other northern French provinces, we have seen them planted in avenues and recovered with the greatest ease. If you have sown holm oaks, particularly American ones, you will do well to protect them from heavy frosts during the first three or four winters. This can be done with dry bedding or straw. In any case, you can cultivate an oak nursery like any other, and give it the same care. As you can see from what we've just said, the oak, so robust when it reaches a certain age, is a delicate tree in its youth. It should therefore be given all the care it deserves, even more for the usefulness of its wood than for its fruit. hazelnut, currant (corrlus.) b. All species of this genus produce a fruit whose sweet, pleasant kernel yields an oil that is good for cooking, though little used, and useful in medicine. Confectioners use hazelnuts to make sugared almonds. Several species and a few varieties are grown. 1 1° common hazelnut (corrlus avellana; L.); native. It has produced the following varieties: a. White-fruited hazelnut (avellana sativa vulgaris); long, early, excellent, soft-shelled fruit. b. Red-fruited hazelnut (avellana fructu rubente); long fruit, similar to the above. c. Nettle-leaved hazelnut, which has been made into a species under the name corylus urticœfolia. We saw it at the home of Count de Montmorenci in Montgeron. Its foliage resembles that of the oak-leaved hornbeam, but its leaves are slightly larger and more deeply toothed. Moreover, it is a very curious variety. d. Aveline des bois; small, round fruit, quite good. e. Aveline de Provence; round fruit, with white skin and thick, hard shell: very good. f. Grosse aveline de Provence; same shape and quality, but much larger. g. Noisetier à feuille pourpre; long fruit, very good. 2° RED HAWTHORN (corylus tubulosa; WiLLD.); native. Gardeners make it a variety of the previous one, and call it corylus avellana fructu rubente maximo, because of the red color and size of its fruit. The oval-fruited hazelnut (cory lus grandis) used by gardeners is just one variety; early fruit, very good, oval, with white skin; tender shell. 3° GRAPEBERRY (corylus glomerata); very good, early, round, very large fruit. 4° CORNU NOISETIER (corylus rostrata; H. K.); from North America. It has a very thick shell and a small but good kernel: it is round. 5° NOISTIER CLABRE (cory lus colurna; L.); from Oriènt. Fruit small, of mediocre quality, round. 4006 6° NOISETIER D'AMÉRIQUE (cory lus americana; MiCn.); fruit round, small and quite good. 7° NOISETIER DE BXZANCE (corylus bizantina; L.); leaves very slender, fruit very small, inferior in quality if compared to the first and second species; its kernel is oily. The tree grows very fast, reaching a height of forty to fifty feet. CULTIVATION. Hazelnuts are plants that can form bushes or trees at will. See page 272. They do well in all soils and at all exposures, so it is customary to place them in cold, shady places, where no other fruit tree would succeed: however, they prefer light soil, or even a little sandy, cool and moist, as well as sunny and sunny exposures. They can be propagated from seed, but must then be grafted, as they rarely produce fruit as good as that sown. The safest and quickest ways to propagate them are by marcotte, which roots quite easily when strangled in autumn; rooted offshoots, which are separated in autumn and recover very well; and cuttings. They hardly bear fruit until the second or third year. Hazel wood has only minor uses, and the best we can do with it is to make hoops and ties. It has been observed that, cut precisely when the leaves are falling, it lasts three times longer than felled in winter and spring. According to Haller and Daubenton, this tree lives to be very old, and is capable of great growth. The former says he saw one in the garden of Leyden, in 1727, which had been planted by Charles de l'Écluse; it was over forty feet high and ten inches dia2. 30,200 meters. The second said he had seen one of this size, which was not yet dying. THIRD DIVISION. Fruits with pulpy, dry or bitter husks. WALNUT. (Juglans.) D. If the most general utility served to classify individuals, the walnut tree would be at the head of all nomenclatures; its fruit, wood, leaves, flowers and all its parts are used advantageously in domestic economy, medicine and the arts. The kernel contained in the nut is edible when new: dried, it provides an oil used in cooking and painting; its husk, as well as the leaves, roots and bark, are used by dyers to make a very solid color; the shells and the rest of the fruit are sudorific; the wood is one of the finest and one of the best that can be used by carpenters, cabinet-makers, armorers and so on. Several species and varieties of walnut trees are grown. 1° CULTIVATED WALNUT (juglans regia; L.); from Asia. Superb tree, with excellent wood, and different fruits depending on the variety. a. Common walnut; oval, rounded fruit of mediocre size, but full and yielding a lot of oil. Very productive tree, giving very good wood. b. Tender walnut or walnut tit; fruit earlier, more elongated than the preceding one, less full; wood softer, but good. c. Late walnut (juglans serotina; H. PAR.). The real merit of this variety is that it only flowers at the end of June, which protects it from spring frosts. The fruit doesn't ripen until early October, is good for eating as kernels, and yields a fair amount of oil. d. Large-fruited walnut. Produces what are known as "gauge nuts"; very large fruit, but the kernel shrinks by half as it dries, and yields little oil. Quite a pro1000 ductive tree, but in some years many fruits fall before maturity. e. Walnut with angular fruit; angular nuts, very hard shell and very good kernel, but very difficult to extract. Produces excellent oil. The tree is one of the largest of its kind; its hard, well-veined wood is the most highly esteemed of all. f. Walnut with large, long fruit; full fruit, soft shell, excellent kernel. Quite productive, with good-quality wood. g. Walnut with jewelled nuts; huge, almost square fruit, with good kernels when new, but diminishing in volume when dry, and turning rancid easily. This variety is used to hide gloves or small jewelry inside the shell. Soft wood. h. Cluster walnut; fruits five or six together, in the shape of an elongated cluster, of medium size, soft-shelled, of the same quality as tit-nut. i. Walnut with small round fruits; hard shell; full nut, yielding a lot of oil. A large tree with very hard wood, widely grown around Joigny. L Walnut with mucronate fruit, elongated nut, medium size, rough, with a point at the top, full and good. Hard wood. 2° PACAN WALNUT (Juglans olivæformis; H. K. aut crlindrica; ENCYCL. ). From North America. Fruits small, oblong, almost cylindrical, the size and shape of an olive, excellent for eating. The tree only produces at twenty years of age, and is very sensitive to cold. Its cultivation can therefore only be advantageous in the south of France. 3° BLACK WALNUT (Juglans nigra; L.). From North America. This tree is very large, grows very quickly, does not fear frosts, and provides excellent wood for joinery. Its fruit is small, round, with a very hard shell and woody partitions. We have obtained from seed a variety whose fruit is once as large, and which grows much faster. We have named it jaglans nigra macrocarpa. 4° BUTTERNUT. (Juglans cinerea; MiCh.). From America. Its fruit is very large, elongated and very rough, but the 2009 thickness of its shell accounts for most of its size. The tree is almost as tall as the previous one, and its wood is used for the same purposes. We still know some American walnut trees, such as alba, porcina, squamosa and others; but, as their fruit and wood are inferior to ours, we have deemed it unnecessary to describe them in the fruit garden. CULTIVATION. Walnut trees are pivotal trees whose lateral roots nevertheless extend a long way. They thrive in deep, rocky, sandy or light soils, and even better in red, chalky soils, where they grow to enormous size. They tolerate ten to twelve degrees of cold fairly well, but can be damaged when the thermometer falls lower; the winter of 1709 and 1789 killed a large number of them. They like northern and eastern exposure, and do better in mountainous or hilly areas than in flat ones. They are propagated from seed, and grafted using the flute grafting method (n° 61, 62), the slit grafting method (n° 47) and the escutcheon grafting method (n° 75). To sow, we choose the most beautiful fruits of the common walnut or even of the one with angular fruits if we have to graft, and if not, the biggest nuts of the varieties we want to propagate. Leave them in their husks until they naturally detach, and stratify them at the beginning of winter. A very good method, which would produce strong, vigorous trees, would be to sow them in place; but, as walnut trees are usually planted quite far from dwellings, it would be very difficult to keep an eye on them during their first age, and to prevent cattle from trampling them underfoot. It is therefore customary to form nurseries. A plot of land is dug to a depth of eighteen or twenty inches, and no smoking is allowed, unless 9 it's with a highly-consumed potting soil. In February or March, rays are traced two and a half feet apart, and the nuts are placed two feet apart; they are sunk two or two and a half inches deep, depending on the size of the fruit. The usual care is given to a nursery, and when the plants are strong enough to get in each other's way, we think about thinning them out; but, as those that are removed are suitable for replanting, we choose a season that is favorable to replanting, i.e. spring. One plant is removed between each one, so that the plants are spaced four feet apart; some are put back where they are missing, and those that are misshapen or of poor quality are replaced. From this moment on, you begin to direct the young plants as we said on page 271, in order to form them into beautiful stems. Some people are in the habit, in the second or third year, of cutting off the roots of all plants that spread laterally; to do this, they drive a spade vertically between each plant, about fifteen or eighteen inches from its collar. The result is that the shortened roots produce more hair. This operation is hard on the trees, but the inconvenience is offset by the much safer recovery process. When young walnut trees have reached an inch to an inch and a half in diameter, they can be grafted at the top of the stem, unless you prefer to wait until they are in place and well established. Gresses are more prone to detachment on this tree than on others, especially those in escutcheon; their shoots are tied to small stakes, which are themselves attached to the stem. If you wanted to swell an old tree, all you'd have to do is pull its branches back onto its trunk, and swell the vigorous shoots it produces. These trees are quite resistant to transplanting, when done with care. As far as possible, they should be raised in rootballs, and the soil in which they are planted should be broken up by three to four pledges. To do this, choose the right season, as mentioned above, and take into account the quality of the soil, planting them at varying distances from one another. Six, seven or eight toises are enough space for ordinary soil and for grafted plants; ten to twelve are not too much for those that are not. We note that the roots crumble and exhaust the soil, and that they extend as far as the branches; that harvests are very mediocre under the shade of this tree; that it needs fresh air, and that in clumps it produces very little fruit. It's on the basis of these observations that we'll determine where to place it. Walnuts have to be harvested in the same way as chestnuts, i.e., with gaules, and the same disadvantages result; so only light blows should be used, taking care not to break the fruit and wood buds. Walnuts should be kept in a dry, airy place, until they are easy to remove from their husks; then they should be dried, and kept in a place where the temperature is neither too hot nor too cold, as these two extremes cause them to go rancid or spoil. AMANDIER. (Amygdalus communis, L.) p. From Asia. Medium-sized, tap-rooted tree. Blooms in February and March before covering itself with leaves. Its fruit, known as almond, is covered with a dry or fleshy husk; the shell is hard or easy to break, and the kernel is sweet or bitter, depending on the variety. Its wood is very hard, sometimes with a beautiful reddish color, but it splits fairly easily when heated. Sweet almonds are used for dessert, either green or dry. With sugar, they are used to make marzipan, macaroons, nougats, sugared almonds, etc. Orgeat is prepared from it, and a very mild oil is extracted, used in medicine and the arts, but which goes rancid easily. Whatever the use to which almonds are put, the yellowish film covering them must always be removed, as it contains a resinous, acrid dust that is very irritating. They go rancid within a year, and are no longer edible. Bitter almonds, which are harmless to humans, are a deadly poison for birds and some other animals. They do, however, provide an oil as sweet as the other varieties. A. SWEET ALMONDS. I. Hard-shelled. 1. AMANDIER FRANC; very productive; fruit small, almost round, with a thick, very hard shell; ripe at the beginning of October. Very tall tree, with narrow, ash-green leaves. 2. AMANDIER COMMUN A GROS PRUIT; very productive; large, very full fruit, with very thick, very hard shell; ripe in September. Less tall than the preceding tree, with broader, more pronounced green foliage. 3. AMANDIER COMMUN A PETIT FRUIT; very productive, fruit fourteen to fifteen lines long, with a point at the top. Tree straight, not very spreading, very large. 4. COMMON AMANDIER WITH LARGE WHITE FLOWERS; fruit of medium size, compressed; ripe at the end of September. Medium-sized tree, with fairly straight branches. 5. AMANDIER WITH LARGE LEAVES; fruit slightly larger than the preceding one, compressed, elongated; ripe at the end of September. Medium-sized tree, with spreading branches. 6. WILLOW LEAF AMANDIER; small, rounded fruit; ripe in October. Elegant tree with upright branches. 7. TOURS AMANDIER; largest fruit of all, elongated, uncompressed, almost soft-shelled. Medium-sized tree with loose branches. 3008 JARDIN FRUITIER, 8. PERSE AMANDIER; small, rounded fruit. Shrub hardly rising above three or four feet, not very fertile. 9. SATINY AMANDIER; small, almost round fruit. Very small tree, with bright red flowers. As it yields little and is delicate, it is cultivated only for ornamental purposes; the brightness of its flowers and the whiteness of its foliage produce a charming effect. II. Soft-shelled. 10. AMANDE PRINCESSE or DES DAMES; highly prized, elongated fruit with a shell that breaks easily between the fingers; ripe in August. Very productive tree. 11. AMANDE SULTANE; rounded fruit, also esteemed, but less abundant and smaller. More delicate tree. 12. AMANDE PISTACHE; fruit even smaller than the preceding one, approaching the shape of a pistachio. Delicate tree. B. BITTER ALMONDS. 13. AMANDIER A GROS FRUITS; hard shell; rounded fruit. Fertile tree, rising very high; its whitish stem gives it a resemblance to the birch. 14. MEDIUM FRUIT AMANDIER; hard shell; rounded fruit. Productive tree, with bark like the previous one. 15. AMANDIER WITH SMALL FRUIT; differs from the two preceding trees only in the smaller size of the fruit. 16. TENDER-shelled almond; medium-sized, slightly compressed fruit. Tree of mediocre size, not very fertile. 17. AMANDIER-PEACHER; this appears to be a hybrid of almond and peach. In hot summers, peaches and almonds are often found on the same branch. The former are large, round and very fleshy, but their pulp retains a bitter flavor that makes them suitable only for eating as compote; the latter are large, but elongated and covered with a dry husk. Sometimes the kernel is quite sweet. A very fertile tree with a beautiful habit. 18. ALMOND TREE - DWARF PEACH TREE. This one, which we have 000 obtained by sowing the previous one, differs only in its very small size. We have also obtained several varieties, differing in fruit and height, but too slightly for us to mention them here. CULTIVATION. The almond tree likes light, deep, warm soil; it does very well in calcareous soils. Above the 46th degree of latitude, it becomes very sensitive to spring frosts, and requires a warm, sheltered exposure to set and ripen its fruit reliably. Farther north, its almonds are rarely good to keep dry, although they are excellent green. It is best suited to the climates of Barbary, Provence and Languedoc. It is propagated from seed and by grafting. To sow, we choose the largest, ripest almonds, i.e. those that have fallen naturally when shedding their shells. They are then stratified to promote germination, and planted in the spring. If sown in autumn, they should be planted in well-disturbed soil, two or three inches deep. As it is not certain that they will all germinate, it is a good idea to put two or three of them in the same hole, two inches apart: if they all succeed, the weaker ones will have to be pulled out the following spring. Sow in place or in nurseries: for the latter, place them in rows eighteen inches apart, so that you can easily pass between each one to cultivate or graft. If they are to form peach or almond trees, they are placed twenty to twenty-four inches apart in the rows; if they are to form tall stems, the intervals should be two to two and a half feet. If they are properly hoeed and cultivated, and if the soil has been well O6 amended, a large number of those that have been stratified can be grafted by the end of August. When transplanting them into place, cut off the pivot of those intended for espaliers, leaving it intact for those to be raised in the open air. Varieties are grafted onto the common species and the peach almond tree, for faster growth and greater vigor. Like some authors, we do not recommend grafting almond trees onto plum trees, as the experiments we have carried out on this subject have always been very unsuccessful. The grafts used for this tree are the escutcheon grafts, n° 1, 2, 3, 74, 108. It is grown in espaliers or in the open air, and managed as described on page 226. When espaliered, it is protected from spring frosts, like apricots and peaches. It is subject to the same diseases as these two trees, and is treated in the same way. FOURTH DIVISION. Norau fruit, with sweet, succulent pulp. PEACH (Amygdalus persica; L.) 6. From Persia. Everyone knows the superiority of its fruit over that of all other fruit trees; and yet, if we are to believe the accounts of a few travelers, this delicious peach, which so pleases the eye and the palate, is a dangerous poison in its native land. As this assertion struck us as peculiar, we took exact information from people who had been in a position to observe this fruit in Persia. The result is that in this country it has a bitter taste that it has lost in ours; that the natives eat it with impunity; but that it causes Europeans an inconvenience that is limited to constipation. 9 The peach tree flowers in March before developing its leaves. It has given rise to a large number of varieties that have been classified more methodically since M. Desprez noticed globular or kidney-shaped glands on the leaves, which are fairly constant in each variety. Nora. The best varieties are marked with an asterisk". I. FRUITS COVERED WITH DOWN. A. CHAIR LEAVING THE NOYAL. a. Large flowers. "Globular glands. 1. HATIVE MIGNONNE PEACH; at the beginning of August, fruit similar to the grosse mignonne, but much smaller and often mamelonned at the top; white flesh, a little pasty. Medium-sized, fairly sturdy tree, fairly successful in the open air, better espaliered at noon or in the east. 2. CURLED MICNONNE; late August, differs from the large mignononne only in its smaller fruit and frizzy foliage. More vigorous tree, prone to blistering. Espalier. 3. * VINEUSE DE FROMENTIN; mid-August; very good fruit, similar to the mignonne, but larger, more elongated, windier and more colorful. Vigorous tree. Suitable for full-wind and espalier plantings. 4. T BELLE BAUSSE; late August; very good, very beautiful fruit, similar to the grosse mignonne, but larger. Montreuil growers obtained it from grosse mignonne, not from seed, but by perfecting its cultivation. Very vigorous tree. Espalier and plein-vent. 5. BELLE BEAUTÉ; late August; very beautiful fruit, large, slightly elongated, very colorful, with white, vinous, excellent flesh. Vigorous tree. Plein-vent and espalier. 6. Y GROSSE MIGNONNE; late August; fruit very good, large, flattened or hollowed at the top by a wide furrow dividing it into two lobes; skin dark-red on the sunny side, yellow on the other; 908 stone small; flesh fine, sweet, melting. Vigorous tree, successful in all types of soil, producing large quantities. Pleinvent and espalier. "Kidney-shaped glands. 7. HATIVE POURPRÉE PEACH; mid-August; large, slightly elongated, colorful fruit with fine, melting, vinous flesh. The tree likes to be espaliered, but is quite successful in the open. 8. TARDY PEACH; large, oval fruit, sometimes a little flattened at the top, pale yellow, dark red on the sunny side, with melting flesh, very red near the stone, sweet, spicy, excellent. Ripens in early October. Vigorous tree; full-wind and espalier. 9. SEMI-DULL-LEAVED PEACH; mid-September; many fruits, fairly good, rounded, medium size, not very colorful. Small, delicate tree. Espalier. 10. * ABRICOTÉE PEACH, admirable yellow, large yellow, Burai peach, orange peach, hermaphrodite sandalie; mid-October; large fruit, yellow in the shade and reddish yellow on the sunny side; yellow flesh, firm, excellent, with a slight apricot taste, keeping a long time on the tree, but becoming mushy when ripening does not go well, and then holding a little to the stone. Average tree, reproducing its seed variety, fairly delicate, very productive. Espalier. 11. T PÉCHE DUBOISVIOLETTE; large, slightly elongated fruit, with a very prominent nipple at the top, red on the sunny side; white, vinous, excellent flesh. Delicate tree, with semi-double flowers, the largest of the genus, purple-red. This tree was brought to us directly from China by Mr. Duboisviolette, to whom we have dedicated it. "Null glands. 12. AVANT-PÉCHE BLANCHE; late June: small, rounded, white fruit with a large stone; succulent, sweet, but not very fragrant flesh. The tree is thin and delicate; it is hardly cultivated except for its early fruit. Espalier at noon. 13. RED PEACH; fruit larger than the preceding one, 2008 rounded, with a very deep gutter on the side, rarely mamelonned, thin-skinned, light yellow, bright red on the sunny side; ripe at the beginning of August; sweet, musky flesh, not very spicy. Medium-sized, productive tree. 14. YELLOW FRUIT; fruit a little elongated, larger than the preceding one, golden yellow, tinted dark reddish-brown on the sunny side; yellow flesh, a little reddish near the skin, fine, pleasant, melting, sweet; ripens at the end of August. Not a very vigorous tree. Espalier. 15. PÈCHE MADELEINE BLANCHE; late August; medium-sized, white fruit, slightly tinged with red on the sunny side; white, delicate, melting, fragrant flesh. The tree is vigorous. Full wind and espalier. All Madeleine peach trees yield their seedling species, or varieties that differ little from them (in all, the leaf glands are replaced by a foliaceous expansion that accompanies the petiole throughout its length). 16.* PÊCHE DE MALTE, belle de Paris; end of August and beginning of September; very good, medium-sized fruit, flattened on the underside, slightly marbled with red on the sunny side. Delicate, excellent flesh. The tree is best planted in espaliers in the east, although it does well in full wind. The stone reproduces its frank variety. 17. * MADELEINE DE COURSON, peasant red; early September; very good fruit, larger than the previous one, rounded, superb red, with firm, vinous flesh. The tree is more vigorous. Espalier and plein-vent. 18 CaRDINale, Furstemberg cardinal; mid-October; medium-sized fruit, compressed underneath, dull dark red; marbled red flesh, good cooked with seasoning. Large, vigorous tree, reproducing its stone variety. Espalier and plein-vent. 19. SANGUINOLENTE; small, round, dark-red fruit; beet-red flesh, a little dry, pungent and a little bitter, unless autumn is warm; ripens in October. Medium-sized, vigorous, productive tree. Espalier at noon. 20. BIG-FRUIT BLOOD; fruit differs only in size from the previous one, ripening at the same time. Medium-sized, vigorous tree. Espalier au midi, 21. BLOODY PEACH WITH SMALL FRUIT; small, round, dark purple, very hairy fruit; dry, blood-red flesh, very mediocre; ripens in October. Medium-sized, delicate tree. Espalier at noon. 22. ISPAHAN PEAR; mid-September; small, colorless, round fruit of mediocre quality. The tree is small, very productive and succeeds in full wind; it reproduces its seed variety, and the latter means suits it much better than grafting; its leaves are narrow, elongated, willow-like. 23. NAIN PEACHER; November; round fruit ripens only in the tarpaulin. This peach is a small shrub with coarse wood; large, serrated leaves and pale pink flowers; it does well in pots, and a sub-variety is grown with double flowers resembling small pompon roses. b. Medium flowers. "Globular glands. 24. * PÈCHE ADMIRABLE, belle de Vitry; mid-September; excellent fruit, very large, rounded, pale-yellow tinged with bright red on the sunny side; flesh firm, delicate, sweet, vinous. The tree is tall and vigorous; it succeeds in any exposure, and in full wind when sheltered; however, it prefers the espalier at midday. 25. YELLOW ADMIRABLE; large, rounded, yellow fruit, tinged with red on the sunny side; firm, vinous flesh; fragrant. Mürit in October. Vigorous tree. Espalier. 26. LATE YELLOW ADMIRABLE; large, elongated, yellowish-green fruit with yellow flesh, not very vinous; ripens in late October in the fruit factory. Quite a vigorous tree; espaliered to the south. "Reniform glands. 27.* ALBERCE JAUNE, péche jaune, Saint-Laurent jaune, petite roussanne; late August; medium-sized fruit, yellow at first, turning dark red as it ripens; firm, sweet, vinous flesh, yellow near the skin, red towards the pit. The tree produces a lot. Full wind and espalier. 28. PEACH TEINDOUX or teindou; fruit large, rounded, compressed at the top and base, yellowish, tender red towards the sun; flesh white, with a few red lines towards the pit, sweet, melting, delicate and good; ripens at the end of September. Vigorous tree. Espalier and plein-vent. 29.* BATIVE CHEVREUSE; early September; very good fruit, large, elongated, rarely mamelonned, first yellow, then marbled with bright red on the sunny side; melting, sweet, fragrant flesh. Medium-sized, fairly robust tree. Espalier. 30.* CHANCELIÈRE; mid-September; fruit similar to above, but less elongated and with sweeter, excellent flesh. Large, vigorous tree. Espalier and plein-vent. 31.* TARDY CHEVREUSE; end of September, fruit very covered with down, elongated in its youth, then rounding out and taking on a very dark color; excellent. Very productive tree, successful in all three exposures. Espalier. "No glands. 32. * MADELEINE A MOYENNES FLEURS, Late red or small-flowered Madeleine; late September; medium-sized fruit, slightly elongated, very red, vinous, excellent. Productive tree, rarely lacking, vigorous. Espalier and plein-vent. 33. MADELEINE ROUCE; medium-sized, oval, purplish-green fruit, purple-red on the sunny side; white, sweet, vinous flesh; ripens in August. Vigorous tree. Suitable for full-wind and espalier plantings. 34. TURENNE; in September, medium-sized, rounded, yellowish-green fruit, tinted red on the sunny side; flesh white, vinous, good. Vigorous, very productive tree. Espalier or plein-vent. This variety is widely grown around Lyon. 7008 c. Small flowers. "Globular glands. 35." PÈCHE GALANDE, Bellegarde; late August; very good fruit. large, sonkish-red, almost black; flesh firm, sweet, delicate, vinous. Vigorous tree, very productive, not very sensitive to frost; it requires sunny exposure, and its fruit must not be too exposed; it is more prone to blistering than the others. 36. * BONNE GROSSE; end of September; very large, almost round, green fruit, slightly tinged with red on the sunny side; firm flesh, quite vinous, good quality. Vigorous tree. Espalier. We obtained it from our seedlings in 1820. 37.* BOURDINE; mid-September; very good fruit, large, rounded, sometimes mamelonned, dark red on the sunny side; vinous, sweet, probing flesh; small, swollen stone. Productive tree, reproducing from the stone, doing well in full wind, better espaliered in the east. We believe this variety to be nothing other than a slightly perfected Venus nipple. 38. * TÉTON DE VÉNUS; late September; very good, large fruit, less colorful than the previous one and usually topped by a large nipple; delicate flesh. The tree is quite vigorous, but its fruit only acquires its full quality in espaliers with a southern exposure and in warm, light soils. 39. * NIVETTE, late velvety; late September; very good, large, slightly elongated, hairy, green and dark red fruit; firm, sweet, fragrant flesh; small stone. The tree requires warm soil and exposure. In all other circumstances, the fruit ripens badly and becomes bitter. 40. DE PAU; large, rounded fruit, ending in a large curved nipple, yellowish, lightly colored, with greenish-white flesh, of poor quality around Paris, because it ripens only very late and the season rarely allows it to reach perfection. The tree is tall, vigorous and has beautiful foliage. Espalier at south. 41.* ROYALE; early October; very good, very large fruit, light yellow with bright red tints on the so3006 leil side, firm, delicate, vinous flesh. A vigorous tree, it thrives in the south of France in full wind, or in a warm, sheltered location; best espaliered. 42. WILLOW LEAF PEAR; November; medium-sized, rounded fruit, whitish before ripening, little colored. Only ripens well in southern France, and the tree requires southern exposure. 43. DOUBLE DE TROYES; medium-sized fruit, inconsistent in shape, sometimes round, sometimes slightly elongated, sometimes nippled, yellowish-white speckled with red, and a beautiful red on the sunny side; flesh fine, white, firm, sweet, vinous, quite good. Ripens at the end of August. Vigorous, productive tree. Suitable for full-wind and espalier plantings. B. CHAIR ADHERENT TO NOYAU. a. Large flowers. "Reniform glands. 44. PAVIE DE POMPONE, monstrous pavia, large red perseca, large melecoton; at the end of October; extremely large fruit, often mamelonned, bright red on the sunny side, wax-white on the other; mediocre raw, excellent cooked. The tree requires a very warm, perfectly sheltered exposure; it reproduces its own kind of stone. Espalier. "No glands. 45.* PAVIE MADELEINE, white pavie; late September; large, white fruit, slightly washed with red on the sunny side; white, delicate, melting, fragrant flesh. Vigorous tree, reproducing its seed species. Espalier. b. Small flowers. "Reniform glands. 46. PAVIE ALBERGE, pavie jaune, persèque jaune; late September; large, superb fruit, yellow, turning a very deep red on the sunny side only when ripe; fairly good yellow flesh. The tree requires a warm, sheltered exposure; it reproduces its seed species. Espalier. 2. 31 008 47. PECRE PERSÈQUE, large, elongated perseca; early October; large, tuberous, elongated, red, mediocre fruit. The tree is very productive, reproduces its seed variety, and succeeds in full wind, but in warm soil and exposure. 48. PAVIE TARDIF; November; large, colorless fruit of mediocre quality; as it ripens very late, we recommend growing it only in the south of France. It has SMOOTH FRUIT, NO DOWN. A. FLESH LEAVING THE STONE. Large flowers. Reniform glands. 40. DES PRÉS; in mid-August, medium-sized fruit; excellent, yellowish-white, slightly tinged with red on the sunny side. Delicate tree, successful only in espaliers at sunrise. 50. SMOOTH YELLOW, smooth yellow, russet; late October; yellow fruit, slightly washed with red, small, with a slight apricot fragrance. The tree requires a warm, sheltered exposure; the fruit rots if autumn is not warm, and care is not taken to uncover it. Espalier. 51.* PLATE PEACH OF THE CRINE; excellent fruit, compressed at the base and top so as to present very pronounced indentations, having a kind of ribbing like a calville, and the color of a crabapple; white flesh; very small, almost smooth stone. Medium-sized, delicate tree. This species, newly arrived from China, has not yet been studied in all aspects of its cultivation. B. CHAIR ADHERENT TO NOYAL. a. Large flowers. Reniform glands. 52. BRUONON MUSQUÉ; late September; large, oval, reddish-beige fruit, brighter red on the sunny side; yellow, vinous, fragrant flesh. Vigorous tree, successful in espaliers at all three exposures, and even in full wind. O01 53. ORDINARY BRUGNON PEAR; medium-sized fruit, round, green, purple on the sunny side; brittle flesh, a little bitter. Ripens in September. Quite a vigorous tree. Espalier and pleinvent. b. Small flowers. Kidney-shaped glands. 54. CHERRY; in August; fruit the size of a greengage plum, cherry-red, with a small point at the top; quite good. The tree is small and delicate, but very fertile and attractive in espaliers. 55.* HATIVE VIOLET; early September; fruit a little larger than the previous one, yellowish, dark purple on the sunny side; flesh vinous, sweet, good. The tree is taller and more vigorous than the previous one, but requires a warm exposure. Espalier and plein-vent. 56. GROSSE VIOLETTE, courson violet, marbled violet; in mid-September; fruit larger than the preceding one, marbled with red violet; not as good. The tree grows less wood than the others, but is very productive. Espalier tree. We still have a few species of peach trees which have come to us from abroad, but whose fruit we have not yet seen. CULTIVATION. This interesting tree thrives in soils suited to the subjects on which it is grafted; thus its cultivation during its first two or three years is the same as that of the almond or plum tree. See these articles. If you wish to obtain free-standing trees, from varieties that do not need to be grafted, select the pits of the best fruit, stratify them and plant them in the nursery or in the field, as described in the article on almond trees. Peach trees are grafted onto almond and plum trees (see page 183), using the following grafting techniques: 1, 2, 3, 74, 108. Dormant-eye grafts are preferred because, as they only grow in spring, the young shoots of the graft have time to gain strength and harden off, and can more easily withstand the rigors of winter. We have already mentioned the circumstances under which grafting should be carried out on hard-shelled almond trees with sweet almonds: royal, large and small violets, bourdine and red madeleine all do well on bitter-fruited almond trees. If the peach almond tree were less rare, it would also provide robust trees suitable for full-wind planting. As for those that are grafted onto plum trees, they are placed on subjects grown from seed and never from offspring; the most suitable species for peach trees are: gros and petit St.-Julien, gros and petit Damas; however, we note that smooth peaches and chevreuses do not do well on the latter. Whether you're planting a plein-vent or an espalier, the ground must be prepared to receive it. If the soil is good, we simply pass it through a rack and mix in some used fertilizer, then throw it back in; but if it has been exhausted, either by plum, peach or apricot trees, or by other trees, we must renew it entirely with soil prepared in advance and ripened in piles. Once this has been done, plant as described on page 185, noting that autumn plantings are more likely to recover than spring plantings. The bed is covered with two or three inches of manure, which is left on all winter, and then ploughed under in spring. This operation is repeated every autumn. If you want to have superb trees, you'll need to establish a bed at least six feet wide along the espalier, which you'll keep free of weeds at all times, and in which you won't grow anything, not even the least voracious vegetables. In addition, every three or four years, a good manuring is given. Only one ploughing is done per year, and it must take place immediately after pruning; it is done lightly and with a fork, so as not to damage the tree roots; then the bed is covered with mulch, to keep the soil moist and prevent the rains from beating it. For the rest of the year, only a few rakes are needed. During the heat of the year, we water the branches and leaves of the trees with a small suction pump or watering cans; it's essential that the water reaches them in the form of a fine rain, which is done with a sheaf pierced with three small holes, and only in the evening, so that the foliage has time to dry out during the night. If the ground is dry, a small pit is dug at the foot of each tree, and two, three or even four watering cans are thrown in if the peach tree is in full ratio and covers a large expanse of wall; one is enough for young trees.

Once the water has been absorbed, the pit is filled with the soil removed. In all cases, stop watering a few days before the fruit ripens, to avoid losing its fragrance. If the peach tree bears too much fruit, you must be scrupulously careful to remove some of it, if you don't want it to run out quickly. For the rest, you should manage it as we taught you in the article on pruning, page 183. Shelter is one of the most important issues for the grower. The walls against which you plant should face east, west and south; never north in temperate climates. If the garden were oriented so that its four walls faced northeast, southeast, northwest and southwest, peach trees could be grown on all their surfaces. Each variety is placed at the most suitable exposure, with early and late species facing south, so that the former bear fruit earlier and the latter ripen. If the trees are trellised "à la loque", i.e. directly against the wall with nails and rags, the coping should extend four or five inches beyond the wall, to protect the branches from rain and frost, which could damage the eyes. For those trellised against a trellis, the coping should extend out six or seven inches. Under the coping, thin pieces of wood or, better still, iron bars, projecting eighteen inches horizontally, will be sealed two and a half feet apart, so that they can easily support straw mats, which will be laid horizontally over them in the form of a roof or awning. The doormats are laid from February onwards, before the flowers bloom, and are left in place until mid-May, when frosts are no longer to be expected. We visit the trees every day; some people even do it in winter, to remove any frost and snow that may have accumulated on the branches; to do this, we use a broom of fine, loosely-packed heather, so as not to damage the eyes. This will prevent the ravages of frost, which seizes buds and even wood much more easily when they are wet. In summer, we kill snails and other insects, and consider the most effective ways of preventing diseases, or stopping them in their tracks as soon as they appear. During severe droughts, it's a good idea to shade for a few hours the branches and even the entire foliage of espaliers facing south, to prevent the sun's scorching rays from drying them out. This precaution is especially useful for plum trees. To do this, use canvas or straw mats, and spread them out in front of the trees, but a few feet apart so as not to impede air circulation; leave them there only during the hottest part of the day. Peach trees are very delicate trees, and they are all the more so when they are poorly trained and badly managed. The diseases that most commonly attack them are blister, gum, rust and canker. On this subject, see our chapter on Plant diseases. The peach harvest begins in July and continues uninterrupted until October. Their ripeness is recognized by their color, not by their tact, as some clumsy people do, since the slightest pressure is enough to bruise them and cause them to rot within twenty-four hours. On the contrary, they should be picked with great care: grasp the peach with all five fingers, pull gently, and it comes off if it's ripe; if it's not, and you want to keep it for a few days, give it half a twist, and it comes off. But before they can be harvested, the fruits require a little care. When they are two-thirds full, we begin to remove the leaves that hide them, so that they can enjoy the influences of air and light. Fifteen days before ripening, the red peaches are fully uncovered, but this must be done in stages, so as not to expose them to burning. The others, most of which ripen later, are uncovered longer before ripening, because the sun does not color them, but ripens them; they are stripped in September, regardless of when they are to be picked. The leaves should never be torn off for fear of injuring the buds they accompany; they should be cut with scissors or a pruning shears, above the petiole. ABRICOTIER (Prunus armeniaca; L.), from the Orient. It is said to have been first brought from Armenia to Rome, and from there transplanted to the rest of Europe. This medium-sized, tap-rooted tree flowers in February and March before showing its leaves, making it susceptible to spring frosts. Its excellent fruit can be eaten raw, candied, in compote, etc. Those produced by plein-vents are more highly esteemed than those produced by espaliers, although they are smaller. Its wood is not very useful, but is used for lathe work. 1. COMMON ABRiCOT; fruit quite good when in full wind and sun, and in this case, large, reddish and scabby; in shade it remains pale and has almost no flavor. Ripe by mid-July. Large, vigorous tree when grafted, but, like all apricot trees, remains shrubby when grown from stone. Full-wind, more reliable, but less good in espaliers. 2. ABRICOT DE HOLLANDE, or AMANDE AVELINE; small, rounded fruit, red speckled with purple on the sunny side, with melting, vinous, spicy, very pleasant flesh; sweet, hazelnut-flavored kernel. Ripe at the end of July. The tree is more fertile when grafted on cherry; but the fruit is larger on Saint-Julien, especially if grown in espaliers. 3. ABRICOT DE HOLLAN DE A FEUILLES PANACHÉES DE JAUNE; fruit similar to the previous one, and ripening at the same time; leaves variegated and spotted with golden yellow. A very vigorous tree, with a beautiful effect. 4. ABRICOT DE PROVENCE; fruit a little compressed, small, red on the sunny side, with melting reddish-yellow flesh; sweet almond. Ripe in the last fortnight of July. A fairly vigorous tree that can be grafted onto Saint-Julien. Pleinvent and espalier. 5. ABRICOT DE PORTUGAL; small, rounded fruit, not very colorful even in the sun; yellow flesh, melting, delicate, excellent. Mür in mid-August. A delicate tree in the Paris climate. 6. EARLY ABRICOT or ARRICOTIR; small, red fruit on the sunny side, quite fragrant, slightly musky, with flesh very attached to the stone. Ripe at the end of June. Its earliness is its greatest merit, and to encourage it, it should be grown in espaliers. 7. ABRICOT BLANC, Duhamel's apricot-peach; fruit small, white, or slightly tinted red, browned on the sunny side; flesh a little fibrous, approaching the flavor of the peach. Ripe in early July. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. Espalier and plein-vent. 8. LARGE WHITE ABRICOT; fruit more elongated and larger than the preceding one, ripening at the same time, with sweet almond. A vigorous tree. 9. VINEY ABRicoT; very large, elongated fruit, compressed at the sides, with a sunken, lobed top, one lobe higher than the other; yellow skin, speckled with red on the sunny side; yellowish-white flesh, melting though quite firm, sweet, fragrant, excellent. Ripens in early August. Large, vigorous tree. We believe that, when properly grafted and cultivated, it will be one of the best apricots known. We obtained it from seed, and it bore fruit for the first time in 1825. 10. ABRiCOT ANGOUNOIS; small, slightly elongated, pale red fruit, spotted with purple on the sunny side, amber-yellow in the shade; reddish-yellow flesh, melting, vinous, very pleasant; sweet almond, tasting a little like filbert. Ripe in mid-July. The low tree has thin buds and medium-sized leaves. 11. ABRICOT ALBERCE; fruit small, with thick, hard, brown skin, strongly scabby on the sunny side; flesh firm, crisp, vinous, spicy and quite good; almond sweet, fragrant, excellent. Ripe by mid-August. The tree reproduces its variety by its kernels; it is widely used as a subject for other varieties. It is the only large, vigorous tree from seed. 12. ApRICOT DE MONCAMET; fruit larger, less rounded 000 than the preceding one, of which it is only a sub-variety, less scabby, less firm flesh, just as good; sweet almond. Ripens a little later. Tree with the same qualities. 13. ABRICOT AVELINE; differs so little from the mongamet that it can only be a very light sub-variety. Same shapes and qualities. 14. ABRicOT PÉCHE, Nancy apricot; the most beautiful and the best of all; very large, compressed, red or brown, scabby on the sunny side, but only in windy and humid years; reddish-yellow flesh, melting, sweet, vinous, excellent. Ripe around mid-August. Medium-strength tree, despite Duhamel's claim that it is the largest of the apricot trees, with broad, hanging foliage. Espalier and flein-vent. It reproduces its seed variety, but almost always of inferior quality. 15. FISHING ABRICOT WITH WHITE MARBLED LEAVES; fruit slightly smaller than the preceding one, of the same quality and ripening at the same time. Less vigorous tree, with variegated or rather white marbled foliage, producing a very picturesque effect, and appearing as if covered with small snowflakes. 16. ABRICOT ROYAL; fruit almost as large as the peach apricot, greenish yellow near the tail, pure towards the top, little colored in the sun; yellow flesh, melting, more acidic, quite good. Ripens in August. Very vigorous tree, with broad leaves supported by very long petioles. 17. ABRICOT DE PARIS; medium-sized, lemon-yellow fruit, speckled with brown on the sunny side, yellow flesh, semi-melting, sweet, pleasant, a little pasty; bitter almond. Ripens in August. Small tree. This variety, which we obtained from apricot-peach seedlings, first produced fruit in 1825. 18. MUSCH-MUSCH APRICOT. This variety originates from the town of Musch, on the borders of Turkey, on the Persian side. We received it, in 1812, from M. Lacour-Gouffé, director and professor at the botanical garden in Marseille, who himself had obtained it from the royal gardens in Madrid. Rounded, dark-yellow fruit with transparent pulp, revealing a hint of stone; flesh probing, fragrant, veryO pleasant; bitter almond. Mür at the end of July. The tree is delicate and wants to be espaliered. 19. ABRICOT GROS MUSCH; fairly large fruit, deeply furrowed on one side, compressed on the other; melting flesh, fragrant, very-good, sweet almond. Ripe at the end of July. 20. ABRICOT DU PAPE, or black; small, round, almost black violet fruit, with red flesh around the circumference, yellowing near the stone, melting and pleasant in warm years, but bland and very mediocre in ordinary years, very adherent to the stone. If one were to judge by the shape of the stone and the flavor of the fruit, it would be more likely to be mistaken for a plum than an apricot. It is grown only as an ornamental tree and an object of curiosity. 21. PAPER ABRICOT WITH WILLOW LEAVES; fruit similar to the previous one, but a little smaller. Medium-sized tree, producing a charming effect with its long, narrow, yellowish-veined leaves. 22. ABRICOTIER DE SIBERIE; we have recently acquired this new species, which has not yet produced any fruit. The tree is small, with rounded, acuminate leaves. 23. NYPAUL ABRICOTIER; this is the pygmy of the apricot trees. We received it a short time ago, and we don't know what its fruit will be. CULTIVATION. This tree likes light, sandy soil; however, it does well in all types, provided they are not too wet or too clayey. It can hardly be expected to do well above 50' latitude, if grown in the open air and in full wind. It likes heat, and its fruit loses much of its quality in cold soils. It is propagated: 1° from seed, 2° by grafting onto plum trees, 3° by grafting onto almond trees. We only sow varieties that reproduce free of stones, such as alberge, peach, early and common apricots. Rarely do we graft on franc, because the trees are more prone to gum and much less vigorous. We choose the stones of the most 000 FRUIT GARDEN, beautiful fruits for sowing, and stratify them immediately for planting in spring or autumn; we put them in good, well-disturbed soil, loosened and amended as much as we can, and bury them two inches deep; during heavy frosts, we cover the seedling with leaves or litter. You can sow in place, or in a nursery, and in the latter case or space the young plants from eighteen inches to two feet apart on the rows, depending on whether you want to raise them for low or high stems. However, a tree can never be too vigorous when it is managed by a man who understands its condition and knows how to tame excess vegetation by distributing the sap evenly. Apricot trees can be grafted into scions using grafting methods n°1, 2, 3, 74, 108. In any soil, plum, black damask, Saint-Julien and cherry trees are grafted from stones and not from offshoots, as the latter are always weak and therefore prone to gumming. If trained in espaliers, they should be planted facing east in suitable soils, or south in cold, damp soils. Sometimes the apricot tree is raised on a five- or six-foot stem, so that it can be placed against a wall between peach trees trellised below its branches. In all cases, it is pruned and trained as described on page 224. In countries where it does not do well, either because of the cold, as in Russia, or because of excessive heat, as in some provinces of Spain and Italy, it should be trained in espaliers with frames, using the methods we have described on page 203. Apricot trees are subject to the same diseases as peach trees, with the exception of blistering. When its blossoms are caught 71 by frost, we try to restore them using the procedures indicated in the article on plant diseases. They are much more susceptible when the tree grows in damp, clayey soil. PLUM (Prunus) b. Plum trees, the largest of which reach only average size, produce fruit that has been greatly improved by cultivation. Plums can be eaten raw, cooked, as prunes, etc., but are never eaten dry. Plums can be eaten raw, cooked, as prunes, etc.: dried, they are never harmful, but some are thought to be febrile when ripe. Plum wood is hard and pleasantly red-veined, and is used in joinery and cabinet-making. Several species and a large number of varieties are grown. NoTA. The best or most beautiful fruits are marked with an asterisk. I. black thorn (prunus spinosa, L.). Indigenous. A shrub that grows to no more than seven or eight feet, and whose sharp thorns make it suitable for making impenetrable hedges. In some parts of France, its small, very acerbic fruits are prized by the population as a pleasant drink. Their juice, cooked and thickened to the consistency of syrup, is known in the druggist's trade as German acacia. 1. LARGE-FRUITED BLACKTHORN. It differs from the previous variety in that its development is larger, and in the size of its fruit, known as plos se in the south of France, which is slightly less sharp than the previous one, and has the same uses. There is another variety with double flowers, which we will describe in the ornamental garden. II. MYROBOLAN PLUM, (Prunus myrobolana, aut cerasifera, WILLD.). From North America. Cultivated more for pleasure than for utility. Its cherry-sized fruit is turbinate, with a pleasant flavor and an attractive red color. 1. myRObOLaN ViOlEr. This tree differs from the previous one in that its leaves are slightly smaller. Its fruit, of the same shape, is more covered with glaucous dust; it has a very pretty violet color, and a rather acid taste. It is a hybrid of the black or pope apricot and the ordinary myrobolan. We obtained it from seed, and it fruited for the first time in 1825. III. SPHERIC FRUTT PLUM (Prunus sphærocarpa; MICH.). From New England. Fruit small, short-stalked and hairy, purple-red, acerbic, of very-mediocre quality. IV. CANADIAN AUTUMN PLUM. (Prunus hiemalis; MICH.). Fruit almost black, acerbic, of mediocre quality, small. V. CHRASAU PLUM (Prunus chicasa; MicR.). Native to India, from where it was brought to Carolina. Small, yellow fruit, ripe in summer, of mediocre quality, though sought after by Americans, who call it chicasaw. We have a variety with red fruit. VI. CULTIVATED PLUM. (Prunus domestica; L.). Indigenous. This is the tree from which the many varieties we are about to list originate. 1.* PRUNE DE CATALOGNE, de Saint-Barnabé, yellow-hdtive; early July; small, elongated, yellow fruit, sometimes good, more often rather mediocre, especially in wet soils. Medium-sized, productive tree, espaliered at midday to accelerate ripening. It is grown in pots for forcing in hot greenhouses. 2.* PRECOCE DE TOURS, hdtive black; 15th July; small, oval fruit with little flavor. Average tree size. 3.* ROYALE HATIVE; early July; fairly large, violet, good fruit, with about the same flavor as violet greengage. Average tree. 4.* BIrèRE, good twice a year; on the fifteenth of July and 006 8 a second time on the fifteenth of September; long, tawny-yellow fruit, very good. Vigorous, medium-sized tree. Autumn fruits are smaller, longer, with long stalks. 5. T PRUNE MONSIEUR; at the end of July; large, round, lovely purple fruit, quite melting, but not very spicy. Productive and vigorous tree, often reproducing its seed species. 6.* MONSIEUR BATIT; July 15th; fruit similar to above, but darker in color. Vigorous, productive tree. 7.* PRUNE-PÊCHE; at the end of July; very large, superb fruit, the most beautiful of its kind, a little fragrant, melting, quite good. Very vigorous tree, not very productive. 8.a ROYAlE DE TOURS; late July; large, rounded fruit, purple on one side and light red on the other, beautiful and very good. Large, productive tree. 9. VIOLET DIAPRÉE; early August; medium-sized fruit, long, firm, very good, but too often worm-eaten. Very vigorous and productive. 10.* DAMAS MUSQUÉ; 15th August; small, dark purple, firm, fairly good fruit. Medium-sized tree, said to originate near Damascus in Syria; not very productive; like all damas, it multiplies its variety through seed. 11. Damas VIolEr; late August; medium-sized, elongated, purple fruit, firm, sweet but a little acidic. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 12. Damas pRoner; late August; small, yellowish-green fruit with green, sweet flesh, very good; medium-sized tree, fairly vigorous. 13. DAMAS NOIR TARDIF; late August; small, rounded fruit, enlarged at the base, dark purple, with greenish flesh and quite good, if a little acid. Medium-sized, vigorous tree. 14. DAMAs ROUCE; late August; small, round fruit, greenish-white flesh, firm, sweet, fragrant. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 15. Damas D'ITalie; closely resembles the preceding tree, differing only in its gray wood spotted with white. Ripens at the same time. 1008 JARDIN FRUITIER, 16. PRUNIER DAMAS A PETIT FRUIT BLANC; at the end of September; small fruit, of mediocre quality. Rather delicate tree. 17. DAMAS A GROSSE FRUIT BLANC; late September; fruit similar to above, but larger and of better quality. More vigorous tree. 18. * DAMAS MAUGEROU; in September; medium-sized fruit, black, round like all damas, with greenish-white flesh, sweet, melting and quite good. Quite a vigorous tree. 19. PERDRIGON VIOLET; late August; fruit of mediocre size, elongated, sweet, fragrant, excellent. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 20. PERDRICON NORMAND; mid-August; large, slightly elongated fruit, swollen at the tail, with firm, fine, delicate flesh. Large, vigorous tree. 21.* REINE-CLAUDE, green apricot, green-good; in August; large, round, green fruit, sometimes spotted with purple or washed with red; the most esteemed and best of all plums. A vigorous tree, producing better fruit in full wind and larger fruit in espaliers. This plum has the disadvantage of splitting and falling when it rains at the time of ripening. It often reproduces from seed. 22. REINE-CLAUDE SEMI- DOUBLE; fruit absolutely similar to the previous one. Tree with very large, semi-double flowers. 23. † REINE-CLAUDE DAUPHINE; good green, green apricot; from August to October; fruit large, round, a little flattened at both ends, yellowish-green, reddening a little on the sunny side; flesh yellowish-green, very-fine, delicatec, melting, fragrant, excellent. Makes very good prunes. Large, productive tree. 24. BETTERAVE; from August to September; very large, round, pale-yellow fruit, with very abundant water, but not very pleasant. Large, very vigorous tree. 25. VIOLET REINE-CLAUDE; August; fruit similar to above, but violet; a little less sweet and fragrant, firmer flesh, tougher skin, but excellent nonetheless. It sometimes lasts until October. It does not have the disadvantage of splitting when it rains. 26 " PRUNE PETITE MIRADELLE; 15th August; small, oval, rounded, yellow, firm, sweet and good fruit; excellent for compotes and jams. Small tree, small leaves, very productive. 27. T GROSSE MIRABELLE, drap d'or; 15th August; fruit larger, rounder, yellow, speckled with red, melting, sweet, excellent. Very bushy tree, growing a large number of confused twigs that must be removed. 28. ImPériale ViolErre, plum-egg; late August; very large, egg-shaped, light violet fruit, quite good, but often worm-eaten, especially in cold, damp soils. Large, vigorous tree. 29. IMperialE WITH SMALL PURPLE FRUIT; the fruit differs from the previous one only in its small size. It has a sub-variety with variegated leaves and fruit, more curious than good. 30. ImpÉRiAlE BLANCuE; at the end of August; fruit larger than the preceding one and of the same shape; leathery skin and white flesh, adhering to the stone; mediocre quality. Vigorous tree. 31. JACINTHE; late August; large, elongated fruit, swollen at the tail, a little cordate, light violet, with thick, hard skin; firm, yellow flesh, less dry than the previous one, a little acid. Vigorous tree. 32. WHITE IMPERATORY; late August; medium-sized, oblong, pale-yellow, firm, sweet, very good fruit. Vigorous tree. 33. VIOLET IMPERATRICE; in August; fruit slightly larger than the preceding one, more rounded at the base, with abundant white flesh, bland flavor. Very vigorous, large tree. 34. FROM CYPRUS; at the end of August; very large, oval-rounded, light purple fruit, firm, sweet, very good. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 35. * JERUSALEM, bull's-eye; in September; very large, elongated fruit, a little nippled at the top, bluish or reddish violet, depending on whether it is in sun or shade; yellowish flesh, mediocre quality, good as a prune. Medium-sized, vigorous tree. 36. PETITE REINE- CLAUDE; in September; round fruit, of mediocre size, greenish-white, with melting flesh, 2. 32 100 sweet, but inferior in quality to the large species. The tree almost always reproduces its seed variety. 37. WHITE PRUNE ABRICOTÉE; early September; large, slightly elongated fruit, yellowish-white on one side, red on the other, with flesh leaving the stone, firm, fragrant, excellent. Medium-sized tree, reproducing, like the following one, its seed variety. 38. ABRICOTÉE ROUGE; mid-September; fruit differs only in color. Medium-sized, vigorous tree. 39. PRUNE-ABRICOT; in September; very large, yellowish-white, rather mediocre fruit. Average tree, vigorous and productive. The inhabitants of Villecrenne, near Brunoy, cultivate this variety extensively to supply the Paris markets. It reproduces its seed variety. 40. DAMAS D'ESPAGNE; at the beginning of September; oval, purple fruit, spotted with red on the sunny side, of mediocre size, with fragrant, sweet flesh leaving the stone. Average tree, fairly vigorous, reproducing its seed variety. 41.* SEPTEMBER DAMAS; in September; small, slightly elongated, dark purple fruit, fragrant, quite pleasant. Medium-sized tree, a little delicate, reproducing its seed variety. 42.* DE MONSIEUR TARDIF, altesse plum; from September to November; medium-sized fruit, round, purple, sweet, good. Medium-sized tree, very productive. 43. SURPASSE MONSIEUR; in September; fruit larger than the preceding one, blackish purple, round; yellow flesh almost like that of the apricot-peach, a little acerbic. Very vigorous tree. We have it from seed, and it bore fruit in 1819. It is a hybrid of Monsieur and Jerusalem. 44. PERDRIGON BLANC; at the beginning of September; fruit small, elongated, white, melting, fragrant, excellent; the tree reproduces its stone variety; it is earlier in espalier, more productive in counter-espalier, and its fruit is better in full wind, but we can no longer raise it there above the 48th degree of latitude. 45. PERDRIGON ROUCE; in September; fruit similar to the preceding one, but a little larger, of a beautiful purplish red, melting, fragrant, very good. Medium-sized tree, fairly productive. 46. PRUNE DATTE; in September; medium-sized fruit, a little elongated, green; yellow flesh, soft and bland. 47. SANS-NOYAU; in September; small fruit, not very fragrant, of very-mediocre quality, but curious. A vigorous, low-growing tree, reproducing its variety through its kernel. 48.* BRIGNOLE; September; fruit a little elongated, of mediocre size, pale yellow, reddening on the sunny side, with yellow, sweet flesh. Used to make Brignole prunes. 49. RED DIAPRÉE; early September; medium-sized, elongated fruit, cherry-red on the sunny side, firm, sweet and fragrant. Quite tall, vigorous, very productive. 50. DE PAPPACONI; in September; fruit larger than the dame-aubert, superb yellow. We owe this variety to her royal highness Madame la duchesse de Berri, who was kind enough to send it to us from the royal gardens of Naples. 51. DAME-AUBERT, plum-figue; in September; fruit of enormous size, elongated, purple, very mediocre flavor. Very large, vigorous tree, not very productive. 52. DAME-AUBERT A FRUIT JAUNE; even larger fruit, of the same quality, but with slightly firmer flesh. Same type of tree. 53. ILE-VERTE; early September; elongated fruit, pointed at both ends, slightly arched, leafy green, pleasant flavor, good for jam. Vigorous tree, not very productive. 54.* SAINTE-CATHERINE; in September and October; medium-sized fruit, elongated, yellow, sweet, the best for prunes in the Paris area. Very tall, very productive tree. 55. QUETSCHE; in September; very long fruit, swollen in the middle, medium size, russet-purple, mediocre flesh, very good for prunes. Tree reproducing its stone variety. 56. QUETSCHE A FRUIT RACCOURCI; from September to October; 008 fruit less elongated, dark purple, same quality as the previous one. Same kind of tree. 57.* WHITE DIAPRED PLUM, early September; small, elongated, pale green fruit with yellow flesh, fragrant, very delicate; the fruit is better espaliered than in the open. Delicate tree. 58. DE BRIANÇON; in August; fruit similar to plum and apricot, mediocre, cultivated because it is used to make marmot oil. Medium-sized tree, very productive, producing its seed variety. 59. PETITE BRICETTE; in October; fruit of mediocre size, elongated, yellowish, sweet. Delicate, low-growing tree. 60.* SAINT-MARTIN; in October and November; medium-sized, round, purple, firm-fleshed fruit; fairly abundant water, but a little acidic; becomes better when subjected to a white frost. Its merit lies in bearing fruit at a time when there are no plums left. A vigorous, fairly tall tree. 61. ROUCE ET BLANCHE; variety bred in America; very sweet fruit. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 62. CERISETTE BLANCHE; in July; small, elongated fruit; fairly good. Cultivated for grafting plum and apricot varieties; like the following tree, it reproduces its seed variety. 63. RED CHERRY; slightly larger, red fruit, similar to the previous one. It is grown as a subject for apricot and plum trees. 64. GROS SAINT -JULIEN; September; small, very mediocre, dark purple fruit. Grown for grafting peach and small early apricot trees. 65. PETIT SAINT-JULIEN; in September, fruit similar to the preceding one, but smaller; this tree is used to graft early peach trees, which are not very vigorous, and apricot trees in the same situation. 66. LARGE BLACK DAMAS; late August; small, poor-quality fruit. Tree used to graft apricot, peach and the most delicate plum trees. 67. PETIT DAMAS NOIR; late August; very small, sharp fruit. It is grown only as a grafting stock for the 1008 peach, apricot and plum trees that are to be raised in cattails or espaliers. CULTIVATION. Plum trees are trailing-rooted trees, so they don't need very deep soil, but clean, light, chalky soil that's cool but not damp. However, they do well in all types of soil, provided they're not too sandy, swampy or dry. In the south of France, they thrive in northern exposure, but above the 46th degree of latitude, they need exposure to the east or west, and sometimes even, for delicate varieties, to the south. It should be noted that the quality of the fruit depends very much on the quality of the soil in which they are planted, and their more or less favorable exposure. Plum trees are propagated by seed, offshoot, shield grafting (n° 1, 2, 3, 108) and slit grafting (n° 5, 8, 18). To sow, the stones are stratified and then planted and cultivated, either in situ or in a nursery, like almonds and peaches. Large and small Saint-Julien, large and small black damask, and cherry are usually sown to graft their own varieties or those of peach and apricot. The offspring have the advantage of coming much sooner; but they also have the disadvantage of producing smaller trees, more prone to gum, and more difficult to get rid of the numerous trees whose roots grow abundantly on all sides. They are rarely used for anything other than espaliers, cattails and small pyramids. Whether you are grafting from cores or offshoots, you need to grasp the exact moment of sap flow, because it passes very quickly, despite the precaution of watering to prolong its life. Crest grafting is the preferred method for young trees, while cleft grafting is ideal for larger trees in spring. Plum trees should be trained as described on page 22. They are quite prone to gum. CHERRY (Prunus cerasus; L.) b, and MERRY (Prunus avium; L.) 5. The former is said to have originated in Africa, where it was brought back by Lucullus. As it was found in the vicinity of Cerasonte, it was given the name cerasus. The latter grows naturally in forests throughout Europe, and has given rise to two main varieties, the cherry and the sour cherry; the former appears to be the type of the cherry and sour cherry of the north. The merits of these trees' fruit are well enough known without needing to be mentioned here; their wood, especially that of the black-fruited cherry, takes on a beautiful red color. It is widely used by carpenters and turners. Nora. The best species are marked with an asterisk". A. MERISIERS; flowers in sessile clusters, developing on the wood of the penultimate year. Most varieties are called "guigne"; fruit rounded or heart-shaped; soft, melting pulp. Taprooted trees. 1. merisier or wild cherry; very small fruit, black or red, very sweet, a little bitter, very tasty. Used to make ratofia and kirschen-waser. Very large, very vigorous tree, growing naturally in all European forests. 2. * In June, large, blackish fruit with thin skin and soft, pleasant, dark-red pulp. Very large, vigorous, productive tree. 3. GUICNIER A PETIT FRUIT NOIR; differs from the preceding only in the small size of its fruit, which ripens at the same time. Tree of the same type. 008 4. † GUIGNIER A CROS FRUIT BLANC; in mid-June; fruit white and reddish on the sunny side; pulp white, firm, very-good. Medium-sized tree, very vigorous and productive. 5. † GUICNIXA A FRUIT ROSE MATIF; mid-June; tender red fruit, with very-aqueous pulp. Tall, fairly vigorous tree. 6. * GUIGNIER A GROS FRUIT NOISANT NOIR; late June; fruit with red pulp, succulent, sweet, excellent. The buds are yellowish and vigorous. q. Y GUIGNIER A GROS FRUIT NOIR ET COURT PÉDONCULE; late June; fruit similar to the previous one, but with a shorter peduncle and more fragrant pulp. This is the best of all the guignes. 8. BLACK FRUIT AND VERY LONG PEDONCULE GUICNIER; small, turbinately ripened, black fruit with a stalk nearly four inches long; watery, sweet, colorful flesh with a pleasant, mild acidity. A tall, robust tree. We obtained it from seed, and it fruited for the first time in 1824. Q. " GUICNIER A RAMEAUX PEN DANS; in July; black, large, shiny fruit, with elongated stalk, blackish-red pulp, very good. Vigorous, very productive tree: B. BICARREAUTIERS; their flowers are similar to those of cherry trees, and develop in the same manner; their fruits are cordisform, swollen, with a very pronounced groove; their flesh is firm, almost hard. Taprooted trees. I0. BICARREAUTIER WITH SMALL BLACK FRUIT; in August; fruit with hard pulp, not very melting, bitter, of mediocre quality. Very productive tree, very vigorous, with high elevation. 11. BIGARREAUTIER A PETIT FRUIT ROSE; early July; fruit with very long stalk, tender flesh, white, sweet, mediocre. Very tall, vigorous tree. We obtained it from our own seedlings, and it bore fruit for the first time in 1824. 12. BiGARREAUTIER HATIT A PETIT FRUIT ROUGE; July 15th; medium-sized fruit, light red, with pulp strewn with white filaments: often attacked by worms. Medium-sized tree, vigorous and productive. 2000 13. "BIG RED FRUIT BIGARREAUTIER; late July; large, red fruit, pulp of a darker color than the previous and better. Quite a tall, vigorous tree. 14. Y BIGARREAUTIER A GROS FRUIT BLANC; at the end of July; fruit similar to the preceding one, but light red on the sunny side and whitish on the other; pulp less firm, but sweeter. Medium-sized tree, vigorous and productive. 15. † BIGARREAUTIER BELLE DE ROCMONT, pigeon heart; on the fifteenth of July; fruit less elongated and less large than the previous one, with shiny, marbled skin. The tree has hanging branches, is vigorous, medium-sized and productive. 16" BIGARREAUTIER A FRUIT COULEUR DE CHAIR; July 15th; fruit similar to the preceding one, but smaller, with less firm pulp, not very spicy. Medium-sized, vigorous tree. 17. * BIGARREAUTIER GROS COEURET; in August; heart-shaped, depressed, short, shiny fruit, first red, then almost black. The best of all bigarrels. High tree, very vigorous. 18. BIGARREAUER TARDIP A FEUILS DE TABAC, cherry tree of the four to the pound; in August; fruit the largest of all, although far from deserving its name. Very firm pulp of mediocre quality. This tree is remarkable for the breadth of its leaves; its fruit has always seemed abortive to us, because it is grafted onto subjects that cannot provide it with enough sap; perhaps also because our climate is too hot, as we received it from Russia. 19. YELLOW-FRUITED BIGARREACTIER; late July; small fruit, firm pulp, not very fragrant, quite good. Tall, vigorous tree. 20. BIGARREAUTIER DE NAPLES; end of July; very large, turbinately ripe, lemon-yellow fruit, with slightly hard, sweet, fairly bonnc pulp. Medium, vigorous tree. We have seen this variety in the Lyon area. 008 C. CHERRY TREE; flowers in slightly pedunculated bunches, often accompanied by a leaf, usually emerging from the previous year's wood; fruits round, more or less acidic, with soft, watery pulp. Trees with tracing roots. 21. * CERISE DE HOLLANDE or d'Angleterre, early June; large, black fruit, watery pulp, very pleasant flavor. Very tall, vigorous tree, one of the most fertile of its kind. It can be grafted and cultivated like the following tree. 22. HOLLAND COULARD CHERRY; fruit similar to the previous one, a little smaller, of inferior quality, but later. Medium-sized tree, bearing many flowers and producing few. 23. HOLLAND CHERRY TREE WITH WILLOW or balsamine leaves; early June; large, black fruit with pleasant, watery pulp. Medium-sized tree, not very vigorous. Can be grafted onto Sainte-Lucie. 24. ROYAL HATIF; late May; large, compressed fruit at top and base, with sweet, very good pulp. Its short green stalk is often accompanied by a leaflet. Very productive, medium-sized tree; can be grafted onto Sainte-Lucie and planted in espaliers to obtain larger, earlier fruit. 25. TROCHET CHERRY; in June; fruits with delicate but acid pulp, several on a common stalk, sometimes up to seven in number. Medium-sized, delicate tree. 26. SEMI- DOUBLE-FLOWERED CHERRY; flower with fifteen to twenty petals, tying very tightly; medium-sized fruit, bright red, not very fleshy, very acid. A low, delicate and slender tree, cultivated more for ornament than for utility. 27. CHERRY-GUICNE; late June; red, turbid fruit with very delicate pulp. Medium-sized, vigorous tree, grafted onto Sainte-Lucie for espalier or cattail cultivation. 28. PRUSSE CHERRY; late June; turbinates, 4008 large, dark-colored fruit, very good. Medium-sized tree, very productive; can be grafted and cultivated like the previous one. 29. * MONTMORENCY SHORT-TAILED CHERRY TREE: early August; medium-sized, bunched, round, compressed fruit with watery, tart pulp. Very productive, medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 30. * MONTMORERCY CHERRY TREE WITH BIG FRUIT; in July; large fruit, compressed at top and base, bright red, with yellowish-white, slightly acid pulp. excellent. Not a very productive tree, which has led the inhabitants of Montmorency to neglect its cultivation. 31. * GROS COBET CHERRY; July; fruit similar to above, but smaller, with deeper groove and shorter stalk, excellent. Vigorous tree, not very tall, not very productive. 32. † VILLÈNES CHERRY TREE WITH AMBER FRUIT; June; small, yellowish-pink fruit with very soft, very sweet white pulp; difficult to defend from birds. A vigorous tree, producing a large number of flowers and very little fruit. 33. T CERISIER DE VILLÈNES WITH PALE RED FRUIT; in June; fruit similar to the above, but less fragrant. Very vigorous, but not very productive. 34. EARLY BORN; end of April and beginning of May; small, pale-red fruit of mediocre quality, valuable for its earliness. Shrub with thin, grey branches, grafted onto Sainte-Lucie, the only subject on which it can grow. Suitable for forcing, either in pots or greenhouses. 35 "ROYAL LATE CHERRY, late English cherry; in July; large fruit, very dark color, excellent. The tree is very productive and can be grafted onto Sainte-Lucie for espaliering in the north, to further delay ripening. 36. * In July, fruit similar to the previous one, but turning almost black as it ripens. Excellent tree, grown like the previous one. 37. T CERISIER DE LA PALEMBRE, doucette, belle de Choisy; 1008,507 in July; medium-sized fruit, beautiful red, long-stalked, excellent. Not a very productive tree. 38 "VARENNE CHERRY; August; large fruit, compressed at top and base, bright red, long-stalked, excellent. High tree, very vigorous. 39. * MADELEINE CHERRY; late July; large, bright-red fruit with soft pulp, sweet and pleasantly acidic. This species is particularly popular near Sceaux and Fontenay-aux-Roses. The tree is large, vigorous and very productive. 40. * LARGE WHITE FRUIT CHERRY; in July; very sweet fruit, with watery pulp, fragrant, very good, difficult to defend from birds. Very tall, vigorous, productive. 41. WHITE CHERRY WITH SMALL FRUIT; differs only in size. The tree is smaller and just as productive. 42. * Cherry-Duck, in August; large fruit, slightly compressed at top and base, bright red, with white, sweet, excellent pulp: one of the most beautiful and best cherries. Large, vigorous, fairly productive tree. 43. TARDIF, or All Saints', cherry tree; in bloom from May to November; small, acidic, red fruit of very mediocre quality, born in the leaf axils. The branches are pendulous, long and flowing. Willdenow regards it as a species, and has named it prunus semperflorens; M. Desfontaines has adopted this opinion, and has included it in the catalog of the Jardin des Plantes under the same name with the synonymy Prunus serotina, RorH. CAT. 44* CERISIER TARDIF A CROS FRUITS; differs from the preceding only in the abundance of its larger, less acid fruits. A taller tree, which we obtained from seed and which fruited for the first time in 1820. Dgtess" GOOgle D. CERISIERS DU NORD or griottiers; flowers develop in the same way as the preceding ones; fruit oval-round, with liquid pulp, blackish, more or less acid; trees with tracing roots. 45. AICRE FRUIT GRIOTTIER; in September and October; small, round fruit, with soft, watery, acid pulp, of very poor quality. Average tree, not very vigorous. 46. NORTHERN ORDINARY GRIOTTIER; in September and October; medium-sized fruit, black like all those of this division, with soft, acid flesh. Very vigorous tree. It is grafted onto Sainte-Lucie, and placed in a northern position to prevent heat from drying out the fruit. We have sometimes had them until November 15th on one of our espaliers, which is over thirty feet high. 47. In August and September; small, oval fruit of mediocre quality. Small tree, but very pretty in shape, making it suitable for ornamental purposes. 48. OF SIBERIA WITH ROUND FRUIT; in August; fruit smaller than the previous one, just as bad. A shrub that grows to only a few feet, and is also cultivated for pleasure. 49. COMMON GRIETTIER; in July; small, very acid, mediocre fruit. Strong, vigorous tree, very low yield. 50. * GERMAN GRIOTTIER; July 15th; fruit with red, very watery, bitter pulp, medium size, poor quality. Tree of medium size, with very multiplied branches, not very productive. 51 "GRIOTTIER DE PORTUGAL; in August; fruit with firm pulp, a little less acidic than the others. Quite vigorous tree, with gathered branches, not very productive. CULTIVATION. Cherry trees do well in all types of soil, but must be deep and dry for cherry and cherry-cherry trees; cool without being damp for the others. They fear clayey, cold, marshy or sandy soils, and thrive in 3008 calcareous and granitic soils. It is especially in countries interspersed with hills and mountains that cherry trees grow, sometimes prodigiously. They are propagated by seed, offshoot or grafting. The first method produces taller, more vigorous trees that are less prone to gum disease; the second produces smaller trees, especially if grafted onto a sour cherry tree; finally, if dwarf trees are required for cattails, espaliers or pyramids, the mahaleb is chosen as the subject. For grafting, we use escutcheons n°" 1, 2, 74, and more often the dead-eye escutcheon, n° 3. If the subject already has a certain strength, it can be grafted in slit n°' 5 and 8, or the branches are folded back to the stem, and the new shoots produced are budded. For sowing, stratify wild cherry, sour cherry and mahaleb kernels. In spring, in loose soil that has been fertilized since the previous autumn, they are sown in rays spaced fifteen to eighteen inches apart for mahalebs, and two to two-and-a-half feet apart for the others. As for the cores, they are spaced only five or six inches apart in the rows, as there are often many missing. We bury them by an inch or an inch and a half; and, if we want to hasten their growth, we mix a little potting soil into the earth we cover them with. Weed carefully and water as needed, as young plants are very sensitive to drought. The following spring, thin out and replant where necessary, continuing to give the usual care to a nursery, but always watering in drought conditions, especially griot seedlings. As for offshoots, they are detached in autumn from the base or roots of old trees; and, if they have a lot of hair, they can be grafted in slit the following spring, and in escutcheon at the second 1 sap, if the first grafts have not grown. Cherry trees are trained and trained as described on page 228. The ManaleB, Bois de S**.-Lucie (prunus mahaleb, L.) b, is a third-growth tree that grows naturally in the hedgerows and woods of southern France. Its bark is brown, speckled with gray when new. Its wood is hard and fragrant; its leaves are hairless, shiny, subcordiform, rounded and ovate; it bears four to six flowers in corymbs on a common, leafy stalk. Fruit small, blackish and bad. We mention this species because it is used as a grafting subject for varieties of other cherry trees. MICOCOULIER DE PROVENCE, or austral. (Celtis australis; L.). b. This taprooted tree grows to thirty or forty feet, flowers in April and May, and in autumn produces an oval, fleshy fruit the size of a small cherry and of a blackish purple; its flesh is white and its flavor pleasant, but a little astringent, it is of very-mediocre quality. The wood of the hackberry is blackish, hard, binding and very elastic, making excellent vat rings with the young branches. The trunk takes on a beautiful polish and is particularly useful for making wind instruments; it is also highly regarded for sculptural work, as it is not prone to splitting or cracking. This tree thrives in deep, open, rich, moist and warm soils. In the north, it needs a warm exposure. It can be propagated by sowing seeds in pots or terrines as soon as they ripen, or by stratifying them like other pits. The first sprout in a year or two, and the others in the spring of the same year. The safest thing to do would be to shelter the young plants for the first two winters, by putting them in an orangeU 511 rie; but, in the absence of a greenhouse, it may be sufficient to cover them with a large bed. When they are eighteen inches or two feet tall, we put them in nurseries, in beds with good exposure, and treat them like other fruit trees. In Provence, where the southern hackberry is fairly common, it is used as a subject for grafting other species, using the same methods as for pear trees. MALE CORN, CORNIER (Cornus mascula; L.). b... Indigenous. A small tree twelve to fifteen feet tall, flowering in February and producing a fruit the size and shape of an olive, but with transparent, watery pulp and a pretty cherry-pink in the ordinary species. This fruit, called dogwood, coriole or horn, has a sweet, slightly sour taste, quite pleasant when perfectly ripe; it makes excellent jams. Dogwood is extremely hard and quite bendable; it is used to make stiles, hoops and so on. Several species and varieties with edible fruit are grown. 1° SAUVACE HORN; fruit small, red, a little sharp. 2° FRANC HORN; fruit larger, softer, red. 3° CORNOUILLER A FRUIT JAUNE; differs only in fruit color. 4° WHITE CUCUMBER (cornus alba; L.); from North America; smaller, earlier fruit, white, sweeter flavor. GROWING. This tree is very sturdy, unaffected by the inclemency of the seasons, and thrives in all soils and all exposures, even shady ones; but its growth is extremely slow, and it hardly rises more than ten feet in the space of fifteen years. It is propagated by stratifying cores, which are then trained like other trees; by scions 70, which are detached from the stock in autumn or spring; by strangulation; and its varieties by slit and escutcheon grafts, nos. 3 and 5. It is easy to prune and shear, and can take on any pleasing shape. FIFTH DIVISION. Fruits with seeds and more or less firm flesh. COMMON QUINCE. (Pyrus cydonia; L. Crdonia vulgaris, HORT. PAR.) D. Southern Europe. A low, twisted tree with brown bark and cottony young shoots. It flowers in April and May, and ripens in autumn; its fruit is large, more or less elongated, very slender or rather cottony when young, fragrant, aromatic, acerbic and can only be eaten cooked. It is used to make liqueurs and a very pleasant jelly. This tree is grown more for grafting pear varieties than for its fruit. A. COGNASSIER DE PORTUCAL; large flowers; ribbed fruit, larger, less gravelly and less acerbic than the common quince; tree larger, more vigorous, less twisted, but afraid of the cold. a. COGNASSIER D'ANGERS; similar to the previous one, but larger, less acerbic, could perhaps be eaten raw, having the defect of splitting a little. B. COCNASSIER COMMUN; flowers and fruit smaller, the latter more cottony, gravelly and acerbic than the former; tree not afraid of the cold. It has two sub-varieties. a. COING-POIRE; elongated fruit, not as bad as the next. b. COING-POMME; rounded fruit, the worst of all. CULTIVATION. Quince trees are not difficult to grow, either in terms of soil quality or exposure, since they thrive wherever pear trees are grown, and even in places where pear trees are unsuccessful. However, they prefer light, chalky, cool soil. They thrive best in sunny and sunny exposures, but the Portuguese and Chinese quince trees do better in southerly exposures. They are propagated from seed, cuttings, offshoots and marcottes; the ease of reproducing free varieties by means of cuttings means that they are rarely grafted, with the exception of quince trees from China and Portugal, which are grafted onto the common quince tree to make them more robust. Slot grafts n°' 5, 8, 10, and escutcheon grafts n°' 1, 2, 3, 108, are the most commonly used, either as subjects for their own varieties or for those of the pear tree. To propagate them from seed, prepare suitable soil by good ploughing, and loosen it as much as possible; make shallow furrows in it, and throw in the seedlings, which are covered with an inch and a half of soil or compost. Weeds are pulled out as they appear, and the seeds germinate the following spring. All that remains is to give them the usual care, and to thin out the seedlings to transplant where they are lacking. Sowing produces trees that are more vigorous and less prone to disease; but it takes a long time, which is why cuttings are preferred. In spring, before vegetation has begun, young shoots from the previous year are cut and, if possible, left with a small heel of two-year-old wood. They are then planted, but not pricked, which tears the bark and causes cankers at the root collar. Place them in rows two feet apart, and fifteen or eighteen inches apart in the rows. They recover quickly, 2. 33 and can sometimes be budded the following September. If the summer is dry, they should be watered. To propagate offshoots, cut the trunk of an old quince tree and mound it, i.e. pile earth around it. It doesn't take long for a number of young shoots to emerge, which take root and grow, and are usually ready to be raised the following year, to be nursed and grafted. The most advantageous method, and the one most commonly used around Paris, consists in planting young rooted plants, cutting them back to the ground when they are ready to produce vigorous shoots, and buttering them to help the shoots take root. This "marcotte" is lifted in autumn to set up in place and in the nursery. Once a tree is in place, it is cultivated as described on page 250. COGNASSIER DE LA CRINE ( cydonia sinensis, Thouin, ANn.), is a new species whose flowers, which appear in April and May, are very red and spread a pleasant fragrance. They are followed by a very large, elongated, oval, pot-bellied, yellowish-green fruit, with a stiff, short stalk and tough, acerbic flesh that ripens poorly in ordinary years in the Paris climate; perhaps its cultivation would be advantageous in the south. It is possible that by sowing, we could later obtain an early variety that would ripen more easily. We regret that no attention has yet been paid to quince seedlings, as we are convinced that artificial fertilization of pear trees would enable us to create new varieties which, without detracting from the beauty of this interesting fruit, would improve its quality to the point of making it edible. PEAR TREE (Prrus communis; L. ). b. Native. A tree from fifteen to fifty feet tall, depending on the variety, with taproots, whose fruit and various uses are well known to everyone. It flowers in April. Its wood is heavy, tight, hard, reddish, takes on a very fine polish, and is not prone to being bitten by insects; it is therefore sought after by carpenters, cabinetmakers, luthiers, turners and wood engravers; but these qualities, all combined in the wild pear tree, disappear as the fruit becomes more mature. This tree sometimes reaches enormous size: Évelin tells of a pear tree in Erfort, England, whose trunk was six feet in diameter, and which yielded seven muids of perry annually. We saw one between Limeille and Valenton, near Brunoy, which produced more than forty thousand pears one year; it was about three feet in diameter and forty feet high. Pear trees have been cultivated since ancient times, and it seems that the oldest known variety is the rousselet, at least according to Pliny. The number of these varieties has grown so prodigiously that catalogs from the time of Louis XIV list them at nearly eight hundred, giving over fifteen hundred French names. There must have been a lot of duplication, as we don't have nearly as many today. We will list, in order of maturity, all those that are worthy of cultivation. Good varieties are marked with an asterisk". A. SUMMER FRUIT. In June. 1. T POIRE AMIRÉ JOANNET, petit Saint-Jean; small, light lemon-yellow; tender flesh, quite pleasant when at its precise point of ripeness. Ripens at the end of the month. Delicate tree, not very fertile, more successful on quince than on franc. Use in espalier or counter-espalier to accelerate ripening. 2.* PETIT MUSCAT, seven in mouth; very small, hardly more than ten lines in diameter by one inch in height; thin, yellowish-green skin, gray or reddish on the sunny side; semi-melting flesh, a little pasty, sometimes musky. Ripens at the end of the month. A very vigorous tree, bearing its fruit in bunches, it does very well in espaliers at sunrise and in full wind. 3. PEAR PEAR, small seven in mouth; fruit the size of an olive; greenish-yellow skin; half-melting flesh. very melt-in-the-mouth, pleasant. Ripens at the end of the month or beginning of the next. Very large, very vigorous tree, bearing fruit in bunches. Full wind. In July. 4. * MUSCAT ROBERT, large musky Saint-Jean; small, twenty lines long, oval, greenish-yellow skin; tender, sweet, fragrant flesh. Ripens around the tenth of the month. Tree with yellow twigs. 5. † ORATE or aurate; twice as big as the petit muscat, same shape, but darker yellow in the shade, redder in the sun; half-melting flesh, a little dry and stony, pleasant and musky in good soils. Ripens in the first days of the month. A vigorous tree when grafted onto a franc. 6. BOURDON MUSQUÉ, summer orange; small, eighteen lines in diameter, rounded, compressed at the top, light green with speckles; flesh white, brittle, coarse, sweet, musky. Ripens around the fifteenth of the month. Very vigorous tree; full wind and cattail. 7. T ROUSSELET HATIT, Cyprus pear, partridge; the smallest of the rousselets, only twenty to twenty-four lines high, conical, yellowish, and red scaled with gray on the sunny side; yellowish flesh, a little brittle, gravelly, sweet and fragrant. Ripens towards the end of the month. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree; full-wind and cattail. 8." MADELEINE, Carmelite lemon; fruit two inches in diameter, rounded, light green, with a fairly long stem; flesh white, melting, fragrant, but soon softens. Ripens at the end of the month. A vigorous tree, quickly setting fruit (3006), very successful in bushes and espaliers. 9. * Medium-sized, elongated, green fruit, reddish-brown on the sunny side; flesh not very melting, but fine and slightly musky. Ripens at the end of the month. Slow to set fruit, but very productive, vigorous when grafted on franc for pleinvent, rather delicate on quince. It does very well in espaliers in the east. 10 "GROS BLANQUET, blanquet, roi Louis, poire d'argent; fruit two inches long, elongated, pot-bellied, whitish, slightly tinted light red in the sun; flesh white, brittle, not very fine, spicy. Ripens at the end of the month. A vigorous tree, sometimes acquiring considerable size when grafted on wild or hard fruit. 11.* BELLISSIME D'ÉTÉ, supreme; large fruit, three inches or more long, calabash-shaped, pale yellow; white, semi-melting flesh, fragrant and pleasant in hot summers, tasteless if the summer is cold. Ripens from July 15 to August 15. Very vigorous, but not very productive. 12. ? GROS HATIVEAU; small, turbinate fruit, no more than twenty to twenty-two lines long, yellow, dark red on the sunny side; flesh not very delicate, slightly musky. Ripens at the end of the month. A vigorous tree, suitable for cattails and full wind. 13. PETIT HATIVEAU; fruit of the same shape and quality as the preceding one, but smaller, fifteen lines long, with yellow skin all over. Same kind of tree as above. 14. SAPIN; fruit small, turbinate, slightly elongated, compressed at the base, yellowish-green; flesh white, coarse, spicy, not very fragrant. Ripens at the end of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 15. DE FAUCE; very-small, rounded, slightly turbinate, yellowish-green fruit, slightly russet-tinted; semi-soft, sweet, fragrant, slightly musky flesh. Ripens at the end of the month. Vigorous tree, more successful on franc than on quince, very productive. 2000 16. POIRE D'ANGE; small, turbinate fruit, bumpy towards the tail, yellowish-green, with fairly fine, semi-breakable, very musky flesh. It is considered a variety of salviati, inferior in quality. Quite a vigorous tree. 17.* PETIT BLANQUET, pearl-shaped pear; small fruit, fifteen to sixteen lines long, calabash-shaped, with rounded top and very protruding eye, yellowish-white; semi-cracking, musky, pleasant flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Very vigorous and productive. 18. * BLANQUETTE A LONGUE QUEUE; larger and more elongated than the previous variety, with whitish skin and long tail. It comes in bunches; white, brittle, fine, sweet and fragrant flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Extremely vigorous tree, very successful in light, deep soils. 19 "EPARGNE, Deau présent, groyse cuisse-madame, Saint-Samson; fairly large, very elongated fruit, often three inches high, slightly paunchy, greenish, colored on the sunny side; melting, fragrant, sweet flesh, with a very pleasant particular flavor. It ripens in the first fortnight of the month and ripens quickly. Quite a big tree, very vigorous, very fertile, but not easily submitted to the shape of a cattail or pyramid. It does well in espaliers at sunset. 20. OGNONET, ognolet, poire ognon, archiduc d'été, amiré roux; medium-sized fruit, turbinate, compressed at the top, yellow, bright red or brown on the sunny side; brittle, often stony flesh, with a slight rose taste. Ripens at the beginning of the month. To be productive, the tree needs to be grafted onto a franc. 21. * PEAR WITHOUT SKIN, guinea flower; fruit usually two and a half inches high, rounded, elongated, sometimes bumpy and washed with red on the sunny side, very variable; melting, delicate, fragrant flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 22. FIN-OR D'ÉTÉ; medium-sized fruit, turbinates, 1006 518 yellowish-green speckled with russet, shiny dark red on the sunny side; fine, greenish, semi-melting, slightly acid flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 23. T SALVIATI PEAR; round fruit like an apple, two inches in diameter, eighteen to twenty lines long, wax yellow, red on the sunny side; melting, sweet, fragrant, excellent flesh. Ripens from the 15th to the 31st of the month. The tree is very vigorous and productive when grafted onto a franc. 24. " ORANGE MUSQUÉE or summer; medium-sized fruit, twenty lines in diameter, round, with skin covered with small indentations like that of an orange, yellow, reddening a little on the sunny side; brittle, musky flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month, but passes very quickly. Tree vigorous enough for cattail and full-wind. 25. PaRpun D'AoUr; small fruit, tur biné, very-reflexed on the eye side, lemon-yellow lightly flecked with fawn, dark red, speckled with yellow on the sunny side; coarse, very musky flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month. Very productive tree. 26 "RED ORANGE; fruit similar to the previous one, but larger and bright red on the sunny side. Ripens at the same time. Very vigorous tree, for cattail and full-wind. 27. ROSE EPINZ; medium-sized fruit, very compressed at the top and base, resembling an apple; sunken eye and tail; greenish skin with gray or tawny spots; semi-melting, very musky, very good flesh. Ripens around the 10th of the month. A very successful tree in full wind, and espaliered in cool soil. 28. CEAIR A DAME; oval, rounded fruit, two inches long, tawny or yellowish gray, reddish on the sunny side, with a short, angled stem; the flesh is semi-crisp, spicy, quite pleasant. Ripens in the middle of the month. The tree is not very vigorous, and grows better on franc than on coguassier. 29. ROBINE, summer royal; small fruit, more or less ar40Q rondi, sixteen to eighteen lines high, pale green, speckled with brown; flesh brittle, sweet, very musky. Ripens around the middle of the month. The tree is quite vigorous. 30 † POIRE BELLE DE BRUXELLES, belle d'aodt; fruit large, very elongated, swollen at the base, yellow, colored on the sunny side; flesh white, melting, fragrant, very-good. Ripens around the middle of the month. Delicate tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 31 "ROUSSELET DE REIMS, petit rousselet; fruit small, two inches high, obtuse oval, tapering towards the tail, skin initially dark green, then turning a very dark red over its entire surface, dotted with gray; flesh fine, melting, musky. Ripens at the end of the month. A tree with spindly, brown branches, it does very well in deep soil. 32. CAssolErre, muscat vert, friolet, lèche-friand; fairly small fruit, not reaching two inches in length, short, oval-round, with green to yellow skin, barely tinted red on the sunny side; brittle, tender, sweet, musky flesh. Ripens at the end of the month. A vigorous tree for full-wind conditions. 33. SANGUINOLE; fruit small, turbinate, almost roud, greenish, rough, a little spotted with red on the sunny side; flesh red or marbled with red. Ripens at the end of the month. Not a very vigorous tree. 34. SANGUINE D'ITALIE, sanguinole d'Italie; small, elongated, grayish fruit, with red, brittle flesh, very mediocre. Ripens at the end of the month. Very vigorous tree. 35. DE VALLÉE; medium-sized, turbinate, greenish-yellow fruit, lightly colored on the sunny side, with brittle, coarse, acerbic flesh, very mediocre. Ripens towards the end of the month. The tree grafted on franc is one of the most productive, which is why it is so widely cultivated by the paysanz around Paris, to bear its fruit at the market. 36. ANGELICA OE ROME; medium-sized, turbinate, yellowish-green fruit, lightly colored on the sunny side, with brittle, fragrant flesh. Ripens towards the end of the month. Very vigorous tree, not very productive. 37. GRISE BONNE, forét pear; small, turbinate fruit, two inches long, grayish-green, with melting, sweet flesh. Ripens at the end of the month. Very productive tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 38. EGG PEAR; elongated oval fruit, slightly tapering towards the tail, the size of a small hen's egg, dotted green, barely reddish on the sunny side; fine, melting flesh, very pleasant taste. Ripens at the end of one month and the beginning of the next. Very delicate tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 39. TWO-HEADED OR TWO-EYEED PEAR; medium-sized, slightly elongated, greenish fruit, red on the sunny side, with the eye separated into two parts by a constriction; half-ripe flesh, fairly sweet, slightly fragrant. Ripens at the end of the month. Very vigorous, very productive tree for full-wind conditions. 40. * MÉDAILLE; medium-sized, turbinate, yellowish-green fruit; half-sweet, fragrant flesh. Ripens at the end of the month. Large, vigorous tree, grafted on franc, for full wind. Ripens in September. 41. FIN-OR DE SEPTEMDRE; large fruit, two and a half inches long, elongated oval, cheerful green, mottled red on the sunny side; flesh white, fine, melting, quite pleasantly acidic. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 42. BON-CHRÉTIEN D'ÉTÉ MUSQUÉ; quince-shaped fruit, light yellow, sometimes bumpy and whipped with red, three inches high; flesh brittle, white, musky, sweet. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Tree can only be grafted onto franc. 43. * BON-CHRÉTIEN D'ÉrÉ, gracioli; large, oval fruit, three and a half inches long, with light green skin, yellowing when ripe; flesh semi-cracking, sweet, very good. Ripens at the beginning of the month. The largest flowering tree of its kind, it does well in paved courtyards, but only succeeds perfectly when grafted onto franc. Pleinvent and large espalier; cannot be trained as a cattail. 44." POIRE AU! MON DIEU; elongated, slightly pot-bellied fruit, two and a half inches long, light yellow washed with red, spotted with sonk red on the sunny side; semi-cracking flesh, sweet, quite fragrant. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Very productive tree, 45. CaSsante de BreSr, cheneau, fondante de Brest; fruit a little paunchy, elongated, with irregular surface, two inches long, with plain green skin, sometimes washed brown on the sunny side; flesh white, fine, sweet, slightly acidic, pleasant. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Very vigorous, very large and very productive; does well on franc, badly on quince. 46 " ÉrINE D'ÉTÉ, melting, musky, green satin; elongated fruit, three inches long, smooth, green, sometimes yellowing near the tail, melting flesh, very musky, very pleasant. Ripens at the beginning of the month, but passes very quickly. A vigorous tree. 47. PASSE-MADELEINE; medium-sized, elongated, lemon-yellow fruit, slightly tinged with gray on the sunny side; melting, sweet, quite fragrant flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Vigorous, very productive tree. 48.* BERCAMOTTE D'ÉrÉ, de la Beuvière, milan blanc; turbinate, very plump fruit, two and a half inches long or a little more, rough to the touch, pale green becoming yellowish, with delicate, melting flesh, pleasantly acidicIt ripens around the tenth of the month, but passes quickly. Vigorous tree. 49. BERGAMOTTE ROUCE; fruit two inches long and a little wider, turbinate, yellow, washed with red: melting flesh, fragrant, but quickly softening; ripens around the fifteenth of the month. Delicate tree. 50. POIRE-FICUE; medium-sized, very long, brownish-green fruit with melting, sweet, fairly good flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Very vigorous, not very productive. 31 "COLOMA BUTTER; medium-sized fruit, elongated, swollen at the base, green, with fairly large grayish spots; white, pasty, fragrant flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Vigorous tree. O 52- " POIREORANGE TULIPÉE, fly pear; fruit oval, elongated, three inches long, pot-bellied, sometimes bumpy near the tail, yellow-green striped or variegated with red, sometimes marbled with gray; flesh brittle, delicate, pleasant. Ripens around the tenth of the month. Vigorous tree. 53. JARGONELLE; turbinate fruit, a little elongated, very rounded at the top, two and a half inches long, shiny skin, yellow, bright red on the sunny side, quite often variegated with darker red on the sides; brittle, musky flesh of mediocre quality. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Tall, vigorous tree; suitable for cattails and plein-vent. 54. GROS ROUSSELET, summer king; medium-sized fruit, a little elongated, pot-bellied, truncated, sometimes a little bumpy on the tail side, which is two-and-a-half inches long, dirty yellow, dotted, colored dark reddish-brown on the sunny side; flesh semi-cracking, fragrant, slightly acidic, pleasant. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Very vigorous tree; suitable for cattails and full wind. 55. OLIVE PEAR; medium-sized, oval, elongated, brownish-green fruit; melting, delicate, fragrant, very pleasant flesh. Ripens around mid-September. Quite a vigorous tree; cattail and full-wind. 56. AZEROLLE; small, turbinate, red fruit with soft, fairly fragrant flesh. Ripens in the middle of the month; grown more for pleasure than for utility. A very vigorous tree, it should be grafted onto a franc tree. 59. * DOYENNÉ BLANC, buttered white, Saint-Michel; large, rounded, yellow, melting fruit, very sweet, excellent. Ripens in the middle of the month. Very productive tree, needs to be pruned short to prevent it from running out of fruit. 58. MANSUETTE, SOLITARY; fruit large, three and a half inches long, irregular in shape, a little bumpy, elongated, obtuse, green speckled with brown, yellow or red on the sunny side; flesh semi-melting, watery, mediocre. Ripens in the middle of the month. More successful on quince than on franc: not very vigorous. 59. * CAILLOU ROSAT; large, rounded, yellow fruit, blushing a little on the sunny side; half-melting, sweet, 28 musky flesh, but quickly softens. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Very vigorous, very productive tree; for cattail and full-wind. 60. T GREY BUTTERED PEAR; large, shortened oval fruit, three and a half inches long, green, gray or red, depending on the soil in which it grows, with melting, delicate, spicy, excellent flesh. It ripens at the end of the month. The tree quickly sets fruit; it is perfectly successful grafted on franc and in pleinvent, but then the pears are smaller and less colorful; they are more beautiful when the tree is grafted on quince and trained in espalier. 61. T BEURRÉ D'ANGLETERRE, English pear; small or medium-sized fruit, ovoid, elongated, with thick, hard, greenish-yellow or slightly gray skin, more or less speckled with russet; flesh tender, melting, soft, sweet, very pleasant. Ripens in mid-September. The tree does very well in full wind and grows very large, but produces larger fruit in espaliers. This species, along with the green sweet, is used for grafting delicate varieties. It is budded on two-year-old quince trees, left to grow until it has reached sufficient height to form a tall-stemmed tree, and then grafted with the weaker species that you want to have full-wind. 62. † GROSSE ANGLETERRE DE NOISETTE; fruit similar to the previous one, but larger, more grayish, and of superior quality. It ripens at the end of the month. It is called hazelnut because it was found in our seedlings. Very vigorous tree, of the same nature as the previous one. 63.* CaLEbASSE; large fruit, four or five inches long, calabash-shaped, gray, turning yellow when ripe; brittle, pleasant flesh. Ripens from September 10 to October. A vigorous tree, it can be grafted onto a franc tree and grown as a full-vent or cattail. 64. BEQUESNE; large, long, fairly well-shaped, oval, lemon-yellow fruit, washed with red on the sunny side, dotted and spotted with gray; soft flesh, a little bland, good when cooked. Ripens in the last days of the month until February. Large, vigorous tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 65. ROUSSEAU PEAR; medium-sized, rounded, yellowish fruit with brittle flesh and little flavor. Ripens at the end of the month. Vigorous tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 66. * HATIVE LUCNÉ; medium-sized, elongated fruit, two to three inches long, pale green; half-melting flesh, sweet, fairly fragrant. Fruits ripen at the end of the month. Vigorous, productive tree. 67. URBANISTE; elongated fruit, three inches long, medium size, yellowish-green, colored on the sunny side; flesh white, melting, sweet, fairly fragrant. Ripens at the end of the month. A vigorous tree, bearing fruit in bunches, very productive. B. AUTUMN FRUIT. October. 68. * CRASSARE, crésane bergamotte crassane; fairly large fruit, two and a half to three inches in diameter, rounded, green speckled with gray, yellowing a little on the sunny side; melting flesh, sweet, fragrant, very good; but, in certain years and on individuals planted in unsuitable soil, it becomes stony and bitter. It is harvested from the eighth to the fifteenth of the month, and keeps until January. The tree likes soft, cool, damp soil; it is very vigorous; it has a very pretty variety with white variegated thresholds. 69. TVERTE-LONGUE, mouille-bouche, flowering muscat; large, elongated fruit, three inches long, bulging towards the middle of its length, uniformly green, perfectly smooth, with delicate, melting, sweet, excellent flesh. It ripens in the first days of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 70. VERTE LONGUE PANACHÉE, culotte de Suisse; variety of the preceding one, smaller and uniformly striped with green and yellow; same qualities and ripening time. 71. DOYENNÉ GRIS, doyenné d'automne, doyenné roux; fruit smaller than doyenné blanc, medium size, 1008 first gray, then russet when ripe; flesh melting, sweet, fragrant, never becoming mushy, excellent. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Quick to set fruit, very successful in espaliers. Sunrise and sunset exposures are the most favorable for its fruit to keep well. 22." GALEOUS DOYEN PEAR; fruit similar to the previous one, but lighter in color and spotted; melting, sweet flesh, often stony on one side. Ripens at the same time. Same kind of tree. 73. BEZI DE MONTIGNY; fruit very similar to doyenné gris, a little more elongated, with more melting and better flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month and sometimes at the end of September. 74. * BEZI DE LA MOTTE; large fruit, about two inches high, pot-bellied, reddish or green, very speckled with gray, rarely colored on the sunny side, with melting, sweet and very good flesh. Ripens at the end of the month. A vigorous, thorny tree, it succeeds only in full wind and on open ground. We believe that the Flemish green bezi is nothing other than this variety. 75. * AUTUMN BERGAMOT; fairly large, turbinately shaped fruit, quite similar to the summer bergamot, but smaller, more elongated, smooth, and rarely washing red on the sunny side; melting, fragrant, very pleasant flesh. Ripens at the end of the month and in November. A vigorous tree. 76. SWISS BERGAMOTTE; fruit a little smaller than the preceding one, medium-sized, turbinate, striped with green, yellow and red; melting, sweet, good flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month. A delicate tree, suitable for cattails. 77. BERGAMOTTE CADETTE, cadet pear; large fruit, nearly three inches long, or smaller in poor soils, turbinate or rounded, yellow slightly tinged with red on the sunny side; flesh semi-melting and quite good, becoming cottony as it passes. Ripens around the middle of the month. Very vigorous tree. 78. BEURRÉ CAPIÉMONT; medium-sized fruit, elongated, swollen at the base, green with a red tint on the sunny side; flesh 90 white, melting, delicate, fragrant. Ripens at the end of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 79. POIRE PASTORALE, musette d'automne, petit rateau; fruit over three inches long, large, elongated, pot-bellied, soft green or yellowish, dotted with large reddish or reddish spots; flesh half-cracking, mediocre. Ripe from the end of the month to December. Delicate tree. 80.T VINE PEAR, demoiselle pear; small, rounded fruit, a little elongated towards the tail, which is very long; grayish skin, dotted with red, sometimes blushing on the sunny side; melting, spicy, good flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month. Quite a vigorous tree, for cattail and full wind. 81. LANSAC, satin, dauphine; small, rounded fruit, no more than two inches in diameter, sometimes a little elongated at both ends, pale yellow or whitish, probing flesh, sweet, spicy, fragrant, quite pleasant. Ripens from the end of the month to January. Vigorous tree, suitable for cattails or full-wind. 82. MessirE JEAN, chaulis; medium-sized fruit, unevenly rounded, sometimes in the form of a shortened calabash; rough, russet skin, mottled gray, often entirely gray, or golden yellow; very crunchy flesh, sometimes stony, always filled with abundant water, spicy, excellent. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Very vigorous, very productive tree, for full wind and cattail. 83. * VERMILLON, supreme, bellissime d'automne, petit certeau; fairly long fruit, tapering to a point at the tail, three to four inches long by two inches in diameter, uneven surface, greenish-yellow speckled, washed and speckled with red on the sunny side; flesh brittle, white, fragrant and very good, though a little stony towards the center. Ripens around the middle of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 84. * GREEN SUGAR; medium-sized fruit, rounded, sometimes oval, two and a half inches long, smooth green, melting flesh, sweet, very pleasant. Ripens at the end of the month. Very vigorous, very productive tree, suitable for further grafting, as we said for the English buttered pear. 85. POIRE FRANC RÉAL; fairly large fruit, two and a half to three inches long, swollen in the middle, greenish with reddish spots, yellowing when ripe; brittle, mediocre flesh, good for cooking. Ripens at the end of the month. Vigorous, productive tree, for full-wind conditions. 86. SARRASIN; large, elongated, brown fruit, speckled with yellow and gray, with semi-melting flesh, good for cooking. Ripens from October to February. Very vigorous tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 87. FRANCIPANE; medium-sized, elongated, slightly pot-bellied fruit, three inches high, light yellow, tinted more or less bright red on the sunny side, finely prickled, smooth; semi-fleshy, sweet, fragrant. Ripens at the end of the month. Not a very vigorous tree, suitable for cattails. 88.* JALOUSIE; large, turbinate, very bulbous fruit, with russet, finely grained skin; melting, sweet, excellent flesh. Ripens at the end of the month, but must be picked before ripening, otherwise it quickly becomes soft. Rather delicate tree, successful only on frank. 89. "SYLVANCE; fairly large, elongated fruit, light green with gray spots, yellowing slightly when ripe; melting flesh, sweet, fragrant, very good. Ripens at the end of the month. Large, very vigorous tree, successful only on free-run land. 90. GARDEN BELLISSIM; medium-sized, fairly long, yellowish-green fruit, slightly tinged with red on the sunny side; semi-crisp, sweet, fragrant flesh of mediocre quality. Ripens at the end of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 91. BEURRÉ ROSE; medium-sized, deanery-shaped fruit, yellowish washed with pink; white flesh, half-melting, sweet. Ripens at the end of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. November. 92. AUTUMN SYLVANGE; large, three-inch-long fruit, swollen at the base, yellowish-green, tinged with grayish on the sunny side; flesh semi-cracking, not very fragrant, of mediocre quality. Very vigorous tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 03. * DRY MARTIN PEAR, winter russet; medium-sized fruit, quite variable in shape and size, sometimes turbinate, or calabash-shaped, or elongated pear with a large tail, tawny or isabella-colored, sometimes blushing a little on the sunny side; brittle flesh, fragrant, sweet, very good. This is one of the best pears for compote. Ripens in this month and in December. Bushy, vigorous, very productive. 94." ROUSSELINE; small, calabash-shaped, pot-bellied fruit, tapering at both ends, dirty tawny or sometimes gray, lightening as it ripens; semi-melting, sweet, musky, pleasant flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month. Rather delicate tree; suitable for cattails. 95. BEZI DE QUESSOY, roussette d'Anjou; small, round or slightly oval fruit, eighteen to twenty lines long, russet, blotchy and rough to the touch, with very deep, sweet, very good flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month, and keeps well until January. Quite a delicate tree. 96. T BEURRÉ D'AREMBERC; fruit a little smaller than the gray beurré, more elongated, green, yellowing as it ripens, with very white and very fine flesh, melting, fragrant, very high, never stony, excellent. We consider this pear to be the best we know; it ripens around the middle of the month, and keeps until February. The tree is very vigorous and does very well in espalier, cattail and counter espalier; it is grafted onto quince and franc trees. In 1806, we brought back this variety from Brabant, from the gardens of the Prince of Aremberg. 97. * DUCHESSE D'ANGOULÊME; fruit shaped like a doyenné, but larger, yellowish, dotted with gray, reddish-brown on the sunny side, with melting, vinous flesh approaching that of the crassane, but better. It ripens around the middle of the month and in November. M. Gendron, lawyer at the Royal Court of Angers, sent it to us from the outskirts of that city. 98. * BON-CHRÉTIEN D'ESPAGNE de Duhamel, mansuette des Flamands; fruit very large, in the shape of an acute pyramid, very wide at its base, four inches high, pale yellow, speckled with brown, and a very beautiful red on the sunny side; flesh cas2. 34 sante, watery, sweet, very good in compote and sometimes eaten raw when the tree is in good exposure. Ripens during the month. A very vigorous tree that can be grafted on franc; suitable for cattails and full-wind. 99.7 POIRE SABINE, Austrasian pear, jaminette; large, rounded, compressed, gray fruit with semi-melting, sweet flesh and pleasant flavor. It ripens during the month. We obtained it from Metz, and sent it to the London Horticultural Society, to Mr. Sabine, its president, to whom we dedicated it. Very vigorous tree. 100. * SAINT-GERMAIN; fairly large fruit, three and a half inches long, elongated, pyramidal, pale green, scabbed with red and gray mainly around the eye, with melting flesh, very watery, with a very pleasant light acidity; it loses most of its qualities in dry soils and in certain years. It ripens in the course of the month, and keeps until March. A vigorous tree. 101. SAINT-GERMAIN WITH YELLOW STRIPED FRUIT; fruit entirely similar to the preceding one, of which it is only a slight yellow-striped variety. It has the same qualities and ripens at the same time. 101.* VIRCOULEUSE, ice pear; large, elongated, yellow fruit, blushing slightly on the sunny side, with melting, sweet, fragrant flesh. Ripens in the course of the month until January. The tree is very large, very vigorous, not very productive, rather difficult in terms of soil quality and exposure; it requires loose soil and the setting sun. 102". MARQUISE; large, pyramidal fruit, over three inches long, sometimes a little bulbous, first green and speckled with dark green, then yellow; melting flesh, sweet, slightly musky, excellent. Ripens this month and next. Very vigorous and productive tree. 103. SAINT-LEZAIN; very large fruit, five or six inches long, conical, soft green speckled with gray; dry, mushy, tasteless flesh. Ripens around the middle of the month. Very large, vigorous tree, grafted on franc. 104. CATILLAC; very large, superb calabash-shaped fruit, oval, grey or light green, yellowing when ripe, often washed red on the sunny side, spotted with reddish Cr; white flesh, well cooked. Can be eaten from the beginning of this month to May. Very large, vigorous tree. 105.* POIRE BEZY DE CHAUMONTEL; fruit very variable in shape and size, usually quite large, elongated, bumpy, yellowish, more or less bright red on the sunny side, with semi-melting, sweet flesh, very good when one grasps the precise moment of ripeness, which usually arrives at the end of the month, but can last until February. Poorly conformed tree, more suitable for espaliering than any other form. 106. GILE-Ô-CILE, large goblet; very large fruit, a little turbinate, swollen at the base, with purplish-red skin; coarse, pasty flesh, quite pleasant flavor. Ripens in the middle of the month. Very vigorous, productive tree. 107. WINTER SPINE; large, elongated, whitish-green fruit, a little yellow, sometimes greenish, but then the fruit is mediocre; melting flesh, sweet, not very spicy. Ripens during the month and keeps until January. The tree can be grafted onto a franc tree in dry soils, or onto a quince tree in wet soils; it requires good exposure. 108.* AMBRETTE; medium-sized, rounded oval fruit, whitish green or yellowish, speckled with gray; melting flesh, sweet, spicy, excellent. Ripens from the end of the month to February. A thorny-wooded tree, it gives very good quality fruit only in full wind, with good exposure, in strong, dry soils, and in hot years. 109" ÉCHASSERY, bezy de chassery; obtuse oval fruit, tapering a little towards the tail, two and a half inches long, light green at first, then yellowish; melting, sweet, musky, very pleasant flesh. Ripens from the end of the month to January. A very delicate tree, suitable for forming cattails and espaliers. 110. MERVEILLE D'HIVER; medium-sized fruit, turbinate or oval, two and a half inches long, bumpy, yellowish-green; melting flesh, delicate, sweet, musky, pleasant. Ripens during the month. The tree does better on franc than on quince; it likes soft, deep soil with good exposure. 4006 I11.* SIEULLE PEAR; medium-sized, rounded, long-stalked, grayish-green fruit with melting, sweet, tangy, excellent flesh. Ripens at the end of the month, earlier or later, depending on the year and exposure, and lasts until February. Very vigorous and fairly productive. 112. BOn-CHRÉTIEN TURC, good Christian from Vernois; resembles other good Christians, but of mediocre quality; good for cooking. Ripens from the end of the month to January. Quite a vigorous tree, more successful on franc than on quince. C.TRUITS D'EIVER. In December. 113. RATTLE PEAR; very large, turbinate fruit, greenish-white, reddish and dotted with reddish spots on the sunny side; brittle flesh, a little sweet and fragrant; edible raw, and good cooked. Ripens around the middle of the month. Very vigorous tree, grafted on franc. 114. GARDEN PEAR; large, round, grainy-skinned fruit, yellow, dark red with golden spots on the sunny side; flesh not very delicate, sometimes stony, with a sweet, quite pleasant taste. Ripens around the middle of the month. Vigorous tree. 115T. ROYAlE D'HIVER; large, elongated fruit, swollen at the base, light yellow, red on the sunny side; semi-melting, sweet flesh. Ripens from mid-month to February. More successful on franc than on quince. 116 BONNE-ENTE; large fruit, shaped like a winter bon-chrétien, yellowish-green, red on the sunny side; semi-melting, sweet, fragrant, excellent flesh. Ripens at the beginning of the month, or at the end of winter. Very low yield. 117. WINTER ANGLETER; fruit large, pyramidal, pot-bellied, three and a half inches high, light green with grey speckles; flesh brittle, soft, quite sweet, pleasant, excellent cooked. Ripens from mid-month to March. A vigorous, fairly productive tree, more successful on franc than on quince. 119." PASSE -COLMAR PEAR; large, elongated fruit, resembling ordinary colmar, but larger at the bottom, thin-skinned, yellowish, colored on the sunny side; yellow flesh, delicate, very melting, sweet, fragrant, excellent. Ripens from mid-month to February. Very productive tree, bearing fruit in bunches. 119. LOUISE BONNE: pyramidal fruit, three and a half inches long, whitish-green, smooth, finely punctuated, with semi-melting flesh, sweet, pleasant when fragrant, which only happens when the tree grows in dry soil. Ripens at the beginning of the month. More successful in full wind than in espalier. 120. POULTRY PEAR, large gray rake; fruit very large, elongated, a little compressed, four inches long, turbinate, green almost entirely hidden by gray or red spots; flesh brittle, well cooked. Ripens at the end of the month and beginning of the next. Very vigorous tree, for full wind. 121. TRÉSOR D'AMOUR; very large, pot-bellied, lemon-yellow fruit, with tender, sweet, well-cooked flesh. Ripens from mid-month to March. Vigorous tree, suitable for full wind. 122. SAINT-AUcUSTiN; elongated, pot-bellied fruit, two and a half inches long, light yellow spotted with brown, slightly tinted red on the sunny side; dry flesh, not very fragrant, mediocre, well cooked. Ripens during the month. Quite a vigorous tree, for full wind. In January. 123. MARTIN-SIRE, ronville; medium-sized fruit, elongated, more paunchy on one side, over three inches long, with smooth, yellow skin, reddening on the sunny side; brittle flesh, fairly soft, a little sweet and fragrant, but sometimes stony, well cooked. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Delicate tree. 124.* EASTER or winter BERCAMOTTE; fairly large fruit, three inches long, a little turbinate, green, speckled with grayish, sometimes reddish on the sunny side, melting flesh, sweet and pleasantly acidic; ripens from the beginning of this month to April. Very vigorous tree. 126. ANGELIC PEAR FROM BORDEAUX; very large, elongated, obtuse fruit, three to four inches long, light yellow, blushing a little on the sunny side; soft, brittle, sweet flesh, rather mediocre: good cooked. Ripens at the beginning of the month, sometimes as early as November and December. Delicate tree, which should be grafted on franc. 127. COLMAR, manne pear; large, turbinate, truncated fruit, three inches long, yellowish-green, speckled with brown, sometimes reddening a little on the sunny side; melting, sweet, spicy flesh, excellent. It ripens from this month until March. A very vigorous tree, but not very productive, to be grown in espaliers or against espaliers. 128." BON-CHRÉTIEN D'RIVER, pear of anguish; fruit very variable in shape and volume, usually large, with thin, even skin, yellow, greenish, incarnate red on the sunny side; flesh a little brittle, sweet, very smoky, excellent when the tree grows in suitable soil. It ripens from the beginning of the month to April, and can be kept for a month without spoiling. The tree is quite delicate, and can be grafted onto quince and trained in espaliers. 129. BOR-CHRÉTIEN D'AUCR; fruit similar to the bon-chrétien d'hiver, but larger, otherwise only a very slight variety, at least in Paris; same quality and ripening time. Same type of tree, but even less productive. 130. * BON-CHRÉTIEN A BOIS IASPÍ, variegated; fruit differing only in longitudinal yellow stripes; same quality and ripening time. Same type of tree, more delicate, with variegated wood like the fruit. 131. BEURaÉ D'EIVEA; fruit with the usual buttery shape, but whose skin remains constantly green; melting, sweet, fragrant, good flesh. It ripens during the month. This pear should not be confused with the one described by Calvel under the same name, whose flesh is only edible when cooked. We have

brought from Brabant in 1806. 132. TROUVÉE, prince's pear, found in the mountains; medium-sized fruit, two and a half inches long, elongated oval, lemon-yellow O04 sometimes washed with pink, bright red and quite dark on the sunny side; yellowish-white flesh, brittle, sweet, quite pleasant. Keeps until April. Vigorous tree. In February. 133. WINTER ORANGE PEAR; medium-sized fruit, round, slightly compressed at base and top, brownish-green, mottled; flesh fine, brittle, musky, pleasant. Ripens from mid-month to March. Quite a vigorous tree. 134. PRIEST PEAR; fruit large, twenty-seven lines long, rounded, compressed, and even hollowed at the base and top, gray, speckled with gray-white; flesh white, semi-brittle, quite fine, but a little stony. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 135. ROUSSELET D'RIVER; small, obtuse oval fruit, isabelle-colored, with brittle, watery flesh, quite spicy, cooked well. Ripens from mid-month to March. Delicate tree. 136. DOUBLE FLOWER, Armenia; medium-sized fruit, depressed at the base and top, yellowish-green when ripe, a little reddish, and spotted gray on the sunny side; brittle flesh, well cooked. Keeps until March. A vigorous, productive tree with flowers of ten to fifteen petals. 137. DOUBLE PANACHED FLOWER; variety of the preceding one, a little more elongated, striped with green and yellow, whipped with red on the sunny side; same quality and same ripening time. Rather delicate tree. 138.* MUScaT L'ALLEMAND; large, pot-bellied, elongated fruit, over three inches high, grayish-green, slightly reddish on the sunny side; melting, musky, very good flesh. Keeps until April. A vigorous tree. 139. BELLISSIME D'HIVER, téton de Vénus; very large, almost round fruit, with yellow skin, red on the sunny side, tender flesh, well cooked. Keeps until May. Quite a vigorous tree, not very productive. 2000 140. TONNEAU PEAR; very large, elongated fruit, roughly barrel-shaped, yellow, fairly bright red on the sunny side, white flesh, well cooked. It ripens from the beginning of the month to the end of March. A very vigorous tree, which should be grafted onto franc. 141. FROM NAPLES; medium-sized, calabash-shaped fruit, short, a little tapering towards the tail, smooth, yellowish-green and reddish-brown on the sunny side, with semi-breakable, sweet flesh, quite good raw, better cooked. Ripens in this month and in March. Delicate tree, but very productive. 142. CHAT-BRULÉ; medium-sized, elongated, yellow or grayish fruit, bright red on the sunny side; brittle flesh, good for cooking until March. Delicate tree. Harvested in March. 143. DE SAINT-PÈRE; fruit large, elongated, obtuse towards the tail, rough to the touch, very dark yellow; flesh white, quite melting, very juicy, quite sweet, can be eaten raw when ripe, that is, during the month and until the end of April, better cooked. Vigorous tree, not very productive. 145. * BON-CHRÉTIEN DE BRUXELLES; elongated fruit, swollen at the base, yellowish-green with brown spots; coarse flesh, slightly fragrant, well cooked. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 144. * COLMAR DORÉ; very large fruit, more elongated than ordinary colmar, greenish, slightly tinged with red on the sunny side, melting flesh, very good. Ripens during the month. Quite a vigorous tree. 145. * IMPÉRIALEA CHENE LEAVES; fairly large, elongated, light-yellow fruit, with semi-melting flesh, not very sweet, mediocre, good cooked. Keeps until May. Very vigorous tree. 148. * BERGAMOTTE DE SOULERS; fairly large, elongated, shiny-skinned, yellowish-green fruit, sometimes washed with red on the sunny side, with sweet, melting flesh, very pleasant flavor. Ripens during the month. Very vigorous tree. 149. BERCAMOTTE DE HOLLANDE, from Alençon; fruit large, tur2008 biné, bumpy, green, spotted with brown; flesh semi-cracking, very good, with a little of the flavor of winter bon-chrétien. It ripens at the end of the month, or at the beginning of the following month, until May. The fruit is better in the south of France than in Paris. Very vigorous tree, grafted on franc for espalier and counter espalier. 149.* POURE BERCAMOTTE DE LA PENTECÔTE, winter deanery; fruit similar to autumn deanery, larger, with brown-spotted skin; excellent, melting flesh. Keeps until May. Very vigorous and productive tree. We believe that this fruit is the same as the Flemish rancid butter; at least, we have not been able to find any difference either in the fruit or in the tree. 150. CHAPTAL; very large, pyramidal fruit, over four inches long, green, speckled, washed with red on the sunny side, with semi-melting, fragrant, excellent cooked flesh. Keeps until April. Very vigorous tree. 151. TARQUIR; fruit shaped like a thrift, long, a little more pointed towards the tail, compressed at the base, greenish-yellow mottled with tawny; brittle, fairly fine flesh. Ripens in April and May. Quite a vigorous tree. 152 ESPADON; we have not yet seen the fruits of this variety; but, from what an august person has told us, they differ in shape and length from what we have. Madame la duchesse de Berri was kind enough to bring it to us from the royal gardens of Naples. However, as they are sometimes cultivated in large orchards, and may be of interest to a few connoisseurs, we will briefly mention the names of the preferable species. Grosse syrolle, - petite syrolle,-de loup,-prince-blanc, - grand-dau- phin, - de perche cœur rouge. - gros carisy blanc. - id. rouge,-de Lyon, - picard-rouge, - de buisson,- rouget, - de salade, - rousselet-de-livery, - du four, - de plâtre, - de fer,- margot, - de cheval, ou noyer, - de cochon, - blanc pernet, - de chemin, - de caladiac, - gros vert, - de Franqueville, - picard-blanc, - bimart, - de Caen- Pucelle, - de Berlin, - de la Sablonnière, - gros mesnil, - de Canivet, - de carcan, - gros moquefriand, - petit moquefriand, - grosse grappe, - petite grappe. CULTIVATION. Pear trees grafted on franc like free soil, rather light than strong, but above all deep and not too dry. Those grafted on quince do fairly well in light, substantial, loose soil, although not very deep. All varieties can be propagated by grafting onto wild, hard or quince trees, depending on the shape you wish to give the tree. On this subject, see page 230. The sauvageon is a tree that comes spontaneously from the seed of a wild fruit or from an offshoot. It is collected from the forest and placed in the nursery. The franc is a tree that has been sown in a garden, and whose initial vigor has already been tamed by cultivation; it is the most widely used. As for quince, see cultivation on p. 512. Franks offer three degrees of strength, depending on whether they come from wild fruit seeds, perry pears or knife pears. Wild fruit pears produce robust, very vigorous trees, which do well in the poorest soils; in this case, it would be advantageous to use them for full-wind planting, especially for varieties that develop rapidly and need abundant sap. Pear trees grown from perry seeds are vigorous and suitable for full-wind grafting for orchards. If mid-wind or large espaliers and cattails are required, preference should be given to trees from knife pear seedlings; and these trees will be all the sweeter for the more advanced the fruit from which they were sown. When it's time to sow, obtain good fruit pips and expose them to the air for a few hours to dry out, after which they are placed in dry sand to preserve them until the time comes to sow them. As for perry pears, they are collected in the pomace that comes from the crushed fruit to express the liqueur, and preserved in the same way. Seedlings are sown in the first days of spring; to do this, good ploughing prepares soft, substantial, deep soil; rays are traced six inches apart, peppercorns are thrown in and covered with two fingers of soil. The whole seedling is then mulched with litter, to prevent frost or the soil from fighting and drying out. It doesn't take long for the seedling to emerge, at which point it is weeded, hoeed, purged of weeds and thinned out if necessary. Most growers lift it in late autumn to put it in the nursery, but we believe that, whatever its strength, it's better to leave it in place for two years; it roots better, becomes stronger, and produces much more vigorous trees. If the nursery is set up in dry, sandy soil, transplanting should be done in autumn; in wet, clayey soils, it's much better to wait until spring. When trees are to be trained for full-wind conditions, the pivot should be kept as short as possible, but cut back when the trees are to be trained as cattails or espaliers; this operation slows down their vigor and causes them to set fruit much earlier. Young trees are trained as described in the "Péppinière" article in the first volume of this book, and prepared for grafting, either near the root collar, or at the top of a long stem; in this case, they are pruned into hooks, according to the principles given on page 245. When they have reached the right size, they are grafted onto a high stem six or eight inches from the ground; and this last method is always the best, even for full-wind trees; for, if an accident should break them, the tree can be restored by amputating it below the fracture and reforming it again. The procedures most generally used for grafting pear trees are those described in the history of scape grafting, n°" 1, 2, 3, 74, 108; and cleft grafting, n°* 5, 6, 8. The following year, the trees are put in place, and maintained throughout their life, according to the pruning principles indicated on page 230. We have a few more observations to make on the cultivation of this precious tree. Pear blossoms, which appear early, are sometimes affected by late frosts, to which they are very sensitive, especially when the sun strikes the pistils. We must try to protect them from the sun's rays by means of canvas and straw mats, which is only practical for espaliers and cattails. Pear trees often alternate their production, i.e. they produce a lot of fruit one year and rest the next. This is often the result of exhaustion caused by too much production, and the intelligent gardener can prevent it by removing some of the fruit that would overload the tree. However, it's natural for certain varieties to alternate, without art being able to effectively oppose it. Here's the simple reason: we know that it takes two years for a fruit bud to form; if all the buds on a tree flower at the same time, it's clear that others won't flower until two years later, and the tree will alternate without exhaustion. Prolonged rain at flowering time also aborts harvests by dispersing pollen before fertilization, as we said in our first volume. This disadvantage can be overcome by sheltering the trees with straw mats, if possible. When continuous rainfall occurs during the development of the fruit, the sap often abandons the fruit and travels to the wood, with the result that a large proportion of the pears fall off, and the others grow little, crack, remain insipid and even become stony. Only a few espaliers can be saved from this disadvantage. When the tips of a tree's branches dry out and die, the reasons must be sought in its temperament. If the damage is caused by insects, cankers or other diseases, it should be treated as described in the Plant Diseases article; the branches should be cut back, the soil on the roots renewed, and good fertilizers used. Sometimes this decline is caused by old age; in this case, by bringing the tree up to its trunk, you can prolong its existence for a few more years. Pear trees are quite prone to moss and lichen, especially in poor or damp soils: they must be scrupulously cleared of them; finally, they should be given suitable ploughing and good manuring every four or five years. COMMUR. APPLE (Malus communis, L.) b. Indigenous. This second-growth tree has roots that are more tractive than taprooted. It thrives only in temperate and even slightly cold countries. In Italy, Spain and the south of France, it is unsuccessful or only very mediocre, whereas it produces considerably in our northern departments and in England; this is because its flowers, which appear in May, are very sensitive to sunlight and heat. We are sufficiently familiar with its fruit and the uses to which it is put that we need not deal with it here. The wood of the wild apple tree is somewhat similar to that of the pear tree, but is less hard and much less pleasing in color. It is much sought-after by carpenters and turners. The number of apple varieties has increased considerably1 in the last century. It seems that in the thirteenth century, only two knife apples were known, in the sixteenth four; in La Quintinie's time, twenty-five were known, but only seven were estimated, and today we have a considerable number, which we will describe. Nora. The best are marked with an asterisk ("). In June. 1. PARADISE APPLE, St. John's apple; fruit small, sometimes rounded, most often elongated, almost white, spotted red on the sunny side; flesh white, fragrant, quite good. Ripens at the end of the month. Very small tree, grown only as a subject, as described in the article on cultivation. 2. JUNE CARMIN; medium-sized fruit, rounded, compressed at both ends, yellowish-green in a very small part on the shady side, bright carmine-red on the sunny side; greenish-white flesh, not very delicate, with a pleasant acidity. Ripens at the end of one month and the beginning of the next. A very vigorous and productive tree, it can be grafted onto a franc tree for full-wind conditions. Its earliness is its main merit. In July. 3. * CALViLLE D'ÉTÉ, pusse-pomme, large madeleine apple; medium-sized fruit, a little conical, with many small ribs around the eye, which is narrow and not very deep-set; leathery skin, dark red on the sunny side, pale in the shade; white or slightly reddish, pasty flesh, good for compote. Ripens at the beginning of the month. Mediocre tree, productive, grafted on doucin and paradis. In August. 4. ASTRACAN APPLE, transparent Muscovy, ice apple; fruit extraordinary for the transparency of its flesh, medium-sized, two inches long, wax-white; flesh very white, sweet, acidulous, mediocre. Ripens in the middle of the month. A delicate tree that Pon grafts onto doucin or paradis. 009 S. RED APPLE PASS; small, compressed, bright red, light fruit; white flesh, not very spicy, good for compote from July. Very productive tree, setting fruit early. 6. WHITE APPLE PASS; elongated, egg-shaped, pale green fruit with tender, almost tasteless flesh. It ripens and passes in the course of the month. A very vigorous tree, which can be grafted onto a franc; full wind. 7. * SUMMER POSTOPHE; medium-sized fruit, sometimes cylindrical, usually narrower at the top, pale red and reddish-brown on the sunny side; flesh grainy, often a little red under the skin, quite pleasant. Ripens at the end of the month. Very vigorous tree, suitable for full-wind conditions. 8. * MONTALIVET D'ÉTÉ; large, fairly compressed, yellowish-white fruit, with tender, sweet flesh, quite good. A vigorous tree, grafted on doucin and paradis. Introduced to France by M. Lelieur. In September. 9. * REINETTE JAUNE HATIVE; medium-sized fruit, a little more elongated than the golden reinette, with fairly even skin, light yellow speckled with brown; tender, mediocre flesh. Ripens around mid-month. Quite a vigorous tree. 10. RAMBOUR FRANC, gros rambour; very large, compressed fruit, with more prominent ribs on the eye side, pale green whipped or striped with red on the sunny side, slightly acidic flesh, well cooked. Ripens towards the end of the month. Robust and very productive. 11.* BELlE D'AOUT, beautiful flower; very large fruit, three inches in diameter, compressed, beautiful red slightly covered with glaucous dust; white flesh, tender, mildly acidic, pleasant. It ripens within a month and lasts only a fortnight. Very vigorous tree, grafted on doucin and paradis. October. 12. *. DES QUATRE COUTS; medium-sized, compressed fruit, green tinged with red on the sunny side; tender flesh, with a distinctive fragrance; quite good. Ripens at the end of the month and in November. Vigorous tree. 3008 13.* NOMPAREILLE APPLE; fruit very similar to the Canadian reinette, but a little smaller and less greenish-yellow. Ripens at the same time and has all its qualities. Quite a vigorous tree. 14. POMME DEUX cOUrs; medium-sized, ribbed, yellowish-white fruit with fine white flesh and very pleasant flavor. Ripens during the month. This apple was sent to me from Nantes by my brother. 15.* REINETTE DU CANADA; very large fruit, sometimes up to sixteen inches in circumference, very compressed, usually more swollen on one side than the other, slightly ribbed, pale green, very piquant, sometimes washing a little red on the sunny side; tender, grainy flesh, very good raw, better cooked. It ripens in the course of the month, but if you want to keep it until April, pick it a little before it ripens, towards the end of September. Very vigorous tree. 16. * CANADA GREY REINET; fruit a little smaller than the previous one, with firmer, more acid flesh, and longer shelf life. Same kind of tree as above. 17. * HOLLAND REINET; large, elongated, yellowish-white fruit with very white, acidic, firm flesh; quite good. Ripens at the beginning of the month and even in September. Very productive and vigorous tree. 18. TENDER REINEER, from Spain, or Spanish white; very long fruit, sometimes five inches long, white, slightly tinted pink on the sunny side, covered with a glaucous dust, like a plum; fine flesh, very pleasantly sweet acid, excellent. Ripens at the end of the month and keeps until March. Very vigorous tree, very successful in cattails when grafted on doucin, and especially on paradis. 19.* REINETTE ROUSSE, or Carmelite; medium-sized, compressed, russet-yellow fruit, with tender, sweetly acidic flesh. Ripens at the end of the month and keeps until November and December. Not a very vigorous tree, it can be grafted onto doucin and paradis. 20. * GROS PIGEONNET, Pigeonnet de Rouen; medium-sized fruit, turbinate, red, striped with darker red 0Ca on the sunny side, with very fine, white flesh, very pleasant taste. Ripens in the course of the month, and passes very quickly. Rather delicate tree. 21" POMME PETIT PIGEONNET; fruit similar to the previous one, except for volume. Ripens a little later. More delicate tree. 22. POIMIER DOUCIN; fruit quite beautiful, compressed, with protruding ribs on the eye side, light green, washed with red on the sun side; flesh white, sweet, mediocre, not much appreciated. Ripens during the month. Average tree, grown only as a subject for other varieties. 23. FENOUILLET JAUNE, drap d'or, apple of character; small fruit, beautiful yellow, marked with lines imitating letters, firm flesh, fragrant. It ripens at the end of the month, and keeps until February. Low tree, very productive. November. 24. REINETTE DE BRETAGNE; large fruit, bright red speckled with yellow, very beautiful; firm, sweet, slightly acidic flesh, very good. Ripens from the beginning of the month to December. Vigorous tree. 25. CUCUMBER APPLE; medium-sized fruit, very long, tender green, white flesh, pleasantly sweet acid. Mature during the month until January. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 26. LITTLE CUCUMBER APPLE; fruit similar in all respects to the preceding one, except that it is smaller in volume. Same kind of tree. 27. LARGE-FACE AMERICAN APPLE; very large, compressed fruit, green tinged with russet on the sunny side; tender flesh, sweet and pleasantly acidic, very good cooked. Ripens this month and next. Very vigorous tree, grafted on doucin and paradis. 28. AMERICAN MONSTER; very large fruit, somewhat irregular in shape, with greenish background almost entirely hidden by russet-gray spots; tender flesh, mildly acidic 2. 35,000, well cooked. Ripens during the month. Very vigorous tree, grafted on doucin and paradis. 29 "RED MALTRANCH APPLE; very large fruit, at least three inches in diameter, bright red and shiny; tender, fine flesh, pleasantly acidic. This beautiful fruit, which ripens in this month and in December, was sent to me from Nantes by my brother. 30. GROS PAPA; very large fruit, rather irregular in shape, green, slightly colored on the sunny side, with coarse flesh, mild acid, good for cooking. Ripens this month and next. A very vigorous and productive tree, grafted on doucin and paradis. Brought from Aniérique by Mr. Lelieur. 31. BELlE DU poIs; large, slightly short, yellowish-green fruit, sometimes lightly colored on the sunny side; white, fairly sweet flesh. Ripens from November to February. Quite a vigorous tree. 32.? CALVILLE ROUGE D'HIVER; very beautiful fruit, a little elongated, two or three inches high, dark red; flesh a little red, fine, grainy, vinous, very pleasant. Ripens at the end of one month and the beginning of the next. Very vigorous tree. 33. CALVILLE ROUGE NORMANDE; differs from the previous one in the deeper red of its skin, and in its almost entirely red flesh; it has the same qualities, ripens at the same time, but keeps until March. Same kind of tree. 34. † DENINED REINET; elongated, turbinate, bumpy fruit, green becoming yellowish as it ripens, with tender flesh, sweet acid, pleasant. It ripens during the month and keeps until January. This dwarf tree must be grafted onto paradise. In December. 35. * CALVILLlE BLANCHE, calville blanche d'hiver, bonnet carré, fruit very large, eye surrounded by bumps or very sharp ribs, pale yellow tending to green, flesh white, grainy, fine, spicy, very good. It ripens from the com2009 mence of the month, and keeps until April. Vigorous, productive tree. 36. CHESTNUT APPLE; medium-sized fruit, slightly elongated, spotted with red, whipped the same color on the sunny side; firm flesh, mediocre raw, excellent cooked. Ripens at the beginning of the month, sometimes in November. A vigorous tree that can be grafted onto franc; full wind. 37. * COEUR DE BOEUF; large, elongated, plain, purple-red fruit, lightly covered with glaucous dust; white flesh, lightly tinged with red, acidic, tender, good cooked. Ripens during the month and keeps until January. Very vigorous and productive tree. 38. CULOTTE DE SUISSE; medium-sized, elongated fruit, striped with yellow and green on a russet background; firm, white flesh, quite pleasantly acidic. Ripens during the month and keeps until January. Very vigorous tree, not very productive. 39. POMME-COING; large, elongated, irregular-shaped fruit, yellowish-green; tender, slightly acidic flesh. Ripens during the month. Very vigorous tree, not very productive. 40.* API; small, compressed, pale yellow fruit, bright cherry-red on the sunny side; firm flesh, mildly acidic, quite pleasant. Ripens during the month and keeps until April. Small tree, grafted on doucin and paradis; on franc it is subject to canker. 41. API NOIR; differs from the previous variety by its dark brown to black color; fruit more compressed, with a few small ribs, larger, but of lesser quality. Ripens at the same time and keeps less than the other. Smaller tree. 42. * DOUBLE API, star apple, beautiful girl; fruit small, very compressed, noticeably divided into five ribs, with plain, yellow skin, orange-red on the sunny side; flesh firm, a little yellow and coarse, acid. Ripens during the month and keeps until June. Quite a vigorous tree. 43. T GROS API, rose apple; medium-sized fruit, very compressed, hard-skinned, red, cherry-red, very dark on the sunny side, or marbled with red and yellow 006 all over; very white flesh, less firm and less pleasant than that of the api. Ripens at the same time and keeps longer. Medium-sized, fairly vigorous tree. 44. POHME NOIRE; very-small, compressed fruit, with smooth, shiny skin, purple-brown speckled with very-small yellow dots, almost black on the sunny side; white flesh, slightly tinged with red under the skin, almost tasteless. Ripens during the month and keeps for a long time. 45. * FENOUILLET CRIS, aniseed; small fruit, rough to the touch, gray, compressed, with sweet, dry, aniseed-scented flesh. It ripens during the month and keeps until March. A delicate, low-growing, highly productive tree. Grafts on doucin and paradis. 46 " POMME-D'OR, drap d'or; it has often been confused with the yellow fennel, but its fruit is slightly larger, lougier and slightly acidic. The fruit is a beautiful golden yellow, finely dotted and sometimes slightly tinged with red on the sunny side. It ripens during the month and keeps until March. A delicate tree, very productive on doucin and paradis. 47. PICEON, pigeon heart, Jerusalem; small fruit, swollen at the base, elongated at the top, with thin, shiny, light yellow skin, dark pink with a few red spots on the sunny side; flesh fine, grainy, white, firm, slightly acid, fragrant, very-delicate and very-good. Ripens during the month and keeps until February. Vigorous, productive tree. 48. COURT PENDU; medium-sized fruit, extraordinarily short-tailed, rounded, with very dark skin on the sunny side; excellent cooked flesh. Ripens during the month. A vigorous, productive tree, grown in the open air. 49. DE FINALE; medium-sized, turbinate, slightly long, yellowish-green fruit; tender, sweet, very pleasantly acidic flesh. Ripens from December to February. Medium-sized tree, ascez productive. 50. DE MER; very large fruit, almost as wide as it is high, with a beautiful red color. Ripens during the month, a little earlier, a little later, depending on exposure and the nature of the tree; very cultivated around Nantes. Very vigorous and highly productive. 51. PRINCESSE NOBLE REINET APPLE; large, elongated fruit, narrower at the top, yellowish-green, red-striped on the sunny side; tender flesh, sweet and pleasantly acidic. Ripens during the month until December. Very vigorous tree. 52. GROS rAROS; medium-sized, compressed, red fruit: a little striped with darker red; white flesh, fairly firm, with a mild, pleasant acidity. Ripens during the month. Large, very productive tree, grafted onto franc for full-wind conditions. 53. PETIT rAROS; fruit similar to the previous one, but more elongated and turbid. Ripens at the same time and has the same qualities. Same type of tree. 54. REINETTE FRANCATU; large, compressed, grayish-green fruit, tinged with red on the sunny side, with firm, very acidic flesh. Ripens during the month and keeps until February. A very vigorous and productive tree. 55. "REINETTE D'ANGLETERRE; large fruit, nearly three inches high, appearing a little elongated, regular, without noticeable ribs, of a beautiful yellow whipped with red; yellowish-white flesh, firm, sweet, quite spicy. Ripens in the course of the month and ripens very quickly. Very vigorous, very productive tree. 56. T REINETTE DORÉE, russet, late yellow; medium-sized fruit, a little compressed, with rough, dull golden-yellow skin, speckled with light gray, sometimes washed with red on the sunny side; firm, fine, sweet, slightly acid flesh. Ripens during the month and early autumn. Quite a delicate tree, very productive on doucin and paradis. 57. * REINETTE DE CAUX; very large, slightly turbid, irregular fruit, beautiful yellow, with pleasantly sweet acidic flesh. Ripens at the end of the month and keeps until February. Very tall, very productive tree. 58. 7 REINETTE GRISE DE GRANVILLE; medium-sized, comHG primed, grayish-yellow fruit, a little reddish on the sunny side, with tender, elastic, yellowish-white, pleasantly acidic flesh. Ripens during the month and keeps until February. Quite a vigorous tree. 59. SWEET ATROCHET APPLE; large, turbinate fruit with plain green skin; firm, greenish-white flesh, almost fragranceless. Ripens during the month and keeps until February. Vigorous, productive tree. 60. PETIT DOUX; differs from the previous variety only in volume; otherwise, same quality and ripening time. 61 "WINTER POSTOPHE"; large, compressed, slightly ribbed fruit, light red, dark cherry red on the sunny side, sometimes yellow in the shade, smooth, shiny, firm flesh, slightly yellowish, very sweet acid, quite pleasant. Ripens at the end of the month and keeps until May. Very vigorous tree, quite productive when grafted on franc. 62. WINTER RANBOUR; very large, very compressed, slightly humped, whitish-green fruit, yellow on the sunny side; tender, greenish-white flesh, a little pungent. Ripens from December to January. A very vigorous, very productive tree, which can be trained in the open; full wind. 63. DOUX D'ANGERS; medium-sized fruit, rounded, a little turbinate, yellowish-green, russet on the sunny side; white flesh, very sweet acid. It ripens during the month until February. This fruit, highly esteemed and cultivated in the Angers area, was sent to us by M. Gendron. 64. GROS BONDY; medium-sized, compressed, yellowish-green fruit with firm flesh and a fairly pronounced acidity. Ripens during the month and in February. This very vigorous tree, which can be grafted onto franc, has a variety with smaller fruit. 65. ROUCE-FEUILLAGE; medium-sized, compressed fruit, striped with red and dark green; firm, very acidic, greenish-white flesh. Ripens from December to February. Very vigorous, productive, but alternate. 1008 In January. 66. "PONNERAUTE-BONTÉ, high-bonté gray rœïnette; large, rounded fruit, compressed at the base, yellowish-green barely blushing on the sunny side, with fine, tender, greenish-white flesh, pleasantly acidic. Ripens in this month and in March. Quite a vigorous and very productive tree. 69.* REINRTTE GRISE DE CHAMPACNE; medium-sized, very compressed, gray-skinned doe-bellied fruit, whipped or striped with red on the sunny side; firm flesh, not very fragrant, sweet, pleasant. Ripens during the month and keeps until the end of January. A delicate, fairly productive tree, which can be grafted onto doucin and paradiz. 68. A LA VÉRTTÉ BLANCHE; medium-sized, turbinate fruit, green tinged with red on the sunny side; firm, greenish-white, very acidic flesh. Ripens until May. A very productive tree, whose merit lies in the abundance and certainty of its harvests. 69. * REINEITE GRISE BEO DE- LIÈVRE; elongated fruit, furrowed at the top, medium size, white flesh, fairly firm, sweet and pleasantly acidic. Ripens from the beginning of the month to March. Very vigorous tree, grafted on franc. 70, BELLE DE SÉNAR; small fruit, the most compressed of all, green with grayish streaks, yellowish flesh, firm, very acid, but pleasant. Ripens during the month until April. A vigorous, very productive tree, found by my father in 1789 in the Sénar forest. 71.* MONTALIVET; very large, yellowish-white fruit, fairly irregular in shape; tender, fairly fine flesh, mildly acidic, pleasant. Ripens during the month into January. A very vigorous and productive tree, it can be grafted onto doucin and paradis. This variety was brought from America by Mr. Lelieur. In February. 72. VIOLET DES QUATRE cOUrS; medium-sized, rounded, purplish-red fruit with greenish-white flesh, firm, very8 JARDIN TRUITIER, acidic, well cooked. Ripens during the month. Quite vigorous and very productive. 73.* POMME FENOUILLET ROUCE, bardin, azerolly; fruit small, rounded, gray-skinned, almost entirely covered with red variegation, rough to the touch; flesh firm, fine, no acidity, sweet, a little musky. Ripens in February and March. Small tree, not very vigorous, very productive. 74.* REINETTE ROUGE; medium-sized fruit, slightly elongated, shiny, yellow and pitted, washed with red on the sunny side; flesh a little yellow, firm, acidulous, wrinkling a lot as it ripens. Delicate tree, fairly productive. 75. PETITE REINETTE ROUCE; a variety of the preceding one, differing only in the size of the fruit. 76. REINETTE BLANCHE, or Spanish reinette; medium-sized, pale yellow fruit, swollen at the base, with tender, white flesh and a pleasantly sweet acidity. Ripens during the month. Vigorous, productive tree. 77. T REINETTE FRANCHE; fruit variable in shape and size, usually medium-sized, rounded, a little elongated, ribbed or plain, light green speckled with gray, sometimes washed with a little red on the sunny side, yellowing and wrinkling a lot when ripe; flesh white, firm, sweet, spicy, very pleasant. This apple, the most prized of all, keeps until June. Quite a vigorous and productive tree, especially on paradise. 78. JUNE FLOWER; medium-sized, turbinate fruit, green tinged with pale red; tender flesh, acerbic flavor when not very ripe. A very productive tree, whose fruit is brought to the market by farmers around Paris, to be sold in March and April under the name of reinette: it is grown on franc; plein-vent, 79. COURT PENDU ROSE, capendu rose; small, compressed fruit, tinted pink on the sunny side, with firm, white flesh and a pleasant, sweet acidity. Ripens from this month to the end of March. A fairly vigorous, productive tree. Can be grafted onto franc; full wind. March. 80. PONRE FIGUE SANS PEPIN, Adam's apple; small, oval, yellow fruit speckled with pale red, with firm, very acid flesh. Ripens during the month. Quite vigorous tree, not very productive, giving flowers without corolla. 81. AUCUBA LEAF APPLE; fruit similar to chestnut apple, large, more elongated, with firmer, more acidic flesh. Ripens during the month. A very vigorous tree, it is grafted onto franc. We still have quite a number of new varieties of knife apples, but as we have not yet been able to verify their descriptions, we have omitted them to avoid duplication. Here is a list of the best cider apples. Muscadet tardif; small, excellent fruit (this must be understood in terms of cider quality); - rouge-bruyère; medium fruit, good for the last season; - de paradis; small fruit; - dure-verte; medium fruit; - bedanne; fairly large, good, long-lasting fruit; - rouge duret; medium fruit, very good; - pomme de suie; very bitter, good fruit; - de rétat; highly-rated fruit; very productive tree; - de Dieppe; beautiful, good fruit: - belle fille; medium fruit, good; - de Paris; second-season fruit; - belle jeannc; - peau de vache; fairly large fruit, late, good; - de relet; large fruit, excellent, second-season; - de melon; medium fruit; - de binet; - d'orange; medium-sized fruit, good; - sonnette; - gros œuf d'août; medium-sized fruit, good; - amerdoux; large fruit, poor quality; - germaine; medium-sized fruit, late, good; - Maillot; good fruit, even for knives, long-lasting; - long-pommier. CULTIVATION. Apple trees like open, strong, soft, slightly cool soil, which need not be very deep. In sand, clay or chalk, they do very poorly. They multiply by seed, offshoots and grafting. When you want to sow, the choice of seedlings is not indifferent; for it is on this choice that depends the greater or lesser vigor and elevation of the trees that you graft onto the subjects they provide. See what we say about this on page 245. Depending on how strong and tall you want your trees to be, you should choose: 1° wild fruit peeps, if you can't find wild ones in the forests; 2° cider fruit peeps; 3° knife fruit peeps. These first three seedlings are often given the name "francs". 4° doucin seedlings or offshoots; 5° paradis seedlings or offshoots. In all cases, they are sown and cultivated in the nursery in exactly the same way as pear trees, with the slight difference that they are ploughed less deeply, because their roots extend further into the earth. When young trees are planted, after they have been grafted, they are spaced thirty to forty feet apart, depending on whether the soil is mediocre or good, and whether the tree is grafted on sauvageon, egin or franc. Counter-palms, half-stems, etc., grafted on doucin, are planted from twelve to twenty feet; cattails, pyramids, from six to ten; finally, paradises from four to five. In light, hot soils, doucin-grafted trees are preferred, as the roots of this species sink deeper than those of paradise, and are therefore less prone to drying out during hot, rainless summers. As for exposure, apple trees are not dissimilar; they do equally well in the north, east and west, in the lowest and coolest locations; however, they fear hot exposures in the south of France, and even in the climate of Paris. They are pruned and trained as described on page 245 ff. Every year, they are given a shallow ploughing so as not to injure the roots, and every three or four years, the soil covering their first roots by five or six inches is removed and replaced by another in which a well-consumed fertilizer, analogous to the nature of the soil, has been mixed. Although this tree is rather afraid of amputations, when it is old and starting to dry out at the end of its branches, you can prolong its life by a few years, by cutting it back to near its trunk. It is very susceptible to insects, decay and cankers, and in these different circumstances, it is treated as we said in our first volume in the article Plant diseases. DOMESTIC SORBER, CORMY ( Sorbus domestica; L.). b. Native. This precious tree, unfortunately all too neglected, usually reaches a height of forty to fifty feet, and much more in soils well suited to it. Its fruit, called corme or sorbe, is picked in autumn; it is stored on straw and eaten when it is soft. Fermentation produces a cider that is stronger than apple cider, but cannot be preserved. In Sweden, it is used to make a liqueur that replaces wine. Mountain ash wood is heavy, tight, hard as horn, and takes on a superb polish. It is much sought-after by turners, carpenters, cartwrights, óbénistes, wood engravers, gunsmiths and carpenter-mechanics. The latter use it to make wheel teeth, lantern spindles, and generally all machine parts exposed to the greatest friction. Its branches make a beautiful black dye. Five varieties are known. 1° The SORBIER FRANC, which grows spontaneously on the edge of woods; it becomes very large, and its wood is one of the best, but the fruit is very small. 2° The SORDIERA FRUIT PYRIFORME, whose slightly larger fruit is shaped like a small pear. 1 3° The SORBIER A FRUIT OVALE; its fruit is more elongated, egg-shaped. 4° The SORDIER A PETIT FRUIT ROUGE; fruit very-small, fibrous, late, of a bad taste, very acerbic like those of the three preceding." 5° The SORBIER A GROS FRUIT BOUCE; the fruits of this one are much bigger, earlier, less acerbic and better than those of the preceding ones. GROWING. Sorb trees like open, light, cool soil, with a sunny or south-facing exposure. They do wonderfully well in fields, vineyards, paddocks and semi-cultivated areas, such as roadsides, hedges, etc. Perhaps the reason for abandoning their cultivation is that they are extremely slow-growing, and hardly bear fruit before they have been planted for thirty years: this long wait is incompatible with the impatience for pleasure and egoism that characterize our century. They are propagated from seedlings sown in nurseries, and governed absolutely like those of pear trees, and the replants are even less afraid of transplanting. They set perfectly, even when the stems have already reached three or four inches in diameter, which means they can be planted when they are already old, and therefore enjoyment can be greatly accelerated. They produce even earlier if you decide to graft them at the top of the stem, so as not to damage the quality of the wood. To graft them, use the same procedures as for pear trees, i.e. methods n° 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 10. NÉFLIER, MESPLIER, MESLIER. ( Mespilus germanica; L.) B. Grows naturally in hedgerows in France and Germany. Its fruit, which varies in size depending on the variety, is bitter and acerbic until it reaches the chard stage, at which point it acquires sweetness and becomes very pleasant. There are several varieties. Oe 1° NÉTLIERA FRUIT SANS PEPINS; singular fruit, but small and of mediocre quality. 2° A FRUIT PRÉCOCE; fruit of mediocre size, ripening long before the others. 3° A FRUFT LONG; oval, medium-sized fruit. 4° A GROSS FRUIT ROUND; very large fruit, the best and most cultivated of all. CULTIVATION. Medlars do very well in any soil, provided it is not too marshy, and at any exposure. However, they become larger and more productive in warm, free limestone soils. They require almost no special cultivation, apart from the care mentioned on page 251. They can be propagated 1° from seed, but this takes a long time, as they take two years to germinate; 2° from marcottes, which are only used for ornamental species; 3° from slit grafts, nos. 5, 6 and 8, or from escutcheon grafts, nos. 1, 2, 3 and 108, on hawthorn, medlar, quince and pear trees. Their fruits are picked at the beginning of October, and placed in a dry place on straw, where they ripen. BIBACIER, JAPANESE NEPLAR. (Mespilus japonica; THUNB.) B. From China. Shrub hardly reaching eight to ten feet in height. Its leaves are large, oval, elongated and cottony on top; it flowers in May, and produces a yellow, slightly hairy fruit, shaped like a small medlar, which is very pleasant to eat. This medlar tree fears the cold, especially when spawned. Grafted from hawthorn using the same procedures as the previous variety, it has withstood the winters of the Paris climate quite well, at least for the last five years. It is planted in light, warm soil, against a wall facing south, and is stocked during the cold season. Its vegeta908 tion is very beautiful, which means it can be pruned regularly in espaliers. It can be propagated from seeds sown in light soil and terrine as soon as they reach maturity, and placed in the orangery during the off-season. They germinate the following spring, and all that's left for the young plant to do is to take the usual care of greenhouse shrubs. AZEROOT, NAPLES MEDLAR, SPANISH THORN. (Mespilus azarolus; L.) b. Native to southern France. Third-generation tree. Blooms in May, and in autumn gives a fruit of rather mediocre quality, called ponsmette. Several varieties are available. I° WITH LONG FRUIT. 2° WITH RED FRUITS. 3° WITH YELLOW FRUIT. CULTIVATION. This tree is grown in the same way as the medlar; it can be propagated from seed, or by grafting onto hawthorn, quince or medlar. It prefers light, warm soil and a southern exposure if its fruit is to be edible. HORSETAIL (Cratœgus) 6. We grow several species of this genus, whose fruit is edible and even has a flavor that pleases many people, but only when they have been left to ripen perfectly on straw, otherwise they are harmful. These trees provide a very hard, supple, bindable and tough wood, capable of receiving a very fine polish; it is therefore sought after by turners, sculptors and mechanics. 1° ALISIER TERMINAL, allouchier des bois (Cratœgus terminalis; L.) Native; red, rounded, cherry-sized fruit; twenty-foot tree with taproots. 2° ALISIER BLANC, allouchier (Cratœegus aria; L.) Native; red, rounded fruit, about the same size as the preceding one; straight tree, twenty-five or thirty feet tall. It has given rise to a long-leaved variety known as Allouchier de Bourgogne, whose fruits differ little. 3° ALISIER DE FONTA!NEBLEAU (Cratœegus latifolia; ExcYcL.) Native; orange-red fruits, slightly larger and longer than the preceding ones. Twenty-five to thirty feet tall. 4° ALISIER AMELANCHIER (Cratœgus amelanchier; H. P. Cratœgus rotundisolia; Exeycl.) Native; blackish-blue fruit, smaller, of even poorer quality. An eight- to nine-foot shrub that also grows in Sumatra, whose inhabitants eat the fruit, which they call gamomong. CULTIVATION. Alisiers do well in all types of soil, but prefer open, light soil and an open, airy, northerly exposure. They can be propagated from seed, offshoots, marcottes and by grafting onto hawthorn. To sow, stratify the seeds, and if you want them all to sprout at once, leave them in the sand for eighteen months. For the rest, it is grown in the same way as medlar. SIXTH DIVISION. Berry-shaped fruit with more or less liquid pulp. MURIER (Morus) 6. Trees of this genus are highly cultivated, but more for their leaves, which are fed to silkworms, than for their fruits, which are nevertheless quite pleasant. Most are dioecious, i.e. the male flowers are on one individual and the female flowers on another. Their cultivation in France dates back only to the reign of Charles IX. Mulberry wood is yellow, fairly hard and suitable for various lathe and engraving work. By rolling the young stems like hemp, we extract from the bark a coarse filasse Pe. suitable for making ropes. There are several species and a large number of varieties, but they differ only in the quality of the leaves for feeding silkworms. 1° MurieR BLaNc. (Morus alba; L.) From Asia Minor. A vigorous, tall tree with small, sweet, slightly bland white fruit, much sought-after by poultry. Silkworms in particular are fed on the leaves of this species. - 2° ITALIAN MULBERRY. (Morus italica; ENCYCL.) A taller, more vigorous tree than the previous one, with larger, white fruit of the same flavor. The pink-fruited Italian mitrier is an interesting variety; its fruit is smaller, but a little less sweet. 3° MUriEr BLANC D'ESPAGNE; a very vigorous tree, with broad leaves; fruit slightly larger than the previous variety, but of the same quality. 4° BLACK MURDER (Morus nigra; L.) From Asia Minor. Twenty-five to thirty-foot tree, with very large, black, pleasant fruit, ripe from July to September. 5° RED MULBERRY. (Morus ruba; L.) From North America. Tree from forty to fifty feet tall, with fairly large, slightly dark red fruit, pleasant to the taste. We have two new varieties from China, but we don't yet know the fruit. CULTIVATION. We must warn our readers that we are considering the mulberry here only in terms of its fruit, and not at all in terms of its leaves. Those wishing to raise silkworms will find sufficient works to consult, if they wish to learn about the mulberry varieties to be preferred for this kind of industry, and the particular care to be given to the trees. Mulberry trees like strong, moist, warm soil; however, they do quite well in all, and especially in yards, rubble and upturned ground. They can be propagated by seed, cuttings or layers, the latter being the quickest and most widely used method. For sowing, we choose the most beautiful blackberries that have been fertilized, as the others, sometimes larger and always more pleasant to eat, contain no seeds. We extract the seeds by crushing them with our hands in a vase full of water, and sow them in spring in good, well-disturbed soil. The same care is given as to ordinary sowing, until the young plants are strong enough to be transported to the nursery, which usually happens in the second or third year; they are placed there in spring, and the following year they can be grafted in slit by procedures n° 5, 6, 8; in escutcheon, n°e 2, 3, 108, and in flute, n° 6, 63, 64, 65 and 113. When they have reached a suitable size, i.e. when their stems have grown from two and a half to four inches in circumference, they are placed in any exposure, but best sheltered from north winds and in half-sun; all that remains is to give them the care mentioned on page 269. Cuttings are taken in spring, using wood from the previous year, in light, cool soil in the shade. They are given some watering, but only to maintain the freshness of the soil, and not enough to expose them to rot. When they are restarted, they are treated in the same way as nursery stock. They can be pruned in the same season, either by strangling them in the usual way, or by cutting them off at ground level and staking them, as we did for quince pruning. PAPER MULBERRY. (Morus paprrifera; L. Broussonetia papyrifera; WillD.) 6. From China. In Japan, where this tree is widely cultivated, the bark of its branches is used to make a paper strong enough to cover the parasols used by 2. 36 its inhabitants. In Louisiana, the young shoots are selected, retted and spun into yarn, which is used by women to make cloth. In any case, the broussone tree grows faster than mulberry trees, is no more sensitive to the cold, and succeeds perfectly in warm, light and even sandy soils. Its leaves are also used as silkworm food. They have the peculiarity of taking on completely different shapes: some are whole, others lobed, digitized, indented, as if eaten away, etc. Its fruits are globular, formed by the aggregation of small, sweet, pleasant berries, which pull away from the receptacle when ripe, and hang there by a small net. They ripen in September. This tree multiplies by seed, sprouts and offspring. It is grown in exactly the same way as the mulberry tree. A male must be placed next to the female if fertile seeds are to be collected. For some years now, we've been growing a new variety with hooded leaves, whose fruit we haven't yet seen. COMMON ARBUS, of the Prrenaea family, strawberry tree. (Arbutus unedo; L.) b. Indigenous. Evergreen shrub, twelve to fifteen feet tall, with white, bell-shaped, fragrant flowers appearing from July to January. They are followed by round, hanging berries of a beautiful red when ripe, somewhat resembling large strawberries. They are good to eat, and are known as arbouses. This charming shrub likes open, light soil and north-west exposure. In its youth, it is rather delicate and somewhat afraid of frost in the Paris climate; it is therefore best to protect it with dry leaves and litter, or even by placing it in a pot or orangery close to the sun for the first three or four years. It can be propagated by seed, sprouts and cuttings. As soon as the seeds are ripe, sow them in a terrine on a warm bed. When the seedling is an inch or two old, transplant it into a pot and leave it there until it is strong enough to be planted in the ground. THE ALPINE SHRUB, (arbutus alpina; L.), is a creeping sub-shrub that grows in the Pyrenees, the Alps, Siberia and Lapland. Inhabitants of Lapland feed on its fruits, which are almost identical to those of the previous species. It is grown in the same way, but is much more delicate and difficult to preserve in the Paris climate. The IRELAND SHRUB, (arbutus andrachne; L. ), is a shrub of fifteen to twenty feet, with red fruit, firmer than the former, with less prominent seeds; its quality is even more mediocre. It is grown in the same way, and seems to us to be even more robust. RASPBERRY (Rubus) 6. This genus offers more or less thorny shrubs, whose excellent fruit, ripening in July, rivals the strawberry for fragrance and flavor. There are several species and varieties. 1° FRANBOISIEA ROUGE CONUR (rubus idœus; L.); small, very sweet fruit. It has given us the following varieties: a. Large-fruited red raspberry; fruit larger than that of the preceding species, sweet, fragrant, excellent. We brought it from Holland. b. Raspberry with large, flesh-colored fruit; larger, better fruit, very plump and never lacking in flavor. We obtained this precious variety from seedlings of the previous one. c. Alpine raspberry, available every month; pedunculated, red, very good fruit. Darbrisseau produces twice, in spring and autumn. 908 d. Raspberry with white fruit. The fruit differs from that of the common raspberry only in color; it is a little less fragrant. e. Raspberry with amber-white fruit; fruit much larger and better than that of the preceding variety, tending slightly to yellow. GROWING. Raspberries thrive in all types of soil, although they prefer light, cool, shady soils, in which they are grown as described on page 269. They can be propagated from seed if you wish to obtain new varieties, in which case they are sown like mulberries. More commonly, we use the numerous offshoots that grow at the base of the tree to propagate them. These are detached from the stumps, and planted from November to February or March, depending on climate and temperature. These shrubs have the disadvantage of crumbling and considerably exhausting the soil, to the point of harming neighboring plants and themselves. They therefore need to be moved every four or five years, otherwise they degenerate, the fruits shrink and diminish considerably in number. It's true that you could leave them in place by changing the soil or breaking it up deeply to put the soil underneath back on top, and giving them fertilizer; but then the raspberries lose some of their fragrance. Every year, they are given a shallow ploughing. In England, raspberry cultivation is very important, and is carried out as follows: raspberry bushes are planted in rows five feet apart, with the clumps three feet apart, and are raised against a strong stake around which they are tied in sheaves. Preference is given to varieties a and b. HEDGE RONCES (rubus fruticosus: L.), BLUE RASPBERRIES (rubus cœsius; L.) and their thornless, curly and multiflorous varieties produce fruit similar to raspberries, but with blackish pulp, firmer and more acidic. They are used to color wines, and alcohol is distilled from them. We've brought back this latest and newest variety from England. These spiny, creeping shrubs are cultivated like raspberries. ROSEMARY (rubus rosœfolius, HORT. PARIS.), from China, is a pretty little shrub, two to three feet tall, whose fruits are large like those of the common raspberry, but brighter red and with a much less pleasant flavor. Same cultivation, but needs to be sheltered with a little bedding in harsh winters. LOTOS OR ITALIAN PLAQUEMIN, (Diosprros Lotus; L.) b. Oriental. This tree, twenty-five or thirty feet high, with very beautiful green foliage, flowers in June and July. Its flowers are followed by a soft fruit, the size and color of a wild plum, with a mild, sweet, pleasant taste. THE VIRGINIA PLAQUEMIN ( diospyros virginiana; L.), grows higher than the preceding one; its fairly large, slightly elongated fruit is yellowish and transparent. THE KAKI PLAQUEMIN (diospyros Kaki; L. F.), from Japan; produces fruits called figs -Kakes, of a beautiful cherry red color and excellent flavor. It is unfortunate that this tree cannot withstand our winters around Paris, where it must be kept in orangeries. In the south of France, it could be grown in the open ground. CULTIVATION. Plaqueminiers are not difficult to grow, but they do require clean, light, cool soil. The first likes a southern exposure, the second a northern one. All three are propagated from seed, which is sown as soon as ripe like mulberry 908, but in a terrine with a warm layer; from marcottes by strangulation, and by approaching grefse in the case of Virginia. The rest of their cultivation is unremarkable. VINE (Vitis vinifera, L.) D. Native to Asia. We won't go into detail here on the history of this precious shrub, nor on the uses to which the grape is put; suffice it to say that, according to Strabo and Justin, it was the Phocaean colonies that brought the vine with them when they came to found the city of Marseille, and that it soon spread from southern Gaul to all other parts where it could be cultivated. We would also like to point out to our readers that France is the country where wine is best for the ordinary purposes of life. In warmer climates, grapes provide only a spirituous, very heady liquor, of which only a very small quantity can be drunk without danger. A considerable number of grape varieties are cultivated in vineyards for their usefulness. So as not to go too far afield, we'll only talk about those grown in gardens for table use. A. WHITE GRAPES. 1. CHASGELAS DE FONTAINEBLEAU, golden, Champagne grape; the most highly esteemed for table use; large, elongated, loose bunches, with round, loosely-packed berries of varying size, light green or yellowish, slightly shaded towards the sun, with soft, sweet pulp. It ripens in late September and early October, and keeps for a very long time. 2. CHASSELAS DE BAR-SUR-AUBE; stronger bunches, but looser, with larger, compressed berries, same color, firm pulp, soft, sweet, pleasant, ripening fifteen days earlier than Chasselas de Fontainebleau, which gave it preference in Brunoy gardens. It is more prone to run. 3. CHASSELAS CIOUTAT, an Austrian variety, differs from Chasselas de Fontainebleau only in its laciniate leaves, and in its bunches, which are smaller, less plentiful, and of the same quality as Chasselas de Fontainebleau. A. CHASSELAS MUSQUÉ; bunches closer together than Chasselas de Fontainebleau, with round, slightly compressed berries, less large, yellowish-white, less transparent; sweet, slightly musky pulp. 5. PETIT CHASSELAS HATIT; elongated, loose bunches, with small, whitish berries, less colorful than Chasselas; soft pulp, not very spicy, a little bland. 6. BLANC DOUX; fairly elongated, compound bunches, with small, light-white berries, liquid pulp, sweet, not very tasty. Quite early and very productive. 7. PANSE MUSQUEE; long, compound, loose bunches, with oval berries, swollen in the middle, transparent white, revealing whiter veins; very firm pulp, good in warm years. 8. Muscar Blanc, or Frontignan grape; medium bunch, elongated, narrow, ending in a rounded point; very tight, hard, crunchy berries, green to dark yellow on the sunny side, bluish-white pulp, very musky. It ripens with difficulty in the Paris area, especially if you don't take the precaution of removing the tightly packed seeds. 9. MUSCAT D'ALEXANDRIE, musky long-pass; very large, stalky, elongated bunches, with large, oval berries, nearly an inch long, light green with a slight shadow, hard, musky and pleasant. It rarely ripens around Paris, unless it is in a very warm location. 10. JERICHO or Promised Land grape; compound bunches of considerable length (said to be from twenty-four to thirty inches), with berries far apart, oval in shape, white; sweet pulp. It does not ripen well in the 7000 climate of Paris. This curious variety deserves to be grown in greenhouses. 11. CORINTHE BLANC; fairly large, elongated, very tight bunches; round, small, yellowish-white berries; sweet, melting, seedless pulp, very pleasant. Ripens in September. 12. VERDAL; large bunches; very large, russet-green berries; soft, sweet, fragrant pulp; excellent. In the Paris area, it ripens only in very warm years. 13. MORILLON BLANC; composite bunches, slightly elongated, with loosely-packed, rounded, medium-sized berries, whitish-green in color, with soft, sweet pulp. 14. PEARLED GRAPE; sparsely packed bunches with very green stalks; berries of variable size, usually small, oval, pale green, with soft, sweet pulp. 15. MORNAIN BLANc or mornan, mornanche; very similar to chasselas de Fontainebleau. Its berries are rounded, pale yellow, more or less reddish on the sunny side, with a soft, very pleasant pulp. It ripens easily, even north of Paris. 16. GOUAIS; fairly large bunches, with rounded, greenish-yellow berries, and abundant, not very tasty, liquid pulp. 17. GRISET BLANC; small, irregular, tight bunches with round, grayish-green berries; soft, sweet, fragrant, very pleasant pulp. 18. MEUNIER; bunches short, thick, tight, with large, round berries, very pale yellow. Pulp soft, sweet, pleasant. 19. VERJUS, bordelais, bourdelas; composite bunches, often extremely large, fairly tightly packed; oval berries, slightly more rounded at the top, large, yellowish-green, with firm, greenish-white pulp. It rarely ripens, so it is used only in green for cooking. 20. CORNICHON BLANC; long, loosely-packed bunches; very long berries, large towards the middle of their length, amiucis and a little curved at the top and base, giving them the shape of gherkins, yellowish-white, 4009 with a soft, sweet, very pleasant pulp; it needs a good harvest to reach full ripeness. 21. SAINT-PIERRE; large, tight bunches, round berries, yellowish-white; soft, sweet pulp, very good. B. VARIEGATED GRAPES. 22. RAISIN D'ALEP; medium-sized, loosely-packed bunches; white, black and variegated grapes of both colors on the same bunch; liquid pulp, not very fragrant. 23. CHASSELAS PANACRÉ; long, loose bunches, with small, whitish berries, variegated with red; pulp soft, sweet, a little bland. C. BLACK CURRANTS. 24. PRECOCE DE LA MADELEINE, July grape; small, tight cluster, small, rounded oval berries, black violet, very covered with glaucous dust; greenish pulp, not very sweet. The fruit's merit lies in its ripening in July and August. 25. CHASSELAS ROUGE; it differs from Chasselas de Fontainebleau in the color of its berries, which are red as soon as formed, and in that it is not musky. 26. VIOLET MUSCAT; elongated bunch of very tightly packed, russet-purple berries; semi-firm, sweet, fragrant, very good pulp. It ripens perfectly only in hot summers. 27. MUSCAT ROUCE; bunches slightly less elongated and less tightly packed than Muscat Blanc; rounded berries, brick-red or pale in the shade, purple-purple in the sunlight; sweet, musky pulp. 28. MUSCAT NOIR; elongated, narrow, loosely-packed bunches; small, round berries, black or dark purple, covered with glaucous dust; reddish pulp next to the skin, not very musky. 29. VIOLET CORNISHON; fruit similar to the white corniccon, but violet seeds, sometimes greenish towards the head. Ripens with greater difficulty in the Paris area. 30. CORINTHE VIOLET; fruit similar to white corinth, O08 but with slightly larger, light purple berries; also seedless. 31. BOURGUIGNOR ROIR; small, shortened, tight bunches with dark red raste; oval, dark red bunches. 32. PINTAU FLEURI DE LA CÔTX D'OR; medium-sized bunches; oval, black berries, fairly tightly packed, covered with a glaucous dust, liquid pulp, soft, sweet, fragrant. 33. TEINTURIER; short, slightly tight bunches, dark violet-red berries; same-colored pulp. This grape is used to color wines. 34. FRANCONIE A FRUIT LONG; long, loose, compound bunches; long, black berries, very covered with glaucous dust, with hard skin, white pulp and large seeds; mediocre quality in the Paris climate, where ripening is difficult. 35. PETIT CAMÉ ROUCE; small, slightly elongated, very square bunches, not very dark violet-red, with round, medium-sized pips; soft, not very sweet pulp. 36. VERJUS VIOLET DU JURA; composite bunches, very large, with tight, round, slightly compressed berries; pulp sweeter than in white verjuice. There are nearly six hundred varieties of grapes grown in vineyards; we have chosen from this list those we consider most suitable for growing and nurturing in gardens, to provide dessert fruit. CULTIVATION. The vine is unique in that in every province, every département, one might even say in every village, it is cultivated using specific methods that differ from one to the next. The result is that authors, considering as the best the methods of the country they have lived in or loved the most, have adopted them without further information, have recommended them as the only really good ones, and, for this ralson, have all contradicted each other. We do not believe, as they do, that vines should * - - - - - 1 - 4 4 - - P - 7 VINEYARDS. 571 be cultivated in the same way in all countries; we even believe that experience has taught each one the practices best suited to the quality of the soil, the usual temperature and the influences of the climate. Ask an Italian why he raises his vines twenty or thirty feet around the trunk of a tree; ask an inhabitant of the south of France why he raises them five or six feet on stilts; ask the inhabitants of Paris why they keep them as close to the ground as they can; they will all answer that experience has taught them these methods, but not one of them will deduce the physical reasons we have given on page 266. From this, and from the observations we have made in all the parts of Europe we have visited, we have concluded that wherever the vine has been cultivated for a long time, it is done in a way that is advantageous to the locality, and that experience is the best teacher. We do not claim, however, that its cultivation cannot be further perfected, but that this perfection will result in each country from observations made on the spot, by the most intelligent indigenous cultivators, and not from the multitude of books in which authors, who often lack the first notions of the laws of vegetation, devise new practices. Consequently, we leave to the estimable men who, in the agricultural societies of the départemens, have devoted their time to observation and their vigilance to their fellow citizens, we leave to them, we say, the difficult but honorable task of eliminating the viciousness of some particular practices, and of perfecting vineyard cultivation. We shall confine ourselves here to the more uniform cultivation of table grapes. The vine is more sensitive to climatic influences than to those of the soil: it succeeds fairly well in all Goo soils, provided they are not too wet or marshy. However, it prefers light, deep, warm soil. Its roots thrive on rocky outcrops and stones, sinking to great depths through cracks in rocks. It is usually propagated by cuttings, to which we give the name crossette, capon, etc., and by marcottes called provins, recouchées, couchage. It is rarely sown, as this method is time-consuming, and we cannot be sure of the quality of the fruit. Cuttings are branches from the previous year, well seasoned, about eighteen inches long, with a heel of one or two inches taken from two-year-old wood. They can be cut in autumn, or even better, after a hard frost. They can be kept with the heel in water or buried in cool, shaded soil, until they are ready to be planted. This is done in spring, just as the vines begin to show signs of growth with the swelling of their buds. In mined soil, or at least well-developed soil loosened by good ploughing, dig a twelve- to fifteen-inch hole, place the crossette in it with the lower part inclined towards the south, cover with soil and leave only the two upper eyes above the surface. All other care is limited to weeding, hoeing and watering if the plant has been planted against a wall facing south and the season is hot and dry. Pruning is nothing more than what we have called "marcottes simples" in our principles. When pruning, the most vigorous sarmen are left in their entire length to provide bedding. In spring, we dig a small pit eight inches deep against the stock, lay the marcotte in it, and cover it with earth, leaving only the two eyes of its tip sticking out at the surface. The following year, it is sufficiently rooted to be detached from the mother, removed and transplanted elsewhere. If you don't want this transplanting to stunt its growth, or if the young pupil is destined to travel, it's much better to make the marcotte in a basket or pot that you bury next to the stump. In this way, it can be removed with the rootball, either for packing or for immediate replanting. Sowing, an invaluable means of obtaining new or at least more vigorous varieties, is done in exactly the same way as for seed trees, and the young plants behave in the same way until they are put in place for cultivation like marcottes and cuttings. In the Paris climate, a seedling hardly bears fruit before the sixth or seventh year. There is a fourth means of propagation, little or not at all used in some countries, but in general use in others. We refer to grafting. See page 61. It should be noted that vines should never be smoked with fresh fertilizers, as the exhalations they produce attach themselves to the grapes and give them a bad taste which sometimes even passes into the wine. For each type of soil, the most suitable fertilizers should be used, i.e., divide the soils that are too strong with very light manures, such as ashes, soot, calcareous marl, sandy earth, etc., and give body to those that are too light, by mixing fatty manures, earth and clayey marl. If you wish to plant on land where vines have already been grown, you must wait at least three years until the roots of the old stock have completely decomposed, and the soil has acquired new nutrient sues. However, you can plant right away, provided you change the soil at least three feet deep, or, if it's in very good soil, by mixing the soil from the dig with a good quantity of much-consumed fertilizer. Every year, two or three good ploughings should be made, and the vines should be fertilized whenever necessary, as can be seen from the languor of the plant and the weakness of its shoots. As for the care to be given to the vine for training, pruning and disbudding, we have already dealt with this in detail (page 257), and we won't return to it here. The distance to be set between each vine stock cannot be specified, as it varies according to the quality of the soil, the climate and even the exposure, all of which have a considerable influence on the development of this shrub. Grapevines are subject to a number of accidents that can affect them to a greater or lesser extent. Late spring frosts are one of the most feared; their damaging effect is particularly noticeable when the cold of the night is followed by a blazing sun. It is said that burning straw smoke before sunrise is enough to slowly thaw out the affected buds, with no ill effects. Spray watering, in the form of fine rain, is even better, but can only be used on trellises or other vines covering a small area. A number of diseases still attack this interesting plant, for which we recommend the remedies indicated in the article on plant diseases. Birds attack grapes as soon as they ripen, and considerably reduce the harvest unless the trellises are covered with nets. The fruit can be protected from their voracity by enclosing it in paper or horsehair bags a little before ripening and when it is very dry, so that it does not rot. This method has the added advantage of preserving it on the shrub, in all its freshness, until the first frosts. GROSEILLIER. (Ribes) b. This genus is made up of small thorny or non-spiny shrubs, all interesting for their fruit, some for their attractive appearance, and capable, by pruning, of taking all the forms of fruit trees in miniature. Several species and a large number of thornless A. TICES WITHOUT THORNS. 1° COMMON GROWTH (Ribes rubrum; L.). Indigenous. The easiest to form into a ball, cattail, fan, etc.; vor. page 269. It has given rise to several varieties. a. Ordinary currant; red, small, acid fruits, little appreciated. Its cultivation is generally neglected. b. Red currant with large red fruit; strawberries larger than the previous one, very sweet and less acidic, very pleasant. Very bushy shrub, remarkable for its vigorous vegetation. c. Currants with very large red fruit; fruit in beautiful bunches, sometimes up to five lines in diameter, with a pronounced acidity, quite pleasant. Delicate shrub, weak vegetation, difficult to propagate. d. Flesh-colored fruit; fruit not as large as above, with more or less the same flavor. e. Pearly fruit; large, white, transparent fruit, sweet, not very acidic. f. Small white fruit. Currants with small white fruit; fruit similar to that of the preceding variety, but less esteemed because of its smaller size and less transparency. g. Currants with large white Angleterro fruit; fruit very transparent, with elongated bunches, loose, of very good quality. 2° BLACKBERRY, blackcurrant, pepper. (Ribes nigrum; L.) Native; fruits slightly larger than in the preceding species, black, with a strong, aromatic odor, pleasing to many people. Shrub has a strong odor in all its parts, like its fruit. a. Black currant with kidney-shaped thresholds; fruit smaller than the preceding species, of the same quality. Shrub has very hairy leaves. quality of the preceding ones. 3° GOLDEN CURRANT. (Ribes aureum; H. P.). From North America. Black fruit, in clusters, with elongated berries of a singular shape, firm pulp and a distinctive fragrance. This charming shrub produces golden-yellow flowers in April, giving off a sweet clove scent. B. THORNY STEMS. 4° MACKEREL SHRUB (Ribes uva-crispa; L.). Indigenous. This species has produced a large number of varieties, most of which were obtained from seed at our plant. Here is the table: A. GREEN OR YELLOW FRUITS. a. Spiky fruit. 12 Green-fruited woods. 2. Woods with amber fruits. 3. Large white fruit with pale veins. 4. Small spiky. 5. Early yellow. 6. Small late yellow. q. Large round spiky green. 8. Spiky red flesh color. 9. Green white. 10. Long green, slightly bristly. 11. White bristly. 12. White round bristly. 13. Yellow spiky. 14. Yellow long bristly. 15. Green long very bristly. 16. Flesh-coloured calabash, superb. 17. Gherkin. 18. Woodland. 19. Auriculate. 20. Large green long smooth. 21. Green long smooth. 22. Smooth common green. 23. Smooth round green. 24. White smooth green. 25. Large smooth green. 26. Large white smooth. 27. White smooth. 28. Large olive, superb species. 29. Large smooth amber. 30. Small late yellow. B. RED OR PURPLE FRUITS. a. Spiky fruit. 31. Round bristly flesh color. 32. Long bristly flesh color. 33. Late round bristly violet. 34. Spiky oval wolette. 35. Long bristly violet. 36. Very long bristly violet. 37. Violet bristly. 38. Small round violet, very bristly. 39. Small bristly purple. 40. Large bristly purple. b. Smooth fruit. 41. Smooth common red. 42. Very large round smooth. 43. Small smooth musky. 44. Very large new English violet. 45. Smooth round violet. 46. Smooth oval violet. 47. Smooth turbinated violet. 2. 57 48. Long smooth flesh color. 49. Large lobed. 50. Cute. The English have over three hundred varieties of thorny currant; we brought most of them over in March 1825, but have not yet seen the fruit. CULTIVATION. Redcurrants are not difficult to grow in any kind of soil; they grow well everywhere, but they prefer soft, fresh, sandy soil, where their fruit is larger and less acidic. They can be propagated from seed, which is sown like other pepines, or from cuttings made in autumn or after the frosts, or more usually from offshoots detached from old plants at the same time, or from marcottes, which root easily. Care is limited to a little ploughing, and pruning as described on page 269. As these shrubs age, they become overgrown with moss and the fruit becomes small. Young students give very good fruit, and in large quantities, from the second year of planting. This operation should be carried out every five or six years. You can keep currants for a very long time on bushes by wrapping them in straw a little before the fruit is fully ripe. VINE-PINE, MNRTIER (Berberis vulgaris, L.) 6. Native, thorny shrub whose oval, elongated, clustered fruits are filled with a pleasant, acidic pulp that makes very good jam. The bark of the shrub is used to make a fairly fine yellow dye. Several varieties are grown. 1° ORDINARY VINEYAR; red fruit. 2° VINETIER A CROS FAUrTS; larger, more attractive red fruit. 3° VINETIER A FRUITS VIOLETS. 4° VINETIER DU CANADA. 5° VINETIER A GROS TRUITS ROUCES SANS PEPINS; it lacks pepins only when the tree has reached a certain ageWe have new species in Nypaule whose fruiting we have not yet seen. CULTIVATION. Vineyards are even less difficult than currants in terms of soil quality; they succeed everywhere if you give them the care mentioned on page 270, and some ploughing. They can be propagated from seed, but as they take two years to germinate, and young plants require a great deal of care during their first few years, it is customary to propagate them by offshoots, marcottes or splinters, which are separated and planted in autumn. MYRTILLE LUCET, cranberry, wood or hind grape, brimbelle, moret, mouretier. (Vaccinium myrtillus; L.) 5. Indigenous. Small, two-foot shrub producing grape-like berries in July, similar to those of myrtle, blackish-blue in color, with liquid pulp, a little acidic and sweet, quite pleasant in taste. They are used to make jam, and by innkeepers to increase the color of their wines. The berries of the AIRELLE CANNEDERCE Ou COUSCINETIE, (vaccinium oxycoccos; L.) can be used for the same purposes; and if you live in the south, or have an orangery, those of the Airelie Do CaNADA (vaccinium macrocarpon; L.), whose berries are larger. CULTIVATION. These shrubs are quite delicate and only do well in very light, cool, shady sandy soil, better in heather soil. They can be propagated from seed sown in terrine and fralche soil, sheltered from the cold until the 900 seedling is strong enough to be planted. They can also be propagated from sprouts and marcottes, but in general, their cultivation is more difficult than important. SECOND CLASS. Trees that fear the cold and only do well in the open below 43 degrees latitude. CULTIVATED OLIVE TREE. (Olea europœa, L.) b. An evergreen tree in southern Europe, from fifteen to twenty-five feet high, whose fruits, called olives, are eaten when pickled, are used in cooking, and provide an excellent oil, the latter use accounting for most of their importance and the wealth of Provence, Languedoc, Italy and Spain. Olive wood is veined, fragrant and highly polished, making it much sought-after by cabinet-makers and table-makers. A fairly large number of varieties are cultivated, of which we will only mention those that are widespread in the south of France. 1 - WILD OLIVE, small, scanty fruit of mediocre quality. 2. OLIVIER TRANCANELOU, amélingue, amelode, almond-shaped fruit, excellent candied. 3. PICHOLINE OLIVE TREE; small, long fruit, the best candied, but keeps poorly. 4. CAYANNE or aglaudan OLIVE TREE; small, round fruit, yielding the best oil. 5. CORMEAU or CORNIAU OLIVE TREE; fruit somewhat resembling that of the corm tree, yielding very fine oil. 6 AMPOULLEAU OLIVE TREE; large, rounded fruit, yielding very fine oil. 7 MOUREAU OLIVE TREE; round, early fruit, yielding excellent oil. 8 SPANISH OLIVE TREE; fairly large, very bitter fruit. 206 9. BUIS LEAF OLIVE; medium-sized fruit; very robust tree. 10. LAURINE OLIVE; large, long, bumpy fruit, very candied. 11. SAUVACE D'ESPACNE; fruit remarkable for its truncated top. 12. OLIVE TREE; dark green fruit. 13. WHITE FRUIT OLIVE; medium-sized fruit. 14. ROYAL OLIVE; large, very fleshy fruit. 15. VERDALE OLIVE TREE; round, very good candied fruit. 16. OLIVIER BOUTEILLEAU; fruit in bunches. 17. OLIVIER PICAU; small, round fruit, variegated with red and black. 18. OLIVIER SALIERNE; small, round, blackish fruit. 19. OLIVIER DE LUCQUES; medium-sized, fragrant fruit. GROWING. These trees do fairly well in all types of soil, but do best in light, warm soils, especially by the sea. The tree grows tall and strong in solid, open soils, while in sandy, poor soils, the fruit is of much higher quality. They are only cultivated with advantage from the 25th degree of latitude to the 43rd, which proves that they are equally afraid of cold and too much heat. It has also been observed that sea air is favorable to them, and that they produce less inland than on the shores of the Mediterranean. Olive trees are propagated from seed, offshoots, marcottes and cuttings, and varieties are propagated by grafting, n° 1, 2, 3, 32, 65, 66, 67. An even easier method, which we have been using for the last ten years with great success, is to graft into the common privet. We invite growers in the south of France to try this method, which may be of great benefit to them, especially when they can use Japanese privet as a subject, because it is O0 more vigorous, grows faster and is therefore more in balance with olive trees. For sowing, it is necessary to obtain pits of the most vigorous varieties, growing naturally on the mountains, and better those of the wild fruits of the Greek Archipelago. Either sow them as soon as they ripen, or have them stratified, as they would otherwise not ripen until the second year of planting. They are spaced so that the plants are three feet apart in all directions. They are treated in the nursery in the same way as other fruit trees. When they are strong enough, they are lifted with extreme care, so as not to break the pivot; they are set in place, spaced thirty-six to fifty feet apart, depending on the quality of the soil, and are grafted once they have fully recovered, if they have not been grafted in the nursery. They are ploughed and fertilized as for other trees. Sowing takes a long time, as an olive tree hardly bears fruit for fifteen years; but if it were used, it would be the best way to prevent the degeneration that the inhabitants of the south of France complain about. Olive trees grow a lot of offshoots, which are removed from the base if they are not intended to provide new trees; otherwise, they are left to strengthen for three years, after which they are lifted and put in place. Marcots are made from branches the size of an arm, which are placed in the ground over winter to root. They are then detached from the stump and raised the following year. Cuttings are taken in autumn and spring from young wood. Place them in a nursery, and leave them there until they are large enough to be planted. This tree can also be propagated by its roots. 7 By cutting one close to the stump and raising its truncated parcel to the surface of the earth, it soon emits a bud, which rises with it when it forms a subject that is vigorous enough for this. This last method of propagation is preferable to the first, because it is less exhausting for the trees, especially if practised on small roots. Once a quincunx of olive trees has been planted, all that remains to be done is to give them the care mentioned on page 260. Cereals and vegetables can be grown under their shade; the trees thrive all the more, because they benefit from the fertilizers and ploughing these crops require. CULTIVATED JUJUPIER. (Ziziphus sativa; HoRT. PARIS. Ziziphus vulgaris, ENcrct. Rhamnus ziziphus; L.)5. From the East. A very thorny shrub, ten to fifteen feet tall, naturalized in Provence and Languedoc, where its fruits, called jujubes, ripen very well. They are oblong, olive-shaped and olive-sized, first green, then yellowish, and finally red; their whitish pulp is soft, sweet, pleasant when dried, and excellent when fresh. The jujube tree multiplies from pits that are smelled as soon as they ripen, or stratified during the winter. In southern France, it can be sown in nurseries and managed like the olive tree, but in northern France, where it must be grown in orangeries, it is sown in pots, on beds and under frames. It can also be propagated by strangulation or by offshoots. GOYAVIER POTRE, guaravier, Indian pear tree. (Psidium prriferum, L.) b. Indies. A tree in its country, a twelve- or fifteen-foot shrub in southern France, where it is naturalized. It produces a fruit as large as a crabapple, crowned like a medlar, greenish at first, then yellowish, with a soft, fragrant pulp, mildly acidic and quite pleasant. Eaten raw or cooked with sugar. The guava tree, as well as its more robust apple-shaped variety, can be grown in exactly the same way as the orange tree, and in the same soil. ORANGE (Citrus). b. Native to Asia. This name covers seven species which have given rise to a very large number of varieties, but many of which produce fruit that is bitter or so acidic that it is of no use, at least as a food substance. All are cultivated in pleasure gardens, where they are the most beautiful ornament: we will therefore describe them without exception in the history of the families, and following the botanical procedure we have imposed on ourselves in the last two volumes of this work. In the fruit garden, however, we shall only discuss edible species and varieties, and we shall only give their names to avoid unnecessary repetition. We will quote here only the French synonyms for 1. FRENCH ORANGE; fruit containing an abundant, pleasant, sweet juice. 2. DE LA CHINE; very good fruit, with a rind soft enough to be eaten. 3. DUBOISVIOLETTE; a slightly pyriform fruit, whose pulp detaches itself from the rind, to the point of playing in it like a bar of soap in its box. Soft, sweet, fragrant, excellent pulp; the best of all oranges. We received it directly from China from Mr. Dubois violette, to whom we dedicated it. 4. EARLY FRUIT; large, very good fruit, with thin rind. 5. DEPRIMED FRUIT; medium-sized fruit, very sweet, very good. 6. PYRAMIDAL; fruit small, firm pulp, mediocre. 7. YGUSE LEAVES; fruit small, soft, sweet, very good. 8. WITH CREPUS LEAVES; medium-sized fruit, bland, not very sweet. 9. WITH PYRIFORM FRUIT; fruit with red pulp around the circumference, yellow in the center, very pleasant. The tree has little fear of the cold around Nice, and its oranges keep very well. 10. ORANCER A LARCES FEUILLES; large fruit, with very sweet pulp. 11. DE GÈNES; quite beautiful fruit, with yellow pulp in the center, red around the circumference, sweet, very pleasant. 12. DE NICE; fairly large, heavy fruit, with sweet pulp, excellent. 13.A PETIT PAUIT; pale pulp, very sweet, not very pleasant. 14. A FAUIT NAIN; small fruit, sweet and pleasant pulp. 15.A FAUIT BOSSELÉ; rather large fruit, a little acid when not perfectly ripe. 16. A FRUIT CORNU; fairly large fruit, with appendages, sweet pulp, very pleasant. 17. DE MALTE; red fruit in places, medium size; red pulp, especially around the circumference, excellent. 18. RED FLESH; fruit entirely yellow, with red pulp, very good. 19. DE MAJORQUE; fairly large fruit, abundant juice, very sweet, pleasant. 20. A FAUIT CACHETÉ; medium-sized fruit, with sweet pulp, mediocre. O 21.A PRUIT MAMPUFÈRE; fairly large fruit, with soft, excellent pulp. 22. A LIMETIFORME FRUIT; nippled fruit with poorly succulent pulp. 23. A FRUIT OBLONC; reddish fruit, with red pulp, very good. 24. A PRUIT ELLIPTIQUE; fruit with red pulp, sweet, a little sapid. 25. A PRUIT TORULEUX; medium-sized fruit, sweet pulp, very good, but a little dry. 26. A raUrr CHARNU; globular fruit, with sweet pulp, not very abundant. 27. A PRUIT RUCUEUX; large fruit, with sweet, watery juice. 28. A FRUIT MIDÉ; small fruit, with reddish, sweet pulp, not very pleasant. 29. POMME D'ADAM DES PARISIENS; medium-sized fruit, with tender, sweet, melting pulp, very good. 908 30. ORARCER A LONCUES FEUILS; large fruit, very poor pulp. 31. MULTITLORE; medium-sized fruit with soft, very pleasant pulp. 32. WITH THIN LEAVES; small fruit, red pulp, very good. 33. A TRUIT TARDIT; large fruit, red pulp, excellent. 34. A PAVIT SANS PEPINS; small fruit, dark red pulp, excellent. 35. DE GRARSE; large fruit, yellow pulp, good, but a little acid. 36. PORTUCAIS; medium-sized fruit, yellow or reddish pulp, good, but a little acidic. There are other edible fruits, and even quite good ones, in the families that authors have named pompelmouse, lumie, limon, etc.; but, as they are not very widespread, we will only talk about them in the volumes dealing with ornamental plants. CULTIVATION. In most of France, the orange tree is grown only in crates or pots, so that it can be squeezed into orangeries during the winter, and in co eas it is strictly speaking only an ornamental tree; it requires special care, details of which will be given in the family histories. Here, we must only use it as a fruit tree, and only grow it in the open ground. Wherever the orange tree can be grown in the open ground, it is not fussy about the choice of soil, and does very well in all types, provided they are neither damp nor cold, neither too light nor too compact; all free, airy exposures suit it, except in its early youth, when it absolutely needs the south. The temperature that is most favorable to it is the one whose most constant average term is ten to eighteen degrees of Réaumur's thermometer, and it seems that it can only be found in France on the shores of the Mediterranean, or at most fifteen or twenty leagues from its shores, because further inland it ceases to be productive. Orange trees are propagated by seed, cuttings and marcottes; the varieties are propagated by means of the grafts we have described no. 1, a, 3, 67, 75, 108, which are common to them and most other fruit trees, and by those specific to them, see page 75. For the sowing operation, select and prepare the seeds as follows. We take a certain quantity of the best fruits, put them in a heap in the sun, and leave them to ferment for eight to ten days, after which we throw them into O water to macerate them for a few hours; we crush the oranges in our hands, and leave the whole thing to rest for a few moments; we then pick up the seeds that have sunk to the bottom, and throw away those that have floated to the surface.

If the season is right, i.e. if it's spring and the temperature is 15°C, sow immediately; if not, wait. Dry the seeds in the shade, and keep them in well-stoppered bottles until the right moment. When you're ready to sow, prepare the ground as evenly as possible, bury the pots or crates in which you'll sow the seeds, and cover the whole with an inch of light, loose soil, or better still, compost. Water and, if the temperature is right, the seedlings sprout in fifteen or twenty days. For vigorous trees, preference is usually given to pepins from wild or cultivated sour orange trees; however, some growers prefer orange pepins, even though they grow more slowly, because they are more resistant to cold, sturdier and produce more fruit. Finally, others recommend using seeds from pompelmouses, particularly pompoleon. During the first year, we simply pull out the weeds and water the plants to prevent the soil from drying out. In the second year, we lift them, taking care to leave a small root ball; we cut off the small twigs and lower leaves, and replace them in the ground eight or ten inches apart. In the spring of the third or fourth year of germination, the plants are usually strong enough to be transplanted into a larger nursery, or into the ground. In February or March, they are removed with the root ball and spaced eighteen inches apart in the nursery; in the field, six or seven feet apart if they are to be trained as espaliers; nine or ten feet apart if they are to be trained as counter-paliers, and eighteen or twenty inches apart if they are to be trained as plein-vent. These distances vary according to the species of orange and the quality of the soil. Finally, in the fifth year after sowing, they are ready for grafting. Experience has shown that it is better to graft orange trees a year or two after they have been planted than in the nursery. Propagation by cuttings is mainly used for pumice and citron trees, although it is equally successful for all species. From December to February, cuttings can be taken. This is how it works: prepare good soil with fertilizers and deep ploughing; open furrows eighteen inches apart and fifteen inches deep; select small branches from the orange trees you want to propagate, or better, the long buds that have grown during the summer, called plumets or gourmands, and which are usually removed in autumn, unless they have been kept for this purpose. They are cut to eighteen inches in length, and beveled at the base; they are buried in the furrows, with only two or three eyes emerging from the surface, which are left leafless; the plantation is watered as needed, and covered with litter at night to protect it from the cold. As soon as the cuttings have grown, all you have to do is give them the usual nursery care. Sometimes, root shavings are used for the purpose just described. Propagation by cuttings is widespread throughout southern Europe, because it is quicker than sowing; but it nevertheless produces much less vigorous trees. As for marcotting, this is rarely used, because it produces weak, puny plants that require a great deal of care; it can be done by strangulation in the ordinary way, or by cepée; and in the latter case, here's how it's done. When the stem forms a trunk, it is cut three or four inches from the ground, giving rise to a large number of shoots which are left to strengthen for two years. A tight ligature is then made at the base of each one, and good soil is mounded over it, bringing it close to the stump so as to form a casing seven to eight inches high. All that remains to be done is to give the necessary care until the marcottes have taken root. They are then lifted and placed in a nursery. The young trees are often visited, whether obtained from seed, cuttings or marcottes; slugs and insects are destroyed, weeds are pulled out, hoeing is carried out two or three times a year, and frequent watering is given during hot spells. Once the orange trees are in place, they are shaped, pruned and trained, as described on page 52. Twice a year, deep ploughing is carried out, penetrating right down to the roots: the first is done in spring, the second in autumn; fertilizers are indispensable to them, and all suit them very well, although each grower gives preference to a particular combination, which his neighbor often rejects in favor of another. This dissidence of opinion and practice is simply the result of the differences in soil types. It is clear that, in strong, compact soils, vegetable fertilizers capable of lightening and dividing the earth will be the best; in those that are burning, cold fertilizers will be more suitable; in damp, cool soils, detritus of animal matter and powders will produce more effect, etc. It is up to the grower's intelligence to decide which fertilizers to use. It's up to the grower's intelligence to choose the most appropriate fertilizers for his land: the essential thing is to use them only when they are well consumed. Orange trees are only smoked in the months of September and October, or February and March, at ploughing time. A circular pit is dug around the tree, a foot or eighteen inches from the trunk, and eight or ten inches deep; it is filled with suitable fertilizers, and covered with the soil from the digging. Plant fertilizers are usually used in autumn, and animal manures in spring. The age and vigor of the trees, as well as the exhaustion of the soil, should be taken into account in this essential operation. Watering should be carried out whenever the shrubs appear to need it, which is perfectly recognizable by the leaf, but moderately, and with clear water at about atmospheric temperature. Watering is only necessary from the first days of June until September, and then only when the temperature remains at twenty degrees and above daily, GRENADIER. (Punica granatum; L.) D. From near Tunis. This tree, which often reaches twenty or twenty-five feet in regions where it grows in the open ground, usually remains a shrub when grown in crates in northern France. Its beautiful red flowers are followed by fruits the size of a fist and larger, with hard, brittle rind, enclosing a red, liquid pulp, mixed with seeds of a pleasantly sweet, acidic flavor. GROWING. Pomegranates are not extremely sensitive to cold, and even overwinter quite well in the open ground around Paris, provided they are sheltered with straw; however, they only produce fruit below 43' degree of latitude. They are propagated from seeds sown in the spring and treated like orange trees, from cuttings and marcottes by strangulation using ordinary methods, and from the numerous offshoots that grow at the base. They are grown in the same way as oranges, and do well in substantial, dry, warm soils. They are pruned and trained as described on page 256. FIGHER CUITIVÍ. (Ficus carica; L.) b. Native. This tree, growing from fifteen to twenty-five feet high, produces delicious fruits twice a year, maugéa fresh, very sweet and recommended in certain cases in medicine when dried out. The wood of the fig tree is white, soft and mellow, and serves almost no purpose; however, locksmiths and gunsmiths sometimes use it to rub and polish their work, because being spongy and soft, it easily takes oil and emery. In warm countries such as Provence, Languedoc, Italy and Spain, a large number of fig tree varieties are grown, but not all succeed above latitude 44. We will mark with an asterisk those varieties that can be grown advantageously in the average climates of France. We have taken the description of all cultivated varieties from M. Loiseleur des Lonchamps' excellent monograph on the fig tree genus. A. WHITE, YELLOW OR GREEN FIGS. "Fruits as long as they are wide, or wider than they are long. 1.a FIGUE BLANCHE or grosse blanche ronde; large fruit, two inches long and about as wide, swollen towards the head, pointed at the base, smooth, pale green or whitish, sweet, very pleasant. Autumn varieties are better than spring varieties. 2.* D'ARGENTEUIL. A variety of the previous one, differing only slightly, and only in the influence of climate. The inhabitants of Argenteuil, who grow it extensively, supply it almost exclusively to the capital. 3. DE SALERNE; white, globular fruit, eighteen to twenty lines in diameter, early, melting, excellent dry; dry, high soil. 4. DE GRASSE; white, sparsely filled fruit, nearly three inches in diameter by twenty-four to twenty-six lines high; flesh of mediocre quality. Moist or waterable soil. 5. GRAISSARE; white fruit, compressed at the top, with a bland taste, especially in the first season. 6. DE MARSEILLE; small, rounded fruit, pale green or whitish, with red pulp, excellent fresh and dry, but requiring a lot of heat, and successful only in the southernmost parts of France. 7. DE LIPARI, or small round white; smallest fruit of all, only six to eight lines in diameter, almost globular, whitish, very sweet. "Fruit longer than it is wide. 8.* COUCOURELLE BLANCRE, angelica, melette; white, rounded, ribbed fruit, fourteen lines in diameter and sixteen to eighteen high. The first season's fruit is more elongated and better than the other. Dry soil to hasten fruit precocity. 9." ROYALE, fig of Versailles; fruit not very full, eighteen to twenty lines in diameter by twenty-two to twenty-four lines in length, much like the white fig; good dry. 10. FIGUE VERTE, figue de cuers or figue des dames, trompe-chasseur; fruit dark green tending to blue, red inside, eighteen to twenty lines in diameter by twenty-four to twenty-six high, with very long stalk. Oily, bumid soil. 11. GROSSE JAURE, white aubic; largest fruit of all, sometimes weighing up to four or five ounces, first yellow, then white as it ripens; red pulp, pleasant-tasting and very sweet. Any soil, best in damp places. 12. LONGUE-MARSEILLAISE, large long white; fruit plain, white, a little red inside, fourteen to sixteen lines in diameter, twenty-five high; early fruit is sweet, much less pleasant than autumn fruit. Humid soil; lots of heat. 13. SEIROLLE; fruit nine to eleven lines in diameter by sixteen to eighteen in height, white inside, bland when fresh, excellent when dry. Dry soil. 14. COTIGNACENQUOS; elongated, slightly compressed, whitish-green fruit with pink or yellow eye; twenty to twenty-two lines long, twelve to fourteen in diameter; quite good fresh and dry, often drying on the tree after ripening. Dry soil. 15. BARNISSOTTE BLANCHE; elongated fruit, compressed at the top, very red inside, late, sixteen to eighteen lines in diameter, by twenty-four to twenty-six in length; excellent. 16. VELUE, perouas; fruit light green, with thick skin covered with hairs and small white dots, fourteen to sixteen lines in diameter, by twenty-four to twenty-six in length; good dryness. Very productive tree, in all soils. B. REDDISH, PURPLE OR BROWNISH FIGS. "Fruits as long as wide, or wider than long. 17. BARNISSOTE, or GROSSE BOURIASSOTTE; globose, compressed fruit, twenty-six to twenty-eight lines in diameter, by 2. 38 twenty-four to twenty-six in height, dark purple, covered with glaucous dust, and with red pulp; the former are not very pleasant, but the latter excellent. Greasy, slightly damp soil. 18. FIGUE PETITE BOURJASSOTTE, sarreigne, verdale; dark purple fruit, thick skin, not very prone to cracking, red pulp, excellent; twenty-two to twenty-four lines in diameter. Oily, slightly damp soil. 19. ROSE-BLANCHE, russet; fruit compressed at the top, globular, with brown skin on a whitish background, and bright red pulp. Dry land. 20. PETITE VIOLETTE DE L'ILE-DE-FRANCE; fruit compressed at the top, elongated towards the stalk, with brownish-violet skin and white pulp mixed with red filaments, of mediocre quality in Ile-de-France. "Fruit longer than wide. 21. SERVANTINE or CORDELIÈRE; fruit of the first sap, oblong, with longitudinal veins, eighteen to twenty lines in diameter, twenty-four to twenty-six high, light red in color, with a delicious flavor. Fruit of the second sap smaller, grayish or ashy, extremely bad. Slightly damp soil. 22. ROSE-NOIRE; elongated, slightly dark red fruit with white pulp, excellent dryness. Dry soil. 23.* VIOLET, mussel; fruit with very thin, bluish or violet skin, usually cracked; red pulp, excellent. The figs of the first sap are more elongated than the others; they are twenty to twenty-two lines in diameter by twenty-four to twenty-six in length, while the second are barely a third as long, but are equally good. Soil neither too dry nor too wet. 24. AUBIQUE NOIRE, large long violet, elongated fruit, tapering towards the stalk, swollen and compressed at the top, dark purple, almost black, covered with glaucous dust, brilliant red inside. The first figs are six to seven inches in diameter and three inches high; the autumn figs are only fourteen to sixteen lines in diameter and twenty-two to one thousand twenty-four lines high. Both are of very mediocre quality. All terrain. 25. FIGUE PETITE VIOLETTE; fruit differing from the preceding one only in volume; otherwise, same quality. 26. DU SAINT-ESPRIT; fruit closely resembling the black aubic; bland, watery taste makes it the worst of all figs. 27.* POIRE, figue de Bordeaux, petite aubique; fruit with a green base, elongated at the tip, everywhere else dark violet or reddish-brown with small light-green spots and very distinctive ribs; reddish-fawn pulp. Twenty-six to thirty-two lines long, fifteen to twenty-two wide. The figs of the second sap are better than those of the first. Slightly humid soil. 28. BLAVETTE; long fruit, sixteen to eighteen lines in diameter by twenty-four to twenty-six in height, purple, with very red pulp, excellent. Oily, damp soil. 29. BARNISSENQUE; fruit rounded at the top, suddenly narrowed at the base, with oblique stalk, eighteen to twenty lines in diameter by twenty-one to twenty-three high, purple, with red pulp, excellent. Greasy, waterable soil. 30. VERTE BRUNE; green fruit, dark purple in the sun, red pulp, ten to twelve lines in diameter; excellent. 31. BELLONNE; fruit compressed at the top, twenty-six to twenty-eight lines long, twenty-one to twenty-four lines in diameter. Both harvests are of the same quality, very good. Slightly humid or waterable soil. 32. DE BARGEMON; late fruit, elongated, pale violet on a yellowish background, and a little colored at the top, twelve to fourteen lines in diameter by eighteen to twenty high, excellent fresh and dry. High ground. 33. PERROQUIN; dark purple fruit, covered with glaucous dust, twenty-four to twenty-six lines long, fourteen to sixteen in diameter, good without being delicate. Fruits of the second sap are smaller. Dry soil. 34. NEGRONE; small, brownish-red fruit, pale red inside, of mediocre quality, but never attacked by insects when dry. Tont terrain. 009 35. FIGUE BRAYASQUE, bouffoz; oval fruit, abruptly tapering towards the stalk, of mediocre quality, but early and not very prone to sinking. All terrain. 36. COUCOURELLE BRUNE; brown, elongated fruit, ten to twelve Tignes in diameter by twelve or fourteen in length, early. Second-harvest figs are less elongated, smaller and less darkly colored. Dry soil, very productive tree. 37. MoUrENAoU; globular, compressed fruit, barely taller than it is wide, thick-skinned, purple-purple, with white pulp, not very pleasant. GROWING. Fig trees are not very sensitive to ordinary frosts, and can withstand Paris winters fairly well, provided a few precautions are taken. They generally like light, sandy, warm soil, but they do well everywhere. In the north, they grow vigorously in rubble, at the foot of walls in the south, and even in paved courtyards. In the south, they thrive in the most arid soils, and can even be found in rock crevices and holes in old walls. They can be propagated in several ways: 1° by seed, 2° by offshoots, 3° by marcottes, 4e by cuttings, 5° by grafting. Sowing is a long process, with uncertain results, as varieties do not reproduce freely, but it is the only way to acquire new varieties. The best species are selected, and only from those that are very ripe, or rather that have withered on the tree; they are crushed in a vase full of water, and only the seeds that sink to the bottom are collected; those that float to the surface must be discarded. In the south of France, they are simply sown in well-disturbed soil, lightly covered and watered. In no time at all, they sprout and produce young trees that require no special care. This is not the case in the north, where the seedlings must be sown on a bed and in a terrine, so that they can be stored in an orangery, at least during the first winter. The following spring, it can be placed in the ground and treated like any other plant. The offshoots are removed from the old plants before they are big enough to wear them out, but when they are strong enough not to keep their fruit waiting too long. They are usually ready for harvesting at the age of two. Picking takes place in March or April, on two-year-old fruiting branches. They are placed in the ground without further precautions, or in pots and baskets, so that when they are removed, they can be planted with the root ball. In spring, wean them from the mother, plant them in holes two feet wide and two feet deep, and give them a few sprinklings until they recover perfectly. Cuttings are taken in March or April, using two-year-old wood. Choose a branch two-and-a-half or three feet long, with one or two twigs at the bottom, which should not be cut, as they will provide the most vigorous roots. Care should also be taken with the top bud or eye, as this is the one that should provide the stem, the others giving only weak buds. Prepare a hole in the same way as for the root ball, and press the cutting into it so that no more than six inches protrude above the surface. Water, especially if the spring is dry, until the plant has recovered. With the exception of approach grafts, all the others generally used for fruit trees can be used on fig trees; however, preference should be given to split, crown and whistle grafts. Care should be taken to secure the young buds of the grafts to a stake, otherwise the wind will break them off very easily. This tree has a rather difficult recovery after planting, so young plants should never be raised in the nursery like other fruit trees, but in the field. In the southern provinces, it is extremely easy to grow: all it needs is a little ploughing, to get rid of the offshoots that grow at the base and exhaust it, and to be managed as described on page 268. In parts of France where the fig tree may be affected by frost, it must be protected from it; and to do this, two methods are employed. The first is to wrap it in straw, and the second, which we're about to describe, is to bury it; but this procedure can only be used in dry, healthy soil. As soon as there's a threat of heavy frost, clear the tree of any remaining leaves and fruit, and dig a small pit at its base; by bending the branches gently, so as not to break them, it's easy to lay them down; Then cover them with at least six inches of earth, mound up the parts you haven't been able to bend, and, if the season becomes very harsh, throw dry litter, leaves or fern on top. You can leave the tree in this state for two and a half or three months without doing it any damage. When the cold has passed, dig it up and straighten its branches. In Argenteuil, near Paris, where huge fields of fig trees are cultivated, the inhabitants have no other method of protecting them from the cold. If any are frozen, they cut them down to the root collar, along with branches that have become too strong to bend, and these trees quickly sprout new shoots that bear fruit after two years. O Figs are often prone to falling off before they reach maturity; this can be prevented by pinching the terminal bud of the branch bearing them, or by watering the tree if this effect is due to dry soil, which happens quite frequently. If you want them to be ripe a fortnight earlier than usual, or even to harvest them in late years, prick their heads with a pin dipped in oil; or, better still, when the fruit is a third of the way full, use the tip of a penknife to circle the part of the head where the male flowers are located, and remove it. The wound is covered, and the fig is no less large. An artificial method of fertilization, known as caprification, is used on wild fig trees in Greece, but as these trees are not cultivated in other parts of Europe, we will only mention it in the family history section. JAMBOSIER. EUGENIA, JAMROSE, JAMBOSE, POMME-ROSE (Eugenia jambos; L.) b. From India. This tree, ten to fifteen feet tall, can only be grown in the open ground in the south of France and in the warmer parts of Europe. It flowers from May to September, and produces a fairly large, yellowish-white, rounded fruit with a soft, sweet pulp and a pleasant rose fragrance. It thrives in free-light soils, with warm, sheltered exposure, where it is grown like the orange tree, except that it requires more watering. It is also propagated by seed, cuttings and marcottes. The French in India call its fruit pommes-roses and jambes-rosades. It would be advantageous to naturalize this tree in parts of France where the temperature permits. END OF THE SECOND VOLEMF. 908 SSUECSD, GOOO -4 Grafting by gems: 12 u 4 3 Pl.1" 10 4 48 A O M E Suregp,CIOOgl0 PEUEETD GoOgle Grafting by branch. S R 13 10 .....4 t. L B Pi: Surenp, CIOOgle Onteedp (COOgle Greffex per twig, 4 Pl.3. J to 9 b.....M....b. 4. 5 16 4 100 SOIECS GOOgle Grafting by approach UiMd. 1 Ie 10 un 4 * 4. a4 16 Na B Pe* SIugg GOOgle Daueese Google Graft divergres P2 ~ 3 1 M 1 18 ~ An. 5 2 13 4 10 42 M1 4 - F 2 - 1 B Souees n Google DItEogn COOgle Herbaceous grafting Plt * E. 0 DIuEeSD Google BtEeSE (OOgle 4 SOuEeSD COOgle Suuees GOOgle --- 2 7- " - c4 A Size ☙ 42 - 2 6 hr 2 - 2 -Ce E ~ 2 ~ 16 4 ==~ sa = E 59UES9 GOOgle . - - .. DOUETD GOOgle Pitsess Google DEtESE GOOQ - - E Pl.1. BOUEED GOOgle OOWEOSE CHOOS - a a L hm-- 8 Ft.u. DaEeE COOE SOUEeSE (OOgle 2 8 ayoP * 2vυvug - * Onteed9 Coogle Onteedo, Coogle ~~ RETURN IO the circulotion desk of ony University of Colifornio Librory or to the NORTHERN REGIONAL UBRARY FACIUIIY Bldg. A00. Richrnond Field Stotion University of Colifornio Richmond, CA 94804-4698 ALL BOOKS MAV BE RECALLED AFTER T DAVS 2-month loons moy be renewed by collino (510) 642-6753 veor loons moy be rechorged by bringing books to NRLE Renewols ond rechorges moy be mode 4 doys prior to due dote. DUE AS STAMPED BELOW De1 31999 12000(11108) 1e 6023