This is a digital copy of a book that has been stored for generations in the stacks of a library, before being carefully digitized by Google as part of a project to enable Internet users to discover the world's literary heritage online. As the book is relatively old, it is no longer protected by copyright law and is now in the public domain. The expression "in the public domain" means that the book in question has never been subject to copyright, or that its legal rights have expired. The conditions required for a book to be in the public domain may vary from country to country. Royalty-free books are links to the past. They bear witness to the richness of our history, our cultural heritage and human knowledge, and are all too often difficult for the public to access. Footnotes and other annotations in the margins of the text present in the original volume are included in this file, as a reminder of the long journey the work has made from the publishing house to the library, and finally into your hands. Instructions for use Google is proud to work in partnership with libraries to digitize works in the public domain, making them accessible to all. After all, these books belong to everyone, and we are simply the guardians of this heritage. However, this is an expensive project. Consequently, and with a view to continuing to distribute these inexhaustible resources, we have taken the necessary steps to prevent any possible abuse by third-party merchant sites, notably by introducing technical constraints on automated queries. We also ask you to: ★Not to use the files for commercial purposes We have designed the Google Book Search program for private individuals. We therefore ask you to use these files for personal purposes only. They may not be used for any commercial purpose. ★ Do not make automated queries Do not send automated queries of any kind to the Google system. If you are researching translation software, optical character recognition or any other field requiring large quantities of text, please do not hesitate to contact us. We encourage the use of public domain works and documents for this type of work, and would be happy to be of assistance. 4 Do not remove attribution The Google watermark contained in each file is essential to inform Internet users about our project and enable them to access more documents through the Google Book Search program. Do not remove it under any circumstances. Staying within the law Whatever use you intend to make of the files, don't forget that it's your responsibility to ensure that you comply with the law. If a work is in the American public domain, don't assume that the same applies in other countries. The legal duration of a book's copyright varies from country to country. We are therefore not in a position to list which works are authorized for use and which are not. Don't assume that just because a book appears on Google Books that it can be used in any way anywhere in the world. The penalties for copyright infringement can be severe. About Google Books By making it easier to find and access a growing number of books available in many languages, including French, Google aims to help promote cultural diversity through Google Books. The Google Books program enables Internet users to discover the world's literary heritage, while helping authors and publishers to expand their audience. You can search the full text of this book online atelhttp: //books. google com 01 1U 1 ... - - --- LE-- -- . . A. gE1 COOgl0 7 - - m da,-- 1 CIC -- CO7 -vre "ecra-- 7 11 BEUNE COOO - - . - GARDENER OF EARLY VEGETABLES. COOC ART de cultiver les jardins, ou Annuaire du bon jardinier et de l'agronome, enclosant un calandrier indiquant mois par mois tous les travaux à faire tant en jardinage qu'en agriculture; les principes généraux du jardinage, tels que connaissances et compositions des terres, multiplication des plantes par semis, marcottes, boutures, greffes, etc.; la culture et la description de toutes les espèces et variétés d'arbres fruitiers et de plantes utiles ou d'agrément; par un jardinier agronome. One large vol. in-18. 183a. Illustrated with figures. 3 fr. 50c. MANUEL du Jardinier, ou l'art de cultiver et de composer toutes sortes de jardins; ouvrage divisé en deux parties; la première contient la culture des jardins potagers et fruitiers; la seconde, la culture des fleurs, et tout ce qui a rapport aux jardins d'agrément, dédié à M. TEOUIN, ex professeur de culture au Muséum d'Histoire naturelle, membre de l'Institut, etc. par M. BAILy, son élève. Fifth edition, revised, corrected and considerably enlarged. Two large vol. with plates. 5f. - DE PHYSIOLOGIÉ végétale, de Physique, de Chimie et de minéralogie, appliquées à la culture, by M. Boitard; 1 vol. with plates. 3 fr. DE L'HERBORISTE, de l'Epicier-Droguiste et du Grainier-Pépiniériste, containing the description of plants, the places of their birth; their chemical analysis and their medical properties, by Messrs. Julia Fontenelle and Tollard; a large volumes. 7f. - DE BOTANIQUE, contenant les principes élémentaires de cette science, la Glossologie, l'Organographie et la Physiologie végétale, la Phytothérosie, l'Analyse de tous les systèmes tant naturels qu'artificiels, faits sur la distribution des plantes depuis Aristote jusqu'à ce jour, et le développement du système des familles naturelles, par M. Boitard, 2e édit.; a vol. orné de planches. 3 f. 50c. - DE BOTANIQUE, 2° partie; Flore française ou Description synoptique de toutes les plantes phanérogames et cryptogames qui croissent naturellement sur le sol français, avec les caracteres des genres des agames et l'indication des principales espèces; by M. Boisduval; 3 gr. v. 10 fr. 50c. JARDINIER DES PRIMEURS, OR . 4 VART DE FORCER LES PLANTES A DONNER LEURS FRUITS OU LEURS FLEURS DANS TOUTES LES SAISONS. BY MM. NOISETTE AND BOITARD, MEMBERS OF SEVERAL NATIONAL AND FOREIGN LEARNED SOCIETIES. Ouprage adorned with figures. PARIS, LIL A LA LIBRAIRIE ENCYCLOPÉDIQUE DE RORET, RUE RAUTETEUILLE, AU COIN DE CELLE DU PATTOIE. 1832. .- L - - 2 6 Google L 3 44 21 3 E tu 4 9 I Va 1 Ri h - -- - THE WORK we offer to the farming public and horticultural enthusiasts is the only one that has been done specifically on early vegetables. We have assumed that we are speaking to men who are already well versed in the practice of gardening, and for this reason we have not returned to the first principles of the art, such as, for example, the making up of beds and the construction of frames, greenhouses, etc. These sorts of things are, moreover, easy to understand. Besides, these sorts of things can be found in all gardening books. The art of forcing plants to give their produce in all seasons of the year is still far from attaining the persection of which we think it is capable; may our work excite the emulation of growers, and the goal we have set ourselves, that of being useful, will seem very close to being achieved. 2 Coogle --- - T4 PRIME GARDENER. A ABRICOTIER (Prunus armeniaca by Linnaeus; armeniaca vulgaris by modern botanists); a third-growth tree, native to Armenia, from where, we are told, it was transported to Rome and from there to the rest of Europe. The apricot tree, too well known to be described here, offers a fairly large number of varieties. We shall mention the best and most widespread. 1. ABRICOTIX, or Early Apricot. In espaliers, it ripens at the end of June, and in July if grown in the open air. Small, rounded, yellow or reddish on the sunny side. Its flesh is musky and of rather mediocre quality, tending towards yellowish. Its kernel is bitter. This variety reproduces very well from stones, so it doesn't need to be grafted, and in this case the tree lasts a very long time. As its greatest merit lies in its earliness, it is customary to raise it in espaliers with warm exposure. 2. WHITE ABRICOT. It ripens a little later than the previous variety, i.e. at the beginning of July; it is about the same size, with whiter skin and flesh; the latter has a slight peach flavor, which makes it a little more pleasant. Its kernel is bitter. It does well in the open air, but prefers a warm espalier position. 3. ARRicor ANGOUMOIS. Ripens around July 15. It is smaller and usually more elongated than the previous variety. Its color is amber-yellow, more or less reddish and speckled with brown, depending on whether it has been more or less exposed to the sun during its development. The flesh is yellow to reddish, very aromatic, melting and pleasant, but a little acidic. Its kernel is very good and often double. 4. ABRiCOr COMMUR. Ripens at the same time as the previous variety. It is fairly large, reddish-yellow in color, and may be scabby on the light side, or even cracked if the year has been rainy. Its flesh is melting and quite good when grown in the open air, but becomes mushy if ripening is too advanced. Amaude amere. A vigorously vegetating tree, but rapidly thinning out. It is never espaliered, and as it reproduces identically from stones, it is often not grafted; in this case, it is much less robust, which is common in apricot trees. 5. HOLLAND ABRICOT, or filbert almond. Ripens at the end of July. Its fruit is small, reddish, yellowish, with a reddish-brown spot on the light side; its flesh is juicy, vinous, melting, quite pleasant, and its sweet almond has the taste of filbert, from which comes one of the names it bears in the trade. It does better in espaliers than in the open air. 6. ABRICOT DE PROVENCE. Ripens at the end of July. It is small, slightly compressed on the sides, yellowish, reddish on the light side; its flesh is juicy, quite full-bodied, but still a little dry in certain warm years, sweet, vinous. The stone is rough and the tart sweet. 7. ABRICOT DE PORTUGAL, or male apricot. Ripens around August 15. The flesh is yellow, melting, fragrant, with a very pleasant flavor. The tree is delicate and, in our climate, requires a warm espalier. 8. ABRICOT ALBERGE. Ripens around August 15. Its flesh is firm, fragrant, good and excellent for jam. Sweet almond. The tree grows quite tall, is very vigorous, and bears a large quantity of fruit, which sometimes degenerates. It reproduces its variety identically by sowing. There are three sub-varieties: Abricot de Montgamet, ripening a little later, larger, less round, with more melting flesh and the same perfume. Sweet almond. Abricot de Tours, ripening at the same time, larger, more fragrant, better quality. Amande douce. Apricot aveline, differing only slightly from Montgamet, from which it has the same quality. Sweet almond. 9. ABRICOT PÊCHE, or Nancy apricot. Ripens around August 15th; very large, compressed, more or less brownish-reddish-yellow, especially in high winds, and often becomes scabby on the light side if the season is rainy. The flesh is reddish, very melting, with a distinctive and very pleasant fragrance. A distinctive feature of this fruit is the hole in the stone through which a pin can easily be inserted. The tree is of average vigor, and its foliage is usually wilted. It has given rise to a large number of sub-varieties, because it always reproduces more or less well by sowing. 10. ABRICOT ROTAL. Ripens around mid-August. Slightly smaller than the previous variety, more rounded, yellowish, lightly colored, with melted, yellow, fragrant flesh, better than that of the peach apricot. The tree is very vigorous; it is remarkable for the size of its leaves and the length of their petiole. 11. AbRicor MUSCn. ripens at the end of July. It is almost round, with very thin, yellow skin, revealing the stone through the flesh, which is very delicate, fragrant and excellent. This variety requires a very warm espalier. 12. ApRIcor caos MUSCH. It ripens at the end of July. Its flesh, which does not adhere to the stone, is melting and fragrant; its kernel is sweet; the tree is more vigorous than the previous one. 13. ABRICOT NOIR Ou DU rAPX. (Prunus dasicarpa, by Willdenow.) Round, small, dark wine-red; flesh red and clinging to the pit; bland, very poor quality, except in extremely hot years. I have seen other new varieties obtained by Mr. Noiseite, such as the Apricot Vinux, the Apricot de Paris, etc., etc., but they are not as widespread as they should be. PRIMEUR. Apricot trees are only very rarely forced to grow in Paris, either because their fruit is not valued as highly here as it is in the north, since we have an abundance of them in season; or because we suspect difficulties in this operation which do not exist; or, finally, because this carelessness too often results in France in an uncertain sale which sometimes cannot compensate for the cost of cultivation. The apricot tree, so well naturalized in France, has not yet become so in northern Europe above the fiftieth degree of latitude, and particularly in Russia. It's no more than sixty years since the apricots eaten in St. Petersburg were brought there from Paris, and although care was taken to pack them a little before they were ripe and with meticulous care, it's easy to judge their condition after such a long journey. tried growing apricots in greenhouses. He succeeded perfectly, made his fortune, and only then stopped making a secret of his process. Until then, he convinced those who came to buy them from him at an exorbitant price that he was bringing them from Paris. Since then, Russia has harvested enough of these fruits to satisfy the consumption of wealthy people. When it comes to forcing an apricot tree, the variety is not indifferent; those that lend themselves most easily to this kind of cultivation are: the apricotin, the petit musch, the common apricot and its varieties named blanc-groszeespèce, commun hatif and blanc de Provence; the angoumois hatif, and some sub-varieties of the apricot-pêche. Nevertheless, the others could succeed in certain climates, given proper care (1). The tree must be young, vigorous, absolutely gum-free, well furnished with wood so as not to occupy too much space unnecessarily, and provided with a quantity of good fruiting eyes. Without this condition, the flower appears, the fruit sets, but often deteriorates and falls for lack of sap, as the leaves alone have the ability to attract it and concentrate it on the young fruit. A tree destined to be forced must be prepared for this as early as spring, i.e. at the time of the first disbudding. All branches should be left to grow, so that the fruit can ripen in the following order: 1. apricotin, 2. angoumois hatif, 3. petit musch, 4. commun bitif, 5. blanc-grosse-espèce, 6. apricot de Provence, q. apricot-pêche and its varieties. In very cold climates, the latter and its sub-varieties are preferable to the others, although they are less likely to produce fruit, and we extract those that are only likely to bear fruit. We act in the same way and according to the same principles during the second disbudding. As soon as the sap is suspended, spread a layer of three to four fingers of compost over the entire surface of the soil to be covered by the greenhouse, mixing it with the soil by ploughing with a fork, the depth of which will always be proportionate to the more or less superficial arrangement of the roots. It is essential that the fertilizer is fully consumed, because it will immediately provide abundant nourishment for the vegetation, and because if it were still susceptible to fermentation, it would attract and fix moisture to the roots, causing them to mildew or give rise to the deadly disease known as powdery mildew. In autumn, shortly after the leaves have fallen, if you want very early fruit, or more usually in January, you prune short to obtain more beautiful fruit, especially if you want to preserve the trees; in the opposite case, you prune long, and the fruit is more numerous, but of lesser quality. If, as a result of this operation, gummy ooze forms, either on the large limbs or on the cut branches, this inconvenience is remedied by removing the gum or ulcerated part with a scraper, and by applying a little grafting wax to cover the wounds when necessary. The apricot tree flowers and ripens fruit in four months, when its vegetation follows its normal course. Forcing could hasten the process, but to avoid heat stroke, it's much better to delay vegetation a little, and allow four and a half months from the time you start forcing to the time you obtain results. To obtain certain results, it takes about a month to bring a tree into flower. This means that if you want apricots in April, you have to start heating in January. But an intelligent gardener can try to force it on much earlier, and success will crown his care in mild winters, especially in those where the sun often appears. An early season gardener can therefore, by employing the method generally in use, provide fruit from the beginning of April right through to the plein-terre season. He can extend the latter season until the end of September, by planting espaliers in the north, in cool soil and exposure, and by choosing late varieties, such as Portuguese apricots, peaches, royal, alberge and others. There are several ways of forcing apricots. We'll describe them all in detail, because we'll be giving here the general notions that can be applied to all other stone trees, and we'll often refer the reader to them. 1. forcing in crates and greenhouses. This method is scarcely used in regions where the cold does not fall below eighteen degrees, a temperature below which apricot trees cannot survive in the open ground; but it is widely used in Sweden and Russia. The trees are grown in pots or crates, just as oraugers are grown here, given the same care, and wintered in greenhouses. To fortify them, we place them in heated tarpaulins, and treat them in the same way as those we force into flying greenhouses. It would therefore be pointless to give a breakdown of the details that follow. 2. Forcing in a flying greenhouse and in an espalier against a wall. After selecting the tree to be heated and preparing it for this operation by pruning and disbudding, place the flying greenhouse as follows. This greenhouse (fig. 11.) consists of a light framework, which can be dismantled at will, and is made up of cross-members to support glass panels of varying lengths, depending on the height of the trees to be forced, but usually not exceeding eight or nine feet. If the panels are long enough to exceed the height of the trees by only a few inches, they can be placed on the ground with their tops against the wall, but more commonly they are supported on a small plank balustrade, eighteen inches to two feet high. In this case, manure stoves are set up along this support during frosts. Sometimes, to make greater use of the flying greenhouse, it is placed on a bed for early fruit and vegetables, as we're about to say, but it should be noted that this method has the disadvantage of making the trees much harder to defend against humidity. Here's how it's done. At two feet from the wall, a warm layer is raised and given a width of four feet; it must be given just the right height so that it can ferment and emit heat. When established according to ordinary principles, solid stakes are driven one foot from the outer edge, through the entire thickness of the layer and into the ground. These piles should be spaced so that each has a purlin to support, and their tops should be flush with the bed. A long cross-beam is nailed solidly to these stakes, to support the panels and hold them in place, so that they don't sink with the layer as it sinks due to the consumption of manure. Usually, this crosspiece consists of a piece of oak two or three inches wide and twelve to eighteen lines thick, but it would be better to make it from a solid plank one foot wide, covering the outside of the bed and sloping slightly to keep rainwater away from the panels. At other times, the layer is only three feet thick, and the stakes supporting the crosspieces are planted against them and on the outside. This is even the most common method, although it doesn't have the same advantages as the previous one. Here's why: when it comes to heating the layer, the stoves have to be placed outside, and can only be covered with litter, which is not enough to prevent the water from the panels from getting in between them and the layer, and cooling them both. In all cases, i.e. whether there is a bed or not, when the crosspieces are mounted, the glazed panels are placed on top, and their length must be proportionate to the height of the espalier. However, the most convenient are never more than eight feet long. They are secured at the bottom with small iron pegs set into the crosspiece, and at the top with a false coping made of plaster, wood or lime mortar. It's essential that air and cold can't penetrate through any of the joints, so we seal them with moss. On the sides of the greenhouse, which are sealed with perfectly joined planks, there is a door on the east side, and a window on the west side. I assume that the espalier faces south, because if it faced either east or west, the door would have to face south. The door would have to be glazed to make it easier to see what's going on inside, which is more difficult than through the glass of the panels. However, this is not the case. Between the door and the bed, if there is one, we build a brick furnace, or place a stove, but with the extreme precaution of isolating it from the bed, for fear of accident. We must light from outside, and the pipe, which can be made of sheet metal or cast iron, will be much better in the ground. It should cross the entire length of the greenhouse, on the surface of the ground; then, when it reaches the end, it bends upwards, runs along one side of the window, and exits at the top near the last panel. To avoid obstructing the passageway, which has only two feet, if there's a layer, we let him run along it, but never less so than by isolating him sufficiently so that we don't have to worry about him setting fire to it. To avoid this accident, and for other reasons, here's how to arrange the layer inside. Five-foot stakes will be driven against the edge, and these stakes will be used to hold planks lying against each other and encasing the layer; they can be held in place by means of a few nails. In this way, the inside of the greenhouse can be kept clean, there's no danger of fire, and when the layer sags, it can't widen. Finally, it can be loaded with tan, or even potting soil, to force flowers, strawberries, small vegetables, etc. We assume that all these preparations are complete. Now it's time to place thermometers at intervals, to check the temperature. We immediately start building a fire to warm up the greenhouse. It is essential not to let any smoke into the greenhouse, as it is fatal not only for the apricot tree, but for all the plants exposed to it. The temperature must not be raised very high all at once, as too sudden a transition will cause the tree to sprout flowing, etiolated buds, incapable of producing anything, or even preserving themselves; it may also result in fruit buds aborting and developing into wood. For the first eight days, simply set the Réaumur thermometer at between eight and ten degrees, then gradually raise the temperature each day, until it reaches between ten and twelve; maintain this temperature until the bud is very swollen and ready to bloom. In the meantime, there are a number of essential treatments we should mention. At least twice a day, the greenhouse should be visited and entered carefully, i.e. with the door open as little as possible, so as not to let the cold in. If an icy wind is blowing in the direction of the door, sew a heavy canvas curtain or mat over it, and let it fall behind you before opening and entering. If the greenhouse were considerable, and the produce capable of compensating for expenses, it would be even better to build a sort of vestibule out of planks, with a first door, which you would close behind you before opening the door. The pathway is swept and cleaned to remove any matter that might retain humidity. The espalier is carefully peeled of any dead leaves that may have remained, and which would certainly lead to contagious mould; the insects, kermes and aphids, that have hatched as a result of the heat, are carefully destroyed; and lastly, any means that circumstances may require are employed to chase away the humidity. The surest way to do this is to provide air, but this requires great precautions, even if the outside temperature is only a few degrees below that inside. If we were to open without further care, the plant's insensitive transpiration would be completely suppressed, leading to sudden death or defoliation. If the damage did not go that far, the tree would remain languid, and some or all of the fruit would abort. If the outside temperature in the shade is below five degrees Celsius, don't let any air in; if it's between five and eight degrees Celsius, let some in, but don't open the door for as long as necessary; finally, if the temperature is between eight and fifteen degrees Celsius, you can let some air in by opening the door and window, but before doing so, prepare the plants so they won't be inconvenienced. This preparation consists in turning off the furnace until the inside thermometers show that the inside and outside temperatures are more or less in equilibrium, 2 although the greenhouse temperature is still a few degrees higher. Let's return to our espalier, which we left when the flower buds were ready to develop, with the greenhouse atmozphere heated to between ten and fifteen degrees. If the gems are seen to swell much more rapidly than they usually do, it is likely that the tree has been pushed too fast. In this case, the organs of fertilization have not had time to develop fully, so they remain languid, the anthers contain little pollen and, still imperfect, the non-irritable stigma cannot be stimulated by the prolific liquor, resulting in fruit abortion. To overcome this major drawback, the thermometer is lowered by a few degrees, air is given and the sap is suspended for a few days; during this time, the fruiting bodies perfect themselves and acquire all the energy necessary for the act of fertilization. This brings us to the critical moment of flowering. If my advice has been followed to date, and the greenhouse has been heated evenly throughout, almost all the flowers will appear at once, and flowering will only last a few days. But it's during this interval that you need to redouble your care and precautions. Keep the temperature strictly between ten and twelve degrees, no more and no less. If the heat is allowed to drop, abortion will occur through weakness; if it is increased, there will be what is known as erosion and brülure, i.e. the drying out of the authenticae and stigmata. These two pitfalls are easily avoided by monitoring day and night for some time, but a third, humidity, is even more fatal. To avoid this, air is given several times a day, from eleven o'clock in the morning until three o'clock in the afternoon, and more or less loug-time each time, depending on the outside temperature. Old 3 1 13 2 ABR 13 rags are used to wipe off any drops of water that stick to the glass panels. Finally, we provide the necessary watering for the strawberry plants or other plants we grow in the greenhouse, either on the bed if there is one, or in pots placed on the shelves we have arranged for this purpose, and we give them only what is strictly essential. Smoke is particularly dangerous during the flowering period, so great care must be taken to avoid letting it get inside the greenhouse, otherwise all the flowers will abort. As soon as they have reached a third of their size, we increase the heat, but gradually, so that it takes at least eight days to raise the thermometer to twelve or fifteen degrees and keep it there. During the course of this education, the tree should be given the care that circumstances dictate. For example, unnecessary branches should be cut back, branches should be trellised as they lengthen; branches should be disbudded and removed if they are crumpled, etiolated or mouldy. When the tree reaches maturity, remove any leaves that may be hiding the fruit, to let it enjoy the sun's rays. When it's very cold, place good mats over the panels at night, and remove them whenever necessary. Finally, we'll take the most scrupulous care to maintain the interior temperature constantly at the same thermometer reading. If there's a layer, we'll probe it from time to time, and when we see that it's starting to cool, we'll place thick stoves of hot manure all along the outside. You can even pull a good portion of the old manure from the outside, and replace it with new manure from the stable. 3. Forcing into espalier frames. In the north of France, or even around Paris, when you don't have a large expanse of wall for espaliers, you can use M. Noisette's espalier à chassis. Here's how it works: in a direction from east to west, plant two rows of apricot trees, ten or twelve feet apart in each row, with the rows five feet apart. Between the two lines, behind each tree, is a wooden trellis against which each espalier is trellised. These trellis frames are six feet high, plus or minus, and iucliated dedaus between the two planting lines, so that the upper end of those in the right-hand line bears on the top of those in the left-hand league, thus A. When the trees trellised on the frames or trellises represented by the sides of this reversed A, have reached the top, their highest branches touch each other, and their growth is directed in such a way as to force them to die out to the right and left without going any higher. In addition, they are bent for pruning like ordinary espaliers. They can be trained as espaliers à la Moutreuil, à la Française, or en palmette, and this last form is the most advantageous in this case, because the tree occupies half the surface area. For heating purposes, trees are prepared and pruned as described above. The glazed paunches are installed, or a furnace is set up, with an earthen pipe running the length of the espalier, passing through the middle of the canopy formed by the coppice of the two lines of trees. Heat it up, taking care to keep it absolutely warm, as we've said, and take the same care as we've taught you. A warm layer can also be used. To do this, dig a pit two and a half feet wide and ten inches deep under the vault, and fill it with hot manure. On top of this manure, we build a hot bed three and a half feet wide at the nozzle, two and a half feet wide at the top, and we raise it three feet; to preserve its heat, we redo it every two weeks. A furnace is set up as above, but the pipe is passed over the bed, or along one of the sides. This method has been used in the past, but offers no advantage; often, in spite of every precaution, the dampness of the manure attaches itself to the twigs and leaves of the trees, causing them to mildew. In addition to this, only a very small part of the bed can be harvested, because with the exception of mushrooms, asparagus, white chicory and a few other vegetables that can only be eaten blanched, the other vegetables cannot be grown there. In northern climates, where the espalier is used only to obtain fruit in the regular season, and where it would not ripen without this precaution, it is sufficient to place nine- to ten-foot panels in the autumn, leaning them against each other in a vault (the glass must be at least six inches from the surface of the foliage). The joints of the panels are hermetically sealed with moss, so that air and cold cannot penetrate inside; along the panels, at their foot, a bed of hot manure two feet high and two or three wide is placed, and everything stops there. Air is supplied whenever the temperature permits, and the panels are removed entirely when the season is warm enough to allow the fruit to grow and ripen. In this way, apricot trees blossom and set fruit long before the outside trees begin to vegetate, and they have time to improve over the course of the summer. This method can also be used for espaliers against a wall. 4°. Forcing in greenhouses and in the open. For this type of cultivation, you need a warm greenhouse that is entirely glazed, or at least glazed on three sides and above, as described in the article on vines. Apricot trees are grown in crates, and when they are strong enough to produce fruit soon, they are removed with the root ball and transplanted into the greenhouse, in the open ground. If you wish, you can grow them as bushes, but the best way is to espalier them. The care required is absolutely the same as for the flying greenhouse. However, it should be remembered that the more light the trees receive, the easier it is for the fruit to set. So place them as close as possible to the glass. We won't go into detail here on how to build and heat the greenhouse, how to raise the layers, etc. For all these articles, we refer you to the "Greenhouse" section. For all these articles, we refer the reader to general works on horticulture. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. The apricot tree does well in all soils, provided they are not too wet; however, it prefers light, sandy and deep soils, especially when it is free-standing or grafted onto an almond tree, as in this case its roots are taprooted. It can be propagated from seed or by grafting. If you want to sow it - and this is the best thing to do in areas where it doesn't seem to do very well - choose varieties that reproduce identically from the kernel, such as early apricot, common apricot, alberge, peach, etc. Preference is given to the kernels that are the most resistant to disease. Preference is given to the largest kernels, coming from the most beautiful fruits; they are immediately stratified, i.e. placed in a crate, alternating a bed of kernels and a bed of damp sand, and then placed in a frost-free cellar over winter. In October, or better still in spring, we take them out of the sand, and, after having well loosened and ploughed the soil, we plant them two inches deep, in place, or in a nursery eighteen inches or two feet apart; and, if we have planted in autumn, we cover the seedlings with a good thickness of litter or dry leaves, in order to protect their delicate sprouts, already developed to a certain extent, from the effects of frosts. If you want a very vigorous tree, you must sow it in place; if you don't, you must replant it in its second year, and if the soil is deep, you must be careful to follow the authors' advice and cut the pivot. The good gardener falls into this error by recommending that the pivot be cut from trees that are to be trained in espaliers. He gives the pretext that the less vigorous growth is easier to manage. Far from sharing this opinion, I believe that a tree can never be vigorous enough, when it is managed by an intelligent gardener who knows his trade. In fact, a tree grown from noyan behaves and grows in exactly the same way as one that has been grafted. Its fruit is usually a little smaller, but just as good, and the tree is more difficult to gum. Apricot trees are never grafted onto themselves, as this method produces trees that are languid and much more prone to gum than others. All varieties do very well on damanoir, cerisette and Saint-Julien plums, but not on almonds; the crests of peach, angoumois and alberge apricots are prone to peeling off when placed on this species. Grafting is usually done with a dormant-eye escutcheon. I would point out that the plants on which it is placed must always come from seed and never from offshoots. In hot, dry soils, apricot trees are best planted facing east; in cold, damp soils, they are best planted facing south. Open-air varieties produce smaller fruit, but in greater quantities and with a more fragrant taste. Three years after planting, this tree starts to bear fruit, and it lasts because of the quality of the soil. Its flowers appear from the first days of spring, but are liable to be destroyed by late frosts, unless care is taken to shelter them from the slightest danger with mats or canvas. When exposed to the full force of the wind, apricot trees will rapidly thin out towards the base of the branches if they are not pruned, at least during the first four or five years. Pruning consists of hollowing out the inside of the tree's head to allow easy access to air and light, cutting off all misplaced or useless branches, and draining the sap towards the lower part of the branches. As for espaliers, they can be trained in palmette, French or Montreuil style, like peach trees; it's true that the wood is irregular and less suited to symmetrical shapes, but as this tree has the quality of growing back on old wood, with intelligence it can always be trained. Fruit-bearing branches should be pruned short, and even, when trellising, it is sometimes necessary to remove part of the shelters, otherwise the tree will be exhausted and remain sterile the following year; those that remain become much bigger and better. The small lambourdes are left intact. When ripe, if you carelessly uncover the fruits by suddenly pulling back the leaves under which they are hidden, the sun will catch them, burn them and make them fall. This operation must therefore be carried out carefully and gradually. When an apricot tree is bald, either because of age or because you've neglected to prune it, you pull it back close to the trunk, and it soon forms a new head. But it soon wears out and perishes after producing a few harvests. For further details on ordinary cultivation, not only of the apricot tree, but of all the plants mentioned in this book, please refer to the excellent Manual by our collaborator Mr. Noisette. 14 1 ABSINTHE (GRANDE), ALUINX, ARSINTEE ROMAINE, ADSINTES COMMUNE, ARMOISE AMÈRE (artemisia Absinthium); perennial, indigenous plant, aromatic in all its parts, which is taken as an infusion and used to make liqueurs. Absinth retains all its cultivation qualities when dried out, and has never been subjected to forced cultivation; we need only mention its ordinary cultivation here. It thrives in all types of soil, but prefers those that are substantial, light and slightly damp, albeit warm. In the south, it lasts fourteen or fifteen years, and acquires much more energetic virtues. It could be propagated from seed, but it's much easier and quicker to spread it from clumps or suckers, which you separate and plant in autumn or spring. What's more, it is very often self-sowing, and all that's needed to multiply it abundantly is to care for the young plants that grow naturally around the mother plant, and transplant them in spring. In Issv, near Paris, some inhabitants grow this plant extensively, to supply it to the capital's distillers (1). GARLIC (Allium sativum); this plant, which is little used in Paris but much used in the south of France, has no need to be grown as a primeur, since its bulbs keep very well all year round, if placed in a dry, frost-free place. PRIMEUR. Nevertheless, as some people are in the habit of using, as a seasoning, what they call garlic tails, i.e. the green top of the leaf, it is worth saying how one can (1) Absinthe "energetic properties; it is tonic, stomachic, vermifuge, etc. obtain it all year round. All you need to do is choose large, very healthy, well-fed bulbs, plant them in potting soil in a tied layer, among other vegetables grown under cloches or trays, and repeat this planting every fortnight during the bad season, so that the leaves can be cut off until you can get some in the ground. The holes in which the plants are planted are made with a planter; the bottom is filled with a little sand to reduce humidity, and the bulb is sunk to an inch and a half. As the stem must be a beautiful green, care is taken to place the garlics in the brightest part of the bed. ROcAmRolr (Allium scorodoprasum) is preferable for this type of cultivation. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Garlic should be planted in the open ground towards the end of February or the beginning of March; however, it still has time to succeed if planting is delayed until the beginning of May, or even later, in light, warm and substantial soils. In southern France, it is sometimes planted in November, but more often in February. It is planted in borders or beds, three inches deep and six bulbs apart. The plant is hardy, and requires only a few weedings to rid it of weeds. When the leaves dry out, maturity is recognized; the plants should then be pulled up and left to lie on the ground for a few days, to allow the air to absorb their excess moisture. When the garlics are quite dry, they are cleaned of any earth that may be attached to them, bundled together and hung in the place where they are to be kept. I've seen a few people use a particular cultivation method, with the sole aim of obtaining extraordinarily large garlics. Here's how they do it: in August, they plant preserved garlic bulbs from the previous year in substantial soil; they leave them in the ground until the heads have grown to the size of walnuts; then they pull them out, dry them in the shade, exposed to a draught, and keep them until spring, to replant them whole in February and March. This method produces monstrously large heads of garlic, but is this advantage enough to offset the doubled cost of cultivation? Garlic, like rocambola, is a very rare seed-bearer, so we only propagate them by their bulblets. Both like warm, light, sandy soil, but they do well everywhere. As with all bulbous plants, they need much-consumed fertilizers, as fresh manure causes them to rot. ALLELUIA, OXALIDE, PETTTX OSEILLE, SURELLE, PAIN-DE-cOUCOU (Oxalis acetozella); a small, perennial, native plant that thrives in the shade of woods and in rock crevices. In some provinces, it is grown on a large scale to produce what is known in the trade as sorrel salt (1). Few people grow it in the kitchen garden, because it is only used in cooking to make seasonings, so we have never tried to force it. This could easily be done, by pulling out the small tubers that make up its roots, and planting them, after having (1) Acid oxalate of potash or sorrel salt, is refreshing; it soothes the pulse, calms thirst, reduces body heat, increases urine secretion, etc., eic. The plant is antiscorbutic and diuretic. This species should not be confused with OXALIDE CORNICULEE, (Oxalis comniculata,) an annual plant more commonly found in the Paris markets, but which does not have the same qualities. Oxalide petite Oseille has white or pink flowers, while Ozalide corniculée has yellow ones. Leave them to dry for a few days in the shade, in the compost of a warm bed, where they should be sunk half an inch. In winter, they can be placed on a bed under a chair, or under cloches housing other early plants. Twenty-five to thirty days after planting, the first leaves can be cut, whatever the season. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Oxalis, which some people eat in the same way as sorrel, although it is more acidic, can be grown in light, sandy, slightly damp soil in the vegetable garden, with a northern exposure. The best fertilizer for it is threshold compost or heather soil. In the spring, propagate from seeds, barely covering them with soil, to allow the roots to sprout. If you want a seedling to succeed, mulch it with chopped moss. Mice are extremely fond of its root tubers, so every care must be taken to keep them away. If you are forced to grow it in open, warm areas, it needs a lot of watering. AMANDIER (Amygdalus communis); Medium-sized tree, native to Asia, whose fruit and various uses are well known. The best varieties are: 1. sweet, hard-shelled almonds. Amandier commun ou franc. Very productive tree, but small, late fruits. Common almond tree with large fruit. Very productive tree; very large fruit, ripening in September. Amandier de Tours. Largest fruit of all, elongated, compressed, with semi-hard shell. 2. Sweet almonds, soft-shelled. Princess or ladies' almond. Very productive tree, very good fruit, very soft-shelled, easily broken in the fingers. Sultana almond. Rather delicate tree; rounded fruit, as esteemed as the previous one. 3. Bitter almonds. Almond tree with large fruit. Very vigorous tree; rounded fruit. Medium-fruited almond tree. Productive tree; rounded fruit. Soft-shelled almond tree. Not very vigorous or productive; medium-sized, slightly compressed fruit. Almond-peach tree. Quite vigorous, productive tree; fruit sometimes resembles an ordinary amald, other times large, rounded, fleshy, but whose pulp always retains a bitter flavor. PRIMEUR. As the amaudier does not succeed above the 48th degree of latitude, where spring frosts constantly destroy its flowers, in northern France we are obliged to subject it to artificial cultivation. It is planted at the foot of a wall in the south, in an espalier, and depending on how cold the climate is, it is sheltered during flowering by canvas, straw mats or glass panels. In Europe's most northerly countries, it is treated in the same way as the apricot. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Almond trees thrive in light, warm, deep soil. They are propagated by sowing or grafting onto themselves, or, more rarely, onto plum trees, and only in shallow, strong, damp soil. Almonds are stratified in January and planted in nurseries or, better still, in the spring. Ordinary weeding, hoeing, etc. is carried out, and the young trees are usually ready for grafting the following year. Grafting is done in buds, with a growing eye in spring, or with a dormant eye in September. All other care is the same as for peach trees. AMBROISIE, CHÉNOPODE AMBROISIE, TEÉ DU MEXIQUE, ANSÉRINE (Chenopodium ambrozoides); annual plant, native to Mexico, which is only cultivated for use in tea infusions, because of the sweet smell it gives off. As it retains its sequential qualities after drying, we don't usually force it into the soil. It grows well in any soil, provided it is warm, but it prefers light, sandy and substantial soils. It is propagated from seed, sown in spring, and when the plant is strong enough, transplanted into the soil. It requires no special care, and does well in all seasons if sown under a bell or frame, on a warm bed with supplies (1). ANGELICA, ANGELICA OFFICIMALE, RACINZ DU SAINT-ESPAIT (Angelica archangelica); biennial plant, growing naturally in the Alps. The ribs of its leaves and young stems are preserved in sugar, its leaves are used to make liqueurs, and its seeds are used to make dragées, from which it follows that, since it can be preserved by these various preparations, it would be absolutely useless to subject this plant to aruficial cultivation (a). (4) This plant can be usefully employed in medicine for pulmonary catharsis, humid asthma, and all diseases of the chest which are not yet declared phthisis; in a word, it can be placed among the bechic stimulans, whose properties are best proven. (a) Angelica is considered stomachic, carminative and diaphoretic. It is a mildly stimulating tonic. Angelica is hardy and fairly easy to grow. It likes open, substantial, slightly damp soil with a sunny exposure; nevertheless, it does well everywhere, provided it is given some watering during summer droughts. It should be sown as soon as the seeds ripen, or in September, because if you wait until spring, the seeds often fail to set. It is undoubtedly on this particularity that a widespread prejudice has been established in the south of France: it is believed that its seeds lose their germinative capacity when harvested with the bare hand. They need little covering and frequent soaking, and usually sprout after a month and a half or two months, sometimes only the following spring. If you leave the young plants in place, they require little care, but if you transplant them, you need to take a few precautions to ensure they take root again. Transplant them into a well-trodden, loosened soil, amended with reconstituted potting compost, and give them a few weedings and waterings. In winter, when the stems have disappeared, the plants are covered with a little compost, and in May and June of the second year, the stems can be cut. Although this plant is biennial, it often grows back in the third and even fourth years. ANISE, ROUCAGE, ARIS VEAT (Fimpinella anisum); a biennial plant, native to the Orient, the seeds of which are used to make small sugared almonds and liqueurs. There would be no point in forcing you to plant it, so we'll just talk here about its ordinary cultivation (1). (1) Anise has the same green characteristics as angelica. The seeds: are tonic, stimulating, carminative, etc. warm, perfectly loosened, amended with old compost. Sow it in spring, in March or April, and give it frequent basins to help germination. Weed the young plant, or water it during droughts, and it sets seed in August. To collect them, the stems are cut close to the ground, left to dry in the sun, then beaten. The plants usually regrow in spring and provide a second crop of seeds, but the roots often perish in winter, so it's wise to sow them every spring. This is also the practice of the inhabitants of southern France and Touraine, where anise is grown extensively. Anise seeds retain their germinative properties for three years. ARACHIDE, PISTACHE-DE TERRE, AMANDE-DE-TEREE (Arachys hypogœa); annual plant, native to Mexico where it is highly cultivated, has many similarities with the bean, and can be grown in much the same way. Its seed, roughly the shape of a large bean, is eaten cooked in water or under ashes; an oil is extracted that is good to eat and suitable for a variety of uses. After flowering, as soon as the pod has formed, the stalk inclines towards the s.I., the pod sinks into the earth, and the seed is found two or three inches below the surface when ripe. Peanuts were brought to France around thirty years ago. Agronomists, struck by the benefits it could bring, strongly recommended it to farmers in the south of France (as it can only succeed in large-scale cultivation in provinces where melons produce good yields in the open ground). In the Landes department, its cultivation succeeded perfectly, but it was soon abandoned because growers could not afford to dispose of its products, which were unavailable on the market. We have never tried to force peanuts, but it could be done with the greatest of ease. All you have to do, in any season, is sow three or four seedlings in a pot six to seven inches in diameter, which you then press into the tan of a warm layer, either in a pineapple greenhouse or under a frame. Leave the plant in this way until it is strong enough to be germinated in the pot, and then place it with the rootball in the potting soil of a warm melon bed under a frame. The same care should be given as to early beans. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Peanuts like warm, substantial, light or sandy soil, so that they can easily sink their pods into the soil, amended with well-consumed potting soil or, better still, leaf compost. In spring, when the soil is sufficiently warmed up, sow in rays or clumps, covering the seeds with two inches of soil. We hoe, weed, and finally give it the same care as beans. M. Noisette recommends soaking the seeds in water forty-eight hours before sowing, to hasten germination. If sown in rays, plants should be spaced fifteen inches apart; two feet apart if sown in clumps. ARROCHE DES JARDINS, BONNE-DAME, BELLÉDAME, IRIBLE, FOLETTE, CHOU D'AMOUR Ou D'ARMOU (Atriplex hortensis); annual plant that comes to us from Tartary. We use it to mix with sorrel to soften its acidity; despite its insipidity, in the south of France we use a lot of it in herb broth. Three varieties are grown: blond, with yellowish-green leaves; red, with pale-red foliage; and very red, with dark-red leaves. PRIMEUR. This plant rises very easily, grows rapidly and is not at all delicate; these reasons make it very easy to grow as a primeur. From October onwards, it is sown thickly in the compost of early bedding, along with supplies, radishes, etc.; fifteen or twenty days later, leaves have to be cut, and it must be sown again in a warmer bed. Sowing continues fortnightly until February, when the seeds can be planted in the open ground. As it is quite water-loving, it should be placed on beds where plants requiring watering are grown. ORDINARY GROWING. It can be sown in March, and as it grows very quickly, sowing should be repeated every twenty days, so that the plant is available all year round. The seed must be harvested a little before maturity, otherwise it is easily scattered by the winds. The stalks are cut, dried in the shade, then shaken on a cloth; the seeds detach and are collected with the greatest of ease. ARTICHAUT (cynara Scolymus); perennial plant, native to Barbary. Several varieties are grown: Le gros vert, or Artichaut de Laon, very large, excellent, the most widely grown around Paris. The gros camus de Bretagne, with a broad, flattened head, paler green than the previous one, a little earlier but less fleshy. The violet, of mediocre size, early, with scales washed purplish-red at the tip, excellent for peppering, but of mediocre quality when cooked. Red, smaller than the previous one, with purple-red circumferential scales, the best of all if eaten raw when young, but becoming hard and fibrous when fully grown. It is less successful around Paris than in the south of France. The white, even more difficult to preserve than the previous one, is very early, assex tender but small. Its head is very flat, and its scales are terminated by a prickly spine. It degenerates quite rapidly in Paris. Sucré de Géne, very small, more spiky than white, pale green, yellow flesh and excellent raw. It degenerates even more quickly than the previous variety, and in the Paris climate, if you want to have it in good condition, you have to bring in carnations from Italy every two years. PRRZUR. There are several ways of obtaining early artichokes, which we will describe in detail below. To obtain artichokes in April, we force them into place. Carnations are planted in the middle of May, and cared for in the same way as full-grown plants, until the cold sets in. You don't want to plant earlier, nor choose carnations that are too big, so that they don't set fruit in autumn, but only form strong, vigorous plants. You get wicker cages, with bars spaced a good inch apart, cylindrical, about like a barrel split at both ends, eighteen inches wide and two feet high. (fig. 3.) As soon as the first frosts threaten, each artichoke plant is mounded with a little soil taken from a nearby square, the leaves are bundled together, after cutting off those at the bottom that threaten to dry out or rot, and a cage is placed over each plant. Arrange the foliage in the cage in such a way as to give the leaves, especially those in the heart of the plant, as much air and light as possible. Once all the cages are in place, spread a well-trampled bed of manure, at least six to eight inches thick, over the entire surface between each cage. When frost arrives, we surround the cages up to the top with a bed of dry litter, against which we raise a good bed of manure. Close the top of the cage with a good plug of broken straw, and cover the whole with a cap of long straw, to keep out rainwater. Whenever the thermometer indicates that the outside temperature is above freezing, remove the plug to let in air and light. You can even leave the plants uncovered during rain, as long as it doesn't last several days in a row, as artichokes are more afraid of shrivelling than humidity when they have air. Every three or four days, as soon as the plants are uncovered, we visit them to remove any rotten leaves, and to replace in a more favorable position those which the deprivation of air and light would threaten to shrivel. Care is taken to avoid being caught out by the frost, and when the thermometer falls, the straw pads are replaced exactly on the cages every evening. When spring arrives and frosts are no longer to be feared, the cages and surrounding fumter are removed, but left on the square until the soil has warmed up enough to allow the first hoeing to take place without any inconvenience. This easy method produces artichokes from Easter to May. It is essential, I repeat, that the plant be young if you want to obtain them at the times indicated. Older plants treated in this way are more likely to be preserved and produce fruit earlier, but only fifteen to twenty days earlier than the others. Artichokes can also be forced in situ, to produce fruit in February and March. Here's how it's done. You dig three pits one foot wide and as deep, parallel to each other and eighteen inches apart; their length is indeterminate; you fill these pits with old manure and potting soil, on which you can make small spring and summer seedlings. In May, strong artichoke eyelets are planted in the beds between the pits. They can be cultivated early in the summer, just like those from an ordinary plantation. When the cold weather is about to arrive, we remove the old manure and compost from the three pits, and replace it with warm manure; or enclose the two rows of artichoke plants in wicker cages similar to those we've already mentioned, but only eighteen inches high. Around the cages and over the pits, a warm layer is established, which is consequently six feet wide by an indeterminate length, and in the middle of which the artichoke vines are placed in voids held by the cages. The layer is raised eighteen inches, and when it is level with the cages, a two-foot-wide, fourteen- to fifteen-inch-high verrine is placed on each plant (fig. 5)." The whole is left in this state until the frosts become intense, at which point the layer is replenished with six or seven inches of warm manure, and, during the night, the verrines are covered with straw mats and large bedding. Needless to say, the bed must be welded often, to see if it loses heat, and whenever this happens, it must be reshaped, new manure added, lined with good stoves, and every means employed to keep it at a constantly high temperature. Whenever the thermometer is between five and eight degrees, or higher, we take advantage of moments of sunshine to give the air by lifting the verrines a few inches. We wipe off the moisture and water droplets that cling to the glass, peel the plants and clean them of aphids, rid them of rotten or moldy leaves, etc., etc.. The third way of forcing artichokes is the one to be preferred, because produce can be obtained from December to April. In spring, baskets or manes are purchased, fourteen to fifteen inches wide and eighteen inches deep. These are filled with a mixture of good, free-flowing soil and well-consumed loam, and in April, one or two artichoke carnations are planted in each basket. These baskets are buried in one of the garden's flowerbeds, and the plant is cared for as if it were in the ground. A gardener with a little experience will easily see if the plant is in danger of remaining too weak to produce in December and January; if so, he'll push it a little with water to get it going. If, on the other hand, the vigor of its vegetation makes him fear that it will bear fruit in the ordinary autumn season, he will remove the basket of soil, and give the rootball only the humidity strictly necessary to prevent the plant from perishing. At the end of October or the beginning of November, depending on whether the plant is more or less advanced, the baskets are removed and carried to a tarpaulin where they are placed in a warm layer. The plants are peeled, aphids are destroyed, air is given, ponds are made where necessary, and all the general care necessary for the plants is taken. In this way, you'll soon obtain prôduits that succeed one another throughout the winter, if the plants are not all of equal strength. Some people don't take such precautions. In October or December, they simply remove old artichoke plants with the root ball, and replant them in a hole made for them in the warm layer of a tarpaulin, and in which they have placed a certain quantity of the soil whose composition we have indicated. This method has the advantage of being more economical, but the results are neither as rapid nor as certain, because whatever precautions are taken to lift the plant, the roots are always damaged to a greater or lesser extent, and transplanting is an operation that tires and delays the plant. If you have a tarpaulin and you don't want to speculate on the product, you can make use of the lost space by forcing a few artichoke plants into it. To do this, all you need is a few eighteen-inch-diameter, deep boxes. Fill them with the soil mentioned above, and in September, plant a strong artichoke plant in each one, and let it recover in the open air. When the first white frosts make themselves felt, we cut off some of the leaves at the base to save space, and transport the crates to the tarpaulin, where all we have to do is give the plants the usual care. We would nevertheless point out that, treated in this way, they require more frequent watering. Finally, we'll end this article on early plants, by teaching you a very simple procedure which can be used to keep arlichauts for part of the winter at low cost. When the cold weather arrives, we cut the fruiting artichoke stems on the ground and, in the vegetable greenhouse or simply in a good cellar, we plant them in damp sand; the heads are thus preserved for a very long time with almost all their qualities. A preferable way of destroying an artichoke patch is to pull up the whole plant and plant it as we have just said, taking care to remove most of the leaves. The teles continue to grow and can supply part of the winter, and this resource is all the more precious as it requires no expense. Sometimes artichokes may run out in a jar din between the two harvests, i.e. in August and early September. This inconvenience, caused by summer drought, is easily avoided by daytime trussing of plants that failed to produce in spring. This method brings fruiting forward by one and a half to two months. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. The artichoke thrives in free soil, rich in nutrient juices, but especially deep, because its roots are pivotal. It can be propagated by graiues, which often produce the same product in the same year, but as they do not reproduce their summer variety, it is customary to propagate only by crilletons. In spring, when the leaves of the mother plants have reached about a foot in length, i.e. in April, the crown is removed, taking care not to damage the roots, and the eyelets growing around the stump are detached by hand. Only three of the most vigorous are left. Of these, the strongest are chosen, with a few roots in the nut, i.e. the crown that forms the collar. However, a carnation will grow well without them, and if you didn't have many, the lack of roots would not be a reason to discourage them. Horticultural experts recommend cutting the leaves to six inches long before replanting the carnations, but three years of comparative experiments at my place have shown me that they are mistaken; the artichoke plants to which I have subjected this operation have always been less vigorous, and above all much less eager than those to which I have left their leaves in their full length. Moreover, this is easy to understand: we know that leaves, as much as roots, contribute to plant nutrition, and if you remove these organs from a plant that already lacks roots, it will no longer be able to draw anything from the air, nutrition will be almost nil, and consequently, recovery will be much longer and more difficult. This is a general rule that applies to all plants. Whatever the case, after having perfectly cleared and loosened the ground intended for planting, and after having suitably amended it with a consummate fertilizer, the eyelets are planted in staggered rows, two and a half feet apart in mediocre soils, and three apart in good soils. Two of them are placed four inches apart, so that there is no gap in the plantation if any are missing. They should not be planted too deeply, to avoid heart rot. From time to time, you give the plants a little water to help them get back on their feet; you hoe and weed to destroy weeds, and that's all you do until winter approaches. If a few plants are missing, they can still be successfully replaced in May, either by detaching new eyelets from the mother plants, or by removing one where both plants have recovered. When a plantation has been well cared for and planted at the right time, two-thirds of the plants start producing the following autumn. As soon as the first frosts appear, all the stems are cut as close as possible to the stump, the base leaves are removed and the others are bundled together. This operation consists in bringing the soil around the stem to protect it from frost. A very pernicious and, unfortunately, all-too-common practice is to take the soil from the bed itself, between the feet, thus uncovering the roots and exposing them to the rigors of the frosts. When this first operation is complete, dry leaves, fern or barley bales are heaped around the plants, and the whole thing is covered with a large bedding. In wet soils, "it is necessary," says M. Noisette, "to open gullies between each row of artichokes, and to use the earth removed to butter the feet. The entire square, except for the gutters, is covered with a layer of dry sumier, which is made thicker around each plant, taking care not to bring the manure into contact with the plants, which are placed at the bottom of a funnel. This funnel is covered with dry litter during the frosts, and the straw is combed to keep rainwater away from the plants. "Whenever the weather gets milder and the sun appears, we remove the litter and replace it during the night. In my opinion, the best way to protect artichokes from the cold, to which they are less sensitive than one might think, and from humidity, shrivelling and the resulting rot, which are the ordinary causes of their loss, is to house them in the cages I mentioned in the article on early vegetables, and to manage them absolutely as I said on page 31. For the last three winters, I have used no other method in my garden, and since then I have always obtained very satisfactory results. The artichoke cover can be removed entirely at the end of March, or earlier if frosts are no longer to be feared. A good ploughing is done, burying the manure from the cover and scattering the soil used to butter the artichoke. The artichoke is then oiled as we said, and other care is limited to a few hoeings to open the pores of the soil and destroy parasitic weeds. Artichokes, though perennial, are only profitable for three years; after the fourth, their yields diminish considerably in quantity and size. For this reason, planting should be renewed every three years. When an old square is destroyed, the leaves can be blanched like cardoons, and used in cooking in the same way. Some authors have printed that they are more delicate; I've experienced this myself, and I can't agree with them. Sowing artichokes can only be useful if you want to obtain new varieties, or if you are short of eyelets. The seed is collected from the best terminal heads, and kept on the artichoke's receptacle until sowing. From flowering to maturity, the stem must be bent to prevent rainwater penetrating through the scales into the heart of the fruit, which would cause the seeds to abort and rot. In February and March, sow in pots sunk into the warm layer of a frame, or wait until the end of April to sow in situ. In the former case, transplant the young plant as soon as it is strong enough; in the latter, thin out, hoe and give it the usual care. Artichokes sown on a bed almost all bear fruit the following autumn, but the others hardly produce their first heads until spring. Seed artichokes are not equally good; many are very thorny, hardly bigger than a thistle head, and must be pulled up; but if you have sown Laon seed, you will get many that are large and excellent. ASPERGE (Asparagus officinalis); native perennial, growing naturally on the sandy beaches of almost all the rivers of France and Germany. Its uses are generally well known. There are several breeds, for example: white asparagus, or Dutch asparagus, green asparagus, violet asparagus, etc.; but the slight differences between them are purely local, and we must not hope to fix them when we change country and culture (1). (1) Asparagus is a very good vegetable, but it has the singular disadvantage of imparting a foul odor to the urine of those who eat it. This odor is easily destroyed by putting muriatic acid or vinegar in the chamberpot; if, after eating asparagus, you swallow a small pill of turpentine, the urine, far from smelling bad, absolutely exalts the odor of violets. PAIMEUR. Market gardeners in Paris produce a lot of early asparagus, using two processes that we'll describe in detail below. In one case, they heat on the spot; in the other, they force the asparagus into a frame. On-site heating. In dry, light, warm soils, the soil is laid out in planks or beds four feet wide; in cold, strong, low-porosity soils, only three feet wide. A two-foot-wide path is left between each bed. The beds are perfectly loosened, and the soil is lightened as much as possible with old topsoil that has been completely used up. In spring, in March in the south of France and in April in the Paris climate, asparagus claws are planted in the beds in the usual way. The difference, however, is that the plant is spaced less widely; ten inches between each plant is sufficient. The main thing is to leave six to eight inches of empty space along both sides of each bed. The plantation is raised and cultivated without any special care until its third year, that is, until the plants are strong enough to be heated. Then, from December to April, depending on whether you want to produce earlier or later, you dig the two-foot-wide paths you've left around the planks to eighteen or twenty inches, and remove the soil after loading the two- or three-inch-thick strips. The pits are filled with well-packed hot manure, and these stoves are raised a foot above the board, and the board itself is covered a foot thick with the same manure. A bed of long litter is placed on top to keep rainwater away from the bed. If the planting is to be done on soil with some consistency, transverse vaults can be dug from distance to distance, under each bed, and filled to measure with hot manure. 8If you have frames, you can save a lot of manure; after raising the stoves as we've just said, cover the board with only six inches of manure, and place the frames with their panels over them at night, especially when it's freezing; cover the whole thing with straw mats, and it's best not to remove them until it's sunny. Fifteen or twenty days later, the asparagus should have emerged from the soil. Remove the manure from the top of the bed, cut off those that are long enough, and replace the manure. If it has lost its heat, mix it with new manure, or even replace it entirely, as well as the manure from the stoves. This is de rigueur whether or not there are frames. However, some market gardeners do things differently: when the asparagus start to grow, they remove the manure from under the frames, and never put it back in. They simply renew the stoves more often. Here's why they do it this way: asparagus growing in manure is deprived of light, and remains white along its entire length, whereas asparagus growing in light under the glass panels turns green or red along its entire length outside the soil. As the heat of the soil is greatly reduced by not replacing the manure, vegetation is delayed, and only by covering with dry leaves and straw mats is it possible to avoid suspending vegetation entirely during very cold weather, this method seems to us to be vicious. All the more so as nothing is as easy as giving asparagus its color. To do this, we gather the asparagus into small bunches of ten to twelve, prick the bunches up to half their length into the soil of a warm vegetable layer, and cover them with a transparent glass cloche. Twenty-four or forty-eight hours later, the asparagus is perfectly colored. So, far from recommending this method used by some market gardeners, who may be unaware of the very simple practice I've just taught, I'd advise you, on the contrary, to load the boards under the frame with a foot of manure when the cold becomes more intense. It's enough for the glass of the boards to be six inches away from the surface of the layer. However, care must be taken not to generate enough heat to burn the asparagus. If you take care to keep rainwater away from the layers, which would cool them down, and if you maintain their heat by reheating the stoves every fortnight, you can cut asparagus every other day for a month and a half or two months. When they stop producing, the soil is thrown back into the paths, and if there are still frosts to be feared, a certain thickness of manure is left on the beds, which is not removed until April, to preserve the roots. In spring, the asparagus grows only a few skinny, flabby stalks, which you must be careful not to cut off; but the following year they have regained enough vigor, if you don't cut them off in spring to be able to be heated again. A plantation in good soil, well managed, can last ten years, and, by alternately heating it two years at a time, provide five harvests of early crops. We should point out that forcing beds can also be encouraged by sowing; only, instead of heating in the third year, you'll have to wait until the fourth, but the yield will never be as good. As we have said, market gardeners hardly start forcing asparagus until the beginning of December, and they continue until February, or March at the latest, because it is during this part of the year that asparagus is most valuable. But the same success can be obtained by heating as soon as the stalks begin to turn yellow, and even as soon as the seed has acquired that red color which heralds its maturity. Heating on a bed. In November, we raise a warm layer eighteen to twenty inches high and three feet wide; if we want to heat later, when winter is in full force, we make the layer three feet thick and four feet wide: the manure, being in a larger mass, heats up more easily and retains its heat better. The layer is filled with three to four inches of very light earth, or old potting soil mixed with half garden soil. Place glass frames over it, and leave it there until the heat has passed. When there's no longer a risk of burning the asparagus roots, we get at least four-year-old claws, shorten the roots so that they are only eight or nine inches long, and lay them upright, very close together, so that they support each other, and take care that all the collars are roughly level. Once this has been done, use your hand to slide potting soil between the roots until all the interstices are well filled, and then spread half a finger's worth of potting soil over the whole plant. A fortnight later, the asparagus begins to grow, and you can start cutting. They are very green, but very thin, so we usually eat them as peas. After fifteen or twenty days, the claws are exhausted and no longer produce; all that's left to do is undo and throw the claws away, because they're burnt. Old squares of asparagus that are destroyed provide excellent roots to be heated in this way. This is the ordinary method used by most of the market gardeners in Paris. Mr. Noisette has made a few modifications, the results of which have been bigger produce, in greater quantities, and lasting longer. Let co tavant agriculteur speak for himself. "At the same times as for the other on-site cultivation (from November to March), layers of hot manure are prepared, eighteen to twenty inches high and four or five inches wide. - When they're at their hottest, we "cover them with ten inches of compost, to which we've mixed" a third of light earth. We place on top, six inches apart, claws aged four years or more, and on top of which we spread a two-inch bed of the same potting soil, and on top a little hot fu mier. Leave the bed in this state for a few days, and when you think the asparagus "are about to start growing, remove the manure and replace it with three inches of new compost," after which the frames are placed. The "chi" of the layer is renewed by means of heaters, which are changed every - time they are needed. After "twelve to fifteen days, the asparagus begin to produce, and we cut for as long as they "give, which is about a month, more or less. - Gardeners who have tarpaulins sometimes make use of places lost in the dark, such as the underside of tiers, back corners, etc., by forcing asparagus into baskets. Nothing is as simple as the means they employ. They procure mannes or baskets, ten inches deep by an indeterminate width; at the bottom they place a bed of straw or litter, over which they spread a layer of sand one inch thick. They finish filling the basket with consumed potting soil mixed with a fifth of light garden loam. In each basket they plant four old claws at the rate of each square foot, and, instead of cutting the roots, they intertwine them with each other. They give a light basking and place these baskets in lost places. The asparagus develops rapidly, and when the claws are exhausted, they replace them with new ones. Some growers place similar baskets in the 2 21 * * Y 2 2 i63 L 16 13 empty places of the warm layers they have in baches, and even in the open air under a frame. ORDINAIRX CULTIVATION. Asparagus like light, sandy, substantial soil; they become superb in fertile sands. They can be propagated from seed, which can be dried in situ or in a nursery. In the latter case, the roots, known as pates or claws, are planted in situ. Sowing takes place in November or October in southern France, in March in the Paris climate, and in April in more northerly regions. To sow in a nursery, prepare the soil with good ploughing and suitable amendments; when the soil is perfectly loosened, sow by broadcasting or in very light rays, and cover the seeds with a fingerful of reconstituted compost. Oh gives a few light basins, if the season is dry, and the seeds usually rise in forty days. We hoe lightly, pull out weeds carefully so as not to uproot the young plant, and give a few sprinklings if necessary. As winter approaches, all stems are cut off, and the plant is covered with three inches of potting soil, which is mixed, if desired, with half light or sandy soil. The following year, if sowing has been perfectly successful, you can remove the claws and put them in place. If not, wait until the second year, but never later. When pulling out the roots, great care must be taken to avoid breaking the large fibers that extend laterally around the collar. If the plant is to be sown in place, a few modifications are made to what has just been said; after preparing the ground as for planting, a hole one inch deep is made in each place where the plant is to be, into which five or six seeds are sown, covered with potting soil, and when they have risen, the most vigorous plant is left and all the others pulled out, or better still, cored below the collar, so as not to undermine the roots of the one that remains. During the first year, watering, hoeing and weeding are carried out in the same way as for the nursery, and in subsequent years the seedling is managed in the same way as the plantation. An asparagus plant established by this method produces its crop a year later, but the plants are more vigorous and last longer. Asparagus plants are planted in different ways. It is done at the same time as sowing, in beds or squares. For both, it's best to prepare the ground the previous autumn. To plant in beds, you open pits two feet deep in dry soils, three feet deep in wet soils, four feet wide and of any length. Between each plank, a sufficient interval is left to receive the soil from the excavation, without forming too high an ados. In wet soils, a foot-thick bed of plaster, gravel, pebbles or anything else capable of allowing water to pass through is placed in each pit. Once this is done, a foot-thick layer of good fertilizer is placed at the bottom, consisting of manure, turf, street mud, etc., which is trampled down as much as possible to prevent it from settling. This is the method used by all growers; but I must confess that I don't quite understand its usefulness, as the asparagus claw only produces a very short, very short hair, always extending laterally; each claw lasts only three years, after which it perishes, and a new one forms above it to replace it. What influence, then, can this fertilizer have on a root that never reaches it, that moves away from it every year, and that can receive no nutritive juices from it since it is placed above it? In any case, we spread three inches of well loosened soil from the excavation on top of this fertilizer, and mix it with enough compost to make it very light. Using a chalk line, draw three equally spaced lines, and fifteen or eighteen inches apart on each line, mark the places where the claws are to be placed, by raising a very small mound of compost. Choose good claws, with long, white, healthy roots; if any are fractured, cut them very cleanly with a serpette; then spread one on each mound, taking care to incline the roots a little. Cover the whole with three fingers of soil similar to that on which you planted. During the course of the year, ordinary care is given, consisting of weeding, watering and so on. In November, the beds are replenished with three fingers of soil taken from the ados which, until then, have been used to sow lettuces, supplies and other plants whose cultivation requires no more than six months' time, and which are not tall enough to provide shade. The following year, the same care is taken, and in autumn, after cutting the dried stems, three new fingers of soil are covered, on which a certain thickness of consumed manure is spread. In the third spring, while hoeing, we bury this fertilizer, and already we can start cutting the biggest asparagus. Every year, you continue with the same cultivation, loading the bed with three fingers of new soil and giving it new fertilizers. In this way, an asparagus plantation is in full production by the fifth year, and can last fourteen or fifteen years. Never cut later than July. If you plant in squares, the costs are a little higher, but the produce is more beautiful, and asparagus usually lasts from fifteen to twenty years. The soil is prepared in August of the previous year, and fertilizers are mixed in to lighten it; if the soil is strong, sand, heather and leached ashes are best. The following spring, in March or early April, the soil is divided into five-foot planks, the first of which is dug with a good spade-shot, and the soil is dumped onto the next one; then it is dug to a depth of eighteen inches in dry soils, and two feet in wet ones, and the soil is placed in a storage area. If two feet have been dug, a six-inch bed of rubble or gravel is placed at the bottom of the pit to facilitate drainage. On top of this, a second bed a foot thick is laid with consumed manure or other fertilizer. The pit is then completely filled with the soil first removed during excavation. In this way, it is in the middle of the rest of the soil. Once this has been done, the second bed is prepared in the same way, then the third, and so on, until the end of the square, which is now at the same level as before the operation. We sow or plant as we have said, giving the same care throughout the year, and by autumn, the soil has settled enough to allow us to top up with three fingers of compost. Every year, in autumn, new fertilizer is brought into the square, which is buried in the spring when the first ploughing is done, and so that in the long run the square does not become too raised, an inch or two of soil is removed from the surface, to be replaced by better soil. The asparagus seed is harvested from the most vigorous stalks, which should not be cut in the spring for this purpose. The stalks are cut off, the berries removed and left to dry in the air for two weeks; they are then crushed in the hands and washed in a vase filled with water. The husks float to the surface, and the seeds sink to the bottom. B BASELLE ROUGE, ÉTINARD DU MALARAR ( Basella rubra); biennial, climbing plant, native to the Indies, cultivated

like Rancux BAselle (Basella alba), and used for the same purposes. These two plants are ideal for replacing spinach, which has the same taste and qualities. They produce much more, and all summer long. PRIMEUR. I don't think that baselle has ever been grown as an early crop, probably because, as it is not well known on the Paris markets, market gardeners would not be able to sell it. It would, however, be very easy to grow for those who use tarpaulins, flying greenhouses or hothouses. In May, plant it in baskets in a bed against a wall facing south. In September, it would be tucked into the tarpaulin, planted with its basket in a bed against a wall, which it would line by trellising against it, and, by this means, it would make use of wasted space. If it had enough light, it would produce very good leaves, which could be harvested until spring. A single plant of boselle can provide, in four or five months, enough leaves for three or four dishes. CULTURX ORDINAIRX. Baselles are sown in March, on a warm bed under a frame, in substantial, loose soil. When frosts, to which they are very sensitive, are no longer to be feared, they are lifted with the rootball, and transplanted into the ground, at the foot of a wall facing south. Weed, hoe and, in hot weather, water frequently, as these plants love water. They should be planted against a trellis, to give their climbing stems (red or green, depending on the species) an easy grip. One of the most vigorous plants is left untouched to obtain seeds, which usually ripen very well. BASILIC (Ocymum basilicum); small annual plant, very aromatic in all its parts, native to Persia. It has several varieties: large-leafed, purple-leafed, lettuce-leafed, aniseed-flavored, etc. They are used as an assortment, and sometimes as a salad ingredient. Basil can be sown in any season, on a warm layer of tarpaulin, under a frame or under a bell. It germinates very easily and grows quite rapidly. If you want to use it for seasoning, wait until its stems have grown to at least five or six inches; for salad, cut it very young, otherwise its strong, aromatic flavor may displease some people. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Basil is sown in the soil in March. In May, it is transplanted to a warm spot in light, well-dressed soil. It requires copious and frequent watering throughout its life. The seed is harvested in autumn. BÉNINCASE GLAUQUE (Benincasa cerifera), and BÉNINCASE CYLINDRIQUE (Benincasa cylindrica); in this article, I bring together these two species or varieties of cucurbits, which I believe belong to the cucumber genus. Believed to have originated in Senegal, they have only been cultivated in Paris since 1826. They are still not very widespread. Their fruits are about the size of a cucumber, elongated, dark green and covered, especially the first, with a thick, viscous, glaucous dust. The flesh is white, firm and quite similar to that of cucumbers, but with a preferable taste; moreover, it can be eaten in the same way. PRIMEUR. These plants are still too little known in France for us to have tried to grow them early, but it is almost certain that, to obtain them in the off-season, we would have to force them in the same way as melons, and manage and prune them in the same way. We therefore refer the reader to this article. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Benincases can be grown in two ways: on a bed or in the ground. In both cases, they are sown in pots at the beginning of April, on a warm bed and under cloches, or under a frame. Seeds germinate with difficulty if they are not given sufficient warmth and humidity. When the plant has risen to a certain strength, it is removed from the soil and placed on an old bed, or at least in an earthen bed, at the foot of a south-facing wall. The stem is pruned over two eyes, and the branches over three or four nodes; moderate watering is given, as they fear too much humidity, and they are steered like melons. I believe that, sown in the open ground around April 15th, they could also succeed in ordinary years, i.e. those that are not too cold or rainy. But to do this, you'd have to sow in bunches, and here's how. Holes eighteen inches deep and two feet wide should be dug in good soil and exposure, and filled with warm, well-packed, trampled manure. In the middle of this manure, we'd make a new funnel-shaped hole, eight inches deep in the middle and a foot wide, which we'd fill with a mixture of three-quarters old topsoil and one-quarter light earth. Sow in this compost, and cover with a cloche or verrine, around which place a hot manure stove, seven to eight inches wide. The seeds would certainly sprout, and all that remained was to remove the stoves and verrines, around the fifteenth of May, perhaps earlier, if the season was favorable. A valuable quality of benincase fruits is that they keep perfectly well throughout the winter, if stored in a very dry place and protected from light frost. In 1828, I saw some at my colloborateur's, Mr. Noisette, on the first of March, and they seemed healthy enough to give him hope that they would keep for some time yet. BETTERAVE (Betta vulgaris); biennial plant, growing spontaneously in southern Europe. It is too well known to list all the uses to which it is put. Its main varieties are: grosse rouge, fairly long and the most widely cultivated of all. Petite rouge, more precocious, with a milder flavor. The round red, also early, of the same quality, but rounded. Yellow, large, elongated and the sweetest of all. Large and small white, very tender, delicate, but a little bland in flavor. Yellow with white flesh, the best for providing sugar. Detterave champétre, or starvation root, is grown only in large quantities, and for sourrage. We don't usually force beet, because the root, the only part we use, keeps perfectly well in a vegetable greenhouse, or simply in a dry cellar, until March and April. If at this time you choose the healthiest roots, place them in fine, very dry sand, in a box and put them in a dry, poorly ventilated place, you can still have them in May and June, and longer if you take the precaution of visiting them often and cutting off the buds as they grow. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Beets do more or less well in all soils that have been suitably loosened and amended, but they take on enormous dimensions in warm, deep, free and light soils, well broken up, and heavily amended from the previous year, or with fertilizers consumed from the beginning of March until May; after two good ploughings, they are sown broadcast or in rays. When the plant has risen, which happens after a fortnight, it is thinned out so that the plants are fifteen inches apart in mediocre soils, and eighteen or twenty in good soils. We hoe, weed, destroy parasitic weeds and, if the season is dry, water deeply. November is harvest time. We pull out the roots and leave them to dry out, then we twist or cut the leaves, and put them in the vegetable greenhouse to pull them out as we use them. Beet has a slight fear of transplanting, so when thinning out the seedling, if you want to transplant where there is a shortage, you must do so immediately and before the air has dried the surface of the roots. Sometimes, when the rácine is as big as a finger, you sow it in a nursery before transplanting it into the field. Transplanting should be carried out with the same care, and care should be taken to avoid injuring or breaking the root, which should never be cut back. If you have to wait before transplanting, soak them in a mixture of soil, water, manure and cow dung, to protect them from contact with the air. At harvest time, some of the best beets are left in the ground to provide seed. During hard frosts, we cover them with straw or dry litter. Sometimes, however, they cannot be preserved, in which case the best and healthiest beets in the vegetable garden are planted in the spring. Let grains retain their germinative virtues for only two or three years. C CAPUCIN. Two species are grown: the CrArD* CAPUCINE (Tropœolum majus), whose stems are very long and climbing, and the reTire CArUCINE (Tropœolum minus,) whose short stems need no support. The flowers of both are used to garnish salads; the buds are candied in vinegar before they open, and the flowers before they ripen. For this purpose, the smaller variety is preferable, as it flowers more abundantly than the larger. It would be of little importance to force the nasturtium if its use were limited to decorating salads, but its double-flowered variety is a very pretty ornamental plant, and can be used in the same way. This is the only one we're going to talk about. Nasturtiums, native to Peru, are perennials in their own country; but as they ripen their seeds in the space of a summer, we are accustomed to growing them as annuals. The double-flowered variety, which does not set seed, is propagated by taking cuttings under a bell or under a frame, in pots sunk in a warm layer. They can be taken from March to August. From September onwards, especially if there are cold rains, the pots are transported to a warm greenhouse, and if you want to enjoy the flowers all winter long, they are placed in a warm layer of tannin, in as much light as possible. The care they require is limited to removing dead leaves, directing the branches so that each enjoys the same amount of light and air, and moderating watering, as this plant is very sensitive to rot. I think that by sowing the little nasturtium in autumn and transporting it to the warm greenhouse before the weather turns sour, it will also flower in winter, and keep for several years. It's a good idea to take cuttings from double nasturtiums every year or two at the most, as experience has shown that young plants are the most resistant in the greenhouse. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Large and small nasturtiums grow well everywhere, but they do best in open, light soil with warm exposure. They are sown in April, and watered frequently during the heat of summer. They sometimes resow themselves. CARDON or Carde (Cynara cardunculus); perennial plant, native to Barbary. Everyone knows that it is grown for its leaf ribs. It has produced several varieties, including Cardou d'Espagne, which has no thorns, but grows very quickly, and has thin ribs. Cardon de Tours, preferred to the first, although very thorny, because it holds well and its ribs are wider and softer. Cardon plein sans épines (full cardoon without thorns), which has the same qualities as the previous one, but with the added advantage of being thornless. Artichoke-leaf cardoon, with very full, reddish, excellent ribs that are also thornless. PRIMEUR. In ordinary cultivation, cardoons supply from October to at least February. We will now describe the procedures to be used to obtain cardoons from March to September. At the beginning of November, prepare a warm bed under a frame. Sow two seeds of Tours cardoon or full cardoon without thorns, in small pots four inches in diameter, filled with a mixture of half light soil and old potting soil fully consumed. This first sowing can be done on a warm layer in the open air, using cloches or verrines. A similar sowing is repeated in December, and a third in January, but these last two should be done under a frame or tarpaulin. In any case, all three can be carried out as described below. When the plant has emerged, one of the two is cut off below the collar, if both seeds have germinated, and only the most vigorous is kept. When it begins to show its third leaf, remove it from its pot with the rootball, and place it in a larger vase with the same soil. A new warm layer of soil is then placed under the frame, and the pot is pushed into it. When the plant is strong enough, we establish a three-foot-thick muted layer at the foot of a south-facing wall, in very dry soil, covered with a foot of good compost mixed with a quarter of light earth. The cardoons are unstuck and planted in the potting soil, two feet apart, in all directions; the frame is placed on top, and surrounded by good stoves that are changed every time they are needed. If you notice that the bed is getting cold, you open a trench two feet wide and four deep around the frame against the bed; you lard it with new manure from underneath, and fill the pit with it to serve as stoves. If the cultivation is carried out in such a way as never to allow the heat to drop in the bed, nor the cold to penetrate into the frame, cardoons can be blanched for kitchen use as early as the month of murs; in April, from the second sowing, and in May, from the third. In March, choose the most vigorous plants from the second and third sowings and plant them out in a bed at the foot of a south-facing wall. Each will be covered with a bell to shelter them from the cool nights and gradually accustom them to the open air. If, during this month, the sun is strong and prickly, they should be sheltered from its rays for part of the day, using light-colored cloths. Otherwise, they should be cared for in the same way as full-earth seedlings, and will start to bind well in June and July, but many will fail; nevertheless, with careful watering and cultivation, they will produce until the time when full-earth cardoons start to yield. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Cardoons like substantial, light, deep soil, as well as abundant watering. You can easily get trained ones as early as August, with the precaution of sowing them in small pots, under a frame, in March, and transplanting them in April, when they require only ordinary care. For late-season and winter plants, sow them in the ground in April and May, and proceed as follows: loosen and fine the soil, which should be perfectly loosened and warm. Three feet apart in all directions, dig holes one pled wide and as deep, fill them with well-consumed manure mixed with a small amount of soil to give it body, then sow two or three seeds in each and cover with two fingers of the same soil. Water frequently, weed and hoe, and keep insects, especially aphids, away from the young plant. When the plant has two or three leaves, we thin it out so as to leave only one leaf in each hole. If watering is not spared, the cardoons will grow with great vigor, and their leaves can reach up to six feet in length. When they are sufficiently formed to be ridged, the soil from the holes is brought together around the plants, and piled as high as possible with a wooden fork. The leaves are brought together to form a sort of bundle, and held in this position with wicker, straw or string ties. They are then covered with a thick shirt of long straw, which is held in place in the same way. The plant is left hidden for three weeks, and this time is always sufficient to soften and whiten the rib. If you were to wait any longer before releasing it for consumption, it would inevitably rot from lack of air and light; as a result, cardoons should only be buttered and tied as necessary. When white frost begins to set in, remove the cardoons and place them in the vegetable greenhouse to protect them from the cold, as they are very sensitive to it. Place them with their root ball in damp sand, after lifting their leaves to make them take up less space, but without squeezing them too tightly, so that air can still circulate between them, which is essential to prevent them from rotting. Some gardeners, lacking sufficient space, are content to place them upright, against a wall and leaning against each other; they often visit them to remove rotten leaves, and to deliver for consumption those whose rot threatens to spread to the heart. If you have a frame at your disposal, it's easy to preserve cardoons without a greenhouse. Choose the hottest, driest spot, open a trench the width of the trunk and three feet deep. Place the box on top, and throw the soil from the trench against its outer walls. A good bed of long, dry straw is placed upright against one side of the trench, and leaned against a row of cardoons; against these a second bed of straw is laid, then a second row of cardoons, and so on until the chassis trunk is filled. Care should be taken to leave the upper third of the length of the leaves exposed to light and air. Once this is done, the glass panels are placed to prevent cold and damp from penetrating to the plants. Whenever the air is dry and it's not freezing, the panels are removed, but they must be rigorously replaced every evening. Some people are content to place their cardoons in an uncovered trench, as described above. They protect them from frost and rain by spreading a thick blanket of dry litter over them, which they take care to remove whenever air can be supplied. Cardoon seeds are harvested in the same way as artichokes. In autumn, a few plants are sheltered as we said for artichokes (see page 31); in spring, they are uncovered and cultivated in the same way as artichokes. The seed retains its germinative properties for five or six years. CARROT (Daucus carota); biennial plant that "sprouts spontaneously in southern Europe, and of which several varieties are grown, namely: The RED ones, often preferred to the others for cooking, because they are generally found to have a spicier taste. The sub-varieties are Short red hative or Dutch, excellent and very early, preferable for autumn and early spring sowing. Its smaller, slightly fatter sub-variety is used almost exclusively by market gardeners in Paris. Rouge-longue, very good, but grown more in Germany than in France. Red pale, from Flanders, good, with the same qualities as yellow. JaUnes, sweet, very good. The sub-varieties are : Long yellow, one of the oldest cultivated varieties, and still considered by many to be one of the best. Young short or round yellow, as good as the previous variety. BLaNCuis, quite good, but especially esteemed for its long, easy shelf-life. Ordinary white, of mediocre quality and not widely grown. Blanche de Breteuil, half-short, often a slightly yellowish color, better than the previous variety. Blanche ronde, very mediocre. Blanche hors de terre, very large, very long, with green collar, quite good. Violet, very sweet and very large, but has the disadvantage of staining broths and stews. Spanish violet, of the same quality and size as the previous one, but usually yellow on the inside, which means it does not stain broth. It is easy to store. PRIMEUR. In order to obtain fresh carrots in winter, spring and early summer, we have subjected these plants to a special cultivation method. Spring-sown carrots keep well through the winter, but they never taste as delicate, nor are they as tender, and it is for these reasons that fresh carrots are preferred as soon as they have reached the size of a little finger or close to it. For the early season, the short rouga from Hollende is the preferred variety, because it is the earliest, the one that rises the least, and one of those that, on the bed, is content with the least thickness of soil. The choice of seeds is not indifferent either, as experience has shown that new varieties produce individuals that grow very quickly. The best seeds are therefore those that are two years old, and older ones should not be sown. It is customary to sow it from September to February on the warm beds prepared for celery, cabbage, lettuce, radishes and supplies; however, as the roots grow quite deep, the bed is reloaded in the area intended for carrots, so that there is eight inches of potting soil; it is advisable, when reloading the bed, to mix two thirds of light earth with the potting soil, which must be thoroughly used up. Carrots sown in potting soil that is too grainy and not sufficiently consumed are prone to staining and bad taste. When the layer is fully warm, sow thickly, cover the seeds with a finger of fine compost, hoe lightly and cover with the frame. In layers where only cloches are used, seeds are sometimes sown in clumps, but in other layers, seeds are broadcast, often between other plants in the empty spaces. Air is given whenever the temperature permits, watering is carried out as needed, and the hard crust that may form on the surface of the soil is carefully broken. As soon as the carrots have emerged, the plant is thinned out by cutting with the nails below the cotiledons the overabundant plants that are to be destroyed; by this means, which should always be used for delicate seedlings, you are never exposed to shaking the roots of the individuals that are to remain. Some time later, when the carrots have gained strength and are showing three leaves, they are thinned out a second time, so that the seedlings are spaced two inches apart. All that's left for the seedlings is the usual care, consisting of new stoves when the warmth of the soil decreases, watering, hoeing, etc. When the carrots have reached their full size, they are ready for planting. When the carrots have reached the right size for the intended use, we pull them out, always choosing those closest together, so that those remaining have more room to develop. Doing as we've just said, you'll have roots of varying size, very tender and very good, until the autumn seedlings in the open ground begin to produce. To grow carrots in spring and early summer, there is no need for beds or frames. Sow the indicated variety in September, with the same care as described in the article on ordinary cultivation, but in light soil with warm exposure. Carrots do not fear the cold, but they are sensitive to it, especially when young. So, when frost sets in, cover them with a good layer of bedding or dry leaves, and give them air whenever the weather permits. In hard winters, such seedlings produce very early. REGULAR CULTIVATION. The quality of carrots depends much more on the type of soil in which they are grown than on the variety to which they belong. In sandy, fertile, deep soils, it is excellent, as well as in those that are free-flowing, soft and substantial. It doesn't like fresh fertilizer, so you need to fertilize the land where you want to plant it at least six months in advance, or at least only with consumed manure; in any other case, it forks, i.e. its root splits into two or more branches. Once the soil has been well loosened and loosened, sowing can begin in February, but with warm exposure, and continue until June, with any exposure. Sow broadcast or in rays spaced six to eight inches apart, covering lightly with a rake or harrowing with a fork. In heavy soils, prone to pounding from rain or watering, spread a fingerful of three-quarter-used potting soil, or a light mulch. If the season is dry, frequent watering helps germination. When carrots begin to sprout, and until they have reached a certain strength, they require a great deal of care, as they are subject to slugs, spiders and other insects that are very avid eaters. As for slugs, there's only one way to get rid of them, and that's to hunt them assiduously in the evenings, mornings and after mild spring rains. Spiders are easily kept at bay by frequent drenching with water infused with a little soot. We hoe from time to time, and keep the seedling free of weeds. When the seedling has no more than three leaves, never later, we start to thin out the thickest areas, so that we can transplant where there is a shortage. This operation requires great care to prevent the transplanted cavottes from forking. We choose a moment when the soil is soaked by a gentle rain; with a florist's hoe, or simply a small wooden palette, we pull out the young plant, taking great care not to break the end of its root; in the place where it is to be transplanted, we make a large hole with the planter, we place the root in it, taking extreme care to place it very vertically and not to bend its end, then we pour soil all around with the tip of the planter. Water immediately and continue to do so until recovery is perfect, but take care not to over-wet. As the carrots grow, you continue to thin them out, and when they are finger-sized, which usually happens around midsummer, you start using the thinned ones for cooking. These can be removed successively for use, until the plants are five or six inches apart, at which point they are no longer touched. In November or December, depending on the severity of the season, the carrots are harvested and stored in the greenhouse. We pull them out with a flat-tined fork, so as to cut less; we clean them of any earth that may be attached to them, cut or twist the leaves above the collar, then, in the greenhouse, we place them in sand, taking care to leave the collar outside and level with the surface of the sand. If you don't have a greenhouse, you can also place them in a cellar or other place sheltered from the rigors of the cold. Air the greenhouse whenever it's safe to do so. When you realize that they have grown a lot of leaves, which can exhaust them or at least rob them of a large part of their qualities, you undo the layer of sand, cut off the collar below the new shoots, and replace them again in the sand, as they were before. With these simple precautions, they can be stored easily and for a very long time. Carrots also keep very well in an open trench in dry soil, but this method is rarely used unless they are grown in large quantities for cattle feed; nevertheless, we'll teach you how. We dig a pit at least four feet deep, four or five wide, and of a length determined by the quantity of carrots to be placed in it. A good bed of rubble or gravel is placed at the bottom, over which a layer of dry sand is spread. This is followed by a bed of carrots, with the snares turned towards the middle of the pit; a bed of sand is then added, followed by a bed of carrots, and so on, alternately, until the trench is full. A good thickness of long straw is spread over the whole, and the earth from the excavation is thrown on top, forming a steep ados to divert rainwater. Some people don't go to such lengths, especially when cultivating dry, light soil. They don't pull the carrots out of the bed where they were grown, but simply defend them against the extreme cold with a good cover of litter, dry leaves or fern. This is certainly the most convenient and economical method, but by no means the safest. It sometimes happens, when heavy frosts follow long rains, that most of the roots perish despite this shelter. Carrot seed retains its germinative capacity for two years. To obtain them, we keep the biggest and best roots in the greenhouse, taking care not to cut their collars, as they would otherwise fail to grow. Sometimes we leave them in the ground, and to protect them from frost, we cover them with a thick layer of litter, which we remove whenever the weather is mild. Those that have been uprooted are replanted in March, in very loose, well-amended soil. They bolt in May, and the seed is harvested in August. The stems are cut or hung in a dry place, and the seeds are not removed from the umbels until it's time to sow them. To rid them of the hairs that cause them to cling and curl up together, they are rubbed in the hands with fine sand or ash. CARUBEAN (ceratonia siliqua); second-growth tree, native to southern France. Its fruit, a foot long, consists of a flat, fleshy silique enclosing a reddish, sweet pulp with its seeds, good for eating when dry, but slightly purgative. PRIIXUR. The carob tree fears frost and hardly ripens its fruit in Paris without special care. It is planted at the foot of a wall in a warm, south-facing position, and trellised. For the first few years, that is, until it is strong enough to blossom, we content ourselveŝte, to protect it from the cold, with stuffing it in the manner of fig trees, but with much more care. When it has developed enough to give hope of obtaining fruit, we stuff it as we said; but in the first days of February, we remove these covers, perfectly net the branches of any garbage that may be heaped on them, and palisate those that need it. Eighteen inches from the base of the tree, a warm layer is erected parallel to the wall, on which glass panels are placed, with their tops resting against the wall above the tree. The sides of this flying greenhouse are closed with planks, the joints of which are sealed with moss to prevent the frost from penetrating. Air is supplied for one or two hours a day, and only when the sun is shining. The bed can be used to sow small vegetables. That's all it takes to advance vegetation and give the tree time to ripen its fruit. The glass panels can only be completely removed at the beginning of June. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Carob trees thrive in free, warm, amended soils with a southern exposure, where they are protected from frost as mentioned above. In the Paris climate, it is wise to have a few plants in orangeries. They can sometimes be propagated by strangling marcottes, but they grow back with great difficulty, and this method of propagation is very time-consuming. It is therefore preferable to use the seedling method. In spring, fill pots with clean, substantial or orange-tree soil, sow a few seeds in each one, and bury them in a warm layer of compost. When the young carob trees have risen, leave just one in each vase, and give them the care ordinary to orangery plants. When the plant is two or three years old, and judged capable of withstanding full soil, it is removed from the vase and 1 44 3 placed with the root ball. The roots should not be touched, and frequent watering should be given to ensure recovery; once it begins to vegetate, watering should be stopped, unless the soil becomes absolutely dry in very hot weather. Carob wood is extremely hard, and is considered incorruptible. CELERY (apium graveolens); biennial plant, growing spontaneously in the marshes of southern France. Cultivation has caused it to lose its pungency, and it is used in cooking, raw or cooked. There are several varieties. Hollow celery, small celery, chopping celery. Leaves are small and spread out, and can hardly be used for anything other than supplies. Dwarf curly celery, very tender, very crisp, used, like the previous one, as a garnish. Full white celery, very large, very fleshy, one of the most widely grown. It has two sub-varieties: Turkish or Prussian celery, which has the same qualities but is larger; and pink celery, which differs only in the pinkish tint of its ribs. Céleri gros violet de Tours. Its ribs are a more pronounced purplish-pink than the previous variety; it is the largest of all the varieties. It is remarkable for the thickness of its ribs and the size of its stalk. Celery root. There are three sub-varieties: long white celeriac, whose root is very large and elongated; round white celeriac, whose root is large and rounded; and red celeriac, whose root is veined with red and purple. The roots of the last three are eaten cooked. PRIMEUR. Early celery is grown for ordinary use, as well as for salads and other purposes. For the latter, hollow celery and curly dwarf celery are grown as follows: on a bed intended for small vegetables, laid out in November and filled with only four inches of compost, sow lightly, cover the seed lightly, baste well and cover with cloches or frames. It is not necessary to provide air until the plants have emerged; simply maintain the humidity of the compost by frequent but moderate watering. Once the celery has risen, start lifting the bells or panels, weather permitting. Thin out so as to leave two or three inches between each plant. As soon as they have three leaves, air becomes much more necessary, and you must give them air whenever you can without inconvenience. We start cutting as soon as the leaves have reached four or five inches in length, and we do this with the care of cutting one plant between two, so as to give the other remaining plants more space until the first ones to be cut have grown back leaves; then we cut the others, and so on alternately. In this way, plants can be grown much closer together without harming each other, and this is all the more advantageous as the great art of early cultivation is to obtain a lot in a little space. We continue to sow on a bed for supply, until the season allows sowing or transplanting in the open ground. Celery grown for other purposes is treated differently. With the precautions described in the article on ordinary cultivation, celery keeps very well until the end of April. Early crops should therefore be cultivated in such a way as to produce celery from May through to August, since seedlings sown in the open ground begin to yield at this time. In December, to obtain produce in May; in January, to obtain it in June; in February, to obtain it in July; in March, to obtain it in August; we sow on beds and under cloches or frames as we shall see. December sowing is done on a warm bed, with three to four inches of compost. Sow lightly, water lightly and cover with cloches or frames. When the plant has risen, air is given and the plants are governed as we have said. When they have three leaves, we transplant them onto a new warm layer filled with six inches of potting soil, two or three inches apart so they don't wilt, and continue the same care until March. At the beginning of this month, in warm, dry soil, establish a muted layer filled with eight inches of potting soil mixed with a small amount of light garden soil, and transplant the celery, staggered, in rays seven to eight inches apart; water, and cover with bells or panels to facilitate recovery. When growth is assured, simply protect the plant from cool nights and cold rains with straw mats or dry litter. Bleaching can begin as early as the end of April. Sowing in January, February and March is done and managed in exactly the same way, but the young plants, instead of being permanently transplanted on a warm bed, are transplanted into the ground as they become strong enough, but not before the beginning of April. In light soil, well amended and loosened, they are transplanted in rays spaced eight to nine inches apart, watered immediately to facilitate recovery, and as this plant is very water-loving, care is taken to keep the soil constantly moist. Needless to say, hoe from time to time, and keep the bed free of weeds. When the celery is strong enough, we blanch it. To do this, you can choose the most advantageous of the methods described below. For example, if you want to enjoy a large quantity at a time, you can butter it; otherwise, you can bind it and cover it several times. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Celery seedlings sown in April, May and June provide good yields from September until the frosts, and until the following spring when the plant is sheltered. The April sowing is usually done in a nursery for transplanting, but the May and June sowings should be done in the field, so that the celery is not delayed by transplanting, and has time to grow to full size before winter. For the nursery, choose a bed in the south, break it up, loosen the soil and mix it with as much compost as you can. Sow very lightly and water frequently. When the seedling is large enough, it is transplanted permanently into beds prepared in the same way as for in-place sowing. Let's take a look at the latter. In clean, substantial soil that is both warm and slightly moist, or in ordinary soil amended with good consumable fertilizers, we prepare beds four feet wide by an indeterminate length. If you want to bind the soil for blanching, leave a path one foot wide between the boards, but if you want to butter the soil, leave a strip three feet wide, so that when the time comes, you can pull out the soil for ridging; you use it to sow lettuces and other plants that will have produced their produce before the first frost. The soil is loosened, a rake is passed over it, and parallel rays are drawn with a string, nine inches apart. Sow the seeds in each ray thickly enough to fill the bed even if half the seeds fail to germinate. Water daily, prick out and thin out the seedlings once they have three leaves. Transplant in places where leaves are lacking, and give the usual care to seedlings. A few days later, when the plant is strong enough to be sure it won't melt any more, we thin out for the last time, so as to leave an eight-inch gap between each plant, and transplant again in the empty places if there are any. The same care is continued until it's time to blanch. To do this, choose dry weather, and bind each plant with three straw or rush ties, after bringing the leaves together in a bundle. The space between the plants is filled with litter, so that only the tips of the leaves are exposed to light and air. Sometimes, after tying, the soil from the flowerbed left next to the plant is thrown back onto the bed and heaped around the plants to a quarter of their height the first time, half that eight days later, and three-quarters another eight days later; the fourth quarter is left uncovered. Some gardeners, to avoid these embarrassments, are content to carefully uproot the celery they want to bleach, and bury it in potting soil, leaving only the tips of the leaves showing. In all cases, it usually turns white within three weeks, and can be used for consumption after that time. Winter celery can be kept in place during the bad season, by means of good earthing-up, but this method has its drawbacks; it is very difficult to dig it up for use when the ground is heavily frozen or covered with snow; then, if prolonged cold rains follow severe cold, most of it rots. It is therefore best to transport it to the vegetable greenhouse, where it is buried in sand up to a third of its length; it is given air whenever you are not afraid of the cold or damp, and is visited often to remove rotten leaves that would spoil the others if left. Celery seedlings are much less successful in very dry soils than in others, unless a method widely used in the south of France is adopted. The soil is thrown in on both sides; once this has been done, the bottom of this kind of pit is chiselled, loosened and perfectly smoked, and the celery is sown and raised as we have said. It finds there a sustained humidity which is very favorable to its vegetation. To butter it, the soil removed before sowing is thrown back onto the boards. To obtain seed, leave a few of the most beautiful plants in place, chosen from among those whose varieties have remained perfectly straightforward. To protect them from the cold, they are mounded up to half their height, and covered with dry litter or, better still, bales of barley or wheat, if you are not afraid of mice, which are often attracted by this kind of covering. Air is provided whenever the temperature permits. In March, the plants are uncovered and dethatched, the rotten leaves are removed, the plant is peeled and soon shows its stems. The seed ripens and is harvested in September; it retains its germinative powers for three or four years, but the newer it is, the better it is. Celery root can be grown in the same way as above, with the difference that it cannot be mounded. To preserve it over winter, simply transport it to the vegetable greenhouse, where it is buried in sand up to the collar. Seed-bearing plants are covered with litter or dry leaves to protect them from frost. CERFEUIL (scandix cerefolium); annual, native, aromatic plant, used in cooking as a garnish and seasoning. A curly-leaved variety is available for the same uses and can be grown in the same way. PRIMEUR. Chervil is only sensitive to very hard frosts, so it produces throughout the winter if sown at the end of September and in October. In countries where the cold is very harsh and snow abundant, it can be sown from December to February, on a warm bed, mixed with other supplies. It rises and supplies promptly, but also passes very quickly, making it necessary to sow at least three or four times during the winter, if you don't want to run the risk of running out. The seedbed is filled with four inches of loam, sown fairly lightly, lightly covered and covered with cloches or frames. The rest is taken care of in the usual way. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Chervil is not at all difficult to grow; it adapts to any soil and any exposure, but as it goes to seed very quickly, we are obliged to sow it every two weeks, in order to always have tender chervil. From March to May, it is sown in warm, loosened and amended soil; from June to the end of August, it is sown in cool or even damp soil, in the shade and with a northern exposure. Autumn sowing takes place at the foot of a wall facing south. During the heat of summer, the only care chervil requires is frequent watering and removal of parasitic weeds. The best seeds are those that ripen in June and July; they keep well for three years, but are safest when new. CERFEUIL MUSQUÉ ou D'ESPAGNE (scandiz odorata); perennial plant, native to Spain, larger than the preceding one, used for the same purposes, but with a stronger, distinctive flavor that is not to everyone's taste. Its fleshy, rather large root is used in soup like carrots and parsnips, and gives it a very pleasant taste; cooked 2 in broth, many people eat it with pleasure. PRIMEUR. Musk chervil is so widely used that it is rarely grown on the ground. Moreover, if we were to do so, it would only be to obtain supplies, as the plant is perennial and grows in the open ground, and we can pull up its roots throughout the winter for consumption. To obtain tender leaves during the frosts, all you have to do is prepare a spot on a warm bed with large vegetables, so that the soil is thick enough, remove a few plants of musk chervil sown the previous year with the root ball, plant them there, and cover them with cloches or frames. With a little watering, the plants will recover easily, and as they develop leaves, they can be cut for use. "ORDINARY CULTIVATION: This species thrives in free-light soils with very warm exposure. As it is rather averse to transplanting, it should be sown in the field as soon as the seeds are mature, otherwise they will only germinate very slowly, and several months after sowing; when the seeds are more than a year old, they no longer germinate. As the plant is quite large, we thin it out and leave at least a foot between each one. If you want to make use of the roots, water them abundantly, so that they are both tender and large. CHERRY (Prunus Cerasus.); native to Africa, where Lucullus brought it. We place next to it the MxRISIER, (Prunus avium,) which grows spontaneously in all the forests of Europe. These two species have produced a large number of varieties, of which we will mention only the main and best. As far as we can, we will relate them to the types that have been recognized by growers. 1. wild cherry. Guignier with large black fruit. Large, blackish fruit with soft, plump pulp, ripening in June. Large white fruit. White fruit, reddish on the sunny side, very good, ripening in June. Guignier with pink fruit. Watery, tender-red fruit, ripening around June 15, quite good. Guignier with large, shiny black fruit. Fruit with red pulp, excellent, ripening at the end of June. Guignier with large black fruit and short stalk. Fruit similar to the previous one, but with a shorter stalk, excellent. This guignier, which ripens at the end of June, is the best of all. Guignier à rameaux pendans. Large, shiny black fruit with elongated stalk, very good, ripening in July. 2. Bigarreautier. Bigarreautier with large red fruit. Reuge fruit, large, good, ripening at the end of July. Bigarreautier with large white fruit. Fruit very similar to the previous one, but whitish on one side and lighter red on the other, of better quality, ripening at the end of July. Belle de Rocmont, cœur-de-pigeon. Fruit less large and elongated than the preceding one, with marbled skin, tresbon, ripening around mid-July. Bigarreautier with flesh-colored fruit. Similar to the previous one, just as good, but smaller. Ripens at the same time. Gros Cœuret. Depressed, heart-shaped fruit, shiny, almost black when ripe, i.e. in August. 3. Cherry trees. Cherry from Holland or England. Large, black, very good fruit, ripening in early June. Prussian cherry. Fruit large, turbinates, dark color, very good, ripe at the end of June. Short-tailed Montmorency cherry. Medium-sized, round, compressed fruit with watery pulp, good, ripens in early August. Large Montmorency cherry. Large, compressed, bright-red fruit, excellent, ripening in July. Not a very productive tree. Gros Gobet. Medium-sized, compressed fruit, more deeply furrowed than the previous one, excellent, ripening in July. Cerise de Villènes. Small, very sweet, yellowish-pink fruit, ripening in June. Early dwarf. Small fruit, of mediocre quality, but very valuable in that it ripens from the end of April to the beginning of May, and is the most suitable variety for forcing. Late English or Royal. Large, very dark red, excellent fruit, ripening in July. It has a sub-variety with almost black fruit. Belle de Choisy, Cerise de la Palembre. Medium red fruit, ripening in July. Cerise de Varennes. Large, compressed fruit, excellent red color, ripening in August. Cerise de la Madeleine. Large, red fruit with soft pulp, good, ripening at the end of July. Cherry Duck. Large, red, slightly compressed fruit with sweet pulp, excellent, ripens in August. Late cherry or All Saints' cherry. Small, acidic, red fruit, ripening successively from June to the first white frosts. M. Noisette has obtained a sub-variety with larger fruit. 4 Griottier. Griottier ordinaire. Medium-sized fruit, black, good, ripening in September and October, and often kept on the tree until November 15th, espaliered to the north. German sour cherry. Medium-sized fruit with red pulp, very poor quality, ripening around mid-July. Griottier de Portu gal. Fruit less acid than the preceding ones, ripening in August. PRIMEUR. Using the various varieties we have just listed, cherries can be obtained naturally from the end of April to the fifteenth of November. To get cherries in winter, you need to heat them, and there are several ways of doing this. The most common is the flying greenhouse, the construction and use of which are described in the article on Apricots. Cherry trees are treated in the same way as other trees, and require similar care, so we won't come back to this point. It is also heated when planted in the greenhouse, and for details of this process, we refer the reader to the article on Vines. It is best grown as an A-grown apricot. We'll now deal with the question of how to heat them in a greenhouse vase. Several varieties can be grown in this way, but those with the best chances of success are: the early dwarf cherry, the English hätive, Dutch broad-leaved, Prussian, cherry-gin, royal hätive and late English cherry. Three or four years in advance, we prepare the trees to be forced by grafting them onto mahalèb, four or six inches from the ground. They are pruned into bushes or cattails, letting them spread out their wood only to the extent of the space they will require in the greenhouse. When the plant is the right size, in autumn, it is lifted with the rootball, and planted in a crate or basket, in good free soil, half mixed with potting compost. Leave it for a year, to allow it to recover, and during this time give it all the care it needs, such as burying the vase, watering, hoeing, etc. Persoons who are not afraid to make the necessary expenditure to raise these subjects in vases (boxes or pots), from their youth, will always achieve more satisfactory success. In any case, from October onwards, a warm layer of half horse manure and half dry leaves is prepared in a greenhouse or a tarpaulin. When the heat is at its peak, holes deep enough to accommodate the vases or baskets are made in the layer, at distances calculated according to the width of the cherry trees. A sufficient thickness of compost is then spread over the entire layer, to ensure that the trees have a well-filled collar, and that the edges of the vases do not show. The trees must be spaced far enough apart, so that air and light can circulate perfectly between all their branches, even when they are leafed out: it is also essential that they are as close as possible to the glasses. We start heating, and it doesn't take long for the gems to swell and develop into leaves and flower buds. Calculate the time of flowering, and don't be afraid to bring it forward or delay it a little, by lowering or raising the heat, so as to take advantage of a few days of sunshine, which is always found in ordinary winters, so that the flowering and fertilization are protected by the light of its rays. If you're lucky enough to seize this favorable moment, almost all the fruit will set, which doesn't always happen when the sky is dark and cloudy. This is a general rule that should be applied to all species of fruit trees, without exception. In any case, the ordinary scins are given in the article on apricot trees. When a currant tree has borne fruit, M you want to keep 1 for another year, don't hurry to put it back in the ground, especially if frosts are still to be feared. Leave it in the greenhouse until March, or move it to an orangery. In spring, we place it in the open ground with good exposure, but nevertheless leaving it in its vase, or, which is much better, placing it with its root ball in a new basket. It is pruned very short to develop wood in the first year. In the second spring, we give it the usual pruning, and the following autumn, if we think it has recovered well enough, we can heat it again. Some trees can only withstand this kind of cultivation for a few years, and perish after being heated twice; others, on the contrary, last a very long time. We need hardly say that to ensure a succession of fruit harvests in the greenhouse, you must not place all the trees in the greenhouse at the same time, but rather from month to month or fortnight to fortnight. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Cherry trees grow well in all types of soil; however, they only develop their full beauty and longevity in deep, light soils, which are dry for bigarreautier and merisier, and a little cool for cherry and griottier, but not wet. All of them also fear clay soils and stagnant humidity. In the granitic mountains of the Rhône department, I have seen wild or grafted cherry trees grow with astonishing speed and vigor, reaching a height of sixty to eighty feet, in soils where rye can only provide a small harvest every eight or ten years. Cherry trees can be propagated by seed or offspring, but the latter are never as robust as the former, and are almost always attacked by pomom disease. In many countries, we don't bother to sow seedlings, because there are plenty of young trees in the woods suitable for transplanting to the nursery. Varieties are propagated by grafting, on wildings or subjects from wild cherry seeds, if you want to grow large trees; on griottier for medium-sized trees; and on mahaleb, when you want to grow them in cattails or espaliers. We would point out that when grafting onto cherry trees, preference should be given to those with red or white fruit, as the graft is stronger and the trees less prone to gum. In marly or chalky soils, mahaleb provides the best subjects. In addition, it can be grafted with a dormant or growing eye, and even with a split when the stems are a little strong. Cherry trees are not pruned, but they should be pruned for the first two or three years, to give them a nice head. Pruning of espaliers and cattails is carried out according to the same principles as for other stone trees; only, for espaliers, the small fruit-bearing branches that have grown in front are retained. When a cherry tree begins to age, thin out and produce little fruit, it is pruned back to the large branches or even to the trunk, and vigorous scions grow which produce a lot for a few years. CHESTNUT (fagus Castanea); a large, indigenous tree, producing a generally well-known fruit. Several varieties are grown, the main ones being: Chataigne égalade, or exalade, slightly flattened, very large and excellent. The tree produces a lot, but quickly wears out. Pourtalonne, very productive, large and good. La verte du limousin, which is large, good and keeps very well. Maron, known by the names of the country where it is grown, for example: maron de Lyon, de Luc, d'Agen, d'Aubray, etc. This is the biggest, best and most sought-after variety. PRIMEUR. It's impossible to force chestnuts into cultivation, but they can be kept all year round. By leaving them in their husks and placing them in dry sand, wheat or bran, in a dry but cool place, you can easily get green ones until April. If you want to enjoy them for longer, as soon as they are picked, they must be dried first in the sun, then in an oven after being baked. Thus treated, they can be stored for two years without difficulty, provided they are kept in a dry place. ORDINAIRX CULTIVATION. Chestnut thrives in deep, granite soils, and does poorly in damp, clayey soils. It is propagated from seed, and to preserve varieties, it is grafted into flutes or growing eyes. Chestnuts are stratified in January; in spring, they are planted or nursed, producing vigorous trees that are pruned every year until their stems have reached a suitable height. If planted in a nursery, holes are dug at least a year in advance. Plant them in autumn, and when they are well established, i.e. one year after planting, graft them and leave them to nature's care. However, care must be taken to protect them from the teeth of cattle, by wrapping thorn bundles around their trunks. We should point out that the chestnut tree fears shade very much, and usually becomes sterile when deprived of the influences of sun and light. When several are planted, they should therefore be spaced appropriately. When a tree becomes old, its large branches are cut back to within three or four feet of the trunk, more or less, depending on their size; a new head is formed, which produces little fruit, to be sure, but very large and of excellent quality. CHENILLETTE (Scorpiurus vermiculata); annual plant, from the south of France, remarkable for its spiral-rolled, bristly, caterpillar-like pods. They are sometimes used as salad greens, with the intention of surprising people who don't know them, and making them mistake them for disgusting insects. In the past, they were preserved in vinegar and used in the same way as capers. It would be pointless to produce early versions of this plant, so it can only be grown in ordinary conditions. It thrives in light, sandy, warm soils, but does well in all, provided it has good exposure. Sow in April, and the seeds ripen perfectly during the summer. If you want to preserve them in vinegar, pick them before they are fully developed, otherwise they will be too hard to eat. We can also cultivate other species, all curious for their pods: for example, the SCORPIURUS RUDX, (Scorpiurus muricata,) whose pod is slender, slightly striated, with small, scattered, short and inconspicuous tubercles on the back, straight in its lower part and curving towards the top, so as to resemble the larva of certain insects. SCORPIURX VELU, (Scorpiurus subvillosa,) and SCORPIURUS SILLONNÉ, (Scorpiurus sulcata,) whose pods are spiral-shaped like snails. CHERVIS, GIROLLE (Sium sitarum); native perennial plant with fleshy, sweet, slightly aromatic roots, eaten like the scorsonera, mainly fried. 42 Since chervis does not fear frost and is perennial, it is not necessary to cultivate it early, since its roots are available all year round. It's true that those that haven't gone to seed are always the most delicate and therefore the best, so it's a good idea to adopt a cultivation method that can provide young ones all year round. To this end, we sow in spring those that are to be eaten over winter, and in autumn those destined to be eaten the following summer. This plant likes soft, fresh, deep soil, amended a few months in advance or at least with used compost, and perfectly loosened. Sow in April and September, and roots from the first sowing can be harvested as early as November. Seeds are sown in rays, or broadcast, and covered with a rake. Once they have emerged, hoe and weed them, and above all water them very frequently if you want to obtain large, tender tubers, as this plant is very water-loving. Chervis can also be propagated by separating its tubers, with the precaution of leaving a piece of the old stem neck with each one; but it has been noted that the roots obtained by this process never have the delicacy of those resulting from sowing. Chervis produces stems in the same year as sowing, but the seeds they produce are usually sterile. They should therefore only be collected from two-year-old plants. They ripen in September, and retain their germinative qualities for three years; nevertheless, the youngest are the best. WILD CHICORIUM (Cichorium intrbus); native perennial, eaten as a salad when very young, or after blanching. Three varieties are grown: The common variety, found wild on paths, and the most common in gardens. variegated, with red-veined leaves. Coffee chicory, whose long, fleshy, parsnip-like roots are used to replace and, more often, adulterate coffee when, after drying, they have been roasted and ground into powder. Its leaves are eaten in salads like those of the previous two varieties. PRIMEUR. Chicory can be grown in the ground all winter long, but it is hard and almost unbearably bitter, so if you want good winter chicory, grow it on a bed. If you don't grow a large quantity, you can grow it on a bed with small vegetables, because, as it is cut very young and when the leaves have reached two to three inches in length, four inches of soil are enough for it. The first sowing, under cloches or trays, can be done in November, and we continue to sow every twenty days so as not to run out during the winter. Sow fairly thickly, covering the seeds sparingly, and basking frequently. Don't stop sowing on the bed until you can safely entrust the seeds to the soil. This young chicory cannot be blanched. A very white, etiolated chicory known as Barbe-de-capucin is sold on the markets, and is considered an excellent winter salad. We'll explain how it's obtained. Depending on the quantity required, there are different procedures. If you only want it for home use, you grow it in barrels, but if you want it for speculation, you blanch it in layers. Here's how it's done. In autumn (rarely in any other season, although this process can be used every month of the year), take an old barrel, split on one side, and drill round holes seven or eight lines in diameter, in the following order. Assuming the barrel is standing on its bottom, make a row of holes all the way around, four inches from the ground, and spaced an inch or two apart. Make a second row four inches above, a third at the same distance, and so on, all the way to the top of the barrel, which should be placed in a warm, dark cellar. Once the barrel has been laid out in this way, obtain wild chicory roots from a year's sowing, and take care not to break them when pulling them out. After spreading a layer of sand in the bottom of the barrel, up to the level of the first row of holes, lay the roots on top, so that the collars pass through the holes, but do not overflow them by more than a line or two. Add a second bed of sand up to the height of the second row of holes, and put in a new row of roots; and so on, until the barrel is full. Water each bed of sand as you go, or use damp sand, so that you don't need to water when the barrel is full, which would cause the planting to sag and the root collars to pull out of the holes through which they are to grow. If you only had coarse sand that was too raw or washed out, you could mix in a little potting soil. If planted in October or November, it produces very good lettuce all winter long, and a row can be cut every two or three days. If you intend to sell the capuchin beard in tins, use a different method. Using sand, potting soil or even light earth, a first bed two inches thick, two to three feet wide and of indeterminate length is laid in a cellar or other dark, warm place. The chicory roots are laid on top, horizontally and with their heads outwards; then a second bed of soil and roots is made in the same way, a third, and so on, up to a suitable height. The beds should be placed slightly back, one on top of the other, to form a sloping layer and avoid 8 landslides. Water well, and soon the long, etiolated, colorless leaves appear, as in the previous crop. The roots are pulled out of the bed, bundled and delivered to the trade. Market gardeners often blanch chicory in a simpler way. They either pull it into bunches and bury the bunches in hot manure, or leave them on the ground and cover them with dry manure. This method is expeditious, but no better, because no new leaves grow, and it's the old ones that turn white and always remain hard and bitter. ORDIKARY CULTIVATION. Wild chicory does well in any soil deep enough for it to spread its long tap roots, but it thrives best in substantial free soil. To obtain young leaves all year round, it must be sown every two weeks. Sowing starts at the end of April, in light, loamy soil; later sowing continues in heavier soil. Sow thickly, water frequently and weed if necessary. Those intended for blanching or graining are sown light, in rays, in spring. The leaves it produces in the course of the year are used only to feed cattle and rabbits. The seed-bearing plants, which are left in the ground without any care, overwinter very well. The following spring, they rise, and their seeds, which keep for ten years or more, ripen in September, WHITE CHICORICE OR ERDIVE (Cichorium endivia); annual plant, native to India. It is eaten as a salad, or cooked and seasoned in various ways. Two races are grown, each of which has produced several varieties. 1° CURLY CHICORY. This breed has produced four varieties: Chicorée de Meaux or Endive, once almost the only variety grown. It fills out slowly, and rises very quickly if sown before June and given a little too much water. grosse frisée or grande endive, with the same disadvantages as the previous variety. Chicorée d'été or Chicorée d'Italie, which fills out better and more quickly than the preceding varieties, is very good for spring sowing because it doesn't climb as much, and can also be sown in autumn. Chicory is always white, with almost no filling, but excellent for cutting young like wild chicory. 2° ESCAROLE CHICORY. This breed includes four varieties: Grande Scarole or Scarole de Hollande, with broad, elongated leaves, fast-growing and therefore suitable only for second-season sowing. The round Scarole, with smaller, rounded leaves, grows more quickly, and has a very rounded, almost pomaceous heart. Blonde or lettuce-leaved, yellowish at birth, very good, but delicate and very sensitive to humidity. La courte or Célestine, very small, but very tender, with little height, and the earliest of all. It has become quite rare in Paris. PRIEUR. Preferred varieties for this type of cultivation are: Itafie chicory, white chicory, white escarole and Célestine. In November, we sow chicory that is always white, on a warm bed and under cloches or frames to cut the young leaves, or the other three varieties to be delivered for consumption only when they have formed. The first is sown fairly thickly, on three or four inches of compost, and sowing should take place every fortnight, if you want to have a constant supply. The most important thing is to give only as much water as is necessary for vegetation, otherwise the humidity, which these plants fear greatly, will melt them before they have produced their products. It is also essential that the beds are constantly maintained at a good level of heat, either by means of reheating or reshuffling, or by renewing them as needed; otherwise, the seeds will rot and grow poorly. Air is given when it is safe to do so, and to let them enjoy the light they need, doormats are removed during the day, whenever it is not freezing, or when there is no fear of frost penetrating under the glass. Seeds of all varieties refuse to germinate if buried, so after throwing them into the soil, simply press them down with the flat of your hand or a small plank palette. Chicory, which is always white, is cut as soon as its leaves have reached three or four inches in length. As for the varieties to be left to form, you can start sowing at the same time, and continue until March. The beds should be kept very warm and covered with six inches of compost. Sow lighter, do not cover the seeds, water moderately, and give air and light as much as possible. Summer chicory, or Italian chicory, is the most successful in this type of cultivation. When the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted onto a new layer, always under a bell and under a frame; it is protected as much as possible from humidity, which is very harmful, and if no care is neglected, chicory can be ready for consumption as early as February. Sometimes, when the season is warm, March seedlings can be transplanted in the open ground, but in warm conditions, in well-soiled beds under cloches. If you want to get very beautiful and good results from January and February seedlings, prepare a muted bed in dry, south-facing soil, plant the seedlings in it, and cover with glass panels. Cloches can also be used, filling the gaps between them with dry manure and bedding. In case of rain, cover with straw mats. There are two ways to grow chicory in December and January: 1° to keep plants grown in the open ground in the vegetable greenhouse; 2° to prick out on bedding. It's the latter that we're going to deal with here. From the beginning of September to October, we sow Meaux chicory in an earthen bed at the foot of a south-facing wall, and leave it there until the approach of the white frosts. Then raise a warm layer filled with six inches of potting soil, remove the plant with the rootball, and plant it in the layer, taking care to water it immediately to help it take root. Cover with cloches or trays, and grow as usual. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: All chicory varieties degenerate rapidly if not properly cared for. Sowing should begin in mid-March or, if it's not a spring year, in early April, and continue until the end of July. The varieties that do best in spring are summer chicory, always white, round escarole and Celestine; the others are prone to bolting if sown before June. In March and April, sow on a south-facing terrace, and later in a bed of light, loose earth, suitably top-dressed. After spreading the seedlings, mulch them to prevent rainwater or watering from beating the soil. It differs only in its stem, which is thin at the base and increases in size from the middle to the top. It has the same qualities, and is planted at the same distance. Chou-Caulet de Flandre. A sub-variety of the first, differing only in the red color of its stem and leaves. Suitable for the same uses and planted at the same distance apart. Chou branchu du Poitou, or Chou mille-tête, grows less tall than the preceding varieties, but produces a large number of leafy stems. It is extremely productive, and can be planted at the same distance as the previous varieties. Daubenton's perennial cabbage has many similarities with the previous one, but differs in that its lower branches are very long, and are inscribed on the ground, where they sometimes take root. It is planted at the same distance as the former. The large green Chon frisé from the north is quite similar to the cavalier, but it grows a little lower, and its paler green leaves are cut and pleated in a very elegant way. Like the two sub-varieties that follow, it is very hardy and resists even the hardest frosts. They are planted two feet apart. Last year, I propagated it with cuttings that have taken root perfectly, but I don't yet know what the final result will be. Scottish kale. A slightly smaller sub-variety, with narrower, more fringed leaves. They are planted two feet apart, as is the variety that follows. Green northern kale, which differs only in the red tint of its stems and leaves. The elegance of these last three cabbages makes them real ornamental plants. The buds that grow in spring are thin, long and very tender, and are eaten by some people as asparagus. variegated cabbage is small, with red and yellowish-white variegated leaves on a green background. It is good, but as it produces little, it is grown more for curiosity than for use. They are planted at eighteen inches. Cabbage with proliferating leaves, obtained by M. Vilmorin, is small, not very productive, but very unusual because of the foliaceous expansions that are implanted on the veins of its leaves. It is grown as a curiosity, with plants spaced eighteen inches apart. Proliferous variegated cabbage differs from the above only in the red and yellowish variegation of its leaves. It is grown in the same way. Palmetto grows taller than its predecessors; the stem is bare and very straight, ending in a rosette of long, narrow, blistered, dark-green leaves. It is an excellent, fairly productive plant, but more delicate than all its predecessors and, above all, much more sensitive to cold. Experience has shown that those sown in July and August are more resistant to frost than those sown in spring. They are planted two feet apart. Naples cabbage is another variety that is just as delicate as the previous one, and needs to be treated in the same way. It has a short, swollen stem and flat, smooth leaves with fringed edges. These last two varieties are native to Italy. Green cabbage with large ribs is an excellent variety, but only acquires all its qualities once it has been through the most severe frosts. Its leaves are smooth, large, rounded and of a beautiful green color; the petiole is broad, full and fleshy. This variety, like the next two, can be sown from May 15th to the end of June, and the young plants transplanted permanently, two feet apart, in July and August. Blond cabbage is preferred to the previous variety by many people, because its leaves are softer and have a milder flavor. It is also hardy. Cabbage with large collars and fringed leaves differs from the previous varieties only in its green leaves with fringed edges. It can be grown in the same way, and is no more sensitive to cold. As all these cabbages produce in winter as well as in summer, they do not need to be forced, so we will only consider them from the point of view of their ordinary cultivation. It is customary to sow them in nurseries in March and April, in well-soiled and perfectly loosened beds with good exposure. In April and May, i.e. when the plant is strong enough, it is permanently repotted, spacing each variety as we have said. Ordinary care is given, and it produces in winter and spring. In July and August, sow in beds with northern exposure, water frequently and transplant permanently in September and November. The plants from these seedlings produce during the following summer. Nevertheless, these times are not so rigorous that you can't advantageously sow every month from spring to autumn. All green cabbages, with the exceptions we have mentioned in each article where necessary, are grown in the same way. They do very well broadcast and in open fields, provided the soil is prepared with good fertilizers and ploughing. In this case, they are very profitable as green fodder for the cowshed during the bad season. II. MILAN cabbage, or Poutis-raisis. Cabbages of this breed are easy to recognize by their short stalks, loosely packed heads, and more or less embossed and braided leaves. They are usually softer and more delicate than cabbages, and taste much less like musk. A large number of varieties are available: The very hative Milan d'Ulm, an excellent variety, very easy to peel, of mediocre size, with a fairly high stem. Milan hatif, with the same qualities as the previous one, but with beautiful green leaves and a lower stem. Milan court, or dwarf, tender, excellent, fairly quick to peel, small and stocky, very dark green, slightly slate-colored. Pancalier de Tourrainc, very good and frost resistant, short stem, very dark green leaves, very short, crinkled at the edges, strong ribs and prominent veins. Ordinary Savoy or large Savoy cabbage. Bigger head than previous varieties; tender green leaves; excellent. Pancalier blond, quite similar to Pancalier de Tourraine, but paler green and slightly yellowish; less resistant to frost. Milan à téte longue, with elongated, small, pointed buds; dark green, blistered, frizzy leaves. Very tender and very good. Milan doré or Savoy, with very curly, blond-green leaves that turn yellowish in winter. Low stems; medium-sized, rounded, loosely packed, excellent apples. This variety has no fear of frost. Milan des vertus or large German kale. Apple as large as that of a large cabbage, which it resembles a little in the way it is made, and in its leaves, which are less blistered than in the preceding varieties and sometimes of a glaucous green. This very vigorous variety, suitable for large-scale cultivation, requires good soil; it resists the cold well and, like ordinary kite and paucalier, keeps longer in winter than white cabbage. Do not sow later than April. The second-season German milan is tender and excellent; its apple, white on the inside, is smaller than that of the previous variety; its leaves are dark green. Milan d'automne or gros Choux frisé de Saint-Denis, has a very large, slightly elongated head; its leaves are slightly blistered, rounded, broad and pale green; its stem is large and fairly high. This variety is tender and very good. Brussels sprouts, or rosette cabbage, has a fairly small main head, but its stem, sometimes two to three feet high, produces small, curly, tender, excc.ient apples that are picked as they grow. The head is cut off last. Russian cabbage, sent to M. Vilmorin from Boston, has leaves cut to the rib, in narrow, irregular and stiff strips; its stem is a foot high, its apple round, of medium size, very tender and excellent. Savoy cabbages can be stored well until spring, so there's no need to grow them as early as possible. They are sown in two seasons: 1. from the end of February to May; 2. in August and September. The earliest are sown in June, and they follow one another without interruption until the frosts. When the young plant has been sown in a well-drained and loosened bed, watered, weeded and carefully thinned out, it can be planted out after a month or five weeks. Transplant in rows or staggered rows, spacing the larger species three feet apart and the smaller ones eighteen inches apart. They require only the usual care, i.e. watering during the heat, and hoeing from time to time. When the frosts come, you can leave outside those whose head is not yet fully formed, and particularly the Tourraine pancalier and the ordinary milan, as they finish peeling very well, either in the interval between the frosts, or when they are over. Varieties that fear the cold more, such as the blond pancalier, the long-headed kite, etc., are lifted from the ground with the root ball, and after having detached part of their large leaves, they are taken to the vegetable greenhouse, where they are buried in dry sand up to the bottom of the apple. They keep perfectly well until March or even April. Savoy cabbages can also be stored without a vegetable greenhouse. Before the cold weather sets in, a little soil is removed from the base of each cabbage in the first row, and on the north side, the cabbages are tilted into these sort of trenches, but with as little uprooting as possible. The holes in the second row are started, and the soil is thrown over the roots and stems of those in the first, continuing in this way until all the rows have been laid down. In this way, rainwater slides over the leaves and prevents it from penetrating the heart of the plant, which would inevitably cause it to rot. During hard frosts, we throw a little straw or bedding over the cabbages to protect them from the excess cold. To save space, by making them occupy a much smaller area, you can also dig a pit one foot deep by a width and length determined by the number of cabbages you want to shelter. We pull them out, or carry them into the pit, and place them there, one against the other, in an inclined position, and throw a little earth on their roots. During frosts, they are covered with straw mats, long litter or dry leaves. Finally, some people are content to store them in a cellar, where they keep quite well if it's neither too hot nor too dry. 9 this breed are numerous and widely cultivated; their heads are very tight and very hard, but they often have a musky odor that many people dislike. Cabbage is used to make sauerkraut (saüer kraut). We will list the varieties in order of earliness, as established by M. Vilmorin. 1 - Yorck cabbage. Very precious and highly prized, its apples are small and very elongated. It has several sub-varieties: Cabbage of Yorck cabage or superfin hatif. Similar to the above, but smaller and a few days earlier. Hätif dwarf Yorck cabbage. As early as the previous one, and similar to it, but with a rounder head and shorter stem. The large Yorck cabbage, with a larger head but slower forming. 2. hatif sugarloaf cabbage. Excellent variety, with slightly blond, slightly hooded leaves; elongated head, sometimes in the shape of an inverted cone, very tender, not very prone to splitting. 3. Beef heart cabbage. Produces three excellent sub-varieties: Small, early, forming its head almost at the same time as Yorck cabbage. The medium-sized variety, larger and less early, is similar to the large white cabbage. Large, with a more rounded apple shape. 4 Large white cabbage or cabbage head. It offers many varieties that are generally larger, rounder and more widely grown than the previous ones: Chou de Saint-Denis or Chou blanc de Bonneuil. Very short stems; very glaucous leaves; large, flattened or round head. Second-season Alsace cabbage. Stem short; leaves rounded, a little hooded, detached; large, rounded or flattened head, forming quickly. Gros Chou d'Alzace, from Germany, or Chou-Quintal. Its stem is short and very thick; its leaves, paler green than those of the preceding varieties, are broad and a little scalloped; in new, substantial, fresh soil, its head acquires enormous volume. Gros Chou tardif d'Allemagne. It differs from the previous variety in having a slightly longer, but very thick stem, and dark green leaves with coarse, whitish veins. Its apples are very large, tight, tender and excellent, but later. Large German cabbage with purple collars. It differs from the previous variety only in the color of the leaf ribs, and in the even slower-forming head. Large Scottish cabbage. Very large, slow-growing, but hardier than the others, more resistant to cold and easy to store. Gros Chou-Cabus de Hollande, or Chou-Cauve, very similar to the above, but a little less hardy. Short-stalked Dutch cabbage, an excellent sub-variety, with medium-sized apples, but forming more quickly than other cabbages. Stubby Brunswisck cabbage. Its stem is very short; its leaves are few, short and rounded; its head is tight, flattened and of medium size. 5. Red cabbage. Two sub-varieties are grown: Large red cabbage, short-stemmed, with leaves that start out an obscure green washed with purple, then turn red, and have reddish-brown ribs. It has a large, loosely-packed head, which some people eat in salads. Blackish Utrecht cabbage, much smaller, with a slightly taller stem, blood-red leaves and a tighter head. Its head leaves, cut into small strips and pickled in vinegar like gherkins, are considered excellent. The German red cabbage has a stronger stem and larger head than the previous variety, whose color it also resembles. AUTUMN SOWING. It's easy to grow cabbage all year round, without forcing, by autumn sowing. Yorck cabbage and other small early varieties are sown at the end of August (never before), in well-soiled beds with good exposure. Ordinary soius are given, consisting of basinage, etc. In October, along a wall facing south, we prepare good ados, well loosened and amended with half-consumed manure, and transplant the young plants, fifteen or eighteen inches apart. Care is taken with them, and if winter is very harsh, it's a good idea to mulch the bed with two or three inches of good manure, which you bury in the spring by hoeing. These cabbages, if planted in good soil and with a warm exposure, start to produce around the fifteenth of April, and give until May, when they are replaced by the following varieties. Ordinary varieties can be sown from the fifteenth of August to the fifteenth of September, with the same care. In October, they can be planted permanently or transplanted from a nursery into a bed facing south, where they will overwinter and only be planted in February and March. Depending on the size of the variety, space them from eighteen inches to three feet apart. Don't spare them any water, especially when they're young. As we have said, they succeed Yorck cabbages and produce until August. SPRING SOWING. In February, a warm bed is prepared and filled with five to six inches of a mixture of three-quarters old compost and one-quarter light garden soil. At the beginning of the month, we sow cabbages in this layer, which we cover with cloches or frames when it freezes and during the night. In the last days of March, they are transplanted into the ground and planted out, and produce in September. The second spring sowing is done at the end of February and beginning of March. In a well-soil bed with a warm exposure, at the foot of a wall facing south, sow lightly and plant out in the first fortnight of April, and produce at the end of September and during October. The third sowing is done in March, in loosened and, above all, well-soiled soil. Transplant at the end of April, and the cabbages harvest in November and December. Cabbages from the last season keep well until spring, if treated as we said for savoy cabbages. IV. RAVES. These varieties are grown for their leaves, but more particularly for their root or collar, which becomes large and fleshy, and is used like turnips. There are three varieties, which have given rise to a number of sub-varieties, namely: I. Siamese cabbage. It is easily recognized by its swollen stem above ground, forming a ball that gives rise to leaves on its top and sides. It has three sub-varieties: White, with a white ball; it is later than the other three. Violet, with a violet stem and leaf ribs of varying shades of violet. The dwarf hative, with small, sparse leaves, forms its ball very quickly. Sown from May 1st to July 15th. a. Choux-Naveis, Choux Turneps, Choux de Laponie. This breed is recognized by its fleshy, thick root, shaped like a large, long turnip and tasting like kohlrabi. Like its predecessors, it is not affected by frost. Three sub-varieties are grown: Ordinary Turnip-Cabbage, with large white roots. Hátif, a little smaller, but much quicker to produce, and more tender; white root. Chou-Navet à collet rouge, with the ribs and veins of the leaves dyed this color. When cooking kohlrabi, be careful to remove the bark to a certain thickness. 3. Rutabago cabbage, or Swedish turnip. Very similar to turnip cabbage, but yellowish, cleaner, quicker to produce and more delicate, it is preferred for cooking. It is sown in the light from the fifteenth of May to the fifteenth of July. All kohlrabi are cold-hardy, and are left in the ground to be used as needed, so there's no need to grow them as early crops. Siam cabbages are sown in May and June, in a nursery, in a bed of light, well-soiled soil. In July and August, break up a square, smoke it with half-consumed fertilizer, and transplant in staggered rows, placing the young plants fifteen inches apart.

of the others. They require some watering and weeding, but are otherwise quite hardy. In regions with heavy frosts, it's a good idea to keep them in a vegetable greenhouse, or other dry place sheltered from the cold. To do this, carefully uproot them, remove their leaves and bury half of them in dry sand. They can also be preserved by simply opening a trench in dry soil, removing their leaves and covering them with a thick layer of litter or dry leaves. Turneps can be grown in exactly the same way, except that they don't need to be transplanted. In this case, sow in a plot prepared by deep ploughing, in rays or broadcast, and thin out the plants so as to leave fifteen or eighteen inches between each one. Transplant where necessary. Rutabaga can be sown in the field, very lightly, at the times we have indicated in this article; however, it can also be sown in a nursery, in which case it is permanently transplanted in July and August. It is very hardy and frost-resistant. Kohlrabi of all breeds can be stored perfectly well in the vegetable greenhouse or in a trench, trained as we said about Siam cabbage. V. cauliflower (Brassica botrytis, by M. Desfontaines) Two quite distinct breeds of cauliflower are grown: 1. cauliflower proper; a. broccoli. They are much more highly esteemed than the former because of their delicacy. Everyone is familiar with the use made of their heads, formed by an immense quantity of flower buds: 1. cauliflowers. Their stems are lower than those of broccoli, and they are much earlier. The tender or "hatif" variety is smaller than the next two, and its less tightly packed head divides fairly quickly into flowering shoots; its leaves are less broad, more united and straighter. The three varieties differ more in quality than in any other characteristic. The semi-hard variety is somewhere between hard and soft, both in appearance and in quality. The hard variety has a large, short stalk; its leaves are large and much more wavy than those of the two precẽdens; it makes its head less quickly, but it is heavier, tighter, and does not flower as quickly. 2. Broccoli differs from cauliflower in its higher stems, wavy leaves, generally larger size and color. They are less precocious and some do not flower. Here are their varieties. A. Head broccoli. Three sub-varieties: White, with white apples, similar to cauliflower, but of better quality. One of the best of all. Purple, with a purplish apple. Excellent. The dwarf violet hátif, smaller, quicker to form, but of less esteemed quality. These three are considered to be the best, and are therefore more widely cultivated than the others. B. Sprouting broccoli. Three sub-varieties: Green, yellow and red. PRIEUR. By means of artificial cultivation and a great deal of care, cauliflowers can be obtained quite easily all year round. First of all, we'd like to point out that cauliflowers are more delicate than other species, and that they need light, very substantial, soft soil, amended with a lot of fertilizer; what they really need is a lot of water, as they won't pump otherwise. For this reason, spring and autumn sowings are usually more successful than early ones. Autumn cauliflowers, preserved as described in the article on ordinary cultivation, provide a winter supply until mid-February. We must therefore begin this article by teaching you how to grow the cauliflowers that will succeed them. 1. Sowing in July, to produce in February and March. From the fifteenth to the twentieth of July, sow tender cauliflower in damp or at least shady soil with a northern exposure. Prepare the soil with good ploughing and amendments appropriate to the season: cow potting soil, for example, is excellent when it is only three-quarters used up; any other fertilizer must be completely used up. Sow lightly, covering the seed with two fingers of compost. Water immediately, and rigorously coutinue the arrocomens twice a day, until September, and beyond if autumn is dry or hot. A fortnight after emergence, the plants are transplanted to a bed at the same exposure, prepared in the same way, but with a foot or fifteen inches between them, depending on their strength. Give them the usual care and attention, especially plenty of watering. If the plant is seen to be advancing too much, it is transplanted a second time, at the end of September, in a well-soiled bed with good exposure. When the first white frosts set in, surround the bed with a good manure stove, two feet high, and whenever the cold sets in, cover the plantation with good mulch spread on sticks laid across the stoves. If we could cover with frame panels, it would be all the better. We try to keep the plants in this way until the middle of December, but with the precaution of giving them air and light whenever it's safe to do so. Nevertheless, if the frosts become more intense before this time, we'll transplant them immediately, as we're about to say. One observation we'd like to make here is that cauliflowers are less afraid of the cold than is generally thought. During the winter of 1827 to 1828, I kept them throughout the bad season, without any cover on the northern exposure, and we know that the thermometer went down several times to five and a half and six degrees below zero; they did perfectly well. Nonetheless, the gardener mustn't take advantage of what we've just said to throw caution to the wind and run the risk of being caught out. Prepare a muted layer four feet wide and three feet thick, and build it up with materials that are likely to retain their heat the longest. A mixture of half hot horse manure and half dry leaves perfectly fulfills this purpose. A nine- to ten-inch bed of potting soil mixed with half light garden soil is spread over the bed. When the heat has passed, i.e. eight to ten days later, which should be the fifteenth of December, if possible, the cauliflower plants are transplanted with the root ball, eighteen inches apart. The glasses should be about three or four inches from the tallest leaves, and never more. If the cabbages are getting longer, you can put in more and more fusegates as needed. Hot manure stoves, at least eighteen inches thick and the same height as the sides of the boxes, are placed around the trunks. Cauliflower wilts easily, so don't miss a single opportunity to give it air and light, as this is, after heat, the first condition for success. From time to time, we probe the layer to see if it's cooling down. If it does, we dig a pit eighteen inches wide and as deep around the frames, and fill it with warm manure, which we renew every fortnight, if winter is intense. We take care to cover the panels every night with good straw mats and bedding, but we remove these covers every day when it's not freezing, or even when it is freezing, but not so hard as to worry about the cold penetrating the frames. As a rule, we start to have a few fine days towards the end of January or in the course of February. If it's a sunny day, and the thermometer rises to four or five degrees above zero, we give the plants plenty of air during the hottest part of the day, by lifting the covers almost entirely. If you give the plants the care we've just described, they'll produce their heads in February and March, unless the winter has been extraordinarily harsh. Their apples will be small but delicious. 2° Sowing in August and September, for production in April. In the last five days of August and the first five days of September, hard and semi-hard cauliflower are sown in a light, earthen bed, in a nursery, with the usual care and attention. Give it the usual care and, above all, water it copiously. When the plant is strong enough, and the frosts begin to make themselves felt, the seedling is transplanted, four inches apart, on a warm bed, under cloches, or better still, under a frame. If under cloches, as soon as the cold becomes intense, surround them with short litter, and when necessary, cover with straw mats. Water as needed, provide as much air and light as possible, and place stoves to prevent the layers from cooling. At the beginning of February, a muted layer fourteen to fifteen inches deep is established in a trench, with half hot manure and half dry leaves, placed in salternative beds. This is filled with ten inches of potting soil mixed, as we said for the previous one, with half of good light garden soil; when its great heat has passed, i.e., ten to twelve days later, the plants are transplanted twenty inches apart. Each cauliflower is covered with a choche, which is left untouched until recovery is assured. Only then do you begin to give the plants air, little by little, to accustom them to it. If the season is cold, fill in the bell gaps with bedding, and if the frosts are still strong, cover them at night with good doormats, which are removed every morning. In March, the blankets can be removed at the beginning of the month, and even the bells around mid-month, if the season is as usual, but they must always be kept close by so that they can be replaced immediately, should unexpected bad weather make them necessary. Cauliflowers treated in this way produce in April. In both these crops, the empty spaces left by cauliflowers on the warm layers, either under the cloches or under the frames, can be used to sow fournitnres, lettuces and other vegetables. 3° Sowing in September, for production in May and June. From the fifth of September until the last days of the month, hard and semi-hard cauliflowers are sown, as described below. Sow lightly in a warm rather than cold soil-bed, or better still, in an old layer of potting soil, and take the usual care when sowing. Fifteen or twenty days after the seedling has emerged, prepare the ground on which it will be planted. Against a south-facing wall, prepare a slightly sloping ados of a width calculated to accommodate two or three rows of bells. After loosening the soil well, you fill it with three or four inches of good, well-consumed compost. We plant the young cauliflowers, spacing them so that each bell, when placed, can cover from fifteen to twenty, and less if we can without losing too much space, and that we have enough glassware. When the first white frosts begin to make themselves felt, the bells are placed every evening, and removed in the morning. When the weather turns bad and the frost becomes more intense, the bells are left on during the day, but lifted whenever it's safe to do so, as cauliflowers quickly wither and melt when deprived of air or light. It sometimes happens, in warm autumns, that the plant advances more than we'd like. In this case, we suspend watering for a while, or, if necessary, we unfold the cabbages, give them a light ploughing in the soil of the bed, and transplant them immediately as they were before. This operation is enough to stop its growth for a suitable length of time. When the frost has become severe enough to threaten to penetrate under the cloches, we fill the gaps between them with litter, and cover them at night with good straw mats. In very harsh winters, we're sometimes obliged to fill in between the bells with warm manure, and cover the whole with a good thickness of bedding, over which we spread more straw mats. In all cases, it's important to continue providing as much air and light as possible. In March, a little earlier if the season is mild, or a little later if you're still afraid of the cold, prepare a bed with good exposure by deep ploughing and fertilizing the soil to suit its quality. Transplant the plants in staggered or staggered rows, two feet apart. Covering with cloches for four or five days makes transplanting much easier, but this precaution is not essential. Hoe, weed and weed, and above all water very often if the season is a little dry and hot. If the care indicated is taken at the right time, and the cabbages have not suffered from frost, they begin to produce towards the end of May, continuing into June and sometimes as late as July. We don't think it's necessary to point out here that the beds where they are overwintered can be advantageously covered with frames instead of bells. If they were used, the cold would be prevented from penetrating inside, by means of manure piled in sufficient quantity around the boxes; a thick blanket of litter would be thrown over the panels, and good straw mats would be spread over them, if necessary. M. Vilmorin teaches a wintering method that Fon can try if he has neither bells nor frames. Let's hear what this skilled farmer has to say. - In the absence of "cloches", he says, you can "winterize" your plant in small recesses made of dry litter, held in place by stakes at the same angle as the bark, so that it "is enclosed in a kind of small wall of dry manure" at a height of five to six inches. Transverse poles" supported by the stakes hold the mulch, which is doubled in cold weather, "and removed in fine weather. 4. Sowing in January, to produce in June and July, Hard and half-hard varieties are usually used for this season's sowing. From January twenty-fifth to February fifteenth, sow very lightly in a warm layer four feet wide and three feet thick, with six to eight inches of pure, well-consumed compost. Cover the seedling with cloches, or better still, with frames, and give it the usual care. Particular care is taken to ensure that heat is maintained, and to this end, bedding blankets and straw mats are used. Fifteen days after emergence, if the seedling has not suffered from cold or lack of light, it should be ready for transplanting. A new warm layer is raised, but given the season, it can be as little as three to three-and-a-half feet high and two feet thick. This is covered with seven to eight inches of potting soil mixed with half light earth. We plant the cauliflowers four or five inches apart, and shelter them with bells, or simply with straw mats, which we spread over them every evening, and hold in place with a few stakes and sticks across the top. If the nights were cold, and we were threatened with frost, we'd place a border of short, broken litter between the bed and the mats every evening. This would prevent the cold from penetrating to the plants. At the end of March, or the beginning of April, the seedlings are transplanted into place, in beds prepared as above. Care is taken as recommended above, the tiquet is spread or watered frequently, and the cabbages produce their heads in June and July. 5. March sowing, to produce in July. Tender and semi-hard cauliflowers are preferred for this month's sowing. From the first to the fifteenth of March, raise a layer of chande in the same proportions as those we have just mentioned; fill it with seven to eight inches of similarly mixed loam, and sow lightly. The seedling is protected from the frequent inclemency of March weather, by means of frames or cloches, or simply with straw mats placed as mentioned above. The seedling can be left on the bed for a month, but only if it has been thinned out or sown very brightly, and can be given air. If the season is not favorable enough to meet this last condition, we transplant it to a new bed and treat it as we did for the previous month's seedlings. In April, it is planted on specially prepared beds at the usual exposure. Proper care is taken, and it produces in July. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. As the seedlings we are about to discuss are planted in the open ground, and cabbages no longer require shelter, we must end our early season article here. 6. April sowing, for July production. The most suitable variety for sowing this season is tender cauliflower. From mid-April to the end of the month, prepare a perfectly composted bed in a south-facing position and sow fairly lightly; rake lightly and cover with a finger's thickness of consumed compost. The seedlings are left in the nursery until they are strong enough to be planted out permanently; then they are transplanted to a bed, twenty inches apart, in a dry, half-shaded position. We give them the usual care of hoeing, weeding, etc., and above all we free them from the tiquet, or earth flea. As soon as the heat begins to make itself felt, watering must be redoubled and given night and morning, because if this rigorous precaution is not taken, if the soil is not kept in a constant state of humidity, you can be sure that the cabbages will not succeed. Moreover, they require no other special care. As cauliflower sown in April does not keep its head for long, it is necessary to sow little at a time and three or four times. 7. Sow in May to produce in September. Semi-hard cauliflower is preferred for sowing this month. Paris market gardeners even give it preference over the other two varieties, for sowing in all seasons. It is sown from the first to the fifteenth of May, in well-prepared soil with ordinary exposure. Like its predecessor, it should only be transplanted once and permanently. As for the rest, it is grown in exactly the same way as the April plant, and requires just as much watering. April and May seedlings are the most difficult to sow, especially when the summer is dry and hot. In this case, it is only with the help of ean bark and a northern exposure that they can be brought to fruition. 8. June sowing, for production from September to November. Semi-hard is still the most popular cauliflower for this month's sowing. In ordinary soils, sow from the tenth to the fifteenth of June, and in warm, light soils, until the twenty-fifth. In a northern exposure, in the coolest part of the garden, prepare a bed and amend it suitably with green manure or, better still, with half-consumed cow manure. The seed is thrown in very lightly, the rake is passed over it, and the soil is loosened as described above. To keep the soil fresh, it's a good idea to mulch the seedling, in which case you don't need to cover it with compost. Leave the seedling in place until you are ready to plant it permanently, but don't spare it any watering, either in the seedling or when it is in the bed, especially during the first few months, as seedlings in this season require the most. When the young cabbages are strong enough, they are transplanted into beds at the usual exposure, and require no further care than that given to other common cabbages. They often start to produce as early as August, and continue until November, or until the first frosts stop their growth. The last heads of cabbage can easily be kept over winter. All you have to do is cut them three inches below the head, and cut off all the leaves, even the smallest ones, which are hidden inside the head. Once this is done, tie them to a string and hang them in a dry, airy place where frost cannot penetrate, such as a fruit garden, a vegetable greenhouse, a healthy cellar, or simply a bedroom. They can also be placed on wooden shelves. They will keep until February. As for cauliflowers that have not yet sprouted when the frosts arrive - and there are a lot of them if you've sown hardy ones - strip them of their largest leaves, and plant them close together, but without them touching, in a layer of compost or sand in the vegetable greenhouse, and they form small but very good heads that produce until March. If you don't have a vegetable greenhouse, you can plant them in a cellar or storeroom; but in this case, it's better to use the method we'll describe below. At the foot of a south-facing wall, in dry soil, open a trench three to four feet wide and two feet deep; plant the cabbages close together, in potting soil and with the root ball, then cover with frames. When the cold gets colder, we cover the panels with litter, and establish good rechands, which we renew every eight or fifteen days around the boxes. Cauliflowers treated in this way produce larger, slightly earlier apples. The best cauliflower seeds are those collected from the largest and most plump plants of the autumn sowing, and the firmest, whitest apples. Seedbeds are overwintered in frames or under cloches, and come up in spring. Above all, they must be kept away from all other cabbage varieties during flowering, otherwise they will cross-pollinate and degenerate. 9. Broccoli cultivation. This breed requires absolutely the same care as other cauliflowers. In May and June, prepare a shady bed, amend it with consumed fertilizers, and sow all varieties very lightly, except the dwarf and purple, whose seeds should not be entrusted to the soil until July. We water abundantly, thin out the seedlings if necessary, and only lift the plants to transplant them when they are strong enough. A bed is then broken up, smoked and loosened, and the broccoli is pricked out two and a half feet apart. We weed, weed, weed and we water daily, especially in the heat of summer. As frost approaches, a small pit is dug at the foot of each broccoli plant, and it is gently laid down, tilting carefully and repeatedly to avoid damaging the roots. Cover the stem with soil and part of the head, but leave half of the head exposed to air and light. During hard frosts, we cover them with a good thickness of dry litter, which we remove to give them air and light whenever the weather permits. At the end of winter or the beginning of spring, they yield their products. You can also overwinter broccoli under a frame, planting it with the root ball in potting soil placed at the bottom of a two-foot-deep trench, as we said for cauliflower from June sowing. Alternatively, simply remove them with the rootball, and plant them upright to the leaves, in a hole made in a south-facing bed. During hard frosts, they are covered with litter. GENERAL CABBAGE CULTIVATION. All cabbages - green, savoy, headed, etc. - like a clean, strong rather than light soil (with the exception of cauliflowers), fresh or even a little damp, deep, amended with half-used fertilizers, and perfectly loosened. In new soils, i.e. newly cleared, they sometimes acquire a surprising volume. They can only be propagated by sowing seeds at the times indicated, in loose, light, earthy soil, facing south in spring and autumn, and north in summer. Throughout their life, they need frequent watering, but it's especially during their youth that watering is absolutely essential. When it comes to planting young cabbages, the first step is to prepare the soil by ploughing several times, to loosen it enough so that the planter doesn't compress it too much. We choose rainy weather for this operation, to hasten and facilitate recovery. Make a hole with the planting tool, insert the root without crumpling it, and press it in so that the eye or heart of the young cabbage is level with the surface of the soil, or even deeper rather than higher. The plant must not be too strong, as then it is prone to rising, knotting and hardening off; but neither must it be too weak, as then it frequently languishes for a few days and melts. Cabbages are attacked, especially in their youth, by a small, black, jumping, very agile insect called the tiquet or earth flea (I); they gnaw the parenchyma of the leaves, making a thousand holes, and cause them to perish in a short time. This plague is avoided by sprinkling cabbages with ashes or road dust when they are wet from dew, rain or sprinkling water. Another insect that is just as dangerous, but only attacks the plant when it is strong, is the red cabbage bug. The only way to destroy it is to hunt it during the day, and throw it into a vase containing soap water. It perishes in a very short time. You shouldn't be reluctant to pick it up with your fingers, as this species has no bad odor. Caterpillars are another destructive insect that must be constantly hunted down. We crush them with a small wooden paddle as we find them. It's especially in the evenings and mornings that you need to be on the lookout for them, because then they're all together and easier to crush. (1) Under this name, gardeners confuse several species, each one as dangerous as the other: they are the vegetable flea beetle (allica oleracea); garden flea beetle (A. Rortezzis); cabbage flea beetle (A. Prassicæ); turnip flea beetle (A. napi); nigriped flea beetle (A. nigripes.) The larva of an insect unknown to me is also very frequently found in the stem of cabbages, near the collar, and causes a very noticeable little tumor. As soon as it is spotted during transplanting, the nodule is opened by cutting off half of it, and the worm is removed. Cabbage is no less successful. Finally, slugs and heliconias, or snails, also wreak havoc on cabbages, especially when they are young. The best way to destroy them is to chase them away. In small seedbeds, by mixing half an ounce of fine tobacco with a pound of ash and sprinkling the soil in the evening, you can kill a large number of them. I teach this procedure only after having experimented with it myself for three consecutive years, and with consistently satisfactory success. No plant that I know of experiences adulterous fertilization as easily as cabbage, without even excluding melons. In 1828, I had a singular example. The mild winter had left me with several very fine cauliflowers. They came up and flowered at a time when no other variety was in bloom, apart from a single plant of northern kale, but which was more than thirty paces away. I carefully harvested the seeds and sowed them in May; out of more than five hundred plants, I had, at most, thirty or so that appear to me today (July 18 28) to be cauliflowers. The others have leaves much larger than kale, flat in the middle, curled and wavy only at the edges, very pale green, and the stems are already over eighteen inches high. I don't know what I'll get from any of them. To avoid similar accidents, which are all too frequent, you need to place each seedling as far apart as possible (in different varieties), and above all try to ensure that they don't flower at the same time: this is the best way to avoid hybridity and degeneration of the races. Great care must always be taken in selecting the individuals intended to bear seed, and only the most beautiful, robust and straightforward of their respective varieties should be kept. We take great care of them during the summer and autumn, then, when the cold weather arrives, we shelter the varieties that fear the cold, with litter, cloches, straw mats, etc. Sometimes in spring, when all the trees start to climb, the apples of some cabus trees are so tightly packed that they can't open to allow the stems to pass through. In this case, we split them in four with the tip of the pruning knife, taking care not to cut too far forward. It is often necessary to use a sharp instrument when a cabbage has suffered from humidity, and its head is spoiled in some parts. The rot is removed by cutting to the quick, and this operation does not prevent it from going to seed as well as any other. If you cut the head off a cabbage, and these shoots produce stems, the seed they produce is just as good as the one obtained with much more stems. A cabbage seed is ripe when the siliques become yellowish-white and begin to open. Then cut the stems gently so as not to lose any seeds, spread them out on a cloth and leave them to dry in the sun or in an airy place sheltered from the rain. Then thresh it, clean it as best you can, and after enclosing it in small canvas bags, hang it in a very dry, frost-free place. It will keep all the better if the temperature is always maintained at the same level, and the same applies to all vegetable seeds. Seeds of cauliflower will not retain their germinative qualities for more than five years, after which only one parlie is produced; but those of all other varieties can be kept for seven or eight years. CHOU-MARIN, or MARITIME CRAMBE (Crambe maritima); a perennial, indigenous plant that can be ranked among the best vegetables. Unbeknownst to us, it is extremely neglected in France, while the English consume it in enormous quantities. Its blanched young shoots can be eaten in a variety of ways. They are boiled like cauliflower, then seasoned with butter or sauce. Their flavor is a cross between broccoli and asparagus. PRIMEUR. Crambe is usually grown in March and April, and it is not usually forced to be grown in France. But English gardeners. But English gardeners put a lot of effort into it, and grow it all year round. We'll explain the methods they use. They force on the spot and on the bed, and each of these processes will provide us with an article. 1. forcing in place. When a crambe plant is to be heated, it must be sown or planted in advance. Planks four feet wide are laid out over an indeterminate length, leaving a three-foot-wide bed between each plank. The plants are planted or sown eighteen inches apart lengthwise, in three rows spaced one foot apart, leaving six inches on each side between the plants and the bed. For two years, if sown, or for one year if planted; the care indicated below for ordinary cultivation is given. But as crambe roots trace out a lot, three or four times during the year, we use the spade's edge to circle around the bed, in order to cut off any raciues that tend to overtake the six inches left next to the last rows. In this way, instead of spreading out in the beds, they are forced to vegetate in the bed. From the month of August, which precedes the winter during which we must force, we stop watering, and even divert rainwater, so that vegetation is suspended instead. Around mid-September, we cut back the leaves and stems, most of which should already have dried out. In October, the soil is removed from the beds, and they are dug eighteen inches deep. They are filled with warm, well-trampled manure, which is raised in a layer a foot above the surface of the soil. After lightly hoeing the planks, they are also covered with a foot of hot manure, and, to keep out rainwater, covered with long straw, straw mats or bedding. If you only had a plank to force, you could make the beds only two feet or even eighteen inches wide; you'd be even if you had to put new manure more often in these kinds of stoves. But English gardeners always give them three feet, because they use them as a bed for sowing small vegetables under cloches. Once things are set up in this way, all that's left to do is to move the manure away from the bed from time to time to see if the crambe is starting to give, which doesn't take long. The shoots and buds are cut when they are five to six inches long, and delivered for consumption. If the crambé is to be sacrificed, everything is cut off until the exhausted plants cease to produce entirely. If you want to keep it, you stop cutting as soon as the produce diminishes noticeably, which usually happens after a month. Then remove the stoves from the beds and fill them with earth, removing much of the fùmier that covers the bed; but always leave a certain thickness to prevent the roots from being caught in the frost. They recover very well the following spring and during the summer, and can be heated two or three times in the six years between planting, which is their normal life span. When January arrives, the crambe doesn't need as much heat to be forced. The plants are mounded with the soil from the leftover bed, taking care not to expose the roots. The mounds, which are roughly conical in shape, are wrapped and covered with a sort of long straw hood, and covered with a good bed of hot manure. Sometimes we heat according to our first method, but with a modification; instead of spreading a foot-thick layer of hot manure on the board, we give it only five or six inches, and cover the whole with glass frames. " 2. Forcing on bedding. From October to the end of January, a warm layer is raised outdoors or under a frame, and covered with eight inches of compost. Carefully uproot three- or four-year-old crambe vines, leaving as much soil as possible, and plant them ten inches apart in the potting soil. Care must be taken not to bury them too deeply, as if the roots came into contact with the manure, they would burn and perish. If the bed is in the open air, calculate the distance between the feet so that one bell can cover three of them; to do this, group them three by three in a triangle and six inches apart; space the groups one foot or eighteen inches apart, depending on the size of the bells. To achieve this easily, all you have to do is place the bells next to each other when the soil in the bed is perfectly even, and press a little on them to make them leave the imprint of their 41 edge; you plant three feet of crambé in each circle formed by these imprints. Water to ensure recovery, cover with cloches, and fill the gaps with the same bedding. Stoves are used to keep the layers constantly warm, until the crambe buds begin to appear. At this point, the bells are completely covered with a thick blanket of litter, to absolutely block out the light and force the buds to turn white. If the layer is cous châssis, we simply tip a pelit pot over each bud as it appears, lining the hole with soggy soil. A little potting soil is gathered around its edges, to keep the plant in the deepest darkness. Many gardeners are content to cover the potting soil with a thick bed of short, dry litter, either in the open air or under a frame. The aim of all the methods we have just described is to provide crambe during the winter, right up to the time when it can be obtained naturally. All that remains is to explain how to obtain crambe during the summer, and that's what we're going to do. Eighteen-inch-diameter baskets are purchased on a foot deep. In spring, we fill them with a soil composed of one third old topsoil, one third fertile sand or heather earth, and one third good light garden soil. These baskets are buried, and a plant of crambe is planted in each one, which is tended all year round like those in the open ground. The following February, the baskets are removed from the soil and placed in a shed with a northerly exposure. The soil dries out, and you only water it enough to prevent the plants from perishing. As long as they are treated in this way, they remain languid, growing only half-aborted leaves and stems. In May, and progressively every month until August, we take a few baskets, remove the soil from the top down to the root collar, and cut off the spindly stems they have sprouted. Cover with a good mixture of half loam and half sandy soil, remove the basket without breaking the root ball, and carry the plant to a cold, deaf bed prepared for the purpose. There, it is first given copious watering, and its languid growth is revived by frequent basining. Soon after, it starts to grow again with vigor, and the buds that emerge are blanched in the usual way: all the art required to succeed in this practice consists simply in suspending vegetation without harming the plant too much, just as we do with orange trees that are deprived of water to bring them to sap and allow them to flower out of season. ORDINARY CULTURR. Crambé likes deep, substantial, light or sandy soil. It can be propagated from seed or by separating the roots. To sow in spring, break up a bed, amend it with fertilizer and loosen the soil as much as possible. Rows are marked out two feet apart, and small holes two inches deep and four inches wide are made, eighteen inches apart, in each row. From March to the beginning of May, you can sow. To do this, throw a handful of terrean into each hole, place five or six crambe seeds an inch apart, and cover with an inch of compost. Water copiously, and continue to do so until the crambe has emerged, and is in its early youth. The plant is then pruned, leaving just one plant in each spot, and transplanted in places where there may be a shortage, which is often the case, as a large proportion of the seeds are usually infertile. As much as, and perhaps more than, cabbages, it is subject to tick attack during its youth; it must be treated with ashes sifted over the leaves, while they are still damp from dew or sprinkling. We hoe, weed and give the usual care. In autumn, the leaves turn yellow and dry out; they are removed in October, and the bed is covered with one or two inches of compost. The crambé reappears in spring, and during this second year, the same care is given as in the previous year. By the third spring, it is ready to produce its first crop, and the young shoots are blanched, as we shall see later. Sometimes, instead of sowing in the field, we sow in a nursery, and this method is considered the most advantageous by some gardeners. After preparing a bed as we have said, at the same time of year, sow thickly and in rays spaced a foot apart. Care is taken as indicated, the tiquet is discarded, and thinning is carried out if necessary, i.e. if the plants are less than five or six inches apart. If you wish, you can transplant the plants removed in this operation elsewhere. In autumn, March and the following April, the plant is transplanted in place in a bed prepared as we have said to facilitate recovery, and if necessary, watering continues. In the third spring, the plants can be blanched. Some gardeners, to be more sure of success, and so that their plants are stronger and more capable of defending themselves in the tick season, sow in small pots sunk in a warm layer under cloches or frames, as early as February; they put five or six seeds in each pot, and, when they have sprouted, they leave only the strongest plant. In April, they plant in the ground with the rootball. Others are content to sow on the top of the bed, and lift the young plant as much as they can with the rootball, to place it permanently. Crambé also multiplies very well by taking cuttings from its roots, which are fleshy, thick and long, tracing between two soils. In February, they are cut into sections two or three inches long, and planted in pots in a warm layer covered with cloches. It doesn't take long for them to sprout buds and put down new roots; in April, they're put in place and, by this means, vigorous plants are obtained the same year, which can often be blanched the following spring. These cuttings can also be taken in the open ground, in March or April, in a nursery or in situ, but they only produce in the second year, i.e. a year earlier than plants from seed. Entin can still be propagated by separating its rooted eyelets. Here's how to bleach it. In February, plants are mounded with soil or compost to form a cone seven to eight inches high. At other times, simply cover with a good thickness of dry litter; finally, you can tip a flowerpot over each bud as it appears. The most important thing, whatever the method used, is that the shoot is absolutely deprived of air and light, otherwise it will contract a rather unpleasant bitter taste. When the bud is five or six inches long, and perfectly white, it is cut three or four lines from the root collar and delivered for consumption. To ensure that a crambe plant lasts a long time, the plants must not be exhausted, so a few tigez are left to rot. When the harvest is complete, if the plants have been buttted, they are uncovered and grow new pouzsent to repair those that have been cut. For five or six years, they can produce harvests, but unless the soil is very suitable, they rarely last longer; however, with a few simple precautions, these plants can be kept for many years. All you have to do is cut them back two years at a time, starting, for example, in the first spring with the first, third and fifth pledges in each row, and in the second spring with the second, fourth and sixth pledges, and so on. It would be even simpler to divide the bed into two equal parts, and cut alternately, one year plants from one, and the next year plants from the other. When the old stumps perish, they will naturally be replaced by the eyelets they have produced. Crambe seed is collected from old plants, which are sewn together without cutting for this purpose. It ripens towards the end of summer. CIBOULE (allium fissile); biennial plant, perennial in one variety, used in cooking for the same purposes as onions, and as a salad garnish. Varieties include: common chives, white chives, hative chives and perennial chives. PRIMEUR. As spring onions can be harvested during part of the winter when the weather is mild, and can be stored quite well in the vegetable greenhouse, it is not very important to force them. However, it can be done with great ease, and by this means we obtain new leaves that are much better than those that are only kept for supplies. From the beginning of August to the first days of September, the early or common variety is sown in the open ground, and gold gives the young plants their ordinary soitis. In October, the seedlings are transplanted in clumps of three to four plants together, on a warm bed of vegetable compost, spaced four inches apart. As soon as frost approaches, i.e. late November or early December, transplant the September seeds onto the same layer. Cover with cloches or frames, baste as needed, and the chives soon sprout. In this way, you can produce very delicious chives right through to January, and sometimes even longer. Perennial chives are used from January through to spring. In December, a few clumps are removed and transplanted to the same bed, where they are cared for for a few days to hasten recovery and vegetation. You can grow chives through the harshest winter without taking such great care. When frost approaches, we pull it out and plant it in the sand or potting soil of a vegetable greenhouse or under a tarpaulin. If you don't have a greenhouse, open a trench eighteen inches deep in the driest part of the garden, place the clumps of chives close together and cover them with a thick layer of dry litter to prevent frost from penetrating. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Annual chives can be grown anywhere, but prefer light, substantial soil amended with old compost. It can be sown at any exposure, at two times of the year: in February and March, for transplanting in April and May; and from the fifteenth to the thirtieth of July, for transplanting in September and enjoyment in April and May of the following year. At least, these are the times fixed by the good gardener's almanac. However, in order to obtain new varieties, which are always more delicate, the market gardeners of Paris sow them every month, from February to September, across their sslade beds. In the south of France, japdiniers start sowing as early as the beginning of January, and if the bad weather of the srison means that the first sowings are unsuccessful, they start again in February and March. If the soil is strong and prone to soaking from rain or watering, a finger of potting soil is spread over the seedbed. Water moderately, weed and weed if necessary. When the plant is strong enough, transplant two or three together to form a clump more quickly, in rays or in borders, leaving five to six inches between each clump. As perennial chives only produce seeds very rarely, they can only be propagated by separating clumps of chives and planting them in autumn or, more reliably, in spring. It can also be planted in rays or in borders, but spaced more widely, as it expands very quickly. If you run out, you can multiply it by planting clove by clove, two inches apart, but you'll have to wait a long time before you get nice clumps. This variety is hardier and more spring-like than the biennial chive, but it needs some watering during the heat of summer if it is to retain its vigorous growth. We keep a few vines of biennial chives, without cutting them, to obtain seeds. When ripe, cut the umbels on a clear day and collect them in bunches in a dry place. Thus preserved in their capsules, the seeds germinate very well for three years; but if you take them out, they lose their germinative virtues after two years. CIBOULETTE, CIVETTE, APPÉTIT (allium schomnopresum); perennial plant, native to Siberia, used in cooking as a salad ingredient, and sometimes as a seasoning. Three varieties were once thought to exist, but it has since been recognized that they are purely local, passing from one to the other with the greatest of ease by a simple change of soil. PRIMXUR. When frost approaches, remove the rootball from the chives in clumps no more than four or five inches wide; make a hole in the potting soil of a warm bed of small vegetables large enough to accommodate the rootball; water very lightly; cut off all the leaves from the clump near the bulbs, and cover with a bell or frame. The leaves grow back quickly and continue to supply until the plant is exhausted. Then, whatever the season, you replace it with another plant taken from the open ground, and by this means you obtain produce throughout the winter. The more air and light you give them, the slower the plants become exhausted. Moreover, you can easily keep chives for part of the winter, by treating them in the same way as we did for spring onions. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Chives are best grown in light, substantial, loose soils with warm exposure; however, they grow well everywhere. It could be propagated from seed, but as this would take a long time, it is customary to propagate by cloves. In March or April, we separate them and plant them in clumps of three or four together, spacing the clumps eight or nine inches apart, whether for beds or borders. These clumps expand rapidly, and the more you cut the leaves, the more tender and numerous they become. If you take care to keep it free of weeds, weed it occasionally and water it during the heat of summer, the chive will keep well and can remain for four or five years, after which it needs to be renewed by moving it to another spot. In autumn, as frost approaches, cut the leaves back to the ground, leave the wounds to dry for a few days, and cover the plant with an inch of reconstituted compost. COCHLÉARIA OFTICINAL OU HERBE A LA CUILLEE (cochlearia officinalis); biennial plant, indigenous, mutilated in cooking, but nevertheless very cultivated in most gardens because of the medicinal virtues attributed to it. PRIMEUR. As we always use fresh cocbléaria, because it loses most of its properties through desiccation, we thought it would be useful to indicate here how it can be obtained all year round. As soon as the seeds are ripe, i.e. around mid-August, prepare a bed in light, cool soil with a northerly exposure, and sow, taking care to keep the soil constantly cool by frequent watering. As frost approaches, lift the young plants with the moth, and plant two or three together, in pots five inches in diameter. If you have a temperate greenhouse or lighted orangery, you can place the plants in the daylight, which is enough to preserve them. If you don't have a greenhouse, set up a muted bed in a dry place, place the pots close together and cover with a frame. It should be noted that it is when the plant is in flower that the leaves have the most energy, so it is at this time that the cochlearía should be delivered to the trade, and arrangements should be made to ensure that it is always in this state. To do this, every two weeks we remove a few pots from under the frame and bury them in the potting soil of a warm layer of A vegetable; vegetation takes on activity; we keep the soil constantly moist, and the plants are quick to rise. You can also sow in a warm layer under a bell in October and November, to have cochlearia in January and February, but it never has as much energy as when it has been sown in the ground and preserved as we have said. Its seeds keep well for two years. ORDINARY GROWING: Cochlearia grows well in all types of soil, provided they are neither too dry nor too hot, but it does much better in light, damp, north-facing soils. It is sown in spring, watered frequently, especially during droughts, and care is limited to that. Usually, there is never a shortage of it in a garden once it has been planted, because it reseeds itself. In too-dry soils, it quickly goes to seed, lasts only three or four months, and is then lost forever. In this case, it acts as an annual. COCHLÉARIA DE BRETAGNE, GRAND RAIFORT, CRANSON RUSTIQUE (cochlearia armorica); perennial, growing naturally in some damp places in France. Its roots, long, thick and fleshy, are used scraped to be eaten with boiled beef and replace mustard, of which they have the strength and pungency. As it can be rooted in all seasons, there is no point in cultivating it as an early crop, so we will only deal here with its ordinary cultivation. Lo cranson grows well in all types of soil and in all types of exposure, but it thrives best in shady spots, in cool or even damp, deep, somewhat consistent soil. To propagate it, all you need to do in autumn is transplant small particles of sca roots, which the following year provide vigorous plants. To obtain very strong, very long roots, plant in troughs, ten or twelve inches deep, throw a certain thickness of well-consumed compost over the sections, and cover with light soil. It can also be propagated from seeds sown in situ or in a nursery, in spring, in very loose, deeply loosened soil. If sown in a nursery, the plant is transplanted permanently, in autumn, and spaced one foot apart in all directions. The most necessary care for a seedling or a plantation consists of watering during summer droughts. When you have strong plants, you don't need to destroy them to obtain the product. All you have to do is dig up a plant, and as the roots are long and extend a long way, you can cut off large portions for use, without destroying the others. We must point out, however, that the ones we value most are the main roots of a plant in its second year, especially when it is uprooted at the moment of flowering. Cranson is used much more in Germany than in France. Its seeds retain their germinative power for three or four years. COGNASSIER (cydonia vulgaris to modern botanists, prrus cydonie to Linnaeus); a third-growth tree, native to southern Europe. Its fruits, unbearably hard, are suitable only for making compotes, jams and liqueurs. But the tree is no less valuable as a grafting stock for cattail and espalier pear trees. We have several varieties, including Coing de Portugal, a large, ribbed fruit, less acerbic than most of the following, Colng d'Anger, a sub-variety of the previous one. It is larger, gravellier and less bitter. Common quince, pyriform fruit in one sub-variety, very mediocre, rounded in another which is the worst of all. PRIMEUR. We have never forced a quince tree, and we don't think we ever will, because we don't use its raw fruit. CULTURX ORDINAIRX. The quince tree likes light soils, cool without being cold, but at least it succeeds more or less well in all soils, except those that are very shallow and rest on a chalky layer. It can be propagated from seed, which is sown as soon as it ripens and sprouts the following spring, or by offshoots and marcottes, or by cuttings. This last method is the easiest and quickest, and is also the most widely used. Cuttings are taken in the first fine days of spring, and when they are detached from their mother, they need to be left with a two-year stub of wood. If the year is dry, they require watering, hoeing and weeding. Sometimes, to obtain vigorous plants, varieties are grafted onto plants grown from seed rather than cuttings. Quince trees thrive in all types of exposure, although they prefer sunny and south-facing exposures, and even the south-facing exposure of the Portuguese quince. As this tree bears its flowers at the tips of its branches, it should not be pruned if fruit is to be produced. Other cultivation methods are absolutely the same as for pears. CUCUMBER, CORRICRON (cucumis zalivus); annual plant, native to Africa, too widespread to be necessary to indicate here the use made of its fruit. There are several varietiesa , namely 12 The long, elongated white, rounded at both ends, highly prized in Paris. The white hatif, similar to the previous one, a little smaller, very suitable for early cultivation. Hatif de Hollande, initially white, then yellowing rapidly; suitable for early cultivation. Gros blanc de Bonneuil, similar to the first, but larger. Long yellow, often with a curved shape. Petit vert or gherkin, suitable for pickling in vinegar. The long green, similar to the previous one, but more elongated; suitable for the same use. Russian or bouquet cucumbers, very small; prezque round, the earliest of all; suitable for pickling. Arada cucumber, the size of an elongated walnut, high yielding, but difficult to grow; delicate, not always successful; suitable for preserving. In addition to these varieties, we grow a second species, the snake cucumber (cacumis flezuosus), which differs from the others only in its elongated shape. It is green, smooth and flagelliform; it is grown in the same way as the previous varieties, and is only suitable for pickling. PRIMZUR. Early cucumbers are not usually grown until December, but they can be successfully sown as early as September or October, as we shall see. As cucumbers do not require any special cultivation during the first two months of their growth, these first sowings can be attempted without great expense, and if they are unsuccessful, they can be sown again at the end of December and in January. The two varieties to be given preference for early crops are blane hatif and hätif de Hollande. Nous allomo divise" les cultures par saisons, 1. From the first of September to the first of November, if you haven't already raised a warm bed, prepare one and fill it with six inches of compost. Get small pots four inches in diameter, and fill them with a soil made up of one-third used potting soil and two-thirds light loam. In each pot, plant four or five cucumber seeds, sinking them half an inch deep. Carry the pots on the bed, bury them in the potting soil, water them lightly and cover them with a cloche or frame. It doesn't take long for the seeds to sprout. Air is given most of the day, weather permitting, but the cloches or panels are never completely removed; they are simply lifted and held in place with the rack, so that the heat from the toleil is concentrated by the glass. On éclaireit, i.e. we leave only two planis in each pot. Fifteen or twenty days after emergence, or rather when the layer has lost its heat, the cucumbers are unstuck and put back into larger pots, where they are pressed down to the cotyledons. Raise a new layer, and press them into it. You can also cover them with bells. When two or three gems have developed, pruning begins: this consists of pinching the stem above the second gil; later, it continues by successively pinching the branches at four or five nodes. A fortnight or three weeks after transplanting, prepare a warm layer and fill it with seven or ten inches of good potting soil, mixed with a third of light earth. When the first heat has passed, the cucumbers are removed from the bed, planted permanently, two and a half feet apart, and covered with the frames. Continue to pinch the branches, water and carefully peel the plants, removing any damaged leaves, or even some of the larger ones if there are many, to allow air and light to penetrate easily. It's at flowering time that precautions must be redoubled, because humidity is then more dangerous than ever. We take advantage of every moment of sunshine to give the plants some air; we wipe off any moisture and grime that may be attached to the glass panels, and we maintain the warmth of the layer with good heaters that we renew every time this is necessary. When the weather is very cold, this operation is sometimes not enough; in this case, the layer must be covered with hot manure from the stable. To do this, remove as much manure from the sides and underside of the bed as you can without undermining the soil on top, and replace it as you go along. With skill and patience, you can renew almost half a layer in this way, without the plants on top suffering the slightest inconvenience. When the cucumbers have formed and begun to take on a certain size, they are gently lifted and a piece of tile, slate or a small board is placed between them and the potting soil, to protect them from humidity. 2. The second season runs from November 1st to the last of January, as we said for the first. However, once the plants have emerged, they should be left in their pots for only a fortnight, and in the second pots for the same length of time. This way, the layers won't have time to cool down too much, and they'll receive the same care. These seedlings can also be grown in cloches, but it is much safer, and easier, to grow them in hutches or trays. 3. From February 1st to April 15th, sow in pots, on a warm layer in the open air, and under cloches. February sowing can be done in other pots and on a new layer, as we have said, but these precautions are unnecessary for sowing from the first to the fifteenth of April. In warm weather, around mid-April, establish a muted layer filled with eight inches of potting soil mixed with half light earth; transplant the cucumbers when the plant is strong enough, and cover with frames. If the spring is warm, the cucumbers are gradually acclimatized to the open air, and at the beginning of May, the panels are removed during the day and replaced in the evening, as long as the cool nights are feared. By using the methods we have just described, you can grow cucumbers for part of the winter and from the first days of spring, but there is still a gap in the year between the end of ordinary cucumbers and the beginning of early cucumbers. Here's how to fill this gap: at the beginning of August, sow in mannes ten inches deep by a foot wide, and bury the baskets in the garden bed. The plants would receive the same care as those grown in the open ground. A few days before the first white frost, we'd set up a warm layer in a furnace tarpaulin; we'd raise the cucumber branches carefully so as not to break or injure them, and we'd hold them in a loose bundle by means of a loose tie; Remove the pots from the soil, and transport the plants with their rootballs in the soil of the bed; stretch out their branches in their natural position, or at least with as little stress as possible; in this way, not only will the little knotted cucumbers reach maturity, but new ones will be formed. During cold spells, the temperature of the greenhouse would be kept at fourteen or fifteen degrees, by means of the furnace. I know that this method would be very expensive, and that if it were used only to grow cucumbers, the results would not compensate for the expense. But nonetheless, I thought I should mention it, because this crop can be grown using the layer of a bache in which vines or other fruit trees are forced. It can even be sown in the ground on ados, then protected from the cold with portable frames and manure rechands. CULTUAX ORDINAÍRE. Cucumbers like light, substantial, loose, open soil, amended with half-consumed manure and warm exposure. From April fifteenth to May fifteenth, hoods are prepared, three feet apart, i.e. holes eighteen inches deep by a foot wide; a foot of warm manure is placed at the bottom, and the soil is filled with six to eight inches of good old potting soil mixed with a third of light earth. Five or six cucumber seeds are planted in each hood, buried an inch apart, and a few sprinklings are given if the season is dry. When the seedlings have risen, they are lightened so as to leave only two or three in each hood. We hoe, weed and give the usual care to full-grown plants. Soon it's time to prune; if you're growing for ripe fruit, follow the same principles as for melons; prune as we said for early fruit, pinching back the stem above the second eye, but leaving the branches a little longer, i.e. over five or six eyes. When you want to pick the fruit young to preserve it in vinegar, you follow a different principle; you prune the branches very long, or rather, you only stop them by pricking the middle when they spread too much, and to make them I ter lateral branches. During the heat of summer, watering should be sparing, as cucumbers love edu and heat. To preserve the true varieties, it is advisable to grow them separately, and even at some distance from each other, as otherwise the races would cross-fertilize each other by adulteration. The seed is collected, leaving the most beautiful fruit to rot on the spot. The seeds are collected, washed and dried in the shade in an airy place. They keep well for eight to ten years, and perhaps longer. CULTIVATED CORIANDER (coriandrum sativum); an annual plant said to originate in the East, but which I have found growing naturally in the south of France on several occasions, where it may have become naturalized if it is not actually indigenous. In cooking, only the seeds are used to spice up stews; they have an aromatic, sweet flavor and a very pleasant odor, but only when dried; when green, if crushed between the fingers, as well as the flower, they have an odor that is at first sweet, then stronger, fetid, unpleasant and capable of giving nausea. The other parts of the plant are odorless. Coriander seed has a number of other uses: it is used to make white beer, various ratafias and sugared almonds. The Egyptians mix it into almost all their foods. As only its dried seeds are used, it would be pointless to subject it to forced cultivation. It likes light soil and low exposure, but grows well in other soils. It is planted in April, and requires no more atitres soms than to be planted from time to time until September, when its ripe seeds must be harvested. They are bormes à scamer que perdani dioz duto COU CORNE DE CERF (PLANTAIN) (plantago coronopus); annual, indigenous plant, with a sweet, almost insipid flavor, nevertheless used in cooking as a salad dressing. Only the leaves are used, which grow back better the more often they are cut. In some countries, they are eaten like spinach. PRIMEUR. In October, sow fairly thickly on a warm bed with small vegetables, and baste frequently; cover with bells. When the seeds have emerged, thin out to leave a two-inch gap between each plant. When the leaves are three to four inches long, we start cutting, and as long as the plants are producing, we continue. If you want to have them all winter long, don't wait until one seedling is exhausted before sowing another; sow every two weeks, until the spring plants begin to produce. All cultivation care is limited to frequent but light watering, so as not to chill the soil. REGULAR CULTIVATION. In light, very loose, loamy soil, sow in March, fairly light. For the plant to succeed perfectly, all you need to do once it has emerged is to give it frequent and abundant watering; this is the only way to obtain tender leaves. You can extend sowing in cool, shady soil until the end of June. If they are not spared water, they will do very well and produce until the first frosts. The seed ripens from September to October, and keeps well for two years. F CUCUMBER, POTIROX, LEMON (cucurbita ). This name covers a large number of varieties that are said to belong to two species: cucurbita pepo and cucurbita melopepo. Squashes are large, creeping annual plants native to India. Their fruits, sometimes surprisingly large, can be eaten in a variety of ways, but are always cooked. All gourds, without exception, are excellent if eaten long before they reach maturity, i.e. a few days after they have blossomed, until they have reached half their size. But this is not the case when they reach maturity; many become tough and scabby. Each so-called species will provide us with a section to which we'll refer sez most generally widespread varieties. 1. Pumpkins. Yellow, very large, widely cultivated. Green, also large and widespread, sometimes reaching enormous size. White, less large, more delicate, rarc. These three varieties, the least esteemed of all although the largest, play a lot and pass easily through each other. There are smooth, warty, long and round varieties, of varying shades of darker or darker colors, sometimes striped or spotted. In Bresse, I've often seen them almost blackish-brown. They are usually abandoned for cultivation. The Spanish pumpkin is an excellent, high-yielding variety. Its fruits are fairly large, flattened, with smooth or slightly chapped rind, very hard and usually green, and firm, soft flesh, much better than the previous varieties. 2. Melopeon ceurges. Giraumon turban, fairly large, with a pistil scar forming a bulge and widening to sometimes occupy the surface of half the fruit, which is yellowish; firm flesh, sweeter than in the pumpkin. Butternut or melonnee squash, fairly large, yellow, firm, sweet, very popular in Provence. Gireumon noir, gres, brownish-green. Barbaris long giraumon or long hande squash, productive; elongated, medium-sized fruit, smooth rind, very wide bands, brownish-green spotted with neirish, sometimes entirely white, on the same piod. Patisson, bonnet d'électeur, or Jeruzalem artichoke, large, white, five-pointed; very shapely flesh; excellent for frying. Jerusalem strip artichoke, similar to the above but smaller, with green-striped rind; even firmer flesh. Valparaiso squash or marrow squash, small, oval, pale yellow or whitish fruit; very soft flesh, excellent before ripening, then becoming fibrous and leathery. La caucourzalle or counge d'Ialie, fruit eighteen poucca long, five or six in diameter, litse, striped or spotted with green; exoellent when eaten very young, i.e. only four or five inches long; very mediotre when ripe. Very short stems. Non-running blanchs squash, of the same shape and quality as the preceding squash, but with very short, non-creeping stems. Pleina squash, elongated, large, greenish-brown fruit, with very red flesh and almost no hollow inside. Potiromon. Fruit fairly large, elongated, almost cylindrical; rind reddish-yellow, with a few purple spots; soft, very good flesh. PRIMEUR. Squash, which occupies a very large area of land and does not produce fruit of great value, has never been subjected to forced cultivation; until now, it has been enough to have early fruit only towards the end of June and in the summer. We will first explain the steps to be taken to achieve this goal; then, in order to meet the objectives we have set ourselves in this book, we will indicate the procedures that should be used to comply with them before these times. 1. February sowing. Obtain six-inch diameter pots, fill them with old potting soil, and sow two squash seeds in each at the beginning of the month. It doesn't matter which variety you choose. Water, then place the pots on a warm layer under cloches or a frame. When the seedlings have emerged, leave only one in each pot, and to avoid shaking it, cut the other by pinching it with the fingernails below the cotyledons, close to the ground. Ordinary care is given. Around the middle of March, one or more muted layers, four feet long by the same width, are established at good exposure. If several are planted, they should be at least eight feet apart, to leave space for the squash branches to run. The layer is filled with eight to ten inches of old potting soil mixed with a quarter of light earth, or better still, half of street mud that has been in a heap for at least a year. The thickness of the layer is calculated so that, when it has settled, it will be roughly level with the surface of the soil. The seedling is removed from the soil, four holes are made in the bed, and two squashes are placed in each hole, with the two rootballs touching. It's best to place only one plant in each hole, if you want the best fruit. These holes should be made at all four corners, but one foot from the edges. Cover with a frame, and give the necessary care to the heated plants. Above all, young plants should be gradually acclimatized to the open air, and when the sun's rays are too intense, which frequently happens in March, they should be shielded from it by means of light-colored cloths, which should be used to cover the frames after opening the baskets. This is essential not only for squash, but for all plants grown in greenhouses and frames. In April, if there are no more white frosts to worry about, remove the glass panels completely, and soon afterwards the frame boxes. To give the plants the space they need, their young branches are spread out in a radial direction around the bed, but carefully so as not to injure them. From this moment on, squash require no further care than that which we will indicate for full-ground plants. 2. March sowing. Like the previous one, this is done in pots and on a warm bed. The young plant is directed as described above. When there is nothing to fear from frosts, holes one foot deep and as wide are dug in a well-exposed square prepared by good ploughing and amended with half-consumed manure, spaced at least ten feet apart. Seven or eight inches of half-consumed manure are thrown in at the bottom, and the holes are filled with half light earth mixed with the same manure. Remove the soil and place two plants in each hole. Cover with a cloche, which is removed when the young gourds want to spread out. All that remains to be done is to care for the plants in the ground. These two seedlings start yielding in June, and produce until the frosts. 3. November seedlings. These seedlings, as well as the next one, are not used for the reasons given above, but they are no less successful. At the beginning of the month, we sow in pots and on a warm bed, as we said in the article on the first sowing, but here the varieties are not indifferent. Choose those that do not run or run very little, such as the Italic squash and the non-runny white squash. Seedlings should be sown with the same care as above. When the plants have filled their pots, they are removed from the soil and placed in a larger vase with a more consistent soil, made up of two-thirds potting soil and one-third light soil. They are then placed on a new layer under a frame, where they are left until they are no longer comfortable in their vase. Then prepare a new warm layer in a tarpaulin, load it with ten inches of potting soil, unstack and transplant onto the layer, leaving three feet between each plant. Air and light are given as often as possible, and heat is maintained by means of the furnace; the heat of the bed is renewed by larding it with hot manure, from underneath, as we said in the cucumber article, and all the usual means are employed against humidity. You should also remove some of the old leaves to let the air, and especially the light, penetrate all parts of the plants, especially the flowers and their buds. Eight days after flowering, goose-egg-sized fruits of great delicacy will be ready for consumption. If the plants are inclined to spread, they can be prevented from doing so by pinching off the tips of the buds. 4° August sowing. Towards the end of the month, we sow in baskets one foot deep and as wide, the same varieties as we have just indicated for the previous sowing. The baskets are planted in a bed facing south, in the open ground, and the usual care is given. When the first white frosts threaten, remove the baskets and transport them to a warm, tarpaulin-covered bed. The plants are cared for as described above, and almost immediately produce. To be forced, gourds have this advantage over 13 other cucurbits: since their fruit can be eaten first after flowering, they don't have to take the chances of those whose ripening you have to wait for. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Squashes like light, free-flowing, substantial soil, amended with half-consumed fertilizers. They grow enormously in those that have been smoked with street sludge and fermented a year in advance. They need good exposure and lots of watering, but although they like water, they would do very badly in naturally damp soil, because the warmth of the soil is even more necessary. When there are no more frosts to fear, usually in April, prepare the soil with fertilizers and good ploughing; eight or ten feet apart, make holes eighteen inches wide and deep, fill them with manure and cover them with eight to ten inches of soil, then plant four or five seeds one inch deep. The seeds are first soaked in water for twenty-four hours, to hasten germination. The water is very lightly soaked and, if desired, covered with a bell jar. When the seeds have sprouted, we thin them out so as to leave only one or two of the most vigorous plants in each hood. Needless to say, if two plants are left, they should be at least a few inches apart. If, through some particular circumstance, the seeds of a hood had run out, young plants could be transplanted without inconvenience, and their growth would be only slightly retarded. In all cases, water often, especially in hot weather. Other care consists of weeding, hoeing and frequent weeding. Like melons and cucumbers, gourds are pruned, but in a very different way. The main branches are usually left to spread as they please, until a fruit is formed; only then are they stopped by pinching them at two or three nodes above the fruit. The secondary branches are also stopped, and the tertiary branches entirely eliminated. There's another type of cultivation that is rarely used, but which is highly advantageous for obtaining very large fruit. When a squash is knotted, instead of pinching the branch, a gutter four or five inches deep is dug in the ground, a little potting soil is thrown in, and the stem is laid down so that the second knot after the fruit is buried at this depth. Roots are thrown in, providing sap to nourish a second fruit that will knot further on, and even a third and fourth if the operation is repeated above each of them. When the autumn frosts begin to make themselves felt, we remove all the fruit and store them in a dry, well-lit place, sheltered from the coldest weather; they will keep perfectly well there for most of the winter. To obtain good seeds, choose the most beautiful, the most honest and the first to ripen; leave to rot on the spot or in the vegetable greenhouse, collect the seeds, wash them and dry them in the shade. They keep well for eight or ten years. To preserve the various varieties of squash, sow them far enough apart to avoid adulterous fertilization. FOUNTAIN CRESSON (sisrmbrium nasturtium); native perennial, growing naturally in almost all clear, running waters. Used in cooking as a garnish, salad, etc. PRIMXUR. Crescon can be found all year round in fountains where the water doesn't freeze easily, so it's hardly ever used in other ways. However, in countries where it is not common, here's how it's done: in spring, an old barrel is used to make a tub eight to ten inches deep; four or five fingeringis of garden soil are placed in the bottom, and filled with well or river water. A few watercress roots are placed in this water, and they soon grow and produce stems that are cut for consumption. The only care required for this crop is to change the water every eight or ten days, and for greater convenience, the tub is placed near a well. In this case, the soil is placed at the bottom of the tub, then sown and watered in such a way as to maintain considerable and permanent humidity, but without submerging the seeds. When they have risen, water is added, but only a few lines, so that the tips of the young shoots are always on the surface. As they lengthen, we increase the height of the water, until finally the tub is full. In this way, you can obtain plants that are more vigorous and more productive, but you have to wait longer for them. You can leave the tub outside until it freezes hard enough to freeze the water; then take it to a vegetable greenhouse or other well-lit, frost-free place. Watercress continues to grow and produce until spring, when it is harvested outdoors. To ensure that your cress is always tender, you must take care never to let it go to seed. The best seeds are those collected in August and September; they keep well for two or three years. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Watercress can be sown in spring, in damp, shady soil, with a northern exposure; but to produce good yields, it must be watered abundantly at least twice a day, to keep the soil, not damp, but constantly wet. Despite this care, watercress is always short, a little hard, and very tasty. If you have a clear, pure body of water in your garden, or a running stream, you can throw a few roots into the mud along its banks, and they will quickly grow back and form large clumps; every year, you can cut back the stems until the hardest frost. In the absence of a pond, plant in a tub, as mentioned above, but leave outside all year round. ALENOIS CRESSON, CULTIVATED PASSAGE (lepidium zativum); annual plant, native to Persia, whose leaves, when young, can be eaten as a salad or as a garnish. Four varieties are available: Ordinary cress, the most widely grown and hardy. Curly cress, with curly thresholds; very good as an early variety. The broad-leafed cress, which grows more slowly. Doré, with pale green leaves, less productive. PRIMEUR. In December, as soon as open-ground cress ceases to produce, sow it on the compost of the warm bed for small vegetables. Basin often, and start cutting as soon as the leaf is two or three inches long. Seedlings should be renewed every fifteen to twenty days, as the plants wear out very quickly. CULTURX ORDINAIRE. From the beginning of March to May, sow thickly on old potting soil, every two weeks, as this plant sets seed very quickly. Basin often if spring is dry. From the beginning of May to the beginning of June, sow in potting soil at any exposure. From June to September, sow in cool, shady, north-facing soil. It's especially in this season that a lot of watering is needed, if you don't want the plants to go to seed almost as soon as they've emerged. From the first of September to the first of November, sow in an earthen bed, facing south. Water if the season is dry. These seedlings often survive the winter and produce until spring. All these seedlings are usually sown thickly and in rays. CARDAMINE (cardamine pratensis); perennial, growing naturally in damp meadows. Its leaves have the pungent flavor of watercress, and are used for the same purposes. PRIMEUR. When the frosts begin to stop the vegetation of cardamine, i.e. at the end of November or beginning of December, a few of these plants are lifted with the rootball from a spring sowing, and transported in the compost of a warm bed with small vegetables. Basin the soil and cover with a cloche or frame. Vegetation takes off quickly, and can be cut for use a few days later. When the plants are exhausted, they are replaced by others taken from the same soil. Sowing on a warm bed and under a bell as early as November produces more delicate and tender leaves, but these have to be waited for longer. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Cardamine grows well in all types of soil, provided they are not too dry and are not over-watered, but it does incomparably better in very damp, marshy or even peaty soils. It is sown in thick gullies in spring, frequently watered and thinned out when necessary. With careful weeding, it can last for several years. The best seeds are harvested in September; they are good for two years. CRESSON DE TERRE, ou VIVACE, CRESSON D'AmíRIQUE (Errsimum prœcox); native perennial whose leaves have some of the flavor of watercress, and are used for the same purposes. PRIMEUR. Everything we have said about cardamine in our article on primeur applies exactly to this plant. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Earth cress thrives in clean, light, moist soil. To obtain very tender leaves, it must be sown in fairly light rays every month from the beginning of March, even though it is perennial. In summer, sow in a northern exposure. It requires no more than ordinary care. Its seeds are harvested at the end of August, and keep well for two or three years. PARA CRESSON, ABECEDAIRE, BIDENT, Prai, THRE (Spitanthus oleracea); annual, creeping plant. native to India. It is used in cooking as a garnish, as a seasoning, and as a remedy for watercress, with its pungent flavor. Another species, the BRÍSII CESSON, is also cultivated. (Spilanthus susca), which serves the same purpose. PRIMEUR. In November and December, sow fairly lightly on a warm bed with meuus vegetables. Water moderately, cover with an elorb or frame, and if the plant is too thick, thin out. Cut back when clumps are strong enough. Gorume ia planie monte agez promptement en graines, et qu'elle s'exhaustue vite, il faut semer tous les mois, On doit donner de l'air aux spilanthes, mais avec beaucoup de précaution, car le moindre froid qui pénétrant sous la cloche ou le châssis les tuer infailliblement. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Para cress grows well in all types of soil, but does best in warm, light, sandy soils with a southern exposure. In February or March, it is sown in pots, on beds and under cloches or trays, and transplanted to the open ground when there is no longer any fear of the cold, to which it is extremely sensitive. During the heat of summer, you must not spare it any watering. It flowers from July to autumn, and its seeds can be harvested in September. They are good for three or four years. D DENT-DE-LION, PISSNIIT (Leontodon taraxacum); perennial plant, very common in our meadows, where, from the first days of spring, it is sought out to be eaten in salads, when its young leaves have been blanched by chance. PRIMEUR. Not only is the dandelion not cultivated as a primeur, but even as a much sought-after salad, it is not found in any garden. A few specific experiments enable us to indicate certain procedures for obtaining excellent dandelions during the winter. Dandelion seed is collected from meadows in late spring and early summer, and if you don't want to wait until next spring, sow it immediately in free, substantial soil, amended with half-consumed fertilizer. If sown in spring, the plant does not require large corners; but, if sown late, and with seeds of the year, it is necessary to weed and give some watering during the heat, to advance the plants. The most important thing is to obtain long, thick-stemmed roots. As frost approaches, we buy a number of flower pots, or better still, crates eighteen inches wide and ten inches deep. Fill them with a mixture of half well-consumed potting soil and half sand. Carefully pull out the dandelion roots, so as not to break or injure them; cut off all the leaves two or three lines above the collar, then, using a chopstick, make holes in the crate, slide the roots in up to the collar, half an inch apart, and give a good watering to settle the soil. If you have a tarpaulin, carry the crates to a dark corner; if you don't, simply place them in a warm, dark cellar. Eight days later, it's time to visit the plantation to remove and discard any roots whose crowns have gone mouldy, but these are always rare if the cellar is not too damp. Dandelions are already starting to put out new leaves. If they are not perfectly white, this is proof that light is penetrating the cellar. In this case, a bed of dry litter, five to six inches thick, is thrown over each box. Cut off the leaves when they are long enough to be eaten in salads, and continue harvesting until the plants are fully mature.

exhausted. When this happens, we replace them with others that we take from the ground, and in this way, we don't fail to harvest throughout the winter. Dandelion can be obtained in an easier way, but to do so, you need to use more space on the beds. You transplant it into the soil of the bed, in the same way as we said for the boxes, and, instead of covering it with cloches, you pour over it flowering lice, the holes of which have been plugged beforehand, so as not to let any light in. It may be sufficient simply to spread a good bed of dry litter, or even half-consumed manure, dry and fine, over the plantation. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Cultivated dandelion seems much more pleasant to many people than wild dandelion, because it has lost some of its bitterness. In any soil, but best in open, fresh soil, it is sown in the border in spring, a little thickly, and all care then consists of weeding and watering. In the following spring, as soon as vegetation begins, the plants need to be covered to whiten them. This can be done, as we've said, with flower pots turned upside down, or with litter, leaves, etc.; but the best way is to cover the seedling with four or five inches of potting soil, or to butter it at the same height, with soil lifted up along the rays or border. Scratch a few spots to see if the leaf is long enough and white enough to be harvested. If it is, and before it pierces the bedding layer, cut it off at the root collar. If you have broadcast sown, cover the bed with six inches of dry, half-consumed manure. This last method is used to obtain dandelion all year round, and particularly during the summer. In this latter season, vegetation is suspended; but it is revived by cutting off all the leaves a little above the collar, and then giving good wetting over the manure cover. Dandelion seeds should be harvested a little before they are fully ripe, otherwise they would be blown away by the winds. It will only keep for one or two years. DOLIQUE (Dolicho.). Three species are grown, all annuals, most similar to beans, but with longer pods. Unguiculated dolicho (D. unguiculatus) from the West Indies. In southern France, where it is fairly widely grown, it is known as bannette or mongette. It produces a lot, but ripens with difficulty. Dolique lablab, or Egrpte bean (D. lablab). It has a white-flowered variety. This species is grown as a garden ornamental. It ripens with the same difficulty as the first. Long-podded dolichan or Asparagus bean (D. sesquipedalis) from the West Indies. Its pods, very long, narrow and fleshy, are excellent for eating green, like those of the preceding species. PRIOR. From the standpoint of both cultivation and use, cowpeas differ little from beans, only in their fear of cold. As they have the same taste, we have never bothered to force them. In any case, if we wanted to do so, we'd have to treat them absolutely like beans. To avoid unnecessary repetition, we refer the reader to the article on Beans. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. In the Paris climate, cowpeas can only succeed in free, light, warm soils with a southern exposure. In March, they are sown in small pots which are sown in the compost of a warm layer, under a bell or under a frame. Give them plenty of air, and the usual care for delicate plants. At the beginning of May, a little earlier or a little later, depending on how hot the season is, we prepare a bed at the foot of a wall facing south, by deep ploughing and good topdressing; we unstack the plants, and put them in place with the root ball, a foot apart. They are rowed to make them climb; weeded, weeded and watered during hot spells, and the green pods are harvested before they have reached their full length. Sometimes we're content to sow them in the open ground, in May, at the foot of a wall facing south; but in this case, it's very rare for the seeds to ripen, unless the summer and autumn are very hot. Nevertheless, they provide green harvests. Cowpea seeds are collected before the first white frost, and stored in their pods, where they mature. They retain their germinative properties for several years, but the newer they are, the easier it is for them to germinate. 1 ECHALOTTE (Allium ascalonicum); perennial plant, native to the East, more commonly used in cooking than ordinary garlic, because of its milder odor and milder flavor. PRIOR. Shallot bulbs keep very well throughout the winter, so there's no need to heat this plant; but, as the tops of its leaves are also frequently used for supplies and seasoning, we must indicate the procedures to be used to obtain them in the wrong season. In autumn, as soon as the plants in the open ground cease to produce, which never happens until the frosts begin, we raise a few clumps of shallots, which we plant in the potting soil of the warm bed for small vegetables. Cover with a cloche or a frame, and give little watering, as this plant fears rot. Later, we repeat the plautation, but with dry bulbs preserved for the purpose; we plant them an inch apart, and so that they are covered with only half an inch of potting soil. They are not watered, as the humidity provided by the layer is sutfying to maintain vegetation. When harvesting, be careful to cut the leaves flush with the compost, and the plant will reproduce new ones for a very long time. ORDINARY CULTIVATION This garlic is more delicate than ordinary garlic, and much more afraid of rotting; it is also more difficult to cultivate, and only succeeds perfectly in warm, substantial, light soils. However, with a little care, it can be grown in any garden. If the soil is too strong, mix it with more or less sand, depending on how much you need to lighten it, and don't give it any fertilizer unless it's all used up. In February or March, in the Paris climate, or in autumn in the south, plant in a bed or border, with three or four inches between each clump; cover with only half a finger's worth of soil, to prevent rotting, weed if necessary, and weed a few times. If the rains are abundant and long-lasting, the plants are dethatched a little, so as to uncover the upper end of the onion. At the end of May, we start pulling out a few bulbs suitable for consumption. You can tell when shallots are ripe when their leaves turn yellow, wither and dry out; then you pull them off, separate the bulbs, leave them to dry in the sun for two or three days, and store them in a very dry place, away from frost. To obtain beautiful bulbs, the longest, thinnest cloves should be selected and planted. This plant almost never sets seed, so it can only be propagated by its bulbs, which multiply greatly. When the shallot is allowed to vegetate in suitable soil, it becomes very large, and it is no doubt this particularity that once led to the belief in the existence of a variety known as groite échalotte, 14 EPINARD (Spinacia oleracea); annual plant, native to North America. Everyone knows how to use its leaves in cooking. Two varieties are grown, each with its own sub-variety, namely: Spinach with prickly seeds. Sub-variety with broader leaves. Spinach with smooth seeds, more widespread than spinach, sub-variety with broader leaves. PRIMEUR. If spinach were to be sown on a bed, the large space occupied by the number of plants needed to provide just one dish would force us to give up this type of cultivation. But it can be grown all winter long. From mid-October to the beginning of November, or a little earlier if autumn seems likely to be cold, prepare a bed with good exposure. We amend it with good, half-consumed fertilizer, plow it and loosen it as much as possible. Sow by broadcasting or in fairly thick rays, and cover with a rake. Spinach soon sprouts and sheds its broad leaves. If the weather holds up well, and you can count on a fortnight before the frosts, you can cut the plant for the first time; but if you feel that the spinach won't have time to regrow before the cold, leave it intact to enjoy its leaves through the harsh winter. With two or three planks, you can easily have enough for a house throughout the bad season. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. To grow spinach all year round, as it goes to seed very quickly, you need to sow it every month, from March to October. Sowing from March to May requires good exposure; sowing from May to the end of August requires northern exposure and lots of watering, otherwise the plants go to seed immediately and produce very little. Finally, September and October should be planted in the same way as spring, i.e. with good exposure. Otherwise, the ground is prepared, and seedlings are sown as described in the article on early crops. Spinach takes up a lot of space in the garden, but this disadvantage is offset by its rapid growth. Six weeks after sowing, it has produced its harvest, and can give way to other vegetables. The best seed is collected from plants that have spent the winter and are coming up in spring. When the act of fertilization is complete, the male plants are pulled out to give the females more room, and they are held together with sticks if necessary. The seed retains its germinative properties for two or three years. ESTRAGON (artemisia dracunculus); aromatic perennial native to Tartary. Its young stalks are used in supplies and seasoning, and the more tender ones are preserved in vinegar with cortichon. PRIMEVR. A few days before the frosts, carefully lift a fairly strong clump of sprout, planted the previous spring and not cut for use during the year. Plant it in a warm layer of potting soil with small vegetables, water moderately to encourage growth, and cover with a cloche or frame. If several plants are to be planted, they should be spaced eight inches apart, allowing four to be placed under each cloche. Tarragon receives the same care as the other vegetables on the bed, and soon sprouts young stems that succeed each other throughout the winter, if care is taken to cut one plant at a time and the other at a later date, so that each plant is cut only every month or six weeks. In spring, when the plants have not been too exhausted, they can be put back in the ground, and they recover very well in the course of the year. The old stock usually dies, but many offspring replace it. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Tarragon thrives in open, light soil that is not too damp and very well loosened. It is customary to multiply it only by separating clumps in spring and planting them a foot apart, after preparing the soil with a good ploughing. Weed to prevent the invasion of parasitic weeds, and water during droughts, especially in light, sandy soils. When recovery is perfect, you can start cutting for use, and continue every fortnight until the frosts, but with the precaution of always leaving two to three inches of stem above ground, if you don't want to exhaust the plants. Tarragon can also be propagated by taking cuttings in spring and summer, but this method takes a long time. However, if you want to use it, you'll need to place the cuttings in a shady bed, and smother them with cloches until they recover perfectly. Seeds from this plant are obtained so rarely and with such difficulty that they are never sown. F FENNEL (ancthum fœniculum); aromatic perennial, growing spontaneously in dry, hot soils in southern France. Two varieties are grown: Ordinary fennel. Its leaves are used very rarely as a seasoning, especially for cooking crayfish. Its seeds are used to make jelly beans and flavour liqueurs. Sweet or Italian fennel. Its roots are used in cooking in the same way as celery. The plant is much lower than the previous one, more tender and with a milder flavor. PRICE. As the leaves of ordinary fennel are not very useful, and its seeds retain their desirable qualities through desiccation, only sweet fennel is cultivated by force. This is also the only one we'll be talking about in this early article. In September, in good exposure and in light, warm, terra-cotta soil, make holes four to five inches wide and as deep, eight inches apart, in equally spaced rows, and fill them with good, well-consumed compost. Sow four or five fennel seeds in each hole, and water. Care is taken with frequent tarring and weeding, and watering is done every day if autumn is dry and hot. Once the seedlings have sprouted, only one is left in each hood. When the first frosts set in, shelter the fennel with cloches or frames, or simply with straw mats and bedding. Air and light must be provided as often as possible, as otherwise the plants will bleach and rot. Fennel is blanched as required for consumption, always a fortnight in advance, as this is the time needed to obtain perfectly white and tender fennel. Fennel can be blanched on the spot or on the bed. In the first case, the stalks are mounded with earth and placed closer together, then surrounded by crushed litter or dry manure. In the second case, the plants are uprooted, their stems are bundled together with a straw tie, and the plants are buried in potting soil in the vegetable greenhouse, up to seven or eight inches above the root collar. Fennel can be grown in this way throughout the winter and part of the spring, as the plant is good for blanching until it rises. Ordinary cultivation methods only produce edible roots in early June, and then successively throughout the summer, so you need to sow on a bed to get some as soon as the autumn season ends, i.e. in April and May. To achieve this, sow in January in warm, pure potting soil under cloches or frames. As this plant loves heat, the bed must be maintained with heaters, which are renewed as often as necessary. Provide air and light, water moderately, and thin out the seedlings so they don't wilt. In February, dig a slice three feet deep and four feet wide in a warm spot; lay a layer of soil ten inches thick, mixed with light earth, and place the seedlings in it; remove the seedlings very carefully, without breaking any of the roots, and leaving as much water as possible behind. Transplant eight inches apart, water and cover with a frame or cloches. If cloches are used, the plants are grouped three by three under each cloche, six inches apart, leaving a one-foot gap between each group. Protect from the cold with bedding and straw mats, and don't give air until the plants have recovered, but from then on, give air as often as possible. From the beginning of April, and sometimes earlier, until May, fennel is strong enough to be blanched as needed. Fennel is not grown in this way in France, but it is very well known in England. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Common fennel and Halie fennel also like light, warm soil with good exposure. The first is sown in March, very lightly, and in place. The plant is thinned out, watered and weeded while young, then left to nature's own devices. As long as the soil is suitable, fennel, which is very hardy, will reseed itself. Italian fennel can be sown in several seasons, in the same way as for the September sowing, in the early article, and in holes at the same distance. It is trained like any other outdoor plant, with frequent thinning and watering. After forty days, it is ready for blanching. The first sowing is done at the beginning of March and gives in June; that of April gives in July and August; that of May in August and September; and that of June, in September, October and November. Sowing can be continued in July and even into early August, if desired, but requires a lot of water, as does sowing in June. Summer fennel can be blanched by mounding, just like celery. Fennel seeds are picked as they ripen, otherwise they fall off and are lost. They keep well for two or three years. FERTILIZER (faba vulgaris major); annual plant, native to Persia. Its seeds, dry and mainly green, are suitable for various manicures; they are floury, and are thought to be less indigestible than those of other leguminous plants. Several varieties are grown, including : La grosse sève ordinairs. Two-foot stems and very large, flat seeds. Picarde is a smaller variety. The Windsor bean, with tall, strong stems like the previous one, and very large, rounded seeds. Its leaves are larger and wider than in any other variety, but usually contain only two seeds. The haitive dwarf bean, or mazagane of the English, originates from the coasts of Africa. It is very productive, very bushy, and its stems don't grow higher than a foot, which makes it very suitable for cultivation as an early crop under glass. It has the disadvantage of degenerating very quickly if care is not taken to choose the most honest plants in their variety as seed-bearers. Julienne or petlte feve, high yielding and very early. * Petite feve d'hiver (small winter feve): very hardy, little fear of cold; also productive. The feve d'héligoland, quite similar to the two preceding ones, also productive, but less precocious. These three varieties are used more for field cultivation than for gardens. Feve à longue cossc, early, with pods containing more seeds than those of the other varieties, and therefore more productive. The green bean, so named because its seeds remain green after drying. It originates from China and is very productive, but is a little later than the others. PRIMEUR. In December, we prepare a sloping bed along a wall facing south, perfectly amended with consumed fertilizers, and load it with a finger of compost. Sow ordinary broad beans in rays or clumps, cover with potting soil and, if it's cold, spread a bit of large-scale litter on top, which you leave for a few days, until the beans begin to emerge. Then remove it to prevent the plants from wilting, and replace it only during the night. When it's getting colder, we build a wall of manure, a foot thick and more or less high, depending on the height of the beans, and place poles or sticks across it to support the mats and bedding we cover the plants with every evening, and even during the day when the thermometer falls below four or five degrees. Whenever the sun shines, even if only for an hour, we provide light, and the more advanced the plants, the more light they need. During the intervals between one frost and the next, the cover is removed entirely, but although the beans are fairly resistant to four or five degrees of cold, you must be careful not to let yourself be surprised, as they become much more susceptible to it when they have been covered. Once the frosts have passed, the manure, straw mats and bedding are removed, and the beans are soon producing. Some gardeners don't bother to cover their seedlings, but they often lose them too. In January, take advantage of a fine day, and sène tur an ados with good exposure, as we said for the previous sowing. The same care is taken, and the products follow on from the first. In November, or even September, open a trench four feet wide and three feet deep, and lay down a bed of warm manure and dry leaves, then another bed of manure and leaves, and so on until the bed is made. Fill it with seven to eight inches of well-consumed potting soil mixed with a quarter of light earth, and sow it with rays of dwarf faba bean. Between each ray, small pots four inches in diameter, filled with the same potting mix, are sown on the layer, and in each pot ten or three broad beans are planted, for the use we shall indicate. The pots are wetted and covered with a frame, which is not opened until the plants begin to emerge; but from that moment onwards, as much air as possible should be allowed in, and whenever the outside temperature does not drop to zero. When the layer begins to cool, open a trench eighteen inches wide around the trunk, and place stoves in it, renewing them every time they are needed. With a little skill, you can even pull some of the old manure out from under the bed and line it with new. Plants raised on a bed receive the usual care, and the beans produce more the warmer they are. Let's get back to the beans planted in pots. When the dull layer we've just been talking about starts to lose heat, we raise a new, unburied layer with very hot exposure, and make it three feet high and as wide. We make it narrow so that the heat from the stoves can penetrate it more easily. We fill it with six or seven inches of potting soil mixed as we said, and let it go through its first fire. The beans sown in pots are taken from the old layer, unstuffed and planted with the clod on the new one. Water moderately, and cover with frames, over whose panels you throw a lot of bedding when it's very cold. Air is given whenever the air is at a suitable temperature, and new heaters are placed every twelve or fifteen days. The dwarf bean, treated in this way, produces long before the one sown on the deaf layer. Finally, in order to have early broad beans to succeed those grown in full soil from the first frosts, sow four or five seeds in late summer of the same haitive seve nalne, in seven-inch-diameter pots filled with good soil made up of half compost and half garden soil. In a north-facing bed, bury the pots, taking care to place them on a bed of sand or gravel, and give the plants the same care you would give to seedlings grown in the open ground. Above all, they would need plenty of water, given the season. In November, the beans would be removed and planted on a warm bed under a frame. They would soon start producing. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Broad beans, whatever their variety, like light, substantial, well-smoked and loosened soils. However, with the right fertilizers, they can be grown anywhere. In February, March and April, with ordinary exposure, and until May, June and July, with damp soil and northern exposure, prepare a bed by ploughing well and using fertilizer, and draw parallel lines with a chalk line, one foot apart. These lines are sown in rays or clumps. To sow in rays, open a furrow with the weeder, throw the beans in so as to leave five or six inches between each plant, and cover with an inch of soil. If you're furrowing in clumps, use the hoe to make a trench an inch deep and five or six inches wide, one foot apart on each row. Throw in three or four beans, and cover them with the soil from the second hole, which in turn is plugged with the soil from the third, etc. When the plant has risen and is four inches high or thereabouts, we give the first hoeing, and start bubbling by bringing the soil between the lines around the feet. This forces the beans to form new roots, increasing their vigor and making them more productive. A fortnight later, a second hoeing is carried out, and the plants are relined in the same way. Finally, the soil around the plants can be raised by a third hoeing, but this operation is not essential. Weed and water frequently when the weather is dry and hot. If we didn't take care to keep the soil of the plants we've sown from May to July continually moist, it's almost certain that they wouldn't produce anything. As soon as the flower has bloomed, it is customary to pinch the tips of the branches with the nails, in order to force the sap, by stopping the plant's growth, to focus exclusively on the fruit, thus increasing both its size and earliness. Many people estimate the sap only when it is very young, and at most a third or a quarter of its normal size. If this is the case, we pick all the beans in a row, more or less, and if the season is not too advanced, we cut the stems on the ground. They immediately grow back new branches, which will produce a second green harvest before the bad season. Beans are also prone to degeneration. As soon as you start to notice this, you need to renew the seeds and bring them from another country, or at least change their exposure and soil. Seeds are harvested from the best varieties of the first spring sowing. To do this, we pull up the stalks, detach the pods and dry them in an airy place, but in the shade. The seeds, enclosed in their pods, retain their germinative virtue for five years or more. STRAWBERRY (Fragaria); native perennial, producing a delicious fruit known to all. It is grown in a large number of varieties and a few species, which we will describe in the order in which M. Noisette classified them in his Manuel, an order which M. Vilmorin adopted in Le bon jardinier, with a few modifications. This skilful farmer divides them into seven races: 1. common strawberries, 2. starry strawberries, 3. goat strawberries, 4. scarlet strawberries, 5. pineapple strawberries, 6. Chilean strawberries, 7. Indian strawberry strawberries, to which he refers all the varieties known to him. I. COMMON STRAWBERRIES. They are indigenous. Their leaves are small to medium-sized, blond-green; their flowers are small; their fruit, round or oblong, are very tasty. Woodland strawberry (Fragaria vesca); flowers sometimes dioecious; red fruit, small, round or elongated, considered the best of all. Sub-varieties: With white fruit, less esteemed. With large flowers. Red fruit; flowers often dioecious. With one leaf. Obtained by M. Duchesne of Versailles. It differs from its tipe in that its leaf is composed of a single leaflet. Its first flowers are often semi-double, and its red fruit is excellent. If its cultivation is neglected, its leaves take on three leaflets. Alpine strawberry (Fragaria semperflorens). Produces throughout the year, from April to frost, in the open ground, and throughout the winter if grown in frames or hot greenhouses. Fruits are medium-sized, elongated and very smoky, comparable in flavor to wild strawberries. This species is prone to degeneration, but is easily renewed by sowing. M. Vilmorin says that if sown on a bed in March, it produces in May, and that its coulans flower at the age of twenty days. Sub-varieties: White-fruited. Its fruits are the same size, but rounded. Fraisier de Gaillon or des Alpes without coulans. It differs from its type only in that it has no netting, which makes it very suitable for growing in borders. From the other 15 it produces the same, and its fruit is excellent, but a little smaller. We owe it to M. Le Baube, who found it in Gaillon a few years ago. Strawberry of the Alnes without coulans and with white fruits. It differs from the previous variety only in the color of its fruits, which are better and more abundant. Sometimes it reproduces identically from seed, but more often it returns to its type. Strawberry bush. Varieties without coulans, suitable for forming borders, formerly cultivated. Its fruit is good, but small; it yields less than the wild strawberry, of which it is perhaps only a sub-variety. Double-flowered strawberry. This variety is hardly cultivated except as a curiosity. Its flowers, though double, produce quite beautiful, but very acid fruit. II. STAR STRAWBERRIES. These are indigenous and can be recognized by their small, dark-green or bluish leaves; their grey stems bear small, often unisexual flowers. Their fruits are round, small and of various flavors and colors. Bargemont strawberry, or majaufe. Blond-green leaves; very long stalks; numerous, rounded, firm, dark-red fruits, very good, but with a musky taste that is not to everyone's taste. Produces a second crop in autumn, but does not always ripen. Sub-variety: Fraïsier de Montreuìl. Similar in foliage to the previous variety, but with larger, alloughed fruits, often compressed and terminated by two nipples; ripens earlier and produces only once. Heterophyllous strawberry; blond-green leaves, composed of three and five leaflets; flowers first greenish and nodding, then white and on straight, stiff stalks; round, slightly hairy fruit, quite pleasant-tasting, but with seeds that crunch under the tooth. In autumn, it produces a second crop that doesn't have time to ripen. Champagne strawberry, Champagne vine, English green strawberry. Small, blond-green leaves; spindly stems and stalks; fruits of mediocre quality, rounded or oblong, brownish on the sunny side and whitish on the other. Small-leaved strawberry. Leaves small, silky, bluish-green, stalks grey and flat-lying; fruits small, oblong, light red, pleasantly flavored. III. CAPRINE STRAWBERRIES. Indigenous. They have large, hairy, blond-green leaves; their peduncles are strong and straight; their flowers are hermaphroditic or unisexual, of medium size, with a raised calyx; their fruits are large, rounded, dark red, and have a distinctive flavor. Common capron. Flowers mostly female; large, swollen fruit of mediocre quality. Sub-varieties: Capron male. Flowers all male, large, and consequently no fruit. Planted in a mixture with the preceding variety, to fertilize it. Roral capron. Hermaphroditic flowers; fruit with firm, musky flesh, with a flavor that is not generally appreciated. Capron-abricot; fairly rare sub-variety; fruit with a flavor approaching that of the apricot, very good. Raspberry capron. Purplish-red fruit with a pronounced raspberry flavor. Very difficult to tie. Prolific Hautboy. Very large, sun-colored, very smoky fruit. This beautiful variety was brought from England by M. Noisette, in 18a4. IV. SCARLET STRAWBERRIES. Most are native to America. Their leaves are very large, bluish-green; the flowers are hermaphroditic and unisexual; the fruits, of varying size, reddish to scarlet in color, are earlier than the others and often borne on weak peduncles. Their seeds are embedded in large alveoli. Virginia strawberry. Leaves composed of narrow leaflets; female, hermaphrodite flowers; small, rounded, purple-red fruit, the earliest of all, good, fragrant, bearing from May to the end of June, and sometimes in autumn. Suitable for frames. Sub-variety: Pink or very pale red fruit, medium size, very good. Strawberry Roseberry. Low, thin foliage; fruit quite large, abundant, elongated, good, borne on stalks. It bears fruit a second time in autumn, but has difficulty ripening outdoors. This is the variety preferred by the English for growing under frames. Scarlet oblong. Late-ripening, very large fruit, which holds up better than the previous variety. Grimstone. Strong, vigorous plant with numerous coulans; large, late, good, very sweet fruit. American scarlet. Vigorous foliage; strong, fairly well-supported peduncles; very late and very beautiful fruit, very numerous, oblong, very dark red. Duke of Kent strawberry. Very small, very deep-rooted plant; peduncles hold up well; fruits very early, small, rounded, very numerous. V. American ANANAS. Their leaves are very large, with very broad leaflets; their flowers are all hermaphroditic and very large; the fruit, rounded or oval, is large, red, pink or white, generally not very fragrant, but nevertheless quite good. Carolina strawberry. Mediocre fruit, fairly large, more or less scarlet-red, rounded, often shiny, sometimes dull, high yielding. Sub-varieties: Long-fruited. With white fruits. Rare. Bath strawberry. Broader, lower leaves; larger fruits, white on one side, red on the other, rounded or elongated, borne on plump stalks, watery and not very fragrant. 1 11 15 1 13 3 2 Pineapple strawberry. Very large foliage; short peduncles, thickening into a club when ripe; large, bright scarlet fruits with few seeds set in deep cells; watery, bland flavor, especially in rainy weather. Sub-variety. Long fruits. Downton strawberry. Vigorous plant; blond-green, blister-like leaves; long, well-supported stalks; large, elongated, blackish-red fruits, very abundant, firm, fragrant, excellent and long-lasting. Kean's Imperial strawberry. Fruits of very pleasant flavor, very large, very bright red on the sunny side. Brought from England by Mr. Noisette. Strawberry-Kean's-Seedling. Vigorous plant; abundant, rounded, very large, dark-red fruit, with equally red, fragrant and excellent flesh. Pine-scarlet strawberry. Very smoky, bright red fruit of medium size. Prince-black strawberry. Fruit dark purple, fairly large, pleasant flavor. These five varieties, bred in England, degenerate rapidly if not cultivated properly. VI. CHILE FRESHIXRS. From America. Leaves less tall than previous varieties; flowers very large, unisexual or hermaphrodite. Fruit erects when ripe, which is positively the opposite of other strawberry plants. Superb Wilmot. This variety appears to be a hybrid of the pineapple and the fruit tree. Its fruits are dark red and surprisingly large. I measured some at Mr. Noisette's that were five and a half inches in circumference, and Mr. Wilmot, an Englishman who obtained it, says he has seen some eight inches. They are quite good, but inferior in quality to many of the previous breeds. Chilean strawberry, or frutilier. Dioecious plant, i.e. bearing only female flowers, or only male flowers. Fruits are very large, yellowish-white, vermilion-red on the sunny side, with an unpleasant taste and almost no fragrance. This species is delicate. It needs very-warm exposure, and good vegetable garden soil or heather. To obtain fruit, you need to own the male, or at least plant it in a mixture with Carolina strawberries, pineapples or caprons, whose flowers fertilize its own. Sub-variety: Chilean fertile strawberry. In this variety, all flowers are hermaphroditic. The fruit is smaller than in the previous variety, but more abundant and of better quality. VII. INDIAN STRAWBERRY. This race contains only one very remarkable species, which has not produced any varieties. Its leaves are small and pale green. Its flowers are yellow; its fruits are oval-rounded, bright red, but tasteless. They sit on a large involucre under the calyx, composed of five crenellated lobes. PRIMEUR. We have marked with an asterisk the three varieties usually used for this type of cultivation: the Alpine strawberry, the Virginia grape and the Roseberry. We'll start with the first method. In spring, four-season strawberry plants are planted in warm conditions, in beds of indeterminate length, but only three feet wide, with a two-foot interval between each bed. Throughout the year, ordinary care is taken, and in particular, watering is not spared when the season is dry. At the start of winter, when vegetation is threatened by the first frosts, the paths between the beds are dug at least a foot deep and eighteen inches wide, and filled with well-packed hot manure. Chassis are placed on the planks, and surrounded by stoves of the same manure, up to the height of the panels. During the night, we throw good straw mats over the whole thing, and cover them in the morning. Air is given as often as possible. Strawberry plants continue to vegetate and produce throughout the winter, provided that the stoves are renewed frequently and the plants are protected from the slightest chill. Four-season strawberries and the other two varieties we've mentioned can be bedded. For the four-season strawberry, here's how it's done. As soon as the first strawberries ripen, i.e. in May and June, sow them in trays and give them the care we mention in the article on ordinary cultivation. As soon as the plants are strong enough, we fill seven-inch-diameter pots with a mixture of one-third light garden soil, one-third heather soil and one-third well-consumed potting compost, and transplant them, placing three plants in each pot. Bury the pots in a flowerbed, and give them the usual cultivation. During the first frosts, the pots are transported on a warm layer in a tarpaulin or under a frame, peeled often to rid them of dead leaves and coulans, watered moderately, kept warm, given air when possible, and they flower and fruit all year round. You don't need to bury the pots in a layer in a furnace-heated tarpaulin, or in a warm greenhouse, you can simply place them on shelves in a well-lit area. You can also use the layers of the flying greenhouse in which you grow vines or other fruit trees. As for Roseberry and Virginia fruit trees, they are lifted with the rootball, and transplanted to a warm bed under a frame, where they soon bear fruit. But as they need to rest for a long time after a first harvest to produce a second, if you want to have them all winter long, you need to lift them from the ground every fortnight to transport them under the frames. They can also be planted in pots and grown on the shelves of a tarpaulin or a warm greenhouse. To grow strawberries throughout the rest of the year, from spring to the first frosts, all you need to do is plant a few beds of Alpine strawberries and water them daily during the hot summer months. CULTURX ORDINAIRX. Strawberry plants are generally successful everywhere, but to produce abundant, fragrant fruit, they need light, warm, semi-shaded soil, perfectly fertilized with much-used fertilizers. Capronia, scarlet and pineapple are less demanding in terms of soil quality; they grow quite vigorously in strong, slightly damp soils, but their fruit is of poor quality there. Strawberry plants can be propagated in three ways: 1. by seed, 2. by shattering, 3. by separating their coulans or fillets. Propagating by seed is infinitely advantageous, because it produces plants that are much more vigorous and productive, and offers the hope of finding new varieties superior to the existing ones. But this method of propagation can only be used for species or varieties that reproduce identically through their seeds, and there aren't many of these. For the others, therefore, we must use the splinter or coulan method. Let's start with sowing. As soon as the strawberries have reached perfect maturity, usually at the end of June, we pick them and crush them with our hands in a vase full of water. The pulp is removed, and the seeds sink to the bottom. After several washes, the seeds are easily removed. Strawberries can also be dried by laying them out in the shade, exposed to a draught, after which the seeds are easily removed by rubbing them with the fingers. Sow immediately, either in the ground or in pots. In the first case, a portion of the bed is ploughed and loosened as best you can, exposed to the sunrise, then top-dressed, raked to unify perfectly, and wetted with a watering can to avoid leading. Mix the seeds with a quantity of ash or fine sand, to sow more evenly, and spread them over the soil. Cover them with no more than half a line of very fine potting compost or heather soil, which you sift over the top. All that's left is to keep the soil continually moist, especially at the surface, to facilitate germination. To do this, you need to water very carefully, because if you beat the soil, the seeds won't germinate. Other care is the same as for all fine, delicate seedlings. Shelter from the sun and drying winds with straw mats, etc. Fifteen or twenty days later, the seedling will have sprouted, and care should be redoubled. If it has not been neglected, six weeks or two months later it will be strong and can be planted; it will produce even if you have sown four-season. Terracotta sowing is done in two ways: 1. after filling the vase with a mixture of two-thirds heather soil and one-third fully-consumed compost, sow and mulch with a small layer of very fine chopped moss. Water over the top, and place the terrine in a warm but shady spot. 2. After filling the terrine with the indicated mixture, unite the soil, throw in the seed and, instead of covering it, simply press it down with a small board or the flat of your hand. To water, place the terrine in a tub containing one or two inches of water: this enters through the holes, is absorbed by the soil and moistens it to the surface. This avoids the need for a watering can, which always plummets the surface to a greater or lesser extent, and all the seeds rise much more easily. When the plants have gained some strength, and find themselves too cramped in their terrines, we transplant them indoors or in a nursery, in well-prepared soil. Varieties with large foliage are planted permanently ten inches apart, and others seven or eight inches apart. It should be noted that if you wish, you can save the seed for sowing the following spring, but in this case it takes much longer to germinate. Terracotta sowing should be preferred for carefully managed crops, because the seeds germinate in much greater numbers and much more easily than in the open ground, where more than three-quarters are always lost. While the plant is young, it should be watered often, hoeed and weeded, and the runners scrupulously removed as they appear, so as not to let it become too weak. Propagation by bursting is the most commonly used method. It is done in autumn and spring. If this operation is carried out in autumn, some of the weaker plants may melt during the winter, but the plantation will produce abundantly the following spring. If, on the other hand, you wait until spring to plant, all the plants recover easily, but only produce the following year. It is therefore advantageous to plant in autumn. The old clumps are lifted, separated into as many parts as can be obtained with good roots, and immediately replanted in beds or borders, at the distance we have mentioned. If the season is dry, water them thoroughly until they recover perfectly. With the exception of two or three varieties, all strawberry plants produce coulans or nets, a species of long, slender, creeping stems, which emit raciues and a tuft of leaves, forming a new plant at each node. When multiplication is not intended, they are pulled out as they appear, because they tire the mother plant and prevent it from producing an abundant harvest; but in the opposite case, as early as August they are left to spread at will, then, in October, they are removed to transplant all the rooted plants they have produced. Whether propagating by sprouting or coulans, or permanently transplanting seedlings obtained from sowing, planting requires a few precautions. The ground is prepared by ploughing and fertilizing, loosening the soil as much as possible, and, if planting is to be done in a bed, the first step is to mulch, because if you waited until planting was finished, this operation would be very difficult to carry out. For this, straw is chopped as short as possible. After mulching, plant in staggered rows, ten to twelve inches apart. Water abundantly, shelter from the sun with straw mats supported by stakes, and, when the plant has recovered, hoe, or weed, and pull out the runners. At the beginning of winter, a good fingerful of three-quarter-used manure is spread over the whole bed, as it is removed from an old layer. The following spring, after removing any dead leaves and coulans, we bury it in biuant. Straw is chopped up very finely. The purpose of this operation is to prevent the soil from becoming waterlogged, to keep the surface moist, to keep out slugs, and to prevent the strawberries from getting dirty on the ground. Strawberries only produce a lot in the second and third years of planting. They must therefore be renewed every three years, either by sowing them anew, or by breaking them up as we have said. The bed from which they came is ploughed and fertilized, and they can be replanted immediately; but if this can be done without inconvenience, it is even better to move them to another site. If, for any particular reason, you want to keep old strawberry plants, every autumn you should replant them with one or two inches of good soil. This would allow them to put down new roots, which would maintain their vigor and fertility. "In England," says Mr. Noisette, "the Horticultural Society places great emphasis on perfecting the cultivation of this delicious fruit, of which they have obtained a large number of new varieties. They plant from one to two feet apart, depending on the size of the plant. Precious species are lightly "butted" once flowering has passed; they are "mulched" as we have said, or slates or tiles are laid under each "foot to support or keep clean the fruits that their weight drags to the ground. This method avoids the inconvenience of washing strawberries, which takes away some of their fragrance. The biggest enemy of strawberries is the larva of the common chafer, commonly known as the white, ton or Turkish worm. Strawberry plants are attacked when their foliage wilts for no apparent reason. The larva is found and killed. When the root of the strawberry plant is not completely cut off, it is replanted, given good watering, and it usually starts growing again. It is said that horn shavings mixed into the fertilizers given to the plants keep out this pernicious insect, the greatest scourge of horticulture, but this observation seems to me to need to be confirmed by new experiments. In any case, the oldest known method seems to me to be still the most effective today. It consists in hunting beetles in their season, morning and evening, and killing them as they are caught. G CULTIVATED LEMON, SPANISH LEMON (Lathyrus sativus); annual plant, more commonly cullivated in the field than in the garden, whose seeds are eaten dry as a purée, and green as peas. As peas are of a much higher quality than chickling peas, we have never tried to force chickling peas onto the soil, as they would take up a lot of space and produce a very small product. Nevertheless, if someone wanted to try this kind of cultivation, it could easily be done by applying to the chickling plant what we said in the article on peas. Chickling grows in all types of soil, provided they are not too damp, but it prefers those that are a little light, substantial and well exposed. In March and April around Paris, and in autumn in the south of France, seedbeds are prepared with good ploughing and half-consumed fertilizers, and sown in clumps or rays. The holes in the clumps are made ten inches apart, and when sowing in rays, eight inches apart. If you want to make the harvest last longer, you can sow as early as February, in a bed facing south, and in warm, sandy soil. In all cases, care is limited to hoeing, weeding and watering during drought and heat, until harvest time. As the cultivation of chickling vetch is absolutely the same as that of peas, we won't go into further detail on this subject, to avoid unnecessary repetition. 16 GOMBO, KETMIE COMESTIBLE ( Hibiscus esculentus) annual plant, native to South America. In the kitchen, we use its still-green fruit, which we eat as a stew, and its young shoots, which we prepare in a variety of ways. Its flowers resemble those of the marshmallow. PRIMEUR. As okra is not yet widely grown in France, it has not yet been subjected to forced cultivation, at least as far as we know. However, if it were to be subjected to forced cultivation, here's how it would be done. In May, June and July, we would sow the plants under a frame, in pots filled with half potting soil and half well-mixed light garden soil, and we would press the pots into the potting soil of an old layer. We would give the usual care to a seedling, and above all we would not scruple about watering. In autumn, the plants would be strong. As soon as the first light frosts occur, which we must take great care to prevent, we would remove the soil and place the plants with the root ball in a warm layer of potting soil, in a tarpaulin heated by the furnace, or under a frame, but then we would have to maintain the warmth of the layer by frequently renewing the stoves. It is also essential to place the plants as close as possible to the glass, so that they can enjoy the light, especially during flowering. If you had a few empty spaces on the shelves of a hot greenhouse, you could place a few plants there, after having put slightly larger pots in them. Their flowers would make a pleasant ornament, and their fruit would quickly reach the right size for consumption. Whatever the means used to heat them, they should be watered often, but little at a time, and given plenty of air and light. To have okra fruit in spring, you'd have to sow in pots in autumn, and winter the young plants in a tarpaulin heated by a furnace. In March, take them out and place them, with the root ball, in a warm layer of potting soil, under a frame. As the plant sometimes reaches a height of four feet, it should in all cases be pinched back as soon as it reaches a foot or eighteen inches, to force it to produce laterally spreading branches. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: In February, sow three or four seeds in pots filled with the same mixture as above. The pots are sunk into a warm layer of potting soil, and covered with cloches or frames. When the seedlings have emerged, leave just one in each pot. In March, a new warm layer is raised and planted. Water, air and light are provided until May, when the plants are removed and planted in a bed at the foot of a south-facing wall, in loosened and perfectly top-dressed soil. All that's left to do is provide the usual care and daily watering, as this plant loves water. Okra fruit can also be obtained simply by sowing in a warm layer of soil, in February and March, without pots, and transplanting to another warm layer, where the plant is raised until it is strong enough to be placed indoors. Sometimes, however, transplanting delays this, and the seeds don't have time to ripen before winter. However, it can be obtained by transplanting it permanently on a new bed under a high frame, or at least on a well-sheltered hillside in light, amended soil. If, in the Paris climate, you want to be sure of collecting good seeds, you must keep at least a few plants under chassis. I4 HARICOTS (Phaseolus vulgaris); annual plant, native to India, which is too well known to mention here its various uses in cooking. Cultivation and climatic differences have produced a large number of varieties, which we will mention here, according to the table presented by Mr. Noisette in his manual. SECTION ITe. - GRIMPAN BEANS, which require rowing. 1. those with white seeds. Soissons bean. Large, flat bean, very thin when dry. This is nothing other than the common flat-seeded bean, generally cultivated, but acquiring a superior quality in Soissons that it does not usually have in other soils. We therefore regard it only as a local variety. Haricot-Sabre, Sabre d'Allemagne, Haricot cossé. Pods of extraordinary width and length, excellent when young, still tender, fleshy and very good when almost fully grown. They are cut into strips and preserved in salt for winter eating. The seed of this variety, which produces a lot, is medium-sized, flattened and the best of all beans, either green or dry. This vigorous plant climbs very high; it needs long oars. Prédome, Prudhomme, Prodommet. Small pod, absolutely parchment-free, excellent, still edible even when semi-dry. Seed white, round, small, very good, new or dry. I have an excellent sub-variety from Caen, whose seeds make the pod appear articulated. Another sub-variety with yellow seeds is known. Sophie bean. Medium-sized, flat, thick-skinned, hard, watery bean of very mediocre quality. This variety is best eaten green, when the pods are three-quarters full. Rice bean. White, oblong, very small bean, excellent when eaten new, often mediocre when dry, especially in damp soils; its green pods are tender and quite good. This variety produces a lot. Lima bean. Short, broad, rough pods, good green color; thick, very large, dirty-white seeds, very floury and excellent dry. This variety climbs very high and requires long oars; it produces a lot, but is late and delicate in the Paris climate. To obtain perfectly ripe seeds suitable for sowing, raise a few plants in pots in March, and transplant them with the rootball in the sin of April or beginning of May, in the open ground, in good exposure. Only one seed is sown in each pot, and when planting, space the plants ten inches apart. Haricot bean. Medium-sized seeds, very good when new, but a little tough-skinned when dry. Excellent green pods. This variety is the earliest of all. Haricot de Picardie or de Liancourt. This variety produces a lot; it has a great analogy with the Soissons bean, but the plant is much more vigorous, rises higher, and the seeds are larger; these are flat, with a slightly hard skin when dry. The pods are quite good when green. Round bean or Pea bean. Numerous pods, good in green; very small, rounded, reddish-white seeds, soft, tasty, very good when dried. Gigantic bean. This variety, which produces little, provides an extraordinarily vegetative plant; it needs reams eight to nine feet long. Very large, flattened seeds, good when new, a little tough-skinned when dry. .2. Colored beans. Prague beans or red peas. A very late variety, but extremely productive in warm autumns. Requires very high raking. Pods without parchment, excellent when green; round, reddish-purple seeds, very good when new; when dry, they are very floury, not at all watery, with a pleasant flavor somewhat similar to that of chestnuts, but with a slightly thick skin. Prague bicolor. Very late, with the same qualities and the same defects as the previous variety; seeds variegated red and purple. Doe belly. Oblong, tawny-yellow seeds, quite good dry, but better mashed than with their skins. Excellent green pods. This variety remains dwarfed in dry, light or sandy, warm soils. It is a sub-variety of the Swiss Bean. Grivelé. A very productive variety, but its seeds, which are good dry, are flax-gray mottled with black, but have the disadvantage of turning the water in which they are cooked purple-black. Green pods. Purplish marbled. Reddish seeds, mottled brown. Very good green pods. Pink bean. Low-yielding variety; tender pods, good in green; more or less grayish-pink seeds, fairly good in dry conditions. Kidney bean. Vigorous, high-yielding plant requiring long oars; pods good for greening; red seeds, fairly good dry. Cardinal bean. Very large, flattened, white seeds with a broad purple crown around the germ, of mediocre quality when dry, and very difficult to ripen. Pods quite tender and quite good green, late variety. SECTION II. - DARK BEANS, 1. those with white seeds. Hatif de Hollande. This variety is the earliest of all, and for this reason should be preferred for early cultivation under chesnut trees. Its pods are long, narrow and excellent for green cultivation; its seeds are quite good for dry cultivation. Hatif d'Argenson. Similar to the previous one, but even earlier; very good for cultivation under chassis. Haricot Flageolet or hátif de Laon. Very early variety, very low growing, high yielding, very suitable for under-frame cultivation. Long, narrow pods, excellent when green; narrow, elongated, almost cylindrical seeds, quite good when dry. This variety is one of the most widespread and highly esteemed around Paris. Haricot dain de Soissons or gros pied. Almost as early as the previous variety; large pods; seeds of mediocre size, flattened, excellent when new, quite good dry. White parchment bean. This variety, like the next, forms very large, very branched clumps. They are very much afraid of damp soil, as their pods, which are very long and attached very low down, drag along the ground and often rot. Seeds small, flattened, excellent new and dry; pods very good in green, without parchment until they have reached three-quarters of their size. Very productive variety, as well as the following one. Sabre dwarf. The plant is very similar to the previous one, but its pods are wider and longer; otherwise, the bean has the same qualities. These two varieties should be sown light, in dry soil, and two or three seeds are enough for a clump. White American bean. A low, bushy, highly branched and highly productive plant, but with the disadvantage of becoming a bit of a climber if sown in open, slightly cool soil, or if the season is damp. Pods large, swollen, a little arched, strongly colored red-brown, especially at the tips, absolutely parchment-free, and therefore excellent in green. Seeds are small, a little elongated, white and very good when dry. This plant should not be sown thickly: two or three seeds per clump are sufficient. Deuz per clump. Low stem, even more branched than the previous variety; excellent green pods, no parchment; very good seeds when newly shelled. Very productive variety. Swiss bean. Fairly early variety, but prone to bolting; elongated, cylindrical, reddish-white seeds, rather mediocre when dry; excellent green pods. a. Dwarf beans with colored seeds. Swiss red. Elongated, cylindrical, red seeds, variegated with different colors depending on the soil, very good dry; excellent green pods. Swiss gray. Elongated, cylindrical seeds, blackish-red with white mottling, very good when dry; excellent green pods, very good when picked at three-quarters of their size and dried for winter consumption. This variety is one of the most widely grown in Paris, although it has the disadvantage of bolting when the season is both hot and rainy. Suisse gris de Bagnolet. This variety is very similar to the previous one, but its seeds are grayish with black and brown spots. It is also widespread in the Paris area, and more highly esteemed because it is less prone to bolting and is earlier; it also has the same qualities. Black or negro bean. It is very attractive and very productive, but has the disadvantage of rising very easily. However, in light, sandy, warm soils, it remains very low. Its seeds are quite good dry, but it is much more interesting if grown to be eaten green. It is widely grown and highly prized in Touraine. Haricot rouge d'Orléans. Quite low stems; small, flat, red seeds, highly prized for dry eating. Canada yellow bean. Extremely low-growing, very early, suitable for under-frame cultivation, very tender pods, no parchment, excellent in green, and even when they have reached most of their size; rounded, pale yellow seeds with a small brownish circle around the umbilicus, very good for dry eating. Yellow-brown bean. Low, productive plant; medium-sized, round seeds, very good when dried. China bean. Highly productive plant; fairly large, rounded, pale sulfur-yellow seeds, excellent when newly shelled, very good dry. We have a sub-variety with the same qualities, but with light bronze-colored seeds. Yellow bean without parchment. This very vigorous variety is very prone to bolting and degeneration; when this happens, the seeds turn from yellow to black. They are small, oval and very good when dried. Long, arched pods, without parchment, excellent green. Yellow with parchment. An even earlier variety than the previous one, and very productive. Seeds are similar, very good dry. Red bean without parchment. This plant forms large, very productive clumps; pods are good when green; seeds are very good when dry, making excellent purée. We have already mentioned all the varieties that deserve to be cultivated: it remains for us to talk about a species that for a long time was cultivated only as an ornamental plant, but which today holds a very advantageous place in the kitchen garden; this is the SPANISH BEAN (Phaseolus coccineus), originally from the West Indies. It has produced two climbing varieties, which are grown in the same way as pole beans. These are Scarlet-flowered runner bean. Stems climb to nine or ten feet high; pods long, thick, good in green; seeds large, grayish-linen mottled with black, of mediocre quality in dry conditions. White-flowered runner bean. Similar to the previous variety, but more productive; pods good when green; seeds large, of the same shape, mealy, with a slightly thick rind, but good when dry. PRIMEUR. Green beans can be harvested in the open ground right up to the first frosts, so it remains for us to teach you how to obtain them from then on, throughout the winter, until the open ground starts yielding again. As each season requires different care, we will divide this chapter into paragraphs. 1. Sowing in September, to supply in December. Towards the beginning of September, six-inch-diameter pots are filled with garden soil mixed with half a layer of well-consumed potting compost. In each pot, sow three or four bean seeds, chosen from the early dwarf varieties we have indicated as suitable for growing under a frame. Water, and place the pots in three or four rows, at the foot of a south-facing wall, without burying them. They can also be sunk into the soil of an old bed. If the season is fine, there's no need for further precautions; but if it's wet, rainwater must be kept away by means of straw mats, or better still, frames. When the plant has risen, only three or four feet are left in each pot, and the others are pinched off with the nails below the cotyledons, so as not to shake the roots of the two remaining plants. Water as needed, but only a little at a time, and in such a way as to maintain only a humidity favorable to vegetation, without drowning the soil. This rule is particularly important in cold autumns. Beans fear even the slightest frost, so cover the seedbed with straw mats every night to avoid surprises. As soon as the bad season is announced by the first white frost, we establish a deaf layer with good exposure, cover it with seven to eight inches of potting soil, and push the pots of beans into it. At the beginning of November, they are removed from the soil and planted in a new warm layer, under a frame. We continue to care for them, giving them air and light, and they soon produce. The plants can also be transported in a layer of tarpaulin heated by a furnace, or on the shelves of a hot greenhouse, or finally on the layer of a flying greenhouse, designed to force vines or other fruit trees. In order to make early beans more productive, we use a method which we will describe here, and which applies equally to all early seedlings. When the stems have reached a foot or fifteen inches in height, they are carefully placed close to the ground, so as not to break or injure them, with the top facing north, i.e. towards the highest part of the trunk, and held in this attitude with laths or sticks. The stems emit new branches, which rise vertically and produce a lot. Seedlings sown in September produce until January. 2. November sowings, to produce in January and February. From the first days of the month, seedlings are sown in pots, as we have said, but they are immediately placed in potting soil in a warm layer, under a frame. We give them air, light and warmth; we thin them out by pinching off too much below the cotyledons, and we water moderately. When the layer has lost its warmth, the plants are removed and replanted on a new warm layer with eight to nine inches of good potting soil; they are covered with stretchers and kept warm with stoves that are renewed often; the layer is even larded underneath with hot manure, when necessary, or replanted in the potting soil of a layer raised in a tarpaulin heated in the furnace, and this is always much better. In any case, the above-mentioned care is taken. February, March and April. From the beginning of December to the end of January, plants are sown and trained as described above. However, some gardeners and market gardeners use different methods, which we will report on below. Two or three seeds are sown in four-inch diameter pots. Place the pots in a warm layer under a frame, and give them the usual care. A month after sowing, the plants are placed in larger pots on a new warm layer, where they are treated in the usual way. When the beans are ready to blossom, establish a deaf layer, with eight to nine inches of well-consumed potting soil, half mixed with light earth; place the beans with or without the pot, cover with frames and surround with thick heaters, and give air and light whenever this can be done without danger. Market gardeners raise a warm layer of one-third old manure and two-thirds new manure in an oven-heated tarpaulin, which they fill with nine to ten inches of potting soil mixed with one-quarter of good light earth. They sow in rays on this layer, thick enough to take up as little space as possible, but not so thick that the plants run the risk of withering. The rays run from south to north. It would be preferable, however, to sow in clumps, at a rate of twenty to twenty-five clumps per panel, the frames supposed to be four feet wide by four and a half feet long. They give them air, light and moderate watering; they lay them down with sticks, as we have said, and, for the rest, they cultivate them like full-grown beans. 4. February sowing, to produce in May. In the first days of the month, they are sown in pots, as we said for the previous sowings, and sown in potting soil in a warm layer, under a frame, where they are raised until the end of April. At this time, we plow a bed at the foot of a south-facing wall, with a very warm exposure, and soil it perfectly. The beans are removed from the soil and transplanted with the root ball. To protect them from the cool nights, cover them every evening with glass jars, straw hives or straw mats. If you use straw mats, spread them out on sticks placed across them and supported at the right height by stakes. If you're afraid of a few cold nights, you can also cover the sides with straw mats, against which you can throw a little bedding. We don't need to tell you that early beans are only grown for their worm-like pods, because for the seeds, which keep dry with all their qualities, this care would become superfluous. If you have a warm greenhouse with some light, you can cultivate the scarlet variety of runner bean and enjoy its produce, the beautiful garlands of greenery that will climb up against the timbers supporting the glass panels, and the pleasant view offered by its beautiful clusters of bright red flowers, in a season when few or no other flowers can be seen. From September to January, fill pots nine to ten inches in diameter with good, prepared soil, and sow five or six seeds in each, leaving only three when they have emerged. If you wish, you can press the pots into the tan of the warm layer to hasten germination, or simply place them on the shelves. We'll take the same care as for the other plants in the greenhouse, but we'll place strings in the direction we want their climbing stems to go, and they'll twist around them. They will soon adorn the greenhouse with their flowers, and their pods will be picked for consumption when they are three-quarters full. As they are very large, fleshy and good from birth until they are almost fully developed, it will be easy to pick a sufficient quantity from time to time to make a dish, even though only a small number of plants are cultivated. CULTURX ORDINAIRX. Beans thrive in soft, light, slightly cool but not cold, perfectly loosened soil; they can be grown in all types of soil, but in clayey, oily and compact soils, more ploughing and much more fertilizer are needed; they are sown later, and the seeds are covered less, so that as the soil is more heated and the seeds closer to the surface, they are less likely to rot. In the Paris climate, in light, warm soils with good exposure, early varieties can be sown as early as the fifteenth or twentieth of April. Once this period has passed, dry harvests can only be expected from a few early varieties, which can still reach maturity by sowing from the fifteenth to the thirtieth of May. Later, until the beginning of July, some varieties are sown for green harvesting, particularly Swiss and flageolet. However, all the above times may vary by ten to twenty days, depending on soil, climate and how early the season is. Beans can be sown in clumps or in rays. Beans should preferably be sown in clumps in light, dry, warm soils, as they retain their moisture better this way. In strong, damp soils, on the other hand, it is much better to sow in rays. If you sow in clumps, first prepare the soil with good ploughing and fertilizer, then rake the soil together and, using a chalk line, draw lines eighteen inches apart. On these lines, with the hoe, you dig large holes eighteen inches apart and in a chessboard pattern, but only two or three inches deep; you throw five or six beans into each, if the soil is dry, light and good, and eight or ten in strong, damp soil where you think some will rot without rising. In the first case, cover with nn inch of soil, or better, potting mix, and in the second, only half an inch. If you have sown more than six seeds, when they have risen, leave only that number, and thin out where there are more. If the season is very dry and the soil light, you can give the seedlings a few sprinklings to facilitate germination, but sparingly, so as not to chill the soil. Sometimes, either as a result of this watering or of rainfall, the soil becomes compacted and forms a hard crust of varying thickness on its surface: the young plants, unable to break through, perish between two layers of soil. This inconvenience is remedied by light sowing, the aim of which is to break up this crust, and is done with a hooked trowel. The seedbed is weeded and kept clean. Fifteen days after sowing, or sometimes a few days later, depending on variety and season, the beans should be up. When they begin to gain some strength, they are given the first hoeing, and when they are a month old, they are given the second hoeing and ridged. The purpose of this operation is to facilitate the emergence of small roots, which increase the vegetation and vigor of the plants. If you have sown climbing varieties, now is the time to row them, so that their long stems can twist and support themselves as they lengthen. The oars should be from five to nine feet long, depending on the variety you're growing. If heavy rains have caused weeds to grow, we pull them out by hand, and that's all we need to do until harvest. Let's get back to sowing in rays. After preparing the ground as we have said, we draw parallel furrows with a chalk line and a hoe, twelve or fifteen inches apart and one inch deep. The beans are thrown in grain by grain, spaced about three inches apart. Cover with a rake, and all other care is the same as if sowing in clumps. Beans, especially those sown early, are prone to being eaten in the ground, before germination, by a very small, elongated insect known to gardeners as the millipede (1). Beans with only the bark left are often found to contain up to fifteen of these insects. There is only one known way to combat this disastrous plague in certain localities, and that is to soak the seeds, forty-eight hours before sowing them, in a strong decoction of chimney soot. It is said that the odor and flavor they acquire in this way ward off millipedes and other destructive insects. Beans should be harvested from the most distinctive varieties, but it is still very difficult to keep them healthy for long, as most are prone to rapid degeneration (:) This insect seems to me to be very close to the sand jule (ule¬"abalo*ς), but much smaller, and a tawny yellowish color. in soils that are not suitable for them. Some of them even have all their qualities only in the place where they were born. Preference should be given to the first seedlings sown. If they are climbing beans, we pick the pods when they are dry and perfectly ripe, which can be easily recognized by their yellowish to blackish color; we keep the seeds in their natural envelope until it's time to sow them. If they are dwarf beans, uproot the stalks, bundle them together and store them in a dry place out of the reach of frost. Seeds kept in their pods retain their germinative properties for several years. Mr. Noisette claims that, once shelled, they will not germinate after three years. 14 CULTIVATED LETTUCE (Lactuca sativa); annual plant, native to Asia, grown in the vegetable garden to provide salads, and sometimes eaten cooked. There are two breeds, 1. head lettuce and 2. romaine lettuce, which have produced a large number of varieties. FIRST RACE. - HEAD LETTUCE, Varieties of this breed are easily distinguished by their rounded, more or less frizzy leaves, tightly packed in the center and forming a more or less large head. Their flavor is generally much less sweet than that of the Romans. They are divided into four sections: 1. spring lettuces; 2. summer lettuces; 3. winter lettuces; 4. lettuces for cutting. We will describe the varieties in the same order: 1. spring head lettuces. This is the name given to lettuces grown in February and March. These are the following varieties: Lettuce-goite. This variety has the advantage of eating very quickly, but also rises quickly. It is small, very blond, with blistered, wrinkled leaves and white seeds. It is generally grown as an early variety, as it is very resistant to air deprivation. However, it can also be sown outdoors in spring. It has given rise to two sub-varieties, one with black seeds, which buds just as quickly, but retains its apple much better. The other is called slow to bolt, because even in summer it bolts very-difficulty, even though it is also early. Its seeds are also black. Red cordon or red-edged lettuce. A small variety, but larger than the preceding ones; blond-green leaves, a little shiny, the tops of those forming the head a little tinted red. Apples are quick to set, but set very quickly; white seeds. It is very good for spring sowing, and nevertheless survives the winter very well. Dauphine lettuce. Very large, early variety, with almost smooth, blondish-green leaves, with the tops of the leaves that form the head slightly tinted red; head forms quickly, but only holds well in spring. Black seeds. This variety does well in all soil types, but requires a lot of water, and the suckers it grows around its first leaves must be carefully removed. Yellow-red lettuce. Medium-sized variety, sweet, tender, very good; almost smooth, round, blond-green leaves with a few light red spots; well-formed head, very yellow at the core, rising fairly quickly; black seeds. Pancake lettuce, round, spring-forming, small, short, degreen. Fairly early variety; yellowish-green leaves; well-shaped, tender, good head. White seeds. This lettuce apples very well under cloche, without needing air. Lettuce grosse george. Smooth, yellowish-green leaves; tight, very tender head, but quick to bolt; white seeds. Performs well under glass if given air and watering. a. Summer head lettuces. Sowing begins in early April, and continues until July. Lettuce de Versailles. A very large, slightly tall variety, excellent for summer sowing; thin, bumpy, pale-green, whitish leaves; head fairly quick to form, well-filled, tender, very difficult to climb; black seeds. Lettuce cocasze. Very blistered, glossy green leaves with a few freckles. These characteristics sufficiently distinguish it from the previous variety, with which it has often been confused; very large head, very long-lasting; white seeds. It wants to be grown in soils that are neither too strong nor too light, unless it is given a lot of fertilizer and watering; when planting it, it sinks a little deeper than the others. Blonde lettuce with black seeds. Leaves are blond-green and shiny, a little golden; the head is medium-sized, firm, tender and holds quite well. Berlin blond lettuce. Leaves tender green, a little yellowish, slightly edged with red; very large head, forming quickly and holding well. Black seeds. This variety, like the following one, is very close to the previous one. Royal lettuce with black seeds. Darker green leaves; very large head, slow to form, but very firm. Very water-loving. White-seeded royal lettuce. Outer leaves lunantes, a little blistered, a beautiful green; apple; now very long, tender, good; seeds blauches. Requires frequent watering. Yellow summer lettuce or lazy blond. Very round leaves, united especially on the head; very well-shaped head, a little flattened, tight, large, holding very well in summer; white seeds. Stubby blond lettuce. Folded, crenate, spreading leaves; broad, flat, tight head, holding even better than the previous variety; white seeds. Batavia blond or Silesia lettuce. When successful, this variety is the largest and best of all lettuces, although its head is never very full, and becomes slightly bitter if left without water. For it to succeed perfectly, it needs light, free soil, and watering in the evening and morning, but never during the day, because if you wet the leaves during this time it will stain and rot. Its leaves are very wrinkled, wavy at the edges, yellowish-green, slightly golden, with a red border; the head is slightly concave, with an imperfect whitening; the seeds are white. Maltese lettuce. This appears to us to be a variety of the previous one, but its leaves are smoother and paler green. The head is flattened and very tender, and the seeds are white. Chou lettuce or yellow Batavia. This variety is very large and beautiful, but better cooked than raw, because it has the disadvantage of being a little tough. Its leaves are dark green, tending to brown; the head is very large and the leaves are white. Turkish lettuce. Large, dull-green, almost smooth leaves; very large, tight, firm, excellent head; black seeds. One of the best and most beautiful summer lettuces. Imperial lettuce. Very similar to the previous one, with all its qualities, but its seeds are white. Lettuce de Génes. Smooth, shiny, tender-green, slightly golden leaves, tinged with red at the top; tight, well-shaped, slightly flattened head, forming quickly and holding well. Black seeds. This excellent lettuce has three sub-varieties, all of which are of equal quality: 1. blond, with smooth leaves, a slightly pointed head and white seeds; 2. red, with curly, russet leaves speckled with brown; rounded, tight head, forming fairly quickly; black seeds; 3. green, with green, curly leaves; yellow, hard, large head; white seeds. This sub-variety should be watered only when necessary, but needs to be hoeing often. Lettuce méterelle. Thin, very wrinkled, bumpy, fairly pronounced green leaves; very tight, very large head, a little slow to form, but difficult to climb; white seeds. Big brown lazy lettuce or big gray market garden lettuce. Leaves large, rounded, a little blistered, grayish-green with a few pale-brown spots; very large, rounded head, tinged red at the top, forming very slowly but rising fairly quickly; black seeds. Lettuce palatine, Laitue rousse, Brune Hollandaise, Petite brune. Leaves almost smooth, strongly tinted red; medium-sized head, very hard, tight, holding very well. Black seeds. This hardy variety is very suitable for late summer planting. Blood or flagellate lettuce with white seeds. Its green leaves are remarkable for their pleasing red variegation; the head is rounded, tender and very good, but rises very easily in hot weather. For this reason, this variety is better suited to spring and autumn sowing than to summer sowing. It succeeds only in mild soils, and does not fully form its head until spring. Black-seeded blood lettuce. Very similar to the previous variety, but with more variegated leaves. Its head holds better in summer, and its seeds, which are difficult to obtain, are black. It needs soft soil, and only apples in spring. Lettuce grosse crépe. Very curly, yellowish-green leaves. Rounded head, quick to set, very tender, very sweet, but quick to bolt; white seeds. White george lettuce. Almost smooth, yellowish-green, brittle leaves; large, tender, excellent, but very quick-growing head; white seeds. Big red lettuce. Very large variety; outer leaves rounded, almost smooth, dark green tending to blackish, shaded a dull, dark red; apple yellow tending a little to orange, tender, sweet, very good. Black seeds. This variety acquires all its qualities only in oily soils, where it grows in all seasons. Italian lettuce. Fine, pale-green leaves, edged with red; tight, tender, very good head; black seeds. Requires lean, light soil and little watering. Bapaume lettuce. Very blond-green leaves; large, full head, much tighter at the bottom than at the top, holding well. Black seeds. Green Perpignane lettuce. Leaves almost smooth, with very strong ribbing; very large, very yellow head, soft, tender, very good, hard to climb. White seeds. This variety is precious in that it holds up well in hot weather, even in light, dry soils. Lettuce Perpignane mouchetéc. Smooth, thick-ribbed, green leaves with yellow spots; very large, excellent, firm head with the same qualities as the previous variety. White seeds. Aubervilliers lettuce. Dark-green, smooth leaves; very small, tight, yellow, excellent, very firm head; white seeds. This variety is rarely grown, although it is very good, due to its lack of head. 3. Winter lettuces. These do not grow as well. They are sown immediately after summer lettuces, and continue until mid-September. Their main merit lies in their hardiness, and in the season in which they set, as they are generally quite hard. Passion lettuce. Given this name because it usually apples around Holy Week. Leaves are green rather than bluish, blistered and slightly reddish-spotted; medium-sized head, fairly hard, better cooked than raw; white seeds. It has a sub-variety which is no better, resembling it, but whose leaves are entirely speckled with red. Shell lettuce with white seeds. Smooth, rounded leaves, green rather than blond; hard, bitter, poorly-forming head, can only be eaten cooked; white seeds. Despite its poor qualities, this variety is quite widely grown, as it is the most resistant to cold. It has a sub-variety with black seeds, which is no longer appreciated. Morine lettuce. Very similar to passion lettuce, but with smaller, greener leaves. Its head is just as large and holds longer; white seeds. Small crepe lettuce. Small variety, difficult to pick, but very successful under glass during winter. Black seeds. It is rarely grown for this reason alone. It has a sub-variety, the petite noire, which resembles it, but does even better under cloche without needing to be given air. Its seeds are similarly black. 4. Cutting lettuces. This is the name given to some varieties that pomace and others that do not, but are sown to be cut before they are formed. All early and blond-leaved lettuces can be used for this purpose, such as gotte, crepes, etc., but there are some that are more particularly cultivated for this purpose, and we will mention them here. Spinach lettuce. This variety does not apple; its leaves are blond, very tender, and cut almost like oak leaves; they have the precious quality of growing back after being cut several times. Chicory lettuce. Folded, curled leaves, rather like those of the small yellow chicory. This variety does not peel, but is good only for cutting. II° RACE. - ROMANS. These lettuces are generally distinguished from the preceding ones by their more elongated shape, their more easily developed heads, and their much sweeter flavor. Romaine hátive or green hative. Blond-green leaves, pointed at the tip; fairly large, full, slightly flat, very good apple; white seeds. This variety has the invaluable advantage of peeling perfectly under a bell, so it is preferred for bedding and spring planting. Romaine verte maraichère or green chicory. Green, long, nacelle-shaped leaves; flattened apple, elongating when it degenerates, forming itself, i.e., without needing to be bound, one of the largest of all; black seeds. This variety is the most widely cultivated because of its hardiness and self-capping quality. Romaine verte d'hiver. Very similar to the previous variety, but smaller and more difficult to comb. White seeds. Romaine grise maraichère, chicon gris, grosse romaine grise. Very similar to the previous variety, but with darker green leaves. It also has a milder flavor, which makes it more highly esteemed. Its seeds are bluish. Romaine blonde maraichère, blond chicon. Its leaves are blond-green, a little less pointed at the tip than in the preceding varieties; the apple is flattened, large, full, more tender and more delicate to eat than the others, but rises quickly. White seeds. Romaine rouge d'hiver, red chicon. This variety is the hardest to withstand winter cold, but often melts as soon as it is tied, if the soil is not suitable. Green outer leaves

reddish; apple yellow, very tender. Black seeds. Romaine panachée, flagellate, sanguine, Silesian lettuce. Green leaves, variegated with red; apple tender, sweet, excellent. Black seeds. There is a sub-variety known as English variegated chicory, whose outer leaves are less variegated, but those of the apple much more so; it has the same qualities, but the seeds are white, and it is often capped without being bound. Romaine alphange; fine, pointed, smooth, slightly yellowish-green leaves, slightly tinged with red at the top; tender, excellent apple, but with the defect of rotting or rising quickly. White seeds. It has a sub-variety, the blond alphanx, whose leaves are fat, thick and yellow; its head is very large and its seeds black. This concludes the list of the most commonly grown lettuces. It is far from certain that all these varieties are constant; many depend on the climate and the quality of the soil. So, after sufficient trials, you should base your decision more on your experience of the varieties that do best in a given locality, than on any particular nomenclature. However, this does not apply to early varieties. PRICE. We will divide this chapter into three articles. 1. Early head lettuces, 2. early cut lettuces, 3. early Romaine lettuces. 18 1. early head lettuces. Head lettuces can be grown throughout the winter without the help of layers. Here's how: from the fifteenth to the twentieth of August, prepare a perfectly earthen and well loosened bed, and sow the varieties we have classified as winter lettuces, particularly Passion, Morine and Shell. We give the usual care to full-earth sowings, and above all we don't spare any watering, as lettuces are all the more tender and milder the more water we give them. New seedlings are sown from the fifth to the tenth of September. Towards the end of October for the first sowing, and from the fifth to the tenth of September for the second, the plants are transplanted to earthen beds at the foot of a wall in a very warm, south-facing position. Care is taken to ensure rapid recovery. When frosts and heavy frosts set in, lettuce plants are sheltered with bedding or straw mats spread over a few poles placed crosswise on very short stakes. Sometimes, lettuces from the first sowing advance too far and perish, but those from the second always succeed and can provide for part of the winter. To obtain good head lettuces from December through to spring, there are a number of other ways to proceed, as described below. Sowing in August, for head lettuce in November and December. For this and subsequent sowings, preference should be given to the following varieties: petile crêpe and its sub-variety petite noire, as well as crépe ronde, if grown under cloches, as these three lettuces do better the more they are deprived of air. If grown under a frame, gotte and grosse george should be preferred, as they need butter air and would be too stifled under clochez. From August twenty to twenty-five, prepare a bed with southern exposure, and sow lightly. Water daily, and give the young seedlings the usual care, until they are strong enough to be transplanted. Then a warm layer is raised with half new manure and half old manure, filled with six inches of good, well-consumed compost, and when its great heat has passed, the lettuces are transplanted. They are spaced so that one bell can cover five. When the cold rains, cool nights or first white frosts come, we cover with bells if we've sown pancakes, or with frames if we've sown gotte or grosse george. In the first case, no air is given; in the second, air must be given by lifting the frame panels whenever the temperature permits, and especially when the lettuces are three-quarters done and ready to eat. If the bed gets cold, it can be warmed up with stoves of new manure, but here we make an essential observation. Lettuces grown on beds are equally sensitive to excess heat and the slightest cold, both of which cause them to melt quickly. Every care must therefore be taken to avoid these two excesses, and you will be all the more certain of obtaining a successful crop if you constantly maintain the temperature of the bedding soil between ten and fifteen degrees of Réaumur's thermometer. Water often and little at a time. When the apple begins to form, remove all the low yellowing leaves from the potting soil, press it against the base, and the apple will swell more rapidly. October sowing, for January apple harvest. At the beginning of October, at the foot of a wall, prepare an ados of potting soil mixed with a quarter of good light garden soil, and sow under cloches. If you wish, you can sow on old potting soil and cover with a frame. As soon as the plant begins to take two leaves in addition to the cotyledons, a new bed of pure potting soil is made, in the same ex position, and the young lettuces are transplanted an inch and a half or two inches apart. Water them, cover them with cloches, and raise them in this suffocated way, without ever giving them air. Towards the end of November, a layer is built up with two-thirds old manure and one-third new, so as not to generate too much heat, and the plants are transplanted into it at a rate of five per bell. Moderate heat is maintained with stoves, and the bed is protected from frost and rain with litter around the bells and straw mats spread over them. The covers are lifted during the day, weather permitting, to provide light for the plants, but care is taken not to give them air, unless you have sown the two varieties that require it. These lettuces flower at the end of December and the beginning of January. Sow in November, to harvest in late January and early February. In early November, prepare a warm bed of half old and half new manure, and fill it with four inches of pure loam. Sow after allowing the greatest heat to pass through, and cover with cloches or frames. The plant is thinned out so that the stalks are two inches apart, and transplanted where they are lacking. It would even be better to transplant the whole plant, but on the same layer, and this should be done when the lettuces have two leaves in addition to the cotyledons. When the plants are strong enough, build a new, warm layer with six inches of potting soil, plant them at a suitable distance from each other, and give them the care indicated above. Sow from December to February, fortnightly, to harvest from February to March. Warm layers are planted with four inches of pure loam, and sowing takes place only when the greatest heat has passed. The seeds are lightly covered, and cloches or frames are placed over them. A few days later, when the first leaf begins to develop, we place good stoves of new sumier to increase the heat of the layer, and we unfold the lettuces to transplant them in the same place, but two inches apart. We surround the cloches with litter and cover them with straw mats, to prevent frost from penetrating the plants; we give air to the varieties that require it, and light to all of them, whenever the temperature allows it. When the lettuces have acquired sufficient strength, i.e. when they have four or five leaves, a new layer is established, filled with six inches of potting soil, and the plants are transplanted in such a way as to hold five under each bell, more or less, depending on the size of the varieties to be sown. The most important thing is that each plant should be able to spread out comfortably, without wasting space. We keep the bed warm with heaters, and give the lettuces the care we've already mentioned. When the lettuces are ready for harvesting, we peel them, removing all dead and yellowing leaves, and place a small amount of potting soil around each plant, pressing it against the crown. 2. Early lettuces for cutting. All varieties of lettuce can be sown to cut young, especially those with blond leaves, but the small, early species mentioned for early cuttings in previous articles are generally preferred. The reason for this is that there is no need to sow them on purpose, because after having chosen the seedlings to be pricked out, from the seedlings sown on the bed from December to February, we still give some care to those that remain to cut them when they are strong enough to do so. Two varieties deserve preference for sowing, if you have no other intention than to have lettuce to cut. One is lettuce-chicory, which, being very tender, can be cut stronger than gottes, crêpes, etc. The other is lettuce-chicory, which, being very tender, can be cut stronger than crêpes. The other is spinach lettuce, which has the same qualities as the previous one, to which it adds the precious advantage of growing back and being able to be cut several times. Throughout the winter, from one week to the next, lettuce for cutting is sown in the empty spaces of warm beds for large or small vegetables, either under cloches or under frames. If you were to raise a bed specifically for this purpose, it would have to be filled with four inches of potting soil, and constantly kept at a moderate temperature. In any case, sow thickly enough, water often but sparingly so as not to flood the bed, which would cool it, and give it the usual care. Lettuce can be cut for consumption when its leaves are an inch and a half to two inches long. 3. Early Romaine. By sowing winter varieties, such as winter greens, red chicon, etc., and treating them in exactly the same way as we did with passion lettuce in our first early article, the same results can be obtained. Romaine lettuces can be grown in the same way as pomme lettuces, the only difference being that they require much more air. They are also sown at the same time of year. Romaine hative, or green hative, is the variety that Paris market gardeners prefer for bedding, because it has the advantage of being more easily capped than the others under cloche. At the beginning of October, they sow it at the foot of a wall facing south, on an ados of potting soil and under a bell. When it has two leaves, in addition to the cotyledons, they transplant it onto another ados of potting soil, spacing the seedlings two inches apart. When the Romaines have acquired sufficient strength, i.e. around November, the larger ones are transplanted onto a warm layer, and are tended in the same way as gotte, but with more frequent airing. We continue to care for those that have remained in the seedbed, and do a second and third transplanting on new warm layers, in December and January. We won't repeat here all the precautions that need to be taken from sowing to the moment when they start to bloom, because we've gone into them in sufficient detail in the preceding paragraphs. REGULAR CULTIVATION. The cultivation of lettuces varies according to variety and time of year. In general, they thrive in open, light, soft soil, loosened and amended with fertilizer; several varieties require the special care we have described in their respective articles. In our first article on early lettuces, we explained how to sow and manage winter lettuces, so all that remains is to talk about 1. spring sowing and 2. summer sowing. 1. Spring sowing. Spring lettuces are sown in March on old potting soil, or on a dull layer of old manure, or simply on a layer of potting soil in a well-exposed bed. Some gardeners are not so fussy and are content to sow in place, in February and March, through beds of onions, salsify, carrots, etc., or on the edges of the paths between these beds. When the seedling is sufficiently strong, usually in April, it is transplanted in place and in beds. To do this, after preparing the soil, parallel lines are drawn ten inches apart with a chalk line, and the plants are transplanted onto these lines, leaving seven to nine inches between each one, depending on the size of the variety being grown. Lettuce roots are extremely delicate, so care must be taken not to press them too hard when planting; care must also be taken never to bury the heart of the plant, otherwise it would inevitably melt. Water immediately, and continue watering whenever necessary. It should be noted here that lettuces are more tender and less bitter the more water they have received, but some varieties are exceptions to this rule, and we have mentioned this in their particular articles. All that remains is to weed often to open the pores of the soil and destroy weeds. Romaines can be grown in exactly the same way, except that varieties that don't top themselves need to be tied with one or two straw ties in dry weather, when there is no moisture on the leaves, otherwise they will rot. We don't need to say that you should refrain from watering the leaves as soon as this operation has been carried out. Cutting lettuces can be sown in the same way, but there's no need to transplant them, since they can be cut as soon as their first leaves are developed enough to be eaten as a salad. To have them all year round, you need to sow new seedlings every two weeks, and not be sparing with watering during hot spells and droughts. a. Sowing summer lettuces. Start sowing in the first days of April, on old potting soil or earthen flowerbeds, and continue fortnightly until July, in order to have successive harvests until the first frosts, by which time you already have winter lettuces and early lettuces. The plant is transplanted as described above, and cared for in the same way. Above all, don't forget that abundant, daily watering is essential in this season, if you want to obtain soft, tender lettuces. To obtain good-quality lettuce seed, you need to choose the most beautiful and vigorous seedlings that have retained the most intact characteristics of their varieties. Each variety should be planted far enough apart to prevent cross-fertilization. When the plant's leaves have turned yellow and the seeds are crowning, the stalks are pulled off and left to dry in the sun, then the stems are beaten, the seeds are winnowed and kept in a dry place for four or five years. COMMON LAVENDER (Lavendula spicata); perennial, frutescent plant native to southern France, cultivated in gardens for its aromatic scent. For the same reason, we also cultivate LARGE LEAVED LAVENDER or ASPIC (Lavendula latifolia), whose leaves are evergreen. These plants are used desiccated for medicinal purposes, and as they are not edible, they are not cultivated in gardens except to form borders; consequently, they have never been forced. They like light, warm soil, and usually multiply by sprouting in September or spring. To ensure recovery, they need to be sunk deep into the soil. They can also be propagated from seed, sown in April in an earthen bed at the foot of a south-facing wall. Cover the seeds lightly and water moderately. When the plant is quite strong, i.e. in June, transplant it permanently to the border. Finally, lavenders multiply very well from cuttings taken in the spring, in a warm layer of potting soil. When perfectly rooted, remove the cuttings, leaving as much potting soil as possible around the hair, and transplant them into the ground. For lavender to form well-stocked clumps, the borders need to be redone every three or four years. LENTILLE COMMUNE ou BLONDE (Ervum Lens); annual plant from southern France, whose dried seeds are eaten in a variety of ways. In addition to the common variety, a much smaller, reddish, rounded seed is grown under the name of lentille à la reine or rouge, and is more highly regarded in some countries. It would be pointless to force lentils, as they are only used dried. We will therefore only deal here with their ordinary cultivation. They like dry, light or sandy soil. In strong, moist soils, they vegetate with great vigor and produce a lot of foliage, but few seeds. In the south of France, they are sown in autumn, but in the climate of Paris, you have to wait until the middle of March or the beginning of April. After ploughing the soil well and giving it suitable fertilizer, sow in clumps or in rays. In the former case, clumps are spaced twelve to fifteen inches apart; in the latter, rays are spaced fifteen to eighteen inches apart. Cover with a rake, and the plants require no more care until harvest than two or three weedings to rid them of weeds. The ripening period can be recognized by the dark-colored pods and yellowing stems. The pods are then pulled out and bundled together, air-dried and transported to a dry place. It is threshed only as needed, and by this method the seeds are preserved, either for eating or sowing, for two years. 215 MACHE ou DouceTre (Valerianella locusta); a small annual and native plant, eaten as a salad throughout the winter. Two varieties are grown outside the commune: Round maiche. Smooth leaves, broader, rounder and more tender than common lamb's lettuce. Maiche d'Italie, régence, grande mache. Very large, yellowish-green leaves, highly esteemed by some people, not so appealing to others because of the short down covering them. PRIMEUR. Lamb's lettuce produces very well in the open ground during the winter, but it is very difficult to get hold of it during the snows and the heaviest frosts, if you don't use the method which is the subject of this article. At the end of August, raise an ados along a wall facing east, and load it with two fingers of good potting soil. Sow as described in the article on ordinary cultivation, and manage the plants in the same way. When the frosts begin to become more intense, a small mound of earth seven to eight inches high by an equal width is raised around the seedling; a cord of manure the same height and a foot wide is used around this mound, then poles are laid across it, and, during snows or heavy frosts, doormats and more or less bedding, depending on how cold it is, are thrown over these poles. Whenever the temperature eases, we uncover the seedbed. You can also sow with the same advantage on an old layer of compost, and cover in the same way, or with frames or cloches. If you have a few empty spaces in warm beds for small vegetables or other early crops, you can use them by sowing lamb's lettuce from autumn onwards, continuing to sow every fortnight until January. It's much harder to get hold of lamb's lettuce in summer, because in that season it rises immediately. However, this can be achieved by sowing in spring, a few at a time, lightly and every eight days, in a shady spot with a northerly exposure, and in strong, moist soil. Water in such a way as to keep the soil in a permanent state of high humidity. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Lamb's lettuce thrives in light, soft, perfectly loosened soil, amended from the previous year, or at least with well-consumed fertilizers. Sowing begins on August 15th, and continues every eight to ten days until the end of October. The first sowings provide successive yields throughout the winter, and the last ones in spring. We broadcast the seed quite thickly, because we thin out the crop, always removing the largest plants for consumption. The seeds are lightly covered with a rake, and if the season is hot or dry, watered as needed. All other care is limited to destroying weeds, either by a few weedings, or by pulling them out by hand. We leave a few of the most beautiful and straightforward plants from the October sowing to obtain seed. To avoid losing them, we harvest them several times by shaking the stems on a piece of paper or cardboard. Then, when you think all the plants are nearing maturity, you pull them up, bundle them together and hang them in a place that's not too dry, so that they can finish ripening. Or - when the fennel turns yellow," says Mr. Noisette, "we carefully pull out the stalks and put them in a heap in a cool, poorly ventilated place, so that they can ferment for two weeks, which is useful for the seed, which can be detached by shaking them with a fork. Then we pick it up, air-dry it for a few days, winnow it, and keep it "good for seven to eight years. A rather peculiar remark is that, contrary to the norm for other seeds, lamb's lettuce seeds germinate very poorly when they are new, whereas on the contrary they germinate very well and very quickly when they are two or three years old. MELISSA OFFICINALE, CITRONELLE (Melissa officinglis); perennial, indigenous, aromatic plant, grown in vegetable gardens only for its young shoots, which are used as a salad garnish, or in omelettes to replace parsley. It is also used to make an edible drink known as eau des carmes or melissa. This plant has never been forced into cultivation, because of the limited use to which it is put. It thrives in light, warm soil and multiplies by seed or splinters. The former are sown in April, in soft, loose, terra-cotta soil. Transplant when it has five or six leaves, if you haven't sown it in place. Shattering is done in autumn. Every year, at the first frost, cut off all the ground-level stems, and the plant remains vigorous and in the same place for a long time. MELON (Cucumis Melo); annual, and native to Asia. Its delicious flavor and fragrance have made it widely cultivated, with the result that we now have a considerable number of varieties, divided into three races, as follows: I RACE - BRODEN MELONS. They are considered to be febrile in the late season. These are the oldest cultivated varieties. Market or common melon, it is usually 39 rounded, sometimes a little depressed from the umbilicus to the stalk, without ribs, very rounded, of medium size. Its flesh is very thick, with a very mediocre flavor. In recent years, it has been the most cultivated of all in the Paris area. Sucrin de Tours. It has given rise to three sub-varieties, each of which easily falls into the other if not cultivated with the utmost care. These are: r. Petit Sucrin de Tours, very small, sometimes no bigger than an orange, round, with green, very embroidered rind; firm, red, very sweet flesh 2. Le gros Sucrin de Tours. Round, with fairly pronounced ribs, lightly but evenly embroidered. Red flesh; firm, vinous, pleasant. 3. Sucrin long de Tours. It differs from the preceding variety only in its elongated shape. Small-seeded sacrin. Small, round, with thick, red flesh. This variety is very early, and does well under glass. *White-fleshed sacrin. Very similar to the previous variety in shape, but its flesh is white, very deep, sweet and very good. This variety is quite precocious, easy to grow, and does well under glass. Melon des Carmes. The ribs are quite visible, the flesh pale, but melting, sweet and very good. It has two sub-varieties: 1. the round Melon des Carmes; very small and round. a. the long Melon des Carmes; of medium size and elongated shape. Melon de Langeais. Medium-sized, oval, with prominent, lightly embroidered ribs; sweet, vinous, red flesh, very good. Sub-variety: Petit Melon de Langeaie. Same shape, but smaller and earlier. Melon d'Honfleur. Very large, sometimes acquiring enormous volume, elongated, with wide and millantei ribs. Flesh a little coarse, not very melting, but vinous, fragrant, good quality. Melon de Coulommiers. Somewhat similar to the previous melon, it becomes just as large, but is greener and more rounded and less regular in shape. Although of inferior quality to the Honfleur melon, it is nevertheless quite good. Melon d'Appoigny. Medium-sized, oval, embroidered; flesh quite firm, fragrant, very good. This variety, brought from the Auxerre area by Mr. Noisette, is precious in that it does very well in the open ground, even in the fields, if sown in May and given little care. Melon d'Angers. Its size is average, its shape quite variable, and its rind mediocrely embroidered. Its flesh is sweet, fragrant and quite good. Melon de la Grave. Medium size, elongated, with regular ribs and finely embroidered green rind. Flesh not very melting, but very sweet. Melon d'Avignon. This is considered a sub-variety of the previous variety, with all its qualities. It is larger and less elongated. Melon de Rugonnant. Two varieties are known, the round and the long. Both have a blackish-green rind, very well embroidered. Their flesh is sweet and quite tart. Melon-Ananaz- Originally from the United States, where it was brought a few years ago. It is small, round, with fairly prominent ribs and lightly embroidered rind. Its flesh is greenish, melting, fragrant, sweet and of perfect goodness. Minorcan melon. Medium-sized, slightly rounded, with finely embroidered rind. Fairly good flesh. IInd RACE - CAnTalour melons. Much more highly esteemed than most of the preceding breeds, they originate from Armenia, from where they were brought to Italy around the beginning of the fifteenth century. In 1495, Charles VIII brought the first ones to be cultivated in France. "Cantatoup orange. It is small, round, with staggered ribs; its rind is light green, or brown. Its firm, orange-red flesh is quite good. This variety has the great merit of being the earliest of all, and of doing very well under glass; it is therefore widely used as an early variety. "Cataloup fin hatif. It is a little smaller and much more compressed than the other, with more prominent, slightly embroidered or scabby ribs. Its flesh is red, sweet, fragrant and very good. It is as early as the orange; it also does well under glass, which is why it would be preferred if it were as large. Brúlot harif. It differs from the previous variety only in that its ribs are more embroidered and more prominent. Otherwise, it has the same qualities. "Melon noir des Carmes. Very early; round, greenish-black fruit, without scabs, with inconspicuous ribs; red flesh, melting, vinous, excellent. Although a little strong in wood and leaves, it does very well under glass. Petit Prescott or hátif. Slightly compressed, small, scabby-ribbed, crowned, with a small protruding point in the middle of the crown; brown or blackish bark; red flesh, excellent quality. This very early variety is one of the best for cultivation under frame. "Gros Prescott. There are two sub-varieties: one blackish, the other whitish. Both resemble the petit prescott, but are larger and more compressed. In addition, these melons are almost as early and of very good quality. Twenty-eight-day Haitif. Round, pale green, slightly ribbed. This variety is very good, very early, but is more widespread in Germany than in France. Boule de siam. Of medium size, very compressed at both ends, with a black base, wide, raised, very pale ribs, but without protruding points; narrow crown; flesh a little less fine than in the preceding varieties. Astracan Cantaloupe. Large, with raised ribs; flesh orange-yellow, melting, quite good. Mogol Cantaloupe. Oblong; blackish rind; large scabs and green flesh in one sub-variety; small scabs and white flesh in the other. Both are highly valued. "Big black Cantaloupe from Holland. One of the largest of this breed; bark black; flesh red, melting, very good. * Cantaloup noir galeux ou des Saints. Small, rounded, blackish-green, very mangy, not yellowing as it ripens; red, melting, sweet flesh. IIIrd RACE. - GREEN MELONS or SMOOTH SHADES. Distinguished by their generally smooth rind and much larger seeds. White-fleshed Malle melon. Medium size, elongated, with green rind; sweet, melting flesh. Early variety. Melon de Malle with red flesh. Earlier than the previous variety, it differs only in its red flesh, which is slightly more aromatic. Muscade des États-Uais, very small, oblong, green and embroidered; green, melting flesh, excellent. Peruvian melon. Oval, with thin, blackish-green rind; white, melting, very sweet flesh. Melon de Morée, de Candie, de Malte d'hiver. Medium-sized, elongated, with smooth rind; greenish flesh, fragrant, melting, very good. If stored in a dry, sheltered place, wrapped in straw, it can be copserxed for most of the winter, and even until the end of February. Persian or Odessa melon. Very elongated shape, green with yellow stripes; green, melting flesh. Can be stored in winter like the previous one. Melon from Cyprus. Peiit and elongated, green marbled with brown; excellent red flesh. It is ascez hiuif, but should be eaten as soon as ripe. We won't mention here the other species of melon mentioned by the authors, because they are no longer available commercially. PRDEUR. Melons have greatly exercised the industry of Paris growers, so it can be said that they excel in this type of cultivation. By combining various processes, sowing times and choice of varieties, they manage to obtain excellent melons from the end of March, and to have juice until the frosts. Morée and Persian melons, which can be kept until February, as mentioned in their article, are used to fill the gap between frost and spring. 1. Sow in December, to produce in April. As this crop is very prone to failure, it is rarely grown except by amateurs; however, if the winter is mild, it is not difficult. Towards the end of December, pots four to five inches in diameter are procured; they are filled with good consumed terracotta, which is very lightly treaded, and three or four seeds are sown in each. The seeds are covered with only half an inch of compost. Bury the pots in a warm layer, cover them with cloches or chágsis, and place them in the tan of a warm greenhouse, if you have one. Seeds soon sprout, so only one seedling is left in each pot, and to avoid uprooting it by removing the others, they are simply cut off with the nails below the cotyledons. They are protected from the cold by mulch, which is removed during the day, and given a little air during the hottest part of the day. If frames or cloches are used, care should be taken to wipe off any moisture that may have adhered to the glass. In addition, all other zoins ordimaires are given to delicate plants grown under chassis. Commo, for example, to maintain the warmth of the bed, to give moderate watering, without wetting the leaves, and so on. When young plants have two leaves, in addition to the cotyledons, the stem above the second leaf is cut with the nails. The result of this operation is that the vertical stem is destroyed, and two or three lateral stems sprout from the leaf axils, which bear fruit much more quickly than the first leaf would if left to develop. After two or three days, the wound is completely healed, and the new layer is prepared to receive the seedling. So far, these are easy enough to take, and within everyone's reach; but for December sowings, since melons have to rot almost without air, they absolutely need a tarpaulin built as we're about to say. At the foot of a south-facing wall, we open a trench three feet deep, ten feet wide and of indeterminate length. A wall one foot thick is built inside, to support the earth, and this wall) on the north side is given a height of five feet, i.e. it rises two feet above the surface of the ground. The southern wall should be roughly flush with the ground. The ground is perfectly joined with this kind of tarpaulin, in the middle of which is built, with poorly joined planks, a box four and a half feet wide, running the entire length. The north side of this coffte must be three and a half feet high, and the side da midistroin piedo trcix poucur, afta that the layer that will be inside is a little inclined to the south. The entire tarpaulin is covered with glass panels. In the trunk, we lay a good layer of horse manure and leaves, so that it can retain its heat as long as possible, and we fill it with eight inches of consumed compost, mixed with no more than one eighth of light garden soil; when the heat is at the right point, we plant the young melons, with the precautions we will indicate. They are removed from the soil with the utmost care, so as not to break the root ball, then three holes are made in each panel, and the melons are planted right up to the collar, fortifying it and causing it to put out a few new roots. The soil is then pressed around the root ball, without pressing too hard, and lightly watered. When planting, arrange the plants as if they were to be staggered; that is, place the first one a foot from one edge of the bed, the second a foot from the opposite edge, the third a foot from the first edge, and so on. In this way, they enjoy to a greater degree the warmth sent into the bed by the rechands. We continue with the usual care, and above all we cover with good doormats, which we place every evening and remove every morning. Plants require a lot of light and air; to provide them with the latter, we raise the mats by an inch or two whenever the outside temperature permits, and especially when it's sunny. When the layer begins to cool, we fill the paths between the walls and the trunk with good, hot manure from the stable, and renew it whenever it's needed. Sometimes the branches grow very vigorously. In this case, to stop them and divert the sap, we make them describe several curves, and mềme a whole circle with a more or less narrow diameter, depending on the bezoin. However, a man who knows perfectly how to prune his melons doesn't need to use this procedure, which delays results. If nothing has been neglected, the plants soon flower. The male flowers appear first, followed a few days later by the female flowers. It's during the flowering period that you need to redouble your efforts to provide light and air without losing heat, and to keep moisture away. When a female flower is dry and the ovary, or young fruit, continues to grow, this is proof that it is knotted. From then on, we prune to a gem or two above the young fruit, and we also prune the main branches; we lengthen those that are vigorous, and shorten those that are weak. Leave the wounds to heal for four or five days, then remove any harmful secondary branches, i.e. those that are badly placed or that cross over one another. If a branch has more than one fruit, cut them off and leave only the most beautiful, especially the one closest to the stump. If it had only one, and it was deformed, it would be removed, and others would soon form. Eight days after this cutting, the tips of the fruiting branches are pinched off, to force the sap to flow to the melon, and all useless branches are removed for the second time. A well-managed plant should never produce less than two or three fruits. When these have reached a certain size, they are gently lifted and placed on a piece of tile or a board to protect them from the humidity of the bed. During pruning, melons need plenty of air and light to help wounds heal; the direct influence of the sun's rays is especially useful, but they must be treated with care, as they can sometimes burn, especially at the end of February and beginning of March. Water for irrigation should not be taken at random either. River or pond water is infinitely better than well or fountain water. In all cases, it should be left to stand for at least forty-eight hours before use, in a greenhouse or other place where it can warm up enough not to chill the roots of the plants. Those wishing to try December sowing, without the expense of a melon tarpaulin as just described, can also succeed in an ordinary tarpaulin heated by a furnace, and even on warm layers in the open air, provided they have at least three parallel rows, and cultivate on the middle row and under a frame. 3. January sowing. This is absolutely the same as the previous one, except that more air is given in spring, and the sun's rays are guaranteed in March. 4. February sowing. This can be done in the same way as the previous one, and the plant can be trained in the same way. But you can also start sowing on a bed in the open air, using bells, although success is more likely. At the beginning of the month, a warm layer of horse manure is laid, filled with six inches of potting soil, into which pots are sown with four or five seeds, leaving only one or two plants. The pots are placed close together, so that several can fit under each bell or glass. The spaces between the cloches are filled with short litter, and mats are thrown over them to keep out the heat. Light is not given until the melons have emerged, but then it's essential, as is air. The young plants are directed as we have said, and after the first pinch, they are replanted on a new bed filled with nine inches of potting soil mixed with a quarter of light earth. Cover with cloches, and take the same care as for plants grown in trays. Only one plant should ever be grown under each cloche, and if two have been kept in a few pots, they are separated by carefully cutting the rootball down the middle, so that the soil does not separate from the roots. When pruning, keep the branches as short as possible, without harming the plant, so as not to let them come out from under this shelter as long as frosts are to be feared. If a plant gets so carried away that it can't be maintained, we replace the bell with a larger glass. When the season permits, we don't just lift the bells on one side, we lift them to a height of a few inches, and hold them in this position by means of three small wooden racks sunk into the soil of the bed. They are removed during the day when the season is more advanced; finally, towards the end of May, they can be made to disappear altogether, unless a few are placed on fruits whose ripening is to be hastened. We prune and manage the plants in the same way as if we were growing them under a frame or tarpaulin. To achieve easy success in the four preceding crops, the choice of varieties is very important. Petit orange is one of the most successful melons for the first season. For the following months, you can also use meloh noir des carmes, brulot hatif, petit prescott, cantaloup fin hatif, canAaloup rouge, sucrin à petites graines; and other varieties chosen from among the earliest, and those that provide the least foliage. 5. March sowing. Most market gardeners do most of their sowing in this month. A few sow on beds in the open air or under cloches. In this case, they build their beds with no more than a third of warm manure, and two-thirds of dry leaves, or other materials, such as garden debris, street manure, etc. The main thing is to have good seedbeds. The key is to have materials that, while not giving a very high degree of heat, retain it for a long time. They make the beds two and a half feet thick by four wide, and fill them with eight to nine inches of potting soil mixed with one-third light earth if they're growing small, delicate species, or with two-thirds light, free-flowing earth if they're sowing large cantaloupes or embroidered melons. When the first heat has passed, they sow a few seeds four inches apart, leaving two or two and a half feet between each group, and bury the seeds an inch and a half deep. They give a light watering, and cover with cloches and litter, as we said for the previous sowing. When the seedlings have four leaves, in addition to the cotyledons, they stop the stem by cutting it cleanly below the axil of the third leaf. At this point, to facilitate healing, they provide plenty of air by raising the bells by two or three inches. As far as they can, they maintain the balance of the vegetation, by placing in a tortuous position those that seem to want to get carried away, and straightening the weakest. As for the rest, they govern their cultivation as we have said. Other growers sow on high beds under frames, and manage their plants in the same way. They remove the glass panels when the season permits, and leave the trays on for a few days longer, so as to be able to replace the panels immediately, should they have to fear sudden changes in temperature. It is essential, when the melon is in the open air and the season is warm, to maintain a slight humidity on the surface of the earth where it vegetates. This is achieved by spreading a finger's worth of finely chopped straw over the layer. Three years ago, a private individual tried to cover the entire surface of the bed with flat bricks, forming a kind of tiled floor: his experiment had the best results. 6. April sowing. This is the month for the last sowings of early melons, and as they are so easy to grow, they are also the most widely used in amateur gardens. A bed is prepared with all kinds of fermentable materials, made two feet high by five wide, and filled with nine inches of potting soil mixed with one-third ordinary earth. Sow as we have said, cover with cloches or verrines, and, when the plant is high, place the cloches on it only during the night or when the weather is bad. If the month of May is very hot, mulch the soil to prevent moisture evaporation. All other care is the same as for previous crops. Before concluding this article, I should mention a method used by an amateur in Lyon to grow melons during the height of winter, i.e. in December, January and February. In August, he fills six-inch diameter pots with potting soil mixed with a quarter of garden soil; he buries them in a flowerbed facing south, sows three or four melon seeds in each, and spares no expense in watering. Around the middle of September, a little earlier or a little later, depending on the season, he procures baskets one foot deep and eighteen inches wide; on four sides of the basket, he firmly attaches a small stake, or rather a piece of stick two feet long, i.e. about six inches higher than the top of the basket. These four 20 stakes are used to support the trellis, which we'll talk about later. He fills the baskets with the same mixed potting soil as the pots, and plants his melons in them as one would in the potting soil of a bed, with the precaution of putting only two in each dummy. He builds a muted layer into which he sinks his baskets, and covers them with frames. He gives the usual care; but he only stops the main stem above the fourth leaf, and if there are more than three side branches, he removes the lower ones. When the branches are eight or ten inches long, he begins to place the trellis on which he makes them crawl. To do this, he attaches four sticks in a cross at the end of the four basket posts, and on this kind of small framework, he establishes a horizontal trellis with flat, wide slats, about an inch wide, with square meshes an inch and a half wide. The entire trellis is four feet in diameter, and this space is enough for him to conveniently spread the branches of two plants over it. Until the first white frosts, he gives the usual care to the frame melons, and the fruit is usually tied when he transports the baskets in the early harvest tarpaulin. The inside of this tarpaulin is sixteen feet long and seven feet wide, sunk four feet into very dry ground. The back wall is seven feet high, and the front wall is three or four inches above ground level. Along the front wall, there's a recess four and a half feet wide to receive a layer made up of one-third horse manure, one-third dry leaves and one-third tan. When the deaf layer has lost its heat, he chooses a moment when the thermometer is a few degrees above zero, removes the baskets without disturbing the small trellises supporting the melon branches, and transports them to the tarpaulin layer. From that moment on, he lights the furnace so as to keep the thermometer constantly between eighteen and twenty degrees. Whenever the weather permits, he provides air by lifting the greenhouse panels to a greater or lesser extent, covering them with straw mats only at night, no matter how cold it is. This cultivation, which requires more meticulous care than expense, produces twenty to twenty-five melons a year, all the better because they are eaten at a time when there are no others, apart from a few green melons preserved in straw. According to Mr. C., who kindly shared these details with me, the trellis serves less to transport the plants conveniently than to protect them from the pernicious fumes of the bed. He is so convinced of this, that he cultivates the melons he grows in the open ground during the summer in the same way. As soon as the fruit has formed, he takes the precaution of placing it on a small board, to prevent it from deforming. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: the quality of melons depends to a large extent on the choice of the right seeds; as these monoecious plants fertilize each other very easily, if the varieties are cultivated at very close distances, the result is hybrids which more often than not lack the qualities of their mothers. Two observations are essential here. The first is that adulterated fertilization has no effect whatsoever on the fruit resulting from a flower that has undergone it, but only on its seeds; so its influence is only to be feared for the following generation. Secondly, experience has shown me that there can be no cross-fertilization between melon, cucumber and squash. I am all the more convinced that such fertilization cannot occur naturally, as for the last three years I have used all the resources of the art to bring it about, without ever having been able to succeed. The melon is usually monoecious, i.e. it produces both male and female flowers on the same plant; but according to the observations of M. Sageret, one of our most knowledgeable amateurs in the history of cucurbit cultivation, it has been proven that this plant is also very often polygamous, producing both male and female flowers, and hermaphrodites, on the same plant. Mr. Sageret has taken great advantage of this discovery to preserve intact the many varieties he grows. As soon as he sees a hermaphrodite flower bloom, he covers it with a glass bell until fertilization has taken place and the fruit has set; In this way, he can be sure that the dust from the stamens of another variety will not have been carried onto his stigmas, and that the seeds will therefore reproduce identically the individual that supplied them. Before sowing, therefore, you need to be sure that the seeds will reproduce their true variety, and the safest way to do this is to collect them yourself. Leave the fruit to rot on the spot if you can; if you want to eat it, the seeds will still be good if you don't pick it until it's perfectly ripe. Seeds retain their germinative virtues for many years, but the best are those that are two or three years old. Newer ones produce over-vigorous individuals that branch out to the detriment of the fruit. Before sowing them, some people soak them for twenty-four hours in water, but I don't think this is very useful. When they come out of the fruit, they are washed, dried in the shade and kept in a dry place. In May, we make a dull layer eighteen inches to two feet thick, with manure that has already been used once, mixed with dry grasses, prunings and other detritus likely to ferment. If the season is poor, a certain amount of hot manure can be added to liven it up. We fill it with ten inches of good soil mixed with a third of consumed loam. Sow as we have said, cover with bells until the plant can no longer stand underneath, and prune according to the principles we have taught. There is, however, one difference: if the plant is vigorous, and especially in the smaller varieties, two fruits may be left on each branch. Throughout the south of France, up to the latitude of Lyon, we sow without such precautions, in April and May, in warm, light soil with good exposure. Holes are dug five or six feet apart, one foot deep and eighteen inches wide; eight inches of old, half-consumed manure is placed at the bottom, and six inches of soil mixed with half the same manure is thrown on top. Sow five or six melon seeds, water, and when they have sprouted, leave three feet in each hole, and lead the plant according to the ordinary method. In Honfleur, where melons weighing as much as twenty-five and thirty pounds are produced, the process is a little different, and very similar to that used by growers in Paris. We dig a pit two to two and a half feet wide and two feet deep, and fill it with hot manure that we compact with our feet. Nine inches of good, light, substantial soil are spread over it, with a quarter of the manure from the previous year's pits mixed in. These muted layers are left to warm up for two weeks, then, in April, five or six seeds are sown in each one, four inches apart, and covered with a cloche or verrine. When the seedlings have sprouted, we thin them out so as to leave only two, and when they have three or four leaves, we pinch off the end of the stem. When the season is poor and the nights are cold, we throw a little litter around the bells, and cover them with straw mats at night. When the branches are large enough that they can no longer be contained under the bells, they are raised by means of racks, and finally, when there is no more bad weather to fear, they are removed altogether. Watering, weeding, hoeing and other ordinary care are then carried out, and when pruning, only three fruits are left on each plant. One thing that is quite difficult, and on which everyone is prone to error, is knowing the precise moment of maturity of a melon. Let M. Noisette tell us, in his Manuel, which signs are the least ambiguous. 1. most melons ripen a few days "in advance", i.e. they change color or "hue". 2. The tail circles and tears as if it's about to detach. 3. The fruit gives off a pleasant odor, especially in the morning. In spite of all these signs," adds this learned farmer, "we are often mistaken, because the quality of the melon depends on a pre-cis point of ripeness which, for certain types, lasts only a few hours. A melon is judged to be of good quality when the characteristics of its variety are well indicated, when it is heavy, firm under the finger, well shaped, and when its stem is short and thick. WATERMELON or Pasrìqur (Cucurbita citrullus); annual plant, native to the Orient. Watermelon differs from ordinary melon in that its leaves are coarse, covered with whitish hairs, sharply cut and digitate-like. Its fruits are large, with a smooth, shiny, green rind, mottled or spotted with brown. The flesh is almost transparent, wine-red or whitish, very sweet, slightly acidic, but always retaining a bland cucumber flavor to which one must be accustomed to find them good. In fact, even people with the most pronounced taste for watermelons will only eat them during the hot summer months, because of their refreshing quality, and after soaking them for several hours in ice-cold water, or at the bottom of a well. They can also be kept cool by wrapping them in a wet cloth and leaving them exposed to the sun for half an hour before eating. Two varieties of watermelon are grown: Watermelon from Italy or Provence, with red flesh and black seeds. It is rounded, very large, and its rind is green, mottled with brown. Watermelon from Africa, with whitish flesh and red seeds. It is a little smaller and more elongated; its rind has large greenish-yellow laches running from base to top. PADEUR. Because watermelons are only eaten in hot weather, it is not customary to force them under frames like ordinary melons. However, if we wished to do so, we could easily do so by treating them in the same way. The difference, however, would be that they would no longer be pruned once they had sufficient branches, and no fruit would be removed. In Spain, Italy and the south of France, watermelons grown with care in the open ground bear fruit and ripen quickly enough to provide their product at the most pleasant time of year, but this is not the case around Paris. We therefore need to take a few special precautions, which consist in sowing them in pots in February, on a warm bed and under a bell or frame. In April, they are replanted on a muted layer filled with nine inches of compost mixed with half light garden soil, and continue to be sheltered by cloches or frames until the season allows them to be left exposed to the open air. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: in the south of France, sow two or three seeds in a hole ten inches wide and as deep, filled with a mixture of two-thirds light, substantial soil and one-third consumed manure. The plant is then pruned and left to nature, with only the care of frequent watering. In Paris, we do much the same, but we sow in May, in a bed at the foot of a wall facing south, and on old potting soil if possible. The fruit doesn't begin to ripen until mid-September, and sometimes even later. If picked and stored in a dry, frost-free place, they can be kept for part of the winter. Seeds can be collected like those of melons or cucumbers, and keep well for many years, but the newer the better. MELONGENA or AUBERGINE (solanum melongena vel esculentum); annual plant, native to South America. Its fruits, which vary in shape and color according to variety, have a mild and rather bland taste; nevertheless, they are widely consumed in Paris. For information on how to prepare them, please refer to the Cuisinière Bourgeoise or the Almanach du bon Jardinier. Several varieties are grown, as follows: Long-fruited red melongene. It has the shape and size of a medium-sized cucumber, and is a dirty purple or reddish color. One of the most widely grown in Paris. Yellow melon with long fruit. The fruit is of medium size and roughly the same shape as the previous variety. It is green at first, whitening as it grows, and finally turning a pronounced yellow when ripe. Red melon with oval fruit. Less large than the first, swollen at the base, giving it a roughly oval shape; its color is pale purplish red. Yellow melongene with oval fruit. It has the same shape as the previous one, but is a little shorter, and its color is pale yellow. Red melongene with round fruit. The fruit is about the size of a walnut, round, compressed and pale purplish-red. Melongene ovifere (solanum ovigerum), which is generally known as the œufi plant, because of the shape and color of its fruit, is a species or perhaps a variety that should not be confused with the above, because it is considered poisonous and is certainly of poor quality. PRIMEUR. Sow in August, in sepi inch diameter pots, filled with half substantial loam and half potting soil; water and care as for full-ground plants. If you wish, you can sow in an earthen bed, raise the plant there until the approach of the bad season, and transplant it into a pot. In any case, only one plant should be placed in each vase. When the cold autumn rains start, lay a soft layer at the foot of a south-facing wall, bury the pots in it and cover them with frames. Care should be taken to gradually accustom the plants to the deprivation of air, and to let them enjoy as much light as possible at all times. When the frosts start, transport the pots in a tarpaulin heated by a furnace, and place the plants as close as possible to the glass. From then on, they require no more care than other greenhouse plants, apart from changing pots if the first ones become too small. This operation should only be carried out a fortnight before flowering or a month afterwards, otherwise the flowers will run or the fruit may abort. Unless you're growing round-fruited melongene, you should leave only three or four fruits on each plant, depending on how vigorous it is. They grow larger and are less likely to abort. These seedlings usually bear fruit in February. In September and October, seedlings are sown under a bell on a warm bed with small vegetables. When the seedling is strong enough, we transplant it into pots as we have said, and raise it under a hot bed until it is ready to flower. It is then placed in a tarpaulin and treated in the same way as August seedlings. It produces in February, April and May. In November, December and January, the plants are sown and directed in the same way, until April. At this time, we establish a dull layer at the foot of a wall facing south, fill it with eight inches of potting soil mixed with half substantial garden soil, and plant the melongenes eighteen inches apart after removing the soil. Needless to say, before planting, you must allow the layer to heat up as much as possible, so that the delicate roots lining the sides of the vases are not exposed to burning. This applies to all plants. We cover them with frames, and gradually acclimatize them to the open air by lifting the panels whenever the weather is hot enough. When the sun is very hot, it's essential to protect them from its rays with light-colored cloths or straw mats, but without accepting the amount of light they need. At the end of May, if the season permits, the frames are removed entirely, and watering is increased. These plants bear fruit in June, July and August. The February and March sowings are the most commonly used by Paris market gardeners. They prepare a warm layer filled with six inches of pure potting soil, sow, water and cover with cloches or frames. Once the plant has acquired sufficient strength, they transplant it into pots, which they immerse in a warm layer and cover with a cloche while frosts are still to be feared. In May, they prepare an earthen bed with a warm exposure, usually at the foot of a south-facing wall, and transplant the melongenes after removing the soil: all that's left to do is the usual care, and above all, not to spare on watering, as these plants love water and heat. Others, to be sure of collecting good seeds, sow as we have just said, but leave the young plant on the bed as long as it remains sufficiently warm to encourage vegetation. They then prepare a deaf layer "as we said above, transplant them there, and never take them out again. Melons sown in February and March usually produce in September and October. If you want fruit all year round, all you have to do is get it in November, December and January, and nothing could be easier. All you have to do is sow the plants in pots in May and June, and raise them outdoors in good exposure. As winter approaches, they are transported to the shelves of a warm greenhouse or to a tarpaulin heated by a fire, and the fruit grows and ripens until January. Success with early melongene depends on three essential things: 1. constantly giving the plants at least eighteen to twenty degrees of heat; 2. letting them enjoy a constant supply of light; 3. placing them in very dry tarpaulins, where humidity cannot attach itself to their leaves or flowers. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: As by ordinary cultivation I mean that which requires no artificial shelter, such as layers, cloches, frames, etc., it follows that we can only study this type of cultivation in the south of France, below the forty-third degree of latitude, or if we prefer, in the only climates where myrtle and pomegranate survive the winter in the open ground without inconvenience. There, melongenes are sown in March, in light, warm soil, and transplanted in staggered rows, two feet apart, in well loosened soil amended with fertilizer. Weed and weed, and give them copious daily watering. In Paris, I've sometimes seen gardeners grow quite beautiful and very good melongenes, but they only produced aborted seeds. At the end of March, they sowed in boxes filled with potting soil, in a sheltered spot such as a shed facing south, or even an uninhabited apartment. They sheltered their seedlings overnight with straw mats, whenever necessary. At the end of April, they planted the seedlings in the ground, at the foot of a wall facing south. They surrounded the bed with litter, and covered it every evening with straw mats supported by poles across it. In May, they gave only the ordinary care to plants grown in the open ground, and the plants usually produced their fruit in October. MORELLE NOIRE (Solanum nigrum); annual plant, growing naturally in all cultivated areas of Europe, very common around Paris. In the islands of Bourbon and France, it is widely used in cooking and known as brède; in the West Indies, it is used in the same way and called laman. It has been eaten for some time in the south of France, but only recently has its use begun to spread to Paris and the surrounding area. Its leaves can be eaten in the same way as spinach, and it has the advantage over spinach of being available during the hottest summer months. This plant has never been grown as an early crop, but as it grows quickly and in all types of soil, it is likely that if treated like spinach, it would do just as well. In ordinary cultivation, it can be sown from March to June, in loosened and amended soil. CULTIVATED MINT, BAUUX (Mentha sativa); perennial, indigenous, aromatic plant, the young stems of which are used as a salad ingredient. PRIMEUR. It's extremely easy to supply yourself with mint throughout the winter. All you have to do is pull up a clump with the root ball, bury it in the compost of a warm bed with small vegetables, and give it a few sprinklings. After a few days, it sprouts numerous buds, which are cut off when they are two or three inches long. These are often renewed before the plant is exhausted. When the plant begins to produce less, another is planted next to it, and so on, until the full-ground mints begin to produce. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Cullivy mint does well in all types of soil, but prefers light, slightly damp or cool soil with a northern exposure. It can be propagated from seed, which is sown in March and April, but more commonly, old plants are broken up in autumn, or rooted suckers are separated in spring. What's more, far from looking for ways to multiply this extremely tractable plant, we're obliged to use them to prevent it from invading much more land than we want to give it. It requires no cultivation care. PEPPER MINT (Mentha piperita) is another species frequently found in vegetable gardens, and grown to flavor pastilles and liqueurs. Everything we've said about the former also applies to this onea1 MOUTARDE NOIRE ou SENEVÉ (Sinapis nigra); an annual, indigenous plant, whose seeds are ground into flour and put into a paste with vinegar and a few assortments, to make the mustard we serve on our tables. When it's young, it's cut up and eaten as a salad, and it's only in this respect that we need to consider it here. PRIMEUR. In December, or, to put it more accurately, as soon as you realize that the cold weather is approaching and that seedlings can no longer be sown in the open ground, you sow them thickly, broadcasting them onto the potting soil of a warm bed of small vegetables. Water lightly and often, and start cutting as soon as the leaf is two or three inches long. To obtain lettuce throughout the winter, seedlings should be renewed every fifteen or twenty days, as the plant wears out very quickly. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: we will always consider mustard only from the point of view of the vegetable garden. Mustard likes sandy or light soils, a little dry and warm, but it succeeds quite well in all soils, provided they have been amended with good fertilizers and perfectly loosened by at least two ploughings. The first sowing is done around the middle of March, and the crop is cut from month to month, so that there is always something tender to cut. Spring seedlings should be sown in earthen beds with good exposure. Summer seedlings should be planted in semi-shaded areas, and require constant watering to produce fine, delicate leaves. Autumn plants are grown in the same way as spring plants. Mustard seed keeps well for three or four years. Mourarde BlanCe (Sinapis alba), also an annual and indigenous plant, is used for the same purposes and can be grown in the same way. 243 NAVET (Brassica napus); a biennial, native plant whose many uses in cooking are too well known to need mentioning here. M. Vilmorin has classified the many varieties of turnip grown in France into three series: 1. dry turnips, 2. tender turnips, 3. semi-tender turnips. According to this wise farmer, we will indicate those that are most common in jardius. IST SERIES. - Navers sEcs. Their flesh is fine and does not fall apart when cooked. Freneuse, small and half-long. Gros Freneuse, same shape, larger and of inferior quality. Navet de Meaux, very elongated, rather like an elongated carrot. Navet de Saulieu, similar to the above in shape, but with a blackish rind. Petit Berlin or Teltau, very small, with no more leaves than a radish. Varieties of this breed only thrive in poor, sandy, soft soils. In the department of Saône-et-Loire, we have a variety known as Navet de Baubry, which is no bigger than a feather-pipe, loug, brown, excellent, and the most esteemed of all turnips around Lyon. It grows in granitic soil, composed entirely of detritus from primitive rocks. All dry turnips are subject to degeneration in two or three years if grown in unsuitable soil. II° SERIES. - Tender turnips. Their flesh is less firm than that of previous varieties, and of mediocre quality; it easily falls apart when cooked. Navet des vertus, an early variety and one of the best in this series; it is oblong and very white. Navet des Sablons, very good; white and half-round. Rose du Palatinat has very tender, very good flesh and a pink neck. The gros long d'Alsace is of very mediocre quality, but is remarkable for its enormous size. The Navet de Clairsontaine is large, very long, and halfway out of the ground. Blanc plat hatif is compressed, very early, but of mediocre quality. The red flat hative differs from the previous one only in color. It is no better in quality. Turneps on rave from the Limousin region is very large, but of such mediocre quality that it is grown only for cattle feed. Turnips from this series are much poorer than dry turnips, but have the advantage of growing well in all soils, and degenerating much less quickly. In most departments of southern France, they are known by the name of rabe, and are grown in large quantities. III° SERIES. - Half-TeNDrEs. Their flesh shares the qualities and defects of the two preceding breeds. The Dutch yellow, with yellowish rind and flesh, and a rounded forine. The jaune d'Ecosse, similar to the previous one, but much more resistant to frost, which has led to its spread in Scotland and England. Malle yellow, newly imported from the United States. It is extremely early, small, round, with very spindly leaves. Alsace black, long, usually very sweet and good. Gris de Morigny, round, with firm, good flesh. These turnips, like the others, are best grown in sandier soil. PRIMEUR. Because turnips keep very well throughout the winter, it is not customary to grow them as early crops. They can easily be kept with their qualities until March, provided they are stored in a dry, frost-free and not too hot place. But if you want to have them from then until the others start to give, you need to follow a very simple procedure, which we'll explain below. In spring, when you're ready to replant the seedbeds, choose from among the turnips those that have sewn up best, i.e. those that have retained their lively color, are firm and wrinkle-free, and whose crowns have sprouted few or no buds. If these are present, we cut them off, removing with them the largest part of the neck that gave rise to them, and leave the wound to dry in the air for four or five days. Once this has been done, prepare a pine box, or simply an old barrel, and spread a four-finger-thick layer of very dry, fine sand on the bottom. Lay a bed of turnips on top, and place them so that they don't touch each other and are at least two inches from the sides of the crate. A second layer of sand of the same thickness as the first is then added, followed by a second bed of turnips, and so on until the box is full. Then the lid is put on, and the whole thing is surrounded by a thick layer of straw, to keep the temperature as even as possible. Needless to say, this should be done in a dry, frost-free place. Turnips are dug up as they are needed for consumption, and covered exactly with sand and straw. In this way, they can often be kept until autumn. Fresh turnips can sometimes be obtained in early summer, by sowing old seeds in spring in cool, shady soil facing north. But these seedlings rarely succeed if the spring is warm. OBDINARY CULTIVATION: As we have already said, turnips only develop their full potential in poor, sandy soils; in strong, substantial soils, they become very large, but lose their fragrance and their flesh softens. As they degenerate very quickly in these types of soil, if you want to keep them good, you need to change the seed every year and bring it from the country where the variety enjoys all its advantages. Turnips are usually sown from the fifteenth of June to the fifteenth of August, and sometimes up to the beginning of September for early varieties. After preparing the soil with a deep plough and loosening it properly, sow lightly, broadcasting as much as possible in dark, rainy weather. All the remaining care consists in weeding and removing weeds. Sowing sometimes takes place in May and early June, with northern exposure and fresh or even damp soil. If the year is not too hot and there is frequent rain, turnips do not bolt and do quite well. Some gardeners, in order to obtain summer turnips, sow in the same soil and same exposure as early as March and April, and they take the precaution of using only old seed for these sowings. Despite all their care, they frequently bolt before forming. Tender turnips, such as virtues, early flats, white or red, are the only ones that offer any hope of success for this season's sowing. When the turnips have risen, whatever the season of sowing, they are thinned out to leave four inches between the feet of the small varieties, and eight between the larger ones. When they have reached their full size, we pull them out by hand, and remove the flower before clamping them. In March, the most beautiful are chosen to serve as seedbeds, and are planted separately to prevent the varieties from degenerating through adulterous fertilization, and the seeds are harvested in August. They retain their germinative qualities for two years. Like cabbages, uavets are prone to being eaten by ticks. These pernicious insects are kept at bay by the same means, i.e. by sprinkling the leaves, when they are still wet from dew, rain or sprinkling, with ashes or simply road dust. AROMATIC NIGEL OF CRETE or FOUR-SPICE (Nigella sativa); annual plant, native to the East, grown in our vegetable gardens for its aromatic seeds, which are used to spice stews and are known as four-spice. As its seeds can only be used dried, and keep very well, it would be pointless to force this plant into the soil. It likes light, warm, substantial soils, but does well in all. Sow in place in spring; give a few sprinklings when the plant has emerged; thin out to transplant elsewhere, if necessary; weed; give a few weedings, and moderate the sprinklings as soon as the flowers appear, to let the seeds acquire all their energy. NOISETIER OR COUDRIER (Corrlus). Shrubs and trees of medium size, native or exotic, We know enough about the different uses we make of their fruit, without being obliged to repeat them here. There are several varieties and species, of which we will mention only those whose fruit is of interest. common hazelnut (corrlus avellana). There are several sub-varieties, whose synonimy we will give below, as they have been confused by some horticultural writers. Hazelnut (C. Avellana sylvestris. Lon. Ic. 2. t. 192). This variety, which grows spontaneously in our woods, has small, white fruit with a pleasant flavor. (C. Avellana sativa, fructu alho minore. Dác. fl. franc. t. 3. pag. 308.) Its fruit is white, oblong and quite small. Lea gardeners call it aveline, as well as the following. Avelinier de Procence (C. Avellana grandis, sativa, fructu rotundo, maximo). Rounded fruit, very large, hard-shelled, with white skin, very good. Avelinier with red fruit (C. Avellana rubra, sativa, fructu oblongo rubente. DÉcAxD. fl. fr. Corilus maxima. MILL. dict. n. 2.) Very large, very elongated, red fruit. I believe this is the variety that Willedenow calls Corrlus tubuloza. Noisetier à fruits en grappes (C. Avellana glomerata, nucibus in racemum congestis. DécAND. fl. fr. ) Fruit agglomerated, round, very large and very good. BLACKBERRY (Corrlus rostrata, NoIsxr. man.), from North America. Fruit very-small, round, very-good, very thick-shelled. AMERICAN NOISETIRR (Corylus américana, Micu.) Round fruit, quite good, but small. NOISTiER DE BXZANCE (Corylus brzantina, L.) Very small, mediocre fruit, but tree remarkable for its rapid growth and height, which often exceeds forty feet. PRIMEUR. Hazelnuts keep very well, and are usually eaten dry. We have never tried to force the tree that produces them, which would be very difficult. CULTURX ORDINAIRE: These trees grow best in damp, light soils, facing east and west. However, they do quite well in the shade, where they are usually found. They can be propagated by sprouting, suckering or seeding, but the latter method is rarely used because it is very time-consuming, and you can never be sure of obtaining the variety you have sown. Buds are strangled in autumn, and take root fairly quickly. The offshoots separate from the mother plants in the same season. Both types hardly bear fruit until the second year after planting. Cultivation is limited to a little ploughing, clearing away dead wood, and not allowing them to be smothered by the shade of higher trees. CULTIVATED WALNUT (Juglans regia); a large tree native to Asia. Its main varieties are:a: Common Walnut. Very productive tree; oval, small, full and very good fruit. The Chestnut or soft-shelled. Elongated, full, very soft-shelled fruit. Norer tardif or Saint-Jean. Blooms very late, and is therefore not exposed to late spring frosts. Fruit yields enough oil. Large-fruited walnut. Very large nuts, not very full; not a very productive tree. The long-fruited walnut is much more productive than the previous variety. The shell of the fruit is tender, and the kernel is excellent. The Walnut with angular fruit is one of the largest of its kind; its fruit shell is very hard, and its kernel yields a lot of oil. The Walnut with jewelled nuts has a very large, almost square fruit, with little filling. The kernel goes rancid easily. The Cluster Walnut has its fruit close together, five or six at a time, in the form of a long cluster. PRIMXUR. The size of this precious tree makes it unsuitable for any kind of forced cultivation. ORDINAIRR CULTIVATION. The walnut tree does fairly well in all deep soils, but in rocky, strong, hot soils, it becomes very large. In cool, sandy soils, it grows much faster, but its wood is of lesser quality. If it is to take on its full beauty, it must be allowed to enjoy all the influences of air and light. Seed walnut and its varieties are propagated by grafting. At the end of December or beginning of January, common or angular walnuts are stratified. In spring, they are removed sprouted, and planted as we shall say, either in situ, which is much better when possible, or in nurseries. Once the ground has been cleared and loosened, parallel gullies are laid out two feet apart. The nuts are planted eighteen or twenty inches apart, and covered with three to four inches of very loose soil. They grow quickly, and for the first two years, all you do is plough, weed and destroy weeds. In subsequent years, they are pruned to form stems, and finally, until it's time to graft them, they are raised like other trees. Once the young trees have reached a suitable size, they are prepared for transplanting. To do this, a sharp spade is driven in between each tree, cutting off all intersecting roots. A new, very abundant root ball forms around the large roots, making them much easier to transplant, as well as being easier to lift with the root ball. If the fruit is more important than the quality of the wood, young walnut trees are grafted at the top of the stem, when it is four or five inches in circumference. Grafting is carried out in the spring, using the growing eye, split, flute or ring graft. The latter is the most common and seems to be the most advantageous. The following year, they can be put in place. At least seven or eight toises should be spaced between the grafted trees, and ten or twelve between the others. If you wish, you can prune them during the first two or three years, to give them a nice head, but this is rarely done. When a walnut tree is old and starting to crown, it should be felled if the quality of the wood is important; otherwise, it should be cut back on the larger branches, and a new head formed, which can last a long time and produce a lot. OGNON (Allium cepa); perennial plant, said to be native to Africa, grown in our vegetable gardens as a biennial. We won't mention here the many uses to which this plant is put in the kitchen, as they are well known to everyone. We have several varieties of this plant: Dark red onion. It is flat, broad, excellent and above all hardy. In some countries, it is grown in fields, where it is sown after the wheat harvest with a single ploughing and harrowing. It requires only weeding to rid it of weeds. Four pounds of seed are enough to sow an acre. Sub-variety: pyriform red onion. Its flavor is a little strong, its flesh a little coarse, but it keeps perfectly well. The pale red variety is the most widely grown in Frauce; it acquires very good quality in suitable soils. Sub-variety: white pyriform onion, milder than the previous varieties. Yellow or blond onion, or ognon des vertus. This name comes from the village near Paris, where it is generally grown. It is large, very tasty and keeps for a very long time. Cambray yellow. Large, as good as the previous one, and keeps just as well. Double stem, very depressed; reddish. It is very hasty, and is easily recognized by the scantiness of its foliage. The Spanish or Catalan onion is sulfur yellow or slightly reddish, very large, broad, with tender flesh and a mild flavor. Blanc hatif is the earliest of all onions; it is very sweet and of excellent quality. The gros blanc is much larger than the previous one, and just as sweet. It is one of the most cultivated varieties for Paris kitchens. Ognon de James is quite similar to the white pyriform onion, but a little more yellowish and less elongated. It keeps for a very long time. Globe onions are a sub-variety of the above, but are absolutely globose when pure-bred. The Ognon Blanc d'Italie or Ognon Blanc de Provence is the smallest of the onions, rarely larger than a hazelnut. It is very tender, very sweet, and excellent for pickling in vinegar with gherkins, for which it is most commonly grown. The Egyptian onion, bulbous or rocambole, stands out from all the others for the bulblets it bears instead of flowers. It is also very rustic and quite good. Ognon patate or sous-terre, which M. Vilmorin regards as a sub-variety of the previous one, produces neither seeds nor bulbils, which means it has to be propagated solely by its cayeux. By sowing at different times of the year, onions can be obtained throughout the summer, and those harvested in autumn keep very well throughout the winter, so there's no need to grow them as early crops. We'll confine ourselves here to teaching you how to grow them. They like substantial, free-flowing soil, rather light than strong, amended from the previous year, as manure that has not yet decomposed is harmful to them, as it is to all bulbous plants. As a result, if you have neglected to fertilize your soil by autumn at the latest, you should only do so with extremely consummate fertilizers. Sheep manure and grape marc are considered the best fertilizers to use for this type of culling. The soil is prepared by careful ploughing in autumn or winter, the last of which should be done at least a fortnight before sowing, to give the soil time to settle and firm up, as onions sown on soil that is too divided will only succeed very poorly. So, before sowing, the soil should be trampled to firm it up, or rolled if you're cultivating large areas. In the past, gardeners used to plant their first seedlings on Saint-Antoine's day, i.e. the 17th of January, but a more enlightened practice has moved this time back from the 15th of February to the 15th of March, in the Paris area. In the south of France, it is customary to sow from the fifteenth of January to the fifteenth of February, and in the north, from the first of March to the first of April. In all cases, seed is broadcast, a little thickly, at the rate of two ounces of seed per perch of ground (the perch is twenty-two feet long). The seed is covered sparingly, and only by harrowing with a fork or rake, or, which is much better, by covering the seedbed with half an inch of half-consumed grape marc, or, failing that, old topsoil. Twenty or twenty-five days later, the seedling should have emerged. As soon as you see that the seeds are beginning to germinate, you give them a few light sprinklings to help them develop, and this is essential if the season is dry. On the other hand, if the weather threatens to be cold or frosty, we'll be very careful to cover the seedling with litter, dry leaves or fern. Throughout its growth, the onion requires nothing more than to be cleared of weeds by precise weeding. The plant is ćthinned, and the excess is eaten as a spring onion, or transplanted to places where it is lacking, taking care to leave four inches between each plant. When autumn arrives, if the onions still retain their vegetation, twist a little and lay the stalk on the ground, to force the sap to reach the bulb, which speeds up ripening. When the leaves turn yellow, a little before they dry out, the onions are pulled off and left scattered on the ground for eight to ten days, so that they can dry out properly and finish ripening. They are then gathered into botillons, and hung in a dry, frost-free place, to be removed as they are consumed. In Paris, it is customary to cut off the stalks, bag them and store them in attics out of the reach of frosts. Sometimes thicker onions are sown in nurseries, and transplanted before the bulb begins to form. This type of cultivation requires the same care as the previous one, and is very well suited to strong soils, particularly for white onions. This variety can be sown like the others in spring, but the most common season is August and September. It can be transplanted in October, or sheltered from snow and cold during the winter, and transplanted in March. By May, the onion has already grown to half its size, and can be eaten throughout the summer. If the seedling is clear, transplanting may be dispensed with. If you want very small onions, suitable for pickling with gherkins, choose the white hative or double-stem onion; sow very thickly, in dry soil, and only water the plant while it is young. When, on the other hand, you want to obtain very large onions, you have to use the planting method, "but" says M. Vilmorin, "instead of planting the plant, as usual, you lay it flat in a very shallow shelf, with its head outwards and slightly beyond the edge of the shelf. In this way, the comb is filled - with plants placed head to tail, five or six inches apart. Cover by hand with good "soft" soil; water for recovery and then as much as "needed; this operation can only be carried out - with plants that are already a little strong. = M. Vilmorin has made a major contribution to the development of the plant. Vilmorin has done much to spread the cultivation of the Egyptian onion or bulb, and as this skilful agronomist is in a better position than anyone else to provide valuable information on this subject, we're going to hear from him again: "The Egyptian onion," he says, "has, among other advantages, reliability in harvesting and economy in cultivation. Instead of raising it from seed, we plant the rocambola it produces on its stalk, each of which is transformed in the course of the summer into an onion, which is usually very large. In this respect, therefore, it has all the merit of the "new" method, but its cultivation is not as diffi cult as that of the "old" method, since to obtain these rocambolias it's - enough to plant ready-made onions, which grow up the stem and produce these little bulbs instead of seeds, or "at least together with a very small quantity" of seeds. Each year, therefore, you need to plant a number of these onions in proportion to your needs. There's no risk of exceeding the quantity strictly necessary, as the larger onions are used for cooking, while the medium and smaller ones are used for planting, except for those that are too small, which are neglected. What's more, even an onion that has been "put in the ground reproduces two or three others of "medium size, which are found at the base when it is "pulled out. So there is multiplication in the ground by "cayeux, and out of the ground by rocamboles. In addition to these qualities, bulbous onions also have their faults: their flesh is coarse, and they rot easily in winter if exposed to the slightest humidity; they must therefore be kept in an extremely dry, cold - or at least unheated - place. Placed in this way, it "keeps well. One liter of rocamboles can provide "for the planting of a bed six to seven toises by "four feet wide, and this liter is itself the product of six to eight ready-made onions that have been planted. "When these are set up, it's very useful to support them with stakes, as the stems are easily dragged down by the weight of the bulbs they "carry. Onions are planted at one foot in all directions in February and March; rocket bulbs from March to mid-April, at six to eight inches between rows and at three to five inches on the row, depending on their size.

size. Italian white onions, when grown for pickling in vinegar, can be sown thickly and grown like ordinary white onions. By sowing it at different times of the year, it can be grown at any time of the year. It requires more watering than other varieties. The potato onion is propagated by planting in May, an inch deep and twelve or fifteen inches apart. Sometimes it is very difficult to keep until this time, as it rots quite easily. If you notice that it is starting to rot, you can plant it as early as December and throughout the winter, provided you take the precaution of sheltering it from the extreme cold with a light blanket of litter. While it's growing, give it the usual care, but butter it at least twice, a little the first time and a lot more the second. Around its roots, it forms a fairly considerable mass of rounded onions and cayes, which are pulled out for use when ripe, but which are as difficult to preserve in winter as Egyptian onions. We won't end this chapter without mentioning the new method of cultivation found by Messrs Nouvellon and Lebrun de Meun, and praised perhaps a little excessively in the annals of the Paris Horticultural Society. In dry, moderately amended soil, in March and April, sow so thickly that one and a half pounds of seed should only cover a square toise of land. Water only once, and immediately after sowing. The result is a multitude of onions the size of peas or slightly larger, which are pulled up in autumn and stored in a very dry place. In spring, these small bulbs are planted in rows six to eight inches apart, with four or five inches between each bulb. Weed and weed, and you get some very beautiful onions, but they have taken up a lot of land and required a lot of care for two years, a disadvantage which I believe will prevent this crop from becoming widespread. Onions intended for seed production should be chosen from those that have retained all the characteristics of their variety. In dry, warm soils, they should be planted in November and December, but in cold, damp soils, it's best to wait until spring. Bury them two inches deep, and space them seven to eight inches apart. The stems are supported with stakes, and the seeds are usually ripe enough to collect in August. ORIGAN MARJOLAINE (Origanum Majoranoides); very small shrub, native to the East, used as a seasoning in some stews. PRIMEUR. As soon as ground marjoram stops producing, usually in November, lift a few clumps with the root ball, and plant them in the compost of a warm bed with small vegetables. Water them, cover them with a frame or cloches, and they soon produce young stems that are cut off as they are needed for consumption. When the plants are exhausted, replace them with new ones. ORDINARY GROWING: Marjoram can be grown successfully in all kinds of soil, but it does best in light, warm, amended conditions. It is grown in clumps or in borders, which are renewed at least every three years. It can be propagated by sowing seeds in earthen flowerbeds in spring, by taking cuttings in cool, shady soil in summer, or more generally by breaking off plants in autumn or spring. MARJOLAINE GENTIILE OR ORIGAN A COQUILLE, (Origanum Ægrptiacum), native to the same country, could be used for the same purposes, but it is sensitive to cold and must be overwintered in orangeries. ORPIN BLANC ou TaIQUE-MADAmE (Sedum album); native annual plant, still known in some places as vermicular, little houseleek, raziné, tripe-madame. Although its flavor is rather insipid, it is widely used as a salad. PRIMXUR. In October, prepare a warm layer with five to six inches of pure potting soil, and sow it lightly and broadcast; water very lightly and cover with cloches or a frame, but make sure to provide air very often. You can already use the plant on this first layer, if you have the precautión to maintain its heat by means of good stoves. In January, the young plants are lifted with the root ball, and transplanted onto the potting soil of a warm layer with small vegetables. If you treat them like other plants, they will produce throughout the winter. There are other ways of achieving the same goal. At the end of June, sow in the open ground on a bed of soil, and in November, transplant the young orpins to the early bed. Or, in September, cuttings are taken from a warm bed under glass and then transplanted to the vegetable bed. Sometimes, when we have vigorous plants from a spring sowing, we remove them with the rootball, and transport them to the bed where they continue to produce. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Borage thrives in sandy or at least light, dry soil with warm exposure. Sow lightly and broadcast in spring. Cover the seeds lightly, and when the plant has emerged, weed and destroy the weeds. Water abundantly during hot spells, if you want it to be tender. It can also be propagated from offshoots and cuttings, which are taken in June and July. sorrel (rumex). We won't go into the uses of this plant in cooking. Several species and varieties are cultivated, all of which grow spontaneously in France. Meadow sorrel (rumex acetosa). This is the most widely cultivated. It has given rise to the following varieties. Common sorrel, with medium-sized, very acid leaves. Belleville sorrel, with broader, less acidic leaves. Widely cultivated around Paris. Blister-leaved sorrel. Leaves broader and larger than the previous one, tormented, as if blistered, not very acidic. VIRGIN or MOUNTAIN sorrel (rumex arifolius, vel montanus). Perennial like all the others, it grows spontaneously in the Alps. It is dioecious, very low in acidity, with slightly blond leaves. It has given us a variety. Large-leaf virgin sorrel. Broader, smoother, darker green leaves. This variety is preferred because it is earlier and can be cut in spring, at least fifteen days before the others. ROUND OSRIL (rumex scutatus). Native to Provence. Distinguished by its rounded or cordate, glaucous-green leaves. More acidic. PRIMEUR. For this type of cultivation, we use Belleville sorrel, virgin sorrel, and especially its large-leaf variety. From November onwards, establish a warm bed with six to eight inches of potting soil. Raise sorrel plants with the root ball, plant them on the bed, water moderately and cover with cloches or frames. It's essential to give the plants air and, above all, plenty of light, as without this they wither with the greatest ease; the leaves turn white, and they no longer have any flavor or acidity. Renew the plantation when the plants are exhausted. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: All species and varieties are cultivated in the same way; they like light, deep soil that is neither too dry nor too hnmid, but nevertheless grow well in all types of soil. In autumn, in dry, warm soils, and in spring, in cold, damp soils, we prepare two beds, one in the south to provide for spring and autumn, the other in the north to provide for summer, a season when sorrel, grown in ordinary exposure, has an excess of acidity that is unbearable. The soil is deeply ploughed, loosened and broadcast; the seeds are lightly covered with a rake, and if potting soil is available, it should be spread lightly over the seedbed to prevent the soil from being washed away by rainwater. You can also, if you wish, sow in the border, and this is quite common in middle-class gardens. In this case, it's best to grow the male sorrel, as it doesn't produce seeds and therefore doesn't swarm the alleys like other species and varieties. Once emerged, sorrel needs only to be thinned out if it is too thick, and weeds removed with a few hoeing operations. Abundant watering during the summer helps to reduce the acidity it contracts in that season. It lasts a very long time, but to keep it beautiful and abundant, it must be renewed at least every three or four years. Sorrel also multiplies very well by sprouting in spring, and this is the only way to propagate the male sorrel. Some people are in the habit of cutting sorrel on the ground for consumption. This method is vicious in that it makes the plants very tired, so it is much better to use the market gardeners' method, which involves picking the leaves one by one, always starting with the outer ones. Sorrel seeds ripen in July and August. If left in their natural husks and stored in a dry place, they retain their germinative properties for three or four years. 4 PANAIS (Pastinaca zativa). A biennial, indigenous plant whose large, long, fleshy root has a sweet, aromatic flavor and is used to flavors soups. Three varieties are grown: Common or long parsnip, elongated, spindle-shaped, white root. Round or royal parsnip, with a rounded, top-shaped root. This variety is earlier than the previous one and, sinking less into the soil, is better suited to shallow soils. Panais de Siam or batard, slightly yellowish root, less elongated than the first variety, more so than the second, highly esteemed. PRIMEUR. As parsnips have no fear of the cold, all you have to do is grow them in the ground and let them overwinter in the bed, where they are pulled out as they are needed. To obtain them in spring, you need to sow round parsnips on a bed; here's how it's done. In September, and successively until February, warm layers are raised and filled with eight inches of well-consumed potting soil, mixed with a quarter of good light garden soil. When a layer is still warm, sow a little thickly, and cover with a fingerful of fine potting soil; baste lightly and place frames over the seedlings. Air the seedbed as often as the outside temperature allows, water as needed, and carefully break up any hard crust the soil may form on its surface. When the seeds have risen, the plant is thinned out, and some time later, when it has gained strength and has three leaves, it is thinned out a second time, so that the parsnips are spaced three or four inches apart. Sowing then requires only the usual care, consisting of new stoves when the heat of the bed begins to diminish, watering, hoeing, etc. When the plants have reached the right size for their intended use, we pull them out, always choosing those closest together, so that those remaining have more room to grow. You don't need layers and frames to grow parsnips in early summer. All you need to do is sow in the open ground, in good exposure, in September, and cover the young plant, during heavy frosts, with a light bed of dry litter. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Parsnips thrive in deep, loose, slightly cool, substantial soil. From the end of February to June, sow the seeds broadcast, covering them lightly with a rake, and spreading a finger of potting soil over the sowing to prevent the soil from fighting. Weed and water frequently. Thinning is done when necessary, to leave seven to eight inches between each plant, and that's all there is to it. In March, we pull out the best roots and replant them in another soil, eighteen inches apart, to obtain seeds. The seed doesn't ripen until the end of August, is harvested like carrots, and keeps well for only a year. Sweet potato (Convolvulus batatas); creeping perennial native to the West Indies and India. Its elongated, fleshy, soft, sweet roots, which have a slight rose odor when they begin to fade, are eaten in the manner of scorzonères, or butter cnites. M. Vilmorin thinks that the sweet potato we have in Paris is not the one grown as a food in the colonies, or, he says, it is not appreciated because it is too sweet. He adds that they prefer another, which is white or yellowish, rounded and more nutritious. In any case, in Paris, we care for three varieties: Sweet potato with white roots, small and of mediocre quality. Yellow-rooted, slightly larger, but not of the most sought-after quality. Red-rooted, excellent and very large, the tuber sometimes weighing a pound or more. Since potatoes can only succeed in the Paris climate with the help of a completely artificial cultivation method, we won't go into the details here. There are several methods that we will teach. 1. in February, prepare a warm layer in the open air or under a tarpaulin, and fill it with six inches of light, soft, pure soil. Let the first fire pass, and when it is only moderately warm, from fifteen to twenty degrees of the Réaumur thermometer, cut palate roots into sections an inch long or a little longer, and plant them two inches deep, eight inches apart. They soon produce vigorous sprays. When these are eight to ten inches long, carefully pull out the roots, cut off all but the tip leaves from the stems, then replant them immediately. Here's how: prepare a dull layer of ten inches of good, light soil, half mixed with extremely well-consumed loam. In this soil, parallel furrows are opened two feet apart, and the plautes are planted in an oblique position, so that their roots are three or four inches deep, and only the end of the stem emerges from the ground. As the roots are planted two feet apart on the rows, the result is a chessboard plantation. Water moderately, weed and weed again, and no further care is needed until the roots are harvested, which is usually around the middle of October. This is the cultivation method used by M.. Noisette in his superb establishment, and taught in his Manucl. 2. M. Vilmorin makes a few modifications to this method. Here's what he says: "In February, we take large pots and fill them with good, soft, light soil, in each of which we plant six to eight potato roots. We place these pots in a warm greenhouse, if we have one, otherwise we make a layer in which we bury the pots; we cover them with a frame, and maintain the heat at eighteen or twenty degrees by means of stoves. During this first planting, water should be used - only as much as necessary, as roots and young shoots - melt at the slightest moisture. By April fifteenth - these plants will have stems at least a foot long. At this point, we prepare a strong, dull, rounded bed - with manure and leaves that only develop moderate but long-lasting heat; we fill it with fifteen inches of good, light soil, into which only half or a third of the potting mix has entered, because the palates - make a lot of hair in the mix, but few or no large roots. The plant is unstuck, and each root and its stems are placed on this new layer, three feet apart, not in "holes, but lying in three-inch-deep gullies, from which only the ends of the stems emerge. This way of planting is already a very favorable mar" cottage for tuber multiplication. A bell is placed over each plant, and the whole layer is covered with a good mulch. As soon as the "heat arrives, water amply and - often; the branches soon cover the entire - layer; in June, pick some up twelve or fifteen - inches from the old plants: they will "root" in a fortnight or three weeks; then we "dry them, and cut them back to six inches."" 3. Some market gardeners in Paris use a much simpler method of cultivation, but one that produces slightly less. With good light soil, they raise cone-shaped plants two feet high and as wide; at the top, they plant a root 23 of palate, or a young plant raised in a pot and on a bed as we said, then they surround these mounds with stoves of hot manure, which they renew often. When the stems are a foot long, they marcott them in order to make them produce new roots, 4. A very distinguished amateur from the Paris area has singularly perfected the last type of cultivation. Here's how: In March, he prepares a bed of indeterminate length, nine or twelve feet wide, against a south-facing wall with a very warm exposure. He divides this bed, along its entire length, into three or four beds, each two feet wide, separated from each other by paths one foot wide, the first of which joins the wall. These paths are dug a foot and a half deep, and the earth is dumped onto the beds, which are shaped like the back of a donkey, a foot high not including the depth of the trenches, giving them an elevation of two and a half feet. Two rows of roots or plants raised on a hot bed are planted on top, and the spaces between the beds are filled with rechauds, which are renewed as often as necessary. With the help of a few poles supported by stakes, doormats are laid every evening, and during the day when it rains. Other care is in no way different from that required for cultivation using the previous method. Potatoes are harvested from the moment they reach maturity, which sometimes begins at the end of September, until the first frosts; but this operation must be carried out with great care, as any that are a little bruised or crumpled quickly rot. They should be placed in a very dry place, sheltered from the slightest frost, so that they can be removed and eaten as soon as they begin to smell of roses, as this is a sure sign of decomposition. The great difficulty in growing potatoes is keeping them until spring, when they can be planted. However, there are two ways of doing this. 1. in July and August, take cuttings in small pots filled with half potting soil and half light soil, on a bed and under a bell; for this, select shoots that are still only three or four inches long out of the ground, and detach them by hand as close as possible to the tubers. When recovery is assured, the pots are placed at the foot of a south-facing wall, in the open air. They are then placed in a warm greenhouse or in a barn heated by a furnace, and throughout the winter they are cared for in the same way as warm-greenhouse plants. When the season arrives, we plant them as we have said, and they provide a very bountiful harvest. 2. From among the last roots pulled out, we choose those that are perfectly healthy, among the petile ones; we let them dry out perfectly, then place them in a crate, bed by bed with fine, very dry sand. The crate is then closed and wrapped in very dry straw, placed in a second crate and placed in a pile of litter, where the potatoes are kept at an even temperature until planting. It should be noted that yellow potatoes keep much more easily than red ones. Mr. Noisètte believes that the potato could be grown very easily in the south of France, in the open ground. All you have to do," he says, "is develop the young stems in a bed, break up a four-foot-wide bed, loosen the soil perfectly, draw two lines two feet apart with a chalk line, and open them into furrows in which you lay the young plants obliquely, in the same way as on a temperate bed. If the soil was dry, we would water, weed and root the weeds, and all care would be limited to that until harvest. PATIENCE, OSEILLE-ÉPINARD, ÍTINARDS-DINORTEIS (rumex patientia); native perennial plant, recently cultivated by a few amateurs who eat its leaves in the manner of spinach or sorrel, and who claim that they share the taste of both. They are large, tender and, as they grow from the first spring, they offer the advantage of being available for cooking before any other greens. According to Miller, patience was once cultivated in England as a vegetable. It does well in all types of soil, provided they are a little deep; but it thrives in substantial, free-flowing soils that are a little damp but not cold. It can be propagated by splintering or sown in spring, very lightly and in situ, or on potting soil in a nursery, to be replanted permanently when it has four leaves. As it is very hardy, it requires little care. A single plant can last for many years, and can provide three or four months' supply each spring, if the stems are cut off as soon as they show signs of coming up. The seeds can be collected like sorrel seeds, and I think they should retain their germinative properties for just as long, i.e. for three or four years. PEACH (Amygdalus persica); medium-sized tree, native to Persia. Its fruit is too well known to discuss its qualities here. It has a very large number of varieties, but as many are of mediocre quality compared with the others, we will mention here only the best, following the selection made by Mr. Noisette. 1. Downy peaches. Vineuse de Fromentin. Very good fruit, resembling the l̀ mignonne, but larger and more elongated. Ripens around August 15. Grosze mignonne. Very good fruit, large, a little flattened, ripening at the end of August. Belle Bausse. Very good fruit, a little like the previous one, but larger. Apricot peach, admirable j'aune. Large fruit with firm, excellent yellow flesh. Avant péche blanche. Round, small, white fruit of rather mediocre quality, but precious because of its earliness; it ripens at the end of June. Before red peach. Fruit larger than the previous one, bright red on one side and light yellow on the other, of mediocre quality, but ripe at the beginning of August. Pêche de Malte, belle de Paris, medium-sized fruit, flattened, slightly marbled with red on the sunny side, very sweet, ripening at the end of August and beginning of September. Madeleine de Courson or rouge paysanne. Fruit larger than the previous one, rounded, superb red color, very good. Cardinale de Furstemberg. Medium-sized fruit, dark, dull red, with red, mottled flesh, very poor quality. We mention it here only because it ripens in October. Admirable, beautiful from Vitry. Very large, rounded, pale yellow fruit, tinged with red, excellent. Alberge yellow. Medium-sized fruit, dark red when ripe, yellow before, excellent. Ripens at the end of August. Chevreuse hative. Large, elongated fruit, marbled with bright red on the sunny side, very good, ripens at the beginning of September. Chancelière. Fruit somewhat similar to the previous one, less elongated, better quality, ripens around mid-September. Chevreuse tardive. Very downy fruit, slightly elongated, very dark color, excellent. Late or medium-ripe red Madeleine. Fruit medium, elongated, very red, excellent. Galande or belle-garde. Large, very deep red fruit, excellent, ripe at the end of August. Bonne grosse. Very large, rounded, green fruit with a hint of red, good, ripe at the end of September. Bourdine. Fruit large, rounded, dark red on the sunny side, very good, ripe towards the middle of September. Téton de Vénus. Large, nippled fruit, less colorful than the previous one, very good, ripe at the end of September. Nivette, velvety late. Fruit large, slightly elongated, vela, green and dark red, very good, ripening at the end of September. Royale. Very large fruit, light yellow tinged with bright red, very good, ripening in early October. Pavie-Madeleine, pavie blanc. Large, white fruit, slightly washed with red on the sunny side, good, ripens at the end of September. Pavie alberge or yellow, persèque jaune. Fruit large, superb, yellow, red on the sunny side, asgez good, ripening at the end of September. a. Smooth peaches. Després. Medium-sized, yellowish-white fruit, a little red on the sunny side, excellent, ripening around mid-August. Brugnon musqué, oval fruit, fairly large, reddish, good, ripens at the end of September. Violetle hásive. Medium-sized fruit, yellowish, dark violet on the sunny side, good, ripens in early September. PEACH. The peach tree is a delicate tree, which does not thrive in the open air at latitudes above Paris, and which, even in the capital's vicinity, very often suffers the disastrous effects of late spring frosts. In northern Europe, to obtain fruit from this tree, you need to give it absolutely the same care as that indicated in the apricot article. REGULAR CULTIVATION. This tree likes deep, substantial, soft, light or even slightly sandy, warm and moderately dry soil. It can be propagated by sowing or grafting. Some varieties reproduce identically through their stones, e.g. madeleine, admirable, grosse mignonne, abricotée, pêche de Malle, bourdine, pavie-madeleine, pavie alberge, etc. The others must be grafted, which can be done by hand. The others must be grafted, although their stones often produce very good fruit. To propagate peach trees by sowing, their pits must be stratified and planted in spring, either in a nursery or in the field, the latter being the preferred method. As for propagation by grafting, this is the most widespread, safest and best method. The subjects to be chosen for grafting are: almond trees with hard shells and sweet almonds, in light, warm and deep soils; in soils that do not have these qualities, and which are especially shallow, preference is given to black Mamas plum trees, and Saint-Julien or cherry trees, but grown from stones and not from suckers. Grafting is usually carried out from July to September, using dormant buds. To establish a nursery, almond or plum pits are stratified, planted in quintuncia, eighteen inches apart, the young plants are cared for according to ordinary methods, grafted and, when two years old, placed against a wall with a sunset, leVant or midi exposure, the latter being the most favorable. All that remains is to prune them to form espaliers à la Montreuil or à la Française. In either case, the principles of pruning are the same; only, when the tree is shaped à la Montreuil, it is raised on only two main branches, open in a V shape, with the two arms spread wide apart; and when it is shaped à la Française or en éventail, it is raised on four or five main branches. We'll assume that you want to form it Montreuil-style, which is undoubtedly the best method, and we'll extract verbatim from our Annuaire du jardinier et de l'Agronome, 1829, the procedures we found simplest and most natural, and those we published in the Almanach du bon jardinier, 1825, following the order indicated by nature. So, we'll take the tree from the moment it's planted, and follow it year by year, until it's fully formed. FIRST YEAR. At the time of pruning, i.e. around March, we cut back the graft on four or five good eyes or even more, but always so that there are at least two on each side; with the fingernail or the tip of the pruning knife, we prick out those on the side of the wall or on the front. It won't be long before the buds start to develop; as soon as they're strong enough to recognize the most vigorous on the right and left, the others can be removed, without damaging the bark. The two remaining lateral buds will grow rapidly, and should be left untouched until August. However, if you find that they emit sub-buds in front of and on the side of the wall, pinch these with your fingernails as they appear. In August, begin to lightly trellis the two buds, barely tilting them so as not to interfere with their development. If one is less vigorous than the other, it should not be tilted at all, but the stronger one should be tilted more. By this means, we'd soon restore the balance of the sap" During this first year, we plough several times. And, if the season is hot and dry, it's a good idea to do some watering. Fan pruning differs from fan pruning only in that it leaves four or five buds instead of two, to form the main branches. As the branches behave in the same way as if there were only two of them, to the nearest plus or minus of inclination, we won't come back to it." DRUXIEMR ANXÉR. - Once the two main branches have been removed, the graft snag is cut off at the base of the highest branch, and covered with grafting wax or Saint-Fiacre ointment to help the wound heal. If both branches are vigorous, they should be pruned to a foot or eighteen inches in length, less loug if they are thin, but always on a well-placed eye, i.e. outside or in front. All under-buds from the previous year are pruned on one eye, and if any are misplaced, they are cut off entirely. Two lower buds are left, one on each side, to form the secondary branches. After pruning, the two main branches are pruned and inclined so that they form an angle of fifteen to twenty degrees, a little more if they are extremely vigorous. The buds supplying the two secondary branches are not pruned until August. We keep a close eye on the vegetation, pinching off misplaced buds as they appear. - As early as this year, if the trees have not produced vigorous vegetation, you should start giving them fertilizer, which you bury close to their roots, but without injuring or even uncovering them. Other care is limited to maintaining the balance of the sap, by inclining more or less each branch that is too vigorous, or by pinching them if this becomes necessary." THIRD YEAR. - Once the tree has been stripped, the first thing to do is to identify the fruiting branches; they are never bigger than a feather-pipe, and their color is always light green, tinged with red on the sunny side. They are pruned from six to twelve inches long, depending on their strength. Buds intended to extend the main branches, as well as the two lower secondary branches, are pruned from ten to twelve inches in length, a little longer if they are very vigorous. Two upper secondary branches should be established, but only pruned to six inches, to encourage budding at their base and prevent them from remaining bald. Trellising is done with care, to maintain the tree in a regular shape, by inclining branches that seem to want to be carried away, and by straightening out those that are weak and languid, which determines the sap to flow to them more abundantly. The main branches are made to form a thirteen-degree angle; disbudding is carried out as described for the two previous years, and all is done with the woody branches. As these branches never bear fruit twice on the same wood, it is extremely necessary to renew them every year. If this operation, known in Montreuil as "replacement", is not carried out, the result is that the branches lengthen beyond measure, and as they never take on body, they perish. Since the tree does not grow back on the old wood, it becomes bald and soon ends up bearing fruit only at the end of the large branches. - To renew fruit-bearing branches, the eye or bud closest to their base should be carefully preserved when disbudding. If the branch did not bear fruit, either because the blossom had aborted or the peaches had fallen off after being tied, we would immediately cut back to the lower buds, whose development would be encouraged as much as possible. In the event of the branch producing fruit, it would still be necessary to monitor the bud from the base, to ensure that it was not hindered in its growth; if necessary, some fruit would be cut off, and the terminal bud of the branch would be rigorously pinched, to force the sap to flow into it. We don't need to say that the buds above must be removed as they appear; nevertheless, this removal requires a few precautions, with regard to the fruit, and here's why. Any fruit bud that is not accompanied by one or two wood or leaf buds is sterile; the flower unfurls, but does not set; and if by chance fruit is formed, it falls long before ripening. If, in order to encourage the development of the replacement bud, the buds accompanying the fruit were suddenly removed, the fruit would fall off. The only thing to do is to pinch them strongly, so as to stop them growing, until the sap has taken its course in the fruit, and it is perfectly secure; only then do we remove it, but always leaving a small tab with a few leaves. "When the replacement is thus prepared a year in advance, nothing could be easier than to oxéoier it; all you have to do is cut the fruiting branch cleanly off the bud that is to replace it, and this operation must be carried out rigorously every year. "The tree is given the same soius as in previous years, and directed in the same principles; the balance of the branches is watched; secondary and tertiary branches are formed, and directed as we have said; the main branches are lengthened, and when trellised, inclined so as to make them form an angle of forty degrees. As the tree is at its most vigorous, the pruning is lengthened accordingly, and the woody branches can be pruned to eighteen inches in length. "Throughout the year, we disbud and remove misplaced buds; we pinch off those that look like they're going to get carried away, etc., etc." FIFTH YEAR. If the tree has been followed from point to point as we have said, it should be formed, and occupy at least twenty-five feet. The angle of the two main branches is further opened, and given forty-five to fifty degrees, at which it should always remain; secondary and tertiary branches are formed, so that the space it occupies against the wall is perfectly lined. The peach tree is only successful in the open air at latitudes below Paris, and the fruit it produces there never has the fragrance or size of peaches grown on espaliers. Growing it is very simple, requiring only pruning during the first two years of planting to form a regular head, after which it is left to nature. It's not enough to have prepared the ground by ripping and fertilizing: once you've planted a peach tree, you still need to maintain the soil's fertility by covering it, every spring, with three or four inches of slightly consumed manure, which you bury in autumn 276, giving the last ploughing. Trees must also be cared for by protecting them from the disastrous effects of snow and frost, which must never be allowed to remain on their branches, and by promptly curing them when they are attacked by any disease. Blister, rust, gum and canker are the diseases that most often attack these precious trees, and unfortunately they are often incurable. Blistering always appears at the tip of the young twigs; the leaves tighten and blister; vegetation ceases; the tree remains sterile for a few more years, and eventually perishes. This disease is attributed to the sudden transition from a warm to a cold temperature caused by the north wind; but the fact is, this is an unproven hypothesis. The only remedy is to remove the affected parts at the time of pruning, and when it is judged that the new buds developed by these amputations still have time to ripen. New fertilizers are applied to stimulate vegetation. Rust is a disease particular to stone fruit trees. It seems to be an altered sap that collects between the bark and the wood, becomes corrosive and disorganizes the parts with which it comes into contact. As the deposit increases, the material filters through a large expanse of tissue, and the disease becomes all the more dangerous as it occupies a larger space. This disease seems to result from some organic bruise or lesion, caused either by a shock, or by pruning done at the wrong time. When it appears on a branch, the best way is to cut it off below the injury; if it exists on the trunk, incisions must be made to allow the gum to pass through. Chancre is a kind of dry or bloody ulceration, which hollows out, corrodes and disorganizes the part of the tree on which it is located. Often in the peach tree, canker is the result of a gum deposit, a tear, a bruise, or an amputation that 4 has not healed. When the disease begins, we can hope to cure it; all we have to do is cut to the quick and remove the whole affected part, then cover the wound with grafting wax or Saint-Fiacre ointment; but this operation, which is certainly successful on all trees other than those with stone fruit, is not always successful on peach trees, and it often happens that a new canker forms under the plaster placed over the wound to defend it from contact with the air. In our opinion, the best course of action when a tree is found to be seriously affected by one of the above-mentioned diseases is to uproot it, change the soil in which it was planted, and replace it with another. PERCR-PIERRE, CRISTE MARINE, BACILE (Crithmum maritimum); native perennial, growing spontaneously in the sands along the seashore. Its leaves can be preserved in vinegar like capers, and are also used for seasoning. The most esteemed is the one collected on the beaches of the ocean, but it is also very successful in our gardens. As this plant is only used when cut, and can be kept in this state for a year or more, there is no point in growing it early. It likes light, slightly damp soil with a warm exposure. Sow in warm soil in March, and transplant permanently when the plant is strong enough, or, much better, as soon as the seeds are ripe. During severe frosts, it is advisable to protect the plant with a bed of long dry litter. All it needs is to be cleared of weeds, and watered occasionally during hot spells. Its leaves are harvested in late August and early September. Seeds must be sown no later than the following spring, after which time they will no longer germinate. 211 1. 1 PARSLEY (Apium petrosélinum); biennial plant, native to Sardinia, known to all for its uses in cooking, either as a seasoning or as a supply. In addition to the common variety, several other varieties are cultivated: Curly parsley with curly leaves; it often reproduces common parsley by sowing. Very curly dwarf parsley, smaller than the above, very slow to grow. Variegated parsley, with yellowish-white variegated leaves. It is more sensitive to cold than the others, and should be covered in winter. Parsley with large leaves; it is distinguished by the breadth of its foliage, but is prone to abortion. Parsley with large roots; its fleshy root is used in cooking and is eaten cooked. Persil de Naples, à grosses coles, Persil-Celeri. Much larger than the previous varieties. It is cultivated because of its roots and the ribs of its leaves, which are cooked to be eaten like celery. PRIMEUR. Nothing is easier than obtaining parsley during the winter; all you have to do is sow it in a bed at midday, then cover the plant with good straw mats during the snows and frosts. In very harsh winters, you can cover with a frame, which you surround with good stoves of hot manure. A few of the most vigorous plants sown in August can also be lifted with the rootball, and transplanted into a warm layer of coarse vegetable compost. Water, air and cut while the plants are producing, and replace them with new ones when they're exhausted. Large-rooted parsley and Vaples parsley are grown in exactly the same way as celery. ONDINARY CULTIVATION. Parsley grows well in all soils, provided they have been loosened. 1 It is sown from March to August, broadcast, in beds or borders, and in autumn, in flowerbeds with warm exposure, to be available in spring. Water, and the seed sprouts in three weeks; it sometimes takes more than a month if this precaution is neglected. Continue watering frequently until the plant is strong enough to be left to its own devices. Large-rooted parsley and Naples parsley require special care. Sow very lightly, and when the plant has emerged, thin it out so that the stems are one foot apart. If you wish, you can sow it in a nursery, very thickly, for permanent transplanting, in perfectly loosened beds amended with consumed manure. As soon as the frosts begin, we mound Naples parsley to blanch it and then pull it out as it is needed for consumption. Parsley with large roots can be pulled up and transported to the vegetable greenhouse, where it is buried in sand. Parsley seeds retain their germinative power for two years. PICRIDIE CULTIVÉE, TERRR-CRÉFIR ( Picridium vulgare); annual, native plant, cultivated for a very long time in Italy, and for a very short time in France, where M. Vilmorin has made every effort to spread its use. Its leaves, cut young, are eaten in salads. PRIMXUR. From November to February, picridie is sown on warm soil under cloches or frames. Water, and don't start giving air until the plant has risen, but then it demands it imperiously. The leaves are cut off daily for use as they reach two or three inches in length. Light is very necessary for this plant, because in the dark it withers very-prom" mentally, and then it has no flavor left. ORDINARY CULTUAX. Picridie grows well everywhere, but much better in substantial, warm, moderately light soils than in all others. It can be sown in good exposure as early as March, with successive sowings continuing until the beginning of August. All the cultivation care it requires is limited to a few weedings to rid it of weeds, and very sparing watering during hot spells, if very tender leaves are to be obtained. ANNUAL PEPPER, LONG PEPPER (Capsicum annuum); annual plant, native to India. When young, the fruit can be pickled in vinegar like gherkins. As it ripens, it acquires a burning, pungent flavor, similar to pepper, but stronger. It is dried in the oven, ground to a powder and used in cooking as a substitute for pepper. If you want to give it the appearance of pepper when ground, knead it with fermented rye dough, dry the mixture in an oven from which you have just removed the bread, then grind it to a powder. In this state, pepper is sold in Paris under the name of "poivre indigène". Several varieties are grown: Piment ordinaire, with red, elongated fruit, widely furrowed when ripe. The gros doux d'Espagne, with fruit of the same color, more rounded, with a less pungent flavor. The round, or cherry-pepper, with fruit smaller than the preceding ones, of the same color, rounded. The violet variety differs from the others only in color. The Piment-Tomate, with rounded, yellow, sweet fruit, rather like a tomato. This variety ripens more slowly than the others. As chillies can only be used candied or dried, it would be pointless to grow them as early crops. This plant likes loose, warm soil, amended with old compost or consumed manure. In February or March, sow on warm soil under cloches or frames; water moderately, and the seeds soon sprout. The young plant is raised on the bed until the beginning of May, and a little earlier or later, depending on temperature, it is transplanted to a bed at the foot of a wall facing south, or to a bed with good exposure, in rows one foot apart. Weed, weed and anoint moderately. In southern départemens, simply sow indoors or in nurseries, in earthen beds with warm exposure. Chilli seeds are harvested in autumn. Select the ripest and most beautiful fruits, dry them in the sun and only open them to remove the seeds when ready to sow. Thus treated, they retain their germinative virtue for two or three years. PIMPRENELLE (Poteritm sanguïsorba); native perennial, common in meadows, used in cooking as a salad ingredient. PRIMEUR. As soon as frosts prevent field-grown salad burnet from producing young leaves, select a few of the bushiest, most vigorous plants, lift them with the rootball, transplant them into the potting soil of the warm vegetable bed, water, cover with cloches or frames, and give them the usual care. As the leaves reach two or three inches in length, they are cut for use, and the plants usually provide food all winter long. If they run out, replace them with others. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Burnet grows everywhere, but does best in substantial, light, dry soils. In spring or autumn, it is usually sown in rays or in borders. Weed it to prevent weeds from invading; water as needed, especially in hot weather, and cut often if you want tender leaves. Sometimes it is multiplied by bursting clumps in spring, but this method, which hardly hastens production, has the disadvantage of producing only skinny, short-lived plants. In good soil, a burnet may last five or six years, but it's always better to renew it every three years. The seed will keep for two years. PISTACHIER ( Pistacia veta); a shrub growing from twelve to fifteen feet tall, native to the Sprie region and naturalized in the south of France. It is dicic; consequently, it is absolutely necessary to have both the male and the female, if one wants to obtain fruit from it. PRIMXUR. As the fruit of the pistac tree is an almond that can be eaten both dry and green, this tree has never been subjected to forced cultivation. CUURE ORDINAIAE. It likes a clean, light and warm climate, and in the Parisian climate, it needs to be planted in the south, at the foot of a marsh, against which it is raised. Sometimes it is multiplied with mancoues, but individuals with semis are always the most vigorous. Pistachios are sown in spring, in a terrine planted in a warm layer under a frame. When the young plant has emerged, it is transplanted separately into pots, so that it can spend the first three or four winters in an orangery, before being transferred to the open ground. In greenhouses, it needs little watering. This shrub cannot withstand six degrees of cold when free-standing, but grafted onto the pistachio thérébinthé (pistacia terebinthus), it braves a ten-degree frost with impunity. With a little care, and only with the precaution of grafting, its growth could become very profitable in the Paris area. The Luxembourg and Roule nurseries have some very fine espaliers, which produce excellent fruit every year. PEAR, BETTX or BLàTE (Beta vulgaris); biennial plant, native to southern Europe. Its leaves are used in cooking only to soften the acidity of sorrel. The ribs of one variety, Poirée à carde, can be cooked like cardoons. PRIMXUR. Ordinary pears, being of little use and not widely grown, have never been cultivated en primeur, at least to my knowledge. Nevertheless, nothing would be easier than to obtain it during the winter. All you'd have to do is sow it in terra-cotta beds in August and September, and transplant the young plant to the warm layer of the vegetable greenhouse as soon as the frosts set in. With a little care, each plant can produce several harvests of thresholds before it is exhausted. As for chard, it can be obtained without much care; simply sow in March for winter, and at the beginning of August for spring. They are covered during severe frosts. As the cold hardens the ribs a little, it's a good idea to remove the plants a fortnight in advance, and blanch them in the greenhouse or in a cellar. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Pear is by no means difficult to grow in terms of soil quality, and it succeeds quite well everywhere, provided the soil has been previously loosened; however, it prefers substantial soil, rather strong than light, and a little humid though warm. The ordinary variety is sown in March in light soils, and from April to August in heavy soils, in rays or broadcast; the seeds are lightly covered, watered copiously and weeded often. If proper care is given to sowing, cutting can begin as early as six weeks after the seeds have been placed in the ground. Poirée-carde is sown light, at the times indicated in the "Early crops" article. Once emerged, the plant is thinned out so that it is spaced fifteen inches apart, or, if desired, transplanted at this distance. For the latter operation, preference should be given to plants sown in June and July. Weeds are weeded often, and the ribs get bigger and more tender the more you water them. As we've said, we cover it with a large amount of bedding to protect it from the cold, and in spring, we remove the covering little by little, so as not to let the sun's rays catch the more or less etiolated leaves, which would infallibly cause them to perish. The plants go to seed in their second year; their stems are supported to prevent the wind from breaking them, and, usually by September, the seeds have reached their point of perfect maturity, which can be recognized by the russet tint they take on. They are placed in a dry place, where they retain their germinative qualities for seven or eight years. PEAR (Prrus communis); native tree, rising from forty to fifty feet in the wild, and varying considerably in size when cultivated. We will mention here only its best varieties, and list them in the order established by the famous M. Noisette, in his Manuel complet du Jardinier. 1. summer fruit. Amiré-Joannet, petit Saint-Jean. Small, lemon-yellow fruit, ripening at the end of July, quite good. Petit-Muscat, Sept-en-Gueule. Very small fruit, yellow to reddish-brown, with musky, half-burred flesh, very good, ripening at the end of June. Muscat Robert, large musky Saint-Jean. Fruit larger than the preceding ones, yellow, sometimes a little ruddy, tender, sweet, fragrant, good, ripening around mid-July. Aurate. Small, turbinate fruit, yellow and light red, a little musky, semi-melting, ripening at the end of July. Bourdon musqué, Summer orange. Fruit, small, arrendi, light green and pitted, with brittle, musky flesh, quite good, ripening around mid-July. Rouszelet hätif, Perdreau, Poire de Chypre. Very small, yellowish fruit, with gray speckles on the soled side. Flesh a little casey, sweet, fragrant; ripens towards the end of July. Madeleine, Citron des Carmes. Medium-sized fruit, turbinate, light green, fragrant, melting, ripening towards the end of July. Cuisse-Madame. Swollen, medium-sized fruit, green and russet, half-buttered, a little musky, ripening at the end of July. Gros Blanquet, Poire d'argent, Roi-Louis, Medium-sized, pyriform, white and carmine fruit, with brittle, sweet and spicy flesh; ripens at the end of July. Bellissime d'été, Supreme. Large, calabash-shaped fruit, pale yellow, with fragrant, half-bearded flesh, pleasant in hot summers. Ripens at the end of July. Gros Hativeau. Small, turbinate fruit, yellow and dark red, not very delicate, a little musky, ripening at the end of July. Petit Blanquet, Roire en pèrle. Small, pearl-shaped fruit, very pale yellow, semi-breakable, musky, ripening in early August. Blanquette à longue queue. Fruit small, pyriform, blant, semi-breakable, sweet, fragrant, ripening in early August. Épargne, Beau-présent, Cuirse-Madame currant. Fruit rt i 4 2 19 ti E 41 4 F 1 12 POI. a47 medium, very elongated, green, melting, excellent, ripening in the first fortnight of August. Skinless pear, guinea flowers. Fruit medium, pyriform, pot-bellied, green and yellow, spotted with red, melting, delicate, fragrant, ripening in early August. Salviati. Medium-sized fruit, round, yellow, light red on the sunny side, semi-melting, sweet, fragrant, ripening in August. Sunken dots, yellow, light red on the sunny side, with brittle, musky flesh, ripening around August 15th. Orange-red. Medium-sized, turbinate fruit, bright red on the sunny side, ripening around August 15th. Belle de Bruxclles, Belle d'aout. Large, elongated, pot-bellied, yellow fruit, colored on the sunny side, melting, fragrant, very good, ripening around mid-August. Rousselet de Reims, petit Rousselet. Small, dark green fruit, reddish-brown on the sunny side, semi-melting, very smoky, ripening at the end of August. Médaille. Medium-sized fruit, turbinate, yellowish-green, half-buried, fragrant, sweet, ripening at the end of August. Summer Bon-Chrétien, Gracioli. Large, oval, light-green fruit, yellowing when ripe, half-buttery, sweet. very soft, ripening at the beginning of September. Ah! mon Dieu. Fruit quite large, elongated, a little paunchy, light yellow, light red on the sunny side, half-bitter, sweet, fragrant, ripening at the beginning of September. Summer thorn, green satin, musky, melting. Fruit medium, pyriform, elongated, green, very musky, ripening at the beginning of September. Bergamotte d'été, Milan blanc, de la Beurrière, Medium-sized fruit, turbinate, very round, pale green or yellowish, melting, very good, ripening around the tenth of September, Baurto du Coloma. Medium-sized fruit, alloncú, a little round with grayish spots, with pasty, fragrant flesh. Ripens in early September. Orange tulipée, Poire aux mouches. Medium-sized, green-brown fruit with light-red stripes and gray marbling, with brittle, pleasant flesh. Ripens around September 10. Gros Rousselet, summer king. Medium-sized fruit, pyriform, dirty yellow, dotted, dark reddish-brown on the sunny side, semi-brittle, fragrant, pleasant, ripening around mid-September. Dorenné blanc, Beurré blanc, Saint-Michel. Fruit large, rounded, yellow, melting, excellent, ripening around mid-September. Caillou rosat. Large, rounded, yellow fruit, a little red on the sunny side, semi-melting, sweet, musky, ripening at the beginning of September. Beurré gris. Large, oval-shaped fruit, green, gray or red, melting, excellent, ripening at the end of September. Beurré d'Angleterre, Poire d'Angleterre. Small or medium-sized fruit, pyriform, greenish or grayish yellow, more or less spotted with red, melting, sweet, very good, ripening around mid-September. Grosse Angleterre de Noisette. Fruit very similar to the previous one, but larger, grayer and of better quality. Ripens at the end of September. Calabash. Very large, pot-bellied, gray fruit, yellowing when ripe, brittle, pleasant, ripening from September 10th to early October. Lucné hative. Medium-sized fruit, elongated, pale green, semi-melting, sweet, fairly fragrant, ripening at the end of September. 2. Autumn fruit. Crassane, Cresane, Bergamot, Crassane. Fruit fairly large, rounded, green, spotted with gray, yellowing a little on the sunny side, melting, sweet, fragrant, ripening from September 8 to 15, and keeping until January. Verte-Longue, Mouille-bouche, Muscat fleuri. Fruit large, elongated, pot-bellied, uniformly green, smooth, melting, sweet, excellent. Dorenné galeux. Medium-sized fruit, light gray, mottled, melting, sweet, ripens at the beginning of September. Doyenné gris, Doyenné d'automne, Doyenné roux, Fruit smaller than doyenné blanc, gray, russet when ripe, melting, sweet, excellent, ripening at the beginning of September. Bezi de la Motte. Large, pot-bellied, reddish or green fruit, very stained gray, sometimes a little colored on the sunny side, melting, very good, ripens at the end of September. Autumn bergamot. Fruit turbinates, fairly large, smooth, rarely washed with red on the sunny side, melting, fragrant, very pleasant, ripening from late September to November. Poire de Vigne, Poire de Demoiselle. Fruit small, rounded, grayish, spotted with red, probing, raised, good, ripening around mid-September. Messire-Jean, Chaulis, medium-sized fruit, irregularly rounded, russet, speckled with gray, sometimes all gray or golden yellow, with brittle, raised flesh, excellent. Ripens in early September. Vermillon, Supreme, Bellissime d'automne, Certeau. Fairly large, elongated, greenish-yellow fruit, speckled and washed with red on the sunny side, with brittle, fragrant, very good flesh. Ripens around mid-September. Sweet-green. Fruit of medium size, rounded, sometimes more or less oval, smooth green, melting, sweet, very pleasant, ripening at the end of September. Jalousie. Fruit large, turbinate, pot-bellied, russet, melting, sweet, excellent, ripening at the end of September. 25 Sylvange. Fruit of medium size, elongated, light green, speckled with gray, yellowing a little when ripe, turgid, fragrant, very good, ripening at the end of September. Martin-Sec, Rousselet d'hiver. Medium-sized, pyriform fruit, tawny or isabella-colored, sometimes a little red on the sunny side, with cassapic flesh, fragrant, very good. Ripens in November and December. Rousseline. Small, pot-bellied fruit, dirty fawn or grayish, half-bearded, musky, sweet, pleasant, ripening around mid-November. Beurré d'Aremberg. Large, slightly elongated, green fruit, yellowing as it ripens, melting, fragrant, very fine, never stony, excellent, ripens around mid-November, and ripens until February. This pear is the best of all. Duchesse d'Angouléme. Fruit similar to a doyenné, larger, yellowish, dotted with reddish gray on the sóleil side, melting, vinous, excellent, ripening around mid-November. Bon-Chrétien d'Espagne, Mansuette, very large fruit, pale yellow, dotted with brown, beautiful red on the sunny side, brittle flesh, sweet, good for compote, and sometimes raw. Ripens in November. Poire Sabine, Poire d'Austrasie, Jaminette. Large, rounded, gray, semi-melting fruit, sweet, pleasant, ripening in November. Saint-Germain. Fruit quite large, pyriform, elongated, pale green, spotted with red and gray, melting, pleasant, ripening during the month. Virgouleuse, Poire-Glace. Large, elongated, yellow fruit, a little reddish on the sunny side, melting, sweet, fragrant, ripening from November to January. Marquise. Large, green fruit, speckled with dark green, then yellow when ripe, melting, sweet, very good, ripening in November and December. Catillac. Very large, turbinately rounded fruit, gray or light green, yellowish when ripe, often washed with red on the sunny side, speckled with russet, good when cooked, ripens from November to May. Bezy de Chaumontel, Fruit varying greatly in shape and size, yellowish, more or less bright yellow on the sunny side, half-bearded, sweet, good, ripening at the end of November, sometimes keeping until February. Ambrette. Umbine fruit, medium size, yellowish green or whitish, speckled with gray, melting, sweet, spicy and excellent, ripening from the end of November to February. Échassery, Bezy de Chassery. Fruit turbinates, medium, yellowish, turgid, sweet, musky, very good, ripening from the end of novenibre until jauvier. Poire de Sieulle. Medium-sized fruit, rounded, grayish, melting, sweet, fragrant, excellent, ripens during the month, sometimes later, and keeps until February. 3. Winter fruit. Royale d'lluvier. Large, elongated, light yellow fruit, red on the sunny side, semi-melting, sweet, ripening from the middle of December to February. Bonne-Ente. Large, yellowish-green fruit, red on the sunny side, semi-melting, sweet, fragrant, excellent, ripening from November to December. Patse-Colmar Fruit large, elongated, yellow, reddish on the sunny side, very melting, sweet, fragrant, very good, ripening from December 15th to February 15th. Bergamot de Paiques or d'hiver. Fruit of medium size, turbinates, green, with grayish spots, sometimes reddish on the sunny side, melting, pleasant, ripening at the beginning of January and lasting until April. Cotmar, Pbire Munne. Large, turbinate, yellowish-green fruit, yellowish-brown, brown-streaked and a little red-washed on the sunny side, melting, sweet, spicy, excellent, ripens from January to March. Bon-Chrélien d'hiver, Poire d'Angoisse. Large, smooth, greenish-yellow fruit, red on the sunny side, slightly brittle flesh, sweet, very smoky, excellent, ripens from early January to April. Muscat l'Allemand. Large, elongated, pot-bellied, grayish-green fruit, a little red on the sunny side, melting, musky, very good, ripens in February and keeps until April. Bon-Chrétien de Bruxelles. Elongated, yellowish-green fruit with brown spots, well cooked, ripens in early March. Colmar doré. Very large fruit, more elongated than ordinary colmar, greenish, slightly tinted red on the sunny side, melting, very good, ripening in March. Impériale à feuilles de chéne. Fruit quite large, elongated, light yellow, semi-melting, not very sweet, good cooked, ripens in March, keeps until May. Hergamotte de Soulers. Quite large, elongated, shiny, yellowish-green fruit, sometimes washed with red on the sunny side, sweet, melting, very pleasant, ripening in March. Hergamotte de la Pentecole, Doyenné d'hiver. Large, greenish fruit, speckled with brown, melting, excellent, ripens in March and keeps until May. We will limit ourselves here to citing the names of the other varieties, as they are all of a much lower quality than those we have just described; we will add after each one the month in which the fruit ripens. Poire Poiron, Petit Sept-en-Gueule; June. - PetitHatiueau; July. - Sapin; July. - Poire de Fance; July. - Poire d'Ange; August. - Ognonet, Ognolet, Poire-Ognon, Archiduc d'éte, Amiré roux; August. - Fin-Or d'été; August. - Parfum-d'Aoĉt; August. - Epine rore; August. - Chair-d-Dame; August. - Robine, Royale d'été; August. - Cassolette, Muzcat vert, Friolet, Lèche-Friand; August. - Sanguinole; August - Sanguinole d'Ialie, Sanguinole d'Italie; August. - Poire de Vallée; August. - Angélique de Rome; August. - Grise-Bonne, Forest pear; August. - Poire d'OEuf; August. - Poire Deux-Têtes or à Deux-Yeux; August. - Fin-Or de septembre: September. - Bon-Chrétien d'éto musqué; September. - Caszante de Brest, Chencau, Fondante de Brest; September. - Paszc-Madeleine; September. - Bergamotte rouge; September. - Poire-Figue; September. - Jargonelle; September. - Olive; September. - Azcrolle; September. - Mansuette, Solitaire; September - Bequesne; September -Rousseau; September. - Urbaniste; September. - Verte-Longus panachée or Culotte de Suisse; October. - Bezy de Montigny; October. - Swiss Bergamot; October. - Bergamotte cadette, Poire Cadct; October. - Beurró Capiémont; October - Pastorale, Musette d'automne, petit Râteau; October. - Lansac, Satin, Dauphine; october. - Franc-Réal; october. - Buckwheat; October. - Frangipane; October. - Garden Bellisaime; October - Beurré rose; October. - Autumn Sylvange; November - Bezy de Quesaoy, Roussette d'Anjou; November. - Saint-Germain with yellow-striped fruit; November. - Saint-Lezin; November. - Gile-o-Gile, Gros-Gobet; November. - Winter thorn; November. - Winter wonder; November. - Bon-Chrétien turc, Bon-Chrétien de Vernois; November. - Poire de Râteau; December. - Garden pear; December. - Angleterre d'hiver; December. - Louise-Bonne; December. - Poire Livre, large gray Râteau; December. - Trésor d'amour; December. - Saint-Augustin; December. - Martin-Sire, Ronville; January. - Angélique de Bordeaux; January. - Bon-Chrétien d'Auch; January - Beurré d'hiver; January - Trouvée, Poire de Prince, Trouvée de Montagne; January. - Winter orange; February. - Priest's pear; February. - Winter Rousselet; February. - Double-Flour, Arménie; February. - Double-Fleur panachée, February. Bellissime d'hiver, Téton de Vénus; February. - Tonneau; February. - De Naples; February. - Chat-Bralé; February. - De Saint- Père; March. - Bergamotte de Hallande, d'Alençon; March. - Chaptal; March. - Tarquin; March. - Espa- don; March. PRIMEUR. It is not customary to force pear trees, for two reasons. The first, which is not the most essential, is that their flowers are extremely delicate, that they flow very easily, and that, consequently, the operation is extremely difficult and the success always doubtful. The second is that several very good varieties can be kept until the beginning of May, and that, thanks to them, there is no shortage of them until June, when Amiré-Joannet and Petit Muscat begin to produce. Nevertheless, if we wanted to try to force polriers, we could do so using the flying greenhouse, and giving them the same care as described in the article on vines and apricots. The earliest varieties should be chosen for this operation. We still use a method that we'll now describe, but more as an object of curiosity than usefulness. In spring, plant a quince cutting in a heddle, or simply in a pot fourteen or fifteen inches wide, which has been well-rooted in advance and is the size of a finger. Place the vase near an early pear tree, and graft a fruiting twig (never a woody branch). Care is taken with the graft as usual, and the flowers are cut off in the middle of their stalks as they appear. When the graft's weld is perfect, it is dried several times. We bury the vase in a flowerbed, and raise the subject as a bush, or to put it more accurately, we let it go as the wind blows, without pruning it. In December, a little earlier or a little later, but only when the leaves have fallen, you can cohment A forcer. Trahsporté the vase in a tarpaulin or a greenhouse chatide, très-près glasses, and bury it in the layer. During the flowering period, if the plant is able to benefit from a few rays of sunlight and can be given some air, the fruit will set quite easily; but above all, the flower must be protected from humidity. I once knew a gardener who was quite successful in this type of cultivation. He directed his trees in such a way as to make them flower in February, which he considered the most favorable time for fertilization. Once a tree had been forced once, he never subjected it to the same operation again. He planted it in a coiten in his garden, and I've noticed that these trees never grew any larger than an apple tree in paradise, even though they continued to bear fruit for several years. I attribute this singularity to the way they had been grafted. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Pear trees thrive in light rather than heavy, deep, chalky soils. In strong, clayey, damp, cold soils, it does not do well, and its stony, leafy fruit has absolutely no fragrance. In shallow soils, resting on clayey or ferruginous tuff, impermeable to water, it languidly vegetates for a few years; its leaves lengthen, turn yellowish, its bark is covered with moss, it produces very few fruits of poor quality, and finally it perishes after languishing for ten to twelve years. Pear trees can be propagated from seed, or by grafting onto quince or pear trees. Sowing requires a few precautions, depending on the type of tree you want to grow. If you want large trees, you need to go out into the woods and find wild plants from seed (not from the stump), or sow wild pear seeds. In this way, you'll obtain foris, vigorous, very long-lasting trees. If you wish to have less tall trees that will bear fruit more quickly, sow more cider or perry pears, and only remove them from the marc when it's time to put them in the ground. Finally, to obtain medium-sized, fast-growing plants, preferably sow knife fruit seeds. These provide very good subjects for cattails and espaliers intended for planting in poor-quality soils, where coguassier does not do well. Once the seeds have been removed from the fruit, they are exposed to the air for some time to dry, then stored in dry sand until they are ready to be planted. From the first fine days of spring, we prepare the soil by loosening it with good ploughing, and amending it if necessary. Sow the seeds in furrows spaced six inches apart and one inch deep; cover with soil, water lightly, and mulch with half an inch of long, half-consumed manure, to prevent the soil from fighting. When the plant has risen, hoe, weed, thin out if necessary, and finally give it the usual care. In autumn, if the young plants have reached sufficient strength, they are lifted and placed in a nursery. In cool or damp soils, we wait until spring to do this. If the plant is not strong enough, we wait until the second year after sowing. In all cases, when transplanting, leave the root pivot intact if you want to obtain suiets of good appearance and full vigor. Nursery plants are planted in staggered rows, two feet apart. If you want to grow them on stems, prune them into hooks. For cattails, espaliers, vases and other small pear trees, a quince nursery should be established, and the young trees treated until grafting, as described in the article on this tree (see Quince).) Full-grown trees are sometimes grafted at the top of a stem formed by raising the subject, but we would point out that it is always better to graft at six inches from the ground, because if the stem is broken by one of those accidents that are frequent in all cultivations, we have the resource of forming a new head without being obliged to graft again, an operation that is often very difficult when the tree has reached a certain size. Needless to say, grafting close to the ground is indispensable for cattails and other low-stemmed trees. Grafting is carried out in the form of a dormant-eye escutcheon at the second sap stage, or in the form of a cleft in spring. The latter is rarely used, except for franks and wildons, because it is claimed to produce trees of shorter duration, which does not seem to me to be sufficiently proven. In any case, grafts should be cut from healthy trees, because if they were attacked by any disease, it is certain that it would be perpetuated on the new trees. When the graft is two years old, the full-grown trees can be lifted from the nursery and put in place; but for cattails and espalier, it's better to wait three or even four years. The best transplants are those made in autumn, unless the soil is compact and moist, likely to hold the pendart lime over winter; in this case, it's better to wait until spring. The ground is dug to a depth of two or three feet, and more if possible; the soil is suitably amended; the soil on the surface is placed at the bottom, and finally the pits are dug to receive the trees; the wider and deeper they are, the more the trees will grow in them. The trees are lifted from the nursery with great care, so as to injure or bruise the roots as little as possible, and placed in position without touching or removing anything except the broken or bruised parts; they are laid out suitably on the bottom soil, in their natural position, and soil is slid between them, stirring from time to time to make it flow into all the interstices. We then finish filling the pit, and press a little around the collar to give the plant strength. Plant a little high up, so that the graft is not buried when the soil settles. Full-grown trees need pruning only in the first two or three years, and then only to give their heads some regularity. They are then left to do as they please, with the proviso, however, that they are inspected every year, in order to remove any greedy branches that may be overpowering the others, and to cut back any that are thin, poorly placed or dead. As for the pruning of cattails, gobeleta, espaliers, etc., we will limit ourselves to transcribing literally here what we have said about it in the Annuaire, and we refer to the excellent treatise on grafting and pruning, by M. Noisette, those who would like to study this diffidile subject in depth. "4. cattail pruning. We'll start with this pruning method, as it has been the most widely used for some fifty years. The tree on which it is pruned must be grafted six inches from the collar. In the first year, the stem is pruned to six or ten inches, in order to produce two lateral buds to line the cattail at the bottom, which is extremely important, and a third to form the extension of the stem. In the second year, prune the terminal bud to a foot or more, depending on your vigor, and prune the side branches so that they are always kept very short; disbud, and leave only the branches needed to fill the bottom cattail perfectly. Each year, we continue to raise the cattail by pruning the terminal bud to produce well-placed side branches: These branches must be arranged in tiers: if one branch grows in front, the second grows from the right side, the third from behind, and the fourth from the left side, the fifth from the same perpendicular as the first, the sixth from the second, and so on, so that all the insertions form a sort of spiral around the trunk; in this way, all the branches can benefit equally from the influences of air and light, and there is never any confusion. In principle, all branches should extend away from the trunk at right angles to its axis, like the rays of a rouc. Nothing is easier than forcing them to take this direction. Here's how. If a branch seems to be heading to the right, prune it on a bud placed on its left side; if, on the contrary, it is heading too far to the left, prune it on a bud placed on the right side. To prevent the bud, which is to form its extension, from heading in the same direction as the branch, we prune an inch from the bud, leaving a small snag which forces the bud to grow slightly sideways; this snag is removed in autumn. If a branch rises too much horizontally, it is forced to rise again by the same means, i.e. by pruning on an eye placed above; if on the contrary it rises too much, we prune on an eye below. We must not try to give the branches of the pear tree too arbitrary an inclination, because each variety has one which is more or less determined and even adjustable; and if we cut it too much, we could harm the vigor of the individual. A well-managed quincunx should have the shape of a regular allougé còne. = "You must be careful with the lambourdes or fruiting branches. They can be recognized by being large, short and transversely folded or wrinkled. "2. palmette pruning. A pear tree pruned in a palmette or fornyth style is nothing more than a cattail applied against a wall, whose branches are bent horizontally against this wall, and have taken on a greater extension. The branches that grow in front and behind are removed, as in all espaliers, and the tree is spurred and pruned in such a way that the lateral branches are six inches apart, and placed alternately one on the left and the other on the right. The tree is raised little by little, with the aim of obtaining two lateral branches and an extension of the stem each year. Any secondary branches that need to be replaced by joists are removed, often requiring long pruning. The balance of the branches is maintained by arching those that are carried away, and more or less straightening those that are losing weight. "3. espalier or fan pruning. The subject is trained on three or five main branches, with the middle one vertical, the other two inclined, and the lower two much more inclined. These three or five branches rise or lead like the stem of a cattail, with the difference that they and the lateral branches are palisaded, and those that develop in front of and on the side of the wall are removed. In weak subjects grafted on quince, it is sometimes necessary to remove the middle vertical branch. "4. pruning with counter-trellises. This differs from espalier pruning only in that it is carried out in the open air and not against a wall, and consequently we are obliged to trellis against stiles. Moreover, as the tree is more exposed to the influences of the air, it is also more vigorous, and often gets carried away instead of bearing fruit. There's a simple way to stop this excessive growth. It consists in letting the middle vertical branch grow upwards, and pruning it in a cattail shape. "5. goblet pruning. If we imagine an espalier tree raised on five main branches, and that we have rounded it into the shape of a cone by bending the two wings and bringing them together, we will have a perfect idea of goblet pruning. As you can see, the subject is raised on five branches, all starting from the collar, and rising away from each other to form an inverted cone. To keep them in this position, they are braced against circles which become larger the closer they are to the top. The inside of the cup must be completely empty." "The choice of exposure is not indifferent for pear trees. For example, early fruits like to be at sunrise, as do summer pears, which also like to be at sunset; but winter fruits only succeed and acquire all their qualities at noon. In principle, very fruitful varieties that would run out of fruit should be pruned short, to make them bear wood, and those that bear fruit differently should be pruned long..." Every year, for trees growing in the open as for others, a good autumn ploughing should be carried out, but with a fork or hook, so as not to mutilate the roots, and during the summer, hoeing and weeding should be carried out as often as possible. Every four or five years, to revive the soil's fertility, good fertilizers are applied halfway through. In dry, warm, light soils, cow manure is preferred; in strong, cold soils, horse manure is preferred. - Pear trees, especially in unsuitable soils, are prone to becoming covered with moss and lichen, which, in addition to keeping the bark very damp, are also a refuge for a large number of harmful insects. Great care must be taken to remove these parasitic plants as they appear." PEAS (Pisum sativum); an annual, indigenous plant, whose uses are well known to everyone. We have a large number of varieties, classified as follows by Messrs Vilmorin and Noisette. 1. SHELLED PEAS. This is the name given to varieties whose pods are covered with a tough, cartaceous film called parchment, which prevents them from being edible. a6 A. Dwarfs, which do not require rowing. Hative dwarf, very suitable for early cultivation, under a frame, because it is the most plastic of all dwarfs. Its stems rise from eighteen inches to two feet, and what distinguishes it from all other peas is that it produces its first flowers at the sccond or third node. Their pods are small rather than large, but are still highly prized. It is customary to sow them in January for the first season. It is necessary to pinch it when cultivating it under a frame, and this operation is even useful when it is in the open ground. Nain de Hollande is one of those peas that gardeners call franc-nains, because they never climb in any soil. For this reason, it is cultivated under a frame, although not early and of average season. Its stems are not as high as those of the previous variety, and they produce a lot, but their pods are smaller, as are the seeds. Of resto, it is of asscz good quality, and is often grown enbordure in mediocre soils. Nain de Bretagne. This one is of very mediocre quality, not very early, and its pods and seeds are very small; but as it rises the least of all peas, its tigez hardly exceeding five or six inches in height, it is very suitable for making borders. The gros Nain sucré is an excellent variety, productive, but late; its pods and seeds are large; the stems vigorous, large, stocky, requiring more space than in other dwarf peas. Le petit Nain vert. A taller variety than the previous ones, quite productive, with excellent seeds, remarkable for their fineness. The Nain vert de Pnusse rises even higher than the preceding variety, and forms the natural parzage between the naime and paddle peas of this region. It is more productive than the small green dwarf, but its seeds are slightly larger. The petit Pois de Blois grows to a height of only fifteen to eighteen inches; it is early and suitable for cultivation in chaszis. Its seeds are smooth, peeled and rounded. Les grimpans, qui, par cotséquent, ont besola d'être souteuus par des rames. Pois Michaux de Hollande is an excellent and very early variety. It is sown at the end of February or the beginning of March, because it is more sensitive to frost than michaux; but, as its vegetation is very rapid, it ordinarily outstrips michaux, which is sown at the end of November. This pea, which is recommendable in every respect, grows a little lower than michaux, and can do without oars if you take the precaution of pinching it at three or four flowers. It does not grow well in strong, damp soils. Pois Baron is quite similar to the previous variety, but taller. Pois Michauz or petit Rois de Paris is an excellent variety that has long enjoyed a high reputation in the capital. It is customary to give it preference for sowing in winter, at the foot of a south-facing wall. It is not necessary to row it, if you have the precaution of pinching it to three or four flowers, unless it is grown in a very substantial soil. Pois de Ruel is a sub-variety of the preceding one, which is grown in the same way, and which is preferred to it, because it is a little earlier, and its pods are larger. Black-eyed Michaxz is a very good variety, but is less or less hative than Ordian Michaxz, which has slightly larger seeds. It is cultivated in the same way. The hatif à la moelle or Pois d'Angleterre is eight joturs or so less hitive than the michaux. Its stems rise higher, its pods are larger, and its seeds are of excellent quality. Dominé has many similarities with the previous variety, but its pods are less rounded. In addition, it is productive and quite esteemed. Pois Laurent closely resembles the previous variety, but is less early. Pois hatif à grosses cosses is another sub-variety, with stronger stems and more rounded pods. It is of good quality and very productive. Pois d'Auvergne, newly introduced to our crops by M. Vilmorin, differs from the other varieties by its very long, arched pods, sometimes containing up to eleven seeds. It is of good quality. Pois de Marly is remarkable for its very high stems, large pods and very round, tender and very good seeds; but it has the disadvantage of being late. Clamart or carré fin is widely grown in Paris; it is used for late-season sowing, in the open field, and is not paddled in amended and substantial soils; in gardens, for example, it is not the same, and necessarily needs to be supported. It is late, tall and productive; its seeds are sweet and tightly packed in the pod. The Manc square grows very tall and has a very vigorous vegetation; also, in substantial soils, it often gets carried away in wood to the detriment of fruit. It is of good quality, but late. The black-eyed Susan is similar to the previous variety. It has the same qualities, and the same defect of getting carried away in wood; moreover, its flowers fear fog, and often abort. Sans-parcil has large pods, fat, elongated seeds, very tender, soft and sweet, excellent for greening; it is very productive and long-lasting, but it is late. Pois-Fève is a late variety whose ligen rises very high. Its seeds are very large and tender, but not very sweet. Pois Géant is one of those with the most vigorous vegetation and the tallest stems; its seeds are extremely large, soft, but not very sweet. Green peas from Normandy are late and grow very tall. Its seeds are good, but more prized dry than green. The wrinkled or Kniht pea, found by Mr. Kniht, of London, and introduced into France by Mr. Vilmorin, is late and grows well. Its pods are large, long and well-filled with seeds, which are large, twisted, a little square, soft, sweet and of excellent quality. Swiss Pea is an old variety that has become quite rare. Its pods are very large and very long, but with few seeds; it is also highly esteemed. 2. PEAS WITHOUT PARCHERIN or EAT-ALL. The pods of these have no cartaceous membrane, and can be eaten with the seeds. a. Dwarfs. Nain hatif is a variety native to Holland, where it is widely grown under frames, although its stems are a little tall. It grows well in the ground and produces quite a lot. The ordinary Nain grows from two to three feet tall; its pods are smaller than the preceding one, but more numerous, very tender and very good. The Flare Pea is the only edible pea that is absolutely dwarfed, its stems barely reaching a foot in height. It is branchy at the bottom, and its branches, almost all extending laterally, give it a fan-like shape, hence its name. Moreover, it is a late bloomer and produces little. b. Grimpans. The large-podded white Sans-Pareil, Corne-deBolien or Faucille, is one of the most esteemed of this secTon. Its stems are very high and very productive in good soils, and its corses are broad, large, fleshy, very tender and curved. This pea is a late bloomer. Pois sans parchemin à demi-rames is very productive and a little earlier than the previous one. Its pods are narrower and fuller. Peas without parchment with red blossoms, or QEil dePerdrir, are very productive and grow to seven or eight feet, but are very late. Its pods are hooked like those of the sans-pareil with large pods, tender, fleshy and sweet; its seeds are reddish green with purple speckles, large, round and smooth. The Turc or Crowned Pea grows very tall; its flowers, a pretty purple in many varieties, are arranged in the shape of a tuft or crown. Its pods are very numerous, very tender and very sweet. PRIMEUR. Early peas can be grown in three different ways: 1. in the ground, 2. in baskets, 3. in tarpaulins or under frames. We will deal separately with these three methods of cultivation. 1. Sowing in the ground. Along a wall in a warm location, prepare a bed by ploughing well. It is important to amend it only with well-consumed compost, if it has not been amended a few months in advance. In November (usually at Saint Catherine's Day) and throughout December, January and February, take advantage of favorable weather to sow in clumps or rays, spacing out as described in the article on ordinary cultivation. It should be noted that the first sowings do quite well in free soil, and that, for the following serials, from December onwards, sandy or at least very light soil is required. If the soil is light and dry, the peas should be sleeved, covered with soil and mulched, making them more resistant to frost. For this type of sowing, choose pigeon peas and other desirable species. Spread a small amount of dry litter over the entire seedbed. Careful attention is paid to where the protniets point out the date, so that the cover can be covered differently. A few stakes are driven into the bed, and poles are fixed horizontally to receive the mats. The mats should never touch the peas, but they should not be more than an inch or two from them, which means that the poles have to be raised as the stems rise. Whenever it's not freezing, remove the straw mats, but replace them again in the evening, and plug up the sides with litter, straw or, better still, dry leaves. When the cold becomes more intense, we leave the blanket in place, and increase its thickness with dry litter, so as to protect the peas from the slightest frost. Despite these precautions, if the peas are surprised and freeze, they should not be considered lost. By not exposing them to the sun's rays, which would kill them in an instant, and by thawing them out slowly using blankets, they recover very well from a frost of four to five degrees. When the weather eases, and there are no more frosts to worry about, usually in February in the Paris climate, we remove the shelters completely, do some weeding, put on the shoes, pinch the stems when they flower, if we think it's appropriate, and all that's left to do is harvest. In spite of all the precautions we've just mentioned, sometimes these seedlings have little or no success, if the winter is very harsh. Other methods must therefore be used to ensure good harvests. 2. Sowing in baskets. Starting in September or November, baskets or dummies seven to eight inches deep and a foot wide are purchased. They are filled with a mixture of half honest garden soil and half well-consumed potting soil; twenty to twenty-five pea seeds are sown in each basket; they are covered with the indicated soil, and a finger of well-consumed potting soil is spread on top. Baskets are buried in a warm place, at the foot of a wall facing south, and watered moderately to encourage germination. Until the first frosts, peas are given the same care as those grown in the open ground; but as soon as the cold begins to make itself felt, a warm layer is established, filled with eight inches of potting soil, and, after removing the baskets from the bed, they are sunk into it, and the young plants are covered with glasses. The glasses are removed as often as the weather permits, and the seedlings are placed in the soil.

never lose a moment of opportunity to provide air, even if only for an hour or two a day, simply by lifting the verrines on one side. When it becomes very cold, fill the space between the verrines with hot manure, and spread a good thickness of dry litter over the whole. Whenever it's sunny, the litter is lifted to provide light. When the thermometer is at or above zero, we open the top glass of the verrine, which must be hinged for this purpose. Peas are pinched off at two or three blossoms at most, and fruit can be obtained as early as February and March. It's essential to wipe off any moisture that clings to the glass as often as possible. Needless to say, for this type of cultivation, portable chàssis can be used to great advantage in place of glass jars. If you don't want to produce before April, you do things differently. When the first cold spells arrive, remove the baskets from the bed and transport them to a lighted orangery or cold greenhouse. They are given as much air as possible, and every effort is made to keep the temperature constantly at two or three degrees. If the temperature is allowed to rise any higher, the peas risk withering away, unless the greenhouse is perfectly lit. When the cold season is over, we take advantage of every opportunity to take out the baskets and let the plants enjoy the influences of the air. In February, we prepare muted beds with good exposure; we make them with horse manure, with which we mix a portion of dry leaves if we can get them, in order to increase the heat and maintain it longer. Cover with potting soil, and when the heat has passed, bury the baskets six inches apart. Soon the peas will bloom, and we pinch them at two or three blossoms. All that remains is to give them ordinary care, unless a few late frosts occur. In this case, cover them with straw mats supported by poles, as we said for seedlings in the ground, or vault them and support them with barrel hoops and laths. I've seen a few people sow peas in pots in December, winter them in apartments, then put them in the ground, in a warm spot, as soon as the season allowed, and obtain early harvests by this very simple means. If you want to grow peas in the late season, for example in November and December, sow them in baskets, as we have said, from the fifteenth of August to the tenth of September, and manage them in the same way; only take care to water them every other day if the season is dry. Pigeon peas are excellent for this cultivation, and when they have reached a height of five or six inches, they are paddled with light branches. When the frosts arrive, the baskets are removed and transported to a vegetable greenhouse or tarpaulin, close to the days. They are taken out whenever the outside temperature permits, and harvesting is not long in coming. 3. Sowing in trays and tarpaulins. In November, December and January, a good, warm layer of horse manure is laid under a frame, and covered with eight to nine inches of good loam. Sow thickly, give F --4 Ra a light watering, and plaster the panels. When the peas have risen and reached a height of three or four inches, we make a new, warm layer with a mixture of hot manure and dry excavation; we cover it with the same terrcan thinner, and transplant the young peas, in rows six to seven inches apart, two plants together, four inches apart on the rows. Lightly moisten the soil and place the panels, which are not lifted until 48 hours later, when recovery is assured. Plants can be left on the old bed, but if they are to succeed, it must have been prepared with a mixture of hot manure and dry leaves, so that it retains adequate heat until harvest time. In all cases, its temperature is maintained by means of new stoves, which are changed every fortnight if necostary. If frosts are severe, thick straw mats or dry litter are spread over the panels, but these covers should be left on as little as possible during the day, as deprivation of light is even more damaging to these plants than lack of air. Whether the peas are sown or planted, as soon as they have reached a height of eight to ten inches, they are placed on the ground, with the top of the stem facing the bottom of the frame, and maintained at this height by means of rods or narrow slats. Their heads continue to grow and soon rise again. After four or five days, the laths are removed, and the stems remain conched. This operation is considered very useful by market gardeners, because it ramifies the plants, which must necessarily increase the number of pods. The tigers are pinched on two, three or four lleurs, depending on whether there is more or less space to give them. Moreover, the zcins are the same as those required for other priors. In other words, we only water very lightly and when absolutely necessary, especially during frosts, so as not to chill the layer too much; we give them air whenever possible, and especially light, to prevent them from shrivelling. If you have a tarpaulin, cultivation becomes easier and safer. A good warm layer is established, and covered with nine inches of a soil prepared with one part light soil, an equal part potting soil, to which a small quantity of poudrette is added if desired; the whole perfectly mixed. From November to January, we sow Michaux or another early variety, and when the plant has emerged, we thin it out so that the plants are spaced as we said above, we pinch off two or three flowers, and we give it the usual care. The main thing is not to let the furnace fire get too hot, because if the temperature were too high, the stems would overextend, turn white and produce only a few flowers, most of which would abort. ORDIHAIRZ CULTIVATION. Peas are not at all fussy about the quality of the soil, and they do quite well everywhere, provided they are moved every year, and an interval of at least two years is allowed to elapse before they are returned to the same site. Without this precaution, they produce little and degenerate rapidly. Nevertheless, they prefer warm, light, sandy soils, and acquire many more qualities there than in the auins. Strong soils rich in nutrient juices enable them to grow a lot of stems and leaves, to the detriment of fruit. For this reason, it is not customary to fertilize the soil where you sow, unless it is of poor quality. Soil has a major influence, not only on the taste and quantity of peas, but also on the conservation of the varieties. Mr. Vilmoria's classification into dwarf peas and pole peas is far from rigorous. In one type of soil, dwarf peas will find abundant, suitable food, and will bolt to become a long-rowed variety; in another type of soil, poor in vegetation principles, rowed varieties will remain dwarf. Peas can be sown in clumps or in rays. In the first case, the holes should be made about a foot apart, a little more or a little less depending on whether you're growing a larger or smaller variety, and five or six seeds are thrown into each one. The soil from the second hole is used to cover the peas from the first, that from the third the second, and so on. When planting in rows, hoe parallel furrows eight inches apart, throw in the peas two by two, leaving about eight inches between them, and cover with two inches of soil. In the normal season, peas take only eight to ten days to rise. If necessary, give them a few sprinklings, pull out the weeds, and when the plant has reached five or six inches in height, cover it again by bringing a little earth around the feet. Now is the time to row the climbing varieties. As mentioned in the "Early crops" article, michaux peas and other early varieties are sown from November to February. All of them can be sown from March to the beginning of July, and at this time sowing can be extended throughout the month, and even up to the fifteenth of August, with Clamart peas, but the latter don't begin to bear fruit until October, and are often exposed to being surprised by autumn frosts. Seed peas are harvested from the best varieties; they retain their germinative power for three years if shelled, and four or five if left in their natural husks. CHICKEN PEAS (Cicer arictinum ). This species is known in various countries under the names Garvanche, Seiron, Ciseron, Pois cornu, etc. It is an annual and originates in France. It is an annual native to the Orient. It is grown very little around Paris, but is widely used throughout southern Europe. It is eaten mashed or cooked like lentils. There are three varieties: The yellow-seeded chickpea, with white flowers and fairly large seeds. The white-seeded chickpea, with white flowers and smaller seeds. The red-seeded chickpea, with pretty pink flowers and medium-sized seeds. PRIMEUR. As this species is only used in dry conditions, I don't think anyone has ever tried to force it into cultivation. Early harvests could be obtained, however, if sown on a warm bed, under a frame or tarpaulin, and given the same care as other peas. ORDINAIRK CULTIVATION. Chickpeas like light, substantial, warm soil. In the south of France, they are sown in autumn, but in the climate of Paris, they have to wait until spring, and can be entrusted to the soil from the beginning of May until the first days of July. The soil is prepared with one or two ploughings and good fertilizers, then sown broadcast or in rays; they are spaced further apart than ordinary peas; they are covered with soil, watered if necessary, weeded and destroyed, and require no further care. To harvest, we wait until the pods are yellow and almost dry. Then the plants are pulled out, bundled together and left to dry in the air, but in a place sheltered from the rain. When the seeds are absolutely dry, they are beaten with a flail. They may germinate for two or three years. 1* 1 74 POMME DE TERRR, PABMRRTRRE (Solehun Tuberosum); perennial plant, native to Peru, too widespread to need to detail here its many uses in domestic ecotomy. In recent years, however, the number of varieties has multiplied. We will mention here only the main ones among the best, and give them in the order established by M. Noisette, in his excellent Mxmuel. 1. Pommes de terre rougus. Frufie d'auilt. Pale red, rounded, precocc, good. Ronde de Lille. This variety is late, but very productive. Tandipe d'Irlonde, Atrinaine or Romme de terre Suiis.n. It is round, ascez big, and, what reud very-recommendable, it keeps without growing until the next harvest. Corve de Bupure. It's a very good variety, very productive, but it has the essential defect of growing in the greenhouse. Dezcroicille. It is lougue, roso, excellent, and keeps very well. Violatta. Keeps well; long and good. Rougi longue de Nollande: produces little, but is excellent. Largue de Bœuf or Pelure d'Ognon. This variety is the most valuable of all garden cultivars, because it is the earliest to flower. It can be harvested for consumption long before it has bloomed. Long marbled red. Its tubers, marbled with rongo and white, are retinned in large clusters at the base of the stems. Their quality is mediocre. Red oblong. This variety, with its excellent taste, has the merit of being very successful in strong soils.  1 3 * 8 * 43 * 4 3 - POM 315 Brought in a few years ago from Long Island. 2. yellow potatoes. Yellow Holland or Yellow Gherkin. Long, floury, excellent. Shaw or Chave. Very early, large, rounded and very productive. It is the most cultivated and perhaps the most esteemed of the early varieties. Naine haitive. Round, small, but even earlier than the previous variety. Patraque jaune. Very large and fairly productive, but of mediocre quality. Round flat. Mealy and very good. We received it from New-Yorck. 3. Purple potatoes. Round. Quite plump and very productive. Black. Has a rather strong, unpleasant odor, similar to that of certain mushrooms. Round and not very productive. Viotette hollandaise. It is oblong and good, but produces little. Its surface is stained yellowish and purple. 4. white potatoes. Grosse du Charollais. Mealy, good and very productive. Patraque blanche. Productive, very large, but of mediocre quality. Blanche à Vache. This is one of the most productive of all the varieties, so it is generally grown in large quantities in the dépariemens. It is quite good. Alanche longue or Irlandeise. It is ausei rustic, as productive and as good as the previous one, but not as big. Corne de Vache or Souris. A little early, very white, excellent, long, pointed at one end and a little flattened. Sucrin d'Hanovre, petite blanche, petite Chinoise. Rounded, irregular, small, very good, but not very productive. PREUCER. Some potato varieties keep fairly well from one harvest to the next, which means that very little has been spent to date on early varieties. Nevertheless, a few perzonians are able to obtain them using the two methods we'll describe below. As soon as the last frosts of January have passed, prepare a warm bed at the foot of a wall facing south, and plant whole tubers of early varieties. Cover them with three or four inches of soil, and spread five or six fingers of manure on top. If the frosts return, a good cover of dry litter is thrown over the planting, which is lifted during the day whenever the temperature permits, and put back exactly every evening. Potatoes treated in this way begin to produce tubers long before those from the previous harvest are exhausted. If you want to obtain new tubers throughout the winter, you do things differently. In May or early June, in a warm, vaulted cellar, spread a four-inch-thick bed of sand mixed with half potting soil that has been completely reduced to earth. Whole tubers are placed on top, four inches apart, and covered with a second bed of sand, a second of potatoes, and so on, until the layer is two and a half feet high. Soon the potatoes sprout spindly, small, flat-lying stalks of yellowish or reddish white. These stems are left to grow at random. As soon as winter begins, we make a hole in the sand of the bed, to check whether the new tubers produced by the roots have reached a suitable size for use in cooking. If this is the case, we start to pull them from one end of the bed, and every day we can extract a good quantity. Those that have not reached a suitable size are covered with sand, and when you have reached the other end of the layer, you can already make a second harvest, by starting again to dig the part of the layer from which the first ones were taken. Usually, this second harvest exhausts the bed, and a new one has to be made every year. We should also point out that the potatoes obtained by this method have much less flavor than those whose stems grow in the open air. REGULAR CULTIVATION. As the potato is more suited to cultivation in the field than in the garden, we will confine ourselves here to the details that are most essential to know. The potato can be grown anywhere, but its volume is greater in rich, substantial, strong soils, and it acquires its full flavor only in dry, light, sandy soils. In damp, marshy soils, it becomes pungent, and its flesh is watery and of poor quality. It can be propagated in two ways: by sowing, or by planting its tubers whole or in fragments. It is sown in early March or early April, very brightly and in rays spaced fifteen to eighteen inches apart. At the bottom of the furrows, cover the seeds with only half an inch of potting soil, and water to facilitate germination. When the plant has risen, thin out if necessary, so that there is about a foot between each plant. Some of the soil from the edges of the plant is then brought down to make a first buttaze, which is renewed as the stems rise, until they are fifteen inches high, at which point they are buttzed for the last time. They are then ridged for the last time, in the same way as planted potatoes. In good, light soils, a good quantity of tubers is obtained, more than half of which are of ordinary size. The smaller ones are excellent for planting the following spring. One of the great advantages of the sowing method is that you run the chance of obtaining new varieties, better than those you may have chosen; in any case, they are more suited to the climate and soil quality. For planting, we use whole tubers, or only cut pieces, each with at least two or three eyes. In March or April, they are planted in holes or gullies, a foot or eighteen inches apart, depending on the variety. They are lightly covered with soil, and as the stems rise, they are replanted with soil from the hole. In a good crop, potatoes should be ridged at least three times. It's extremely useful to harvest them at their ripening point, because if this point is missed and autumn is rainy, they turn green, sprout buds and lose all their quality. After allowing them to dry out on the terraip for twenty-four or forty-eight hours, they can be moved to a dry, frost-free place, where they keep very well, provided they are not overcrowded, or that you take the precaution of stirring them at least a few times. COMMON APPLE (Malus communis); native tree, of second size, having provided a large number of varieties, the best of which are Pammes de Paredis on da la Sam ham Fsuin ppit, rounded or elongated, bleno, spotted with red on one side, quite good, ripening at the end of June. Carmiz de fuin. Rounded, medium-sized fruit, greenish, bright red on the sunny side, a little acidic, but very pleasant. We mention these two species only because of their fruitiness. Calollle d'été, grosse pomme Maueteine, Passe-pomme. Small, conical, ribbed fruit, dark red on the sunny side, with dry flesh and little flavor, ripening at the beginning of the month. Astracan apple, Muscovy fransparent, ice apple. Medium-sized, wax-white, transparent fruit of mediocre quality, ripening around mid-August. Passe-pomme red. Small, flattened fruit, pink on one side and pale red on the other, of mediocre quality, mushy, ripening in July. Postophe d'été. Medium-sized, elongated, slightly conical fruit, pale red, reddish on the sunny side, with grainy flesh, quite pleasant, ripens at the end of August. Montalinet d'áté. Large, compressed, yellowish-white fruit with fairly good flesh, ripens in August. Kainette jcune halive. Fruit meyen, resembling the reinelte franche; of a light jenne, spiked with brown, of mediotre quality, ripening around mid-September. Rambour franc, pus Hembour. Very large, flattened, ribbed fruit, pale yellow, slightly red-striped, slightly acidic, ripening towards the end of September. Belle d'aoüt, Belle-Fleur. Very large fruit, red bgau, sweet and pleasantly acidic, ripens in September. Apple det Quecre-gouie. Medium-sized, flattened, russet-green fruit, quite good, ripens in October. Noxparcilla Trult rossetoblant à la reinetie du Canada, mais plua potit et d'un jaune plus pranoncé, mûrissant en octobre. Roirme da Reuiqbila Fruit rayen, tetet, yellowish-white, very pleasant, ripening in October. Reinelle du Canada. Very large, red lava-yellow fruit, very good, ripens in October and keeps until April. Grey Canadian sherry. Fruit smaller than the previous one, good, ripens at the same time and keeps longer. Reinette de Hollande. Large, elongated, very good fruit, ripening in early October. Reinette tendre, Reinette d'Espagne, blanc d'Espagne. Very large, elongated, white fruit, tinted pink on the sunny side, with a sweet, very pleasant acidity, ripening at the end of October and keeping until March. Reinette rousse or Carmes. Medium-sized, flattened, russet-yellow fruit, slightly acidic but good, ripening at the end of October. Gros Pigeonnet, Pigeonnet de Rouen. Medium-sized fruit, turbinates, red, very pleasant, ripens in October. Petit Pigeonnet. Fruit similar to the previous one, but smaller and ripening later. Fenouillet jaune, Pomme de Caracière, Drap d'or. Small, yellow fruit with lines imitating letters, fragrant, ripens at the end of October and keeps until February. Reinette de Bretagne. Large, bright, dark red fruit, speckled with yellow, very good, ripening in early November. Maltranche rouge. Very large, bright red fruit, very pleasantly acidic, ripening at the end of the month. Calville winter red. Fruit large, slightly elongated, dark red, very good, ripening at the end of November and beginning of December. Reinette daine. Elongated, bumpy, yellowish, pleasant fruit, ripens in November and keeps until January. Calville blanche, Bonnet carré. Very large, ribbed fruit, pale yellow and greenish, very good, ripens in early December and keeps until April. Chestnut. Medium-sized fruit, slightly elongated, red-streaked, very good when cooked, ripening in early December. Beef heart. Large, elongated, purple-red fruit, very well cooked, ripens in December and keeps until January. Culotte de Suisse. Medium-sized, elongated, russet fruit, striped with yellow and green, quite pleasant, ripening in December. Pomme-Coing. Large, pear-shaped, yellowish-green fruit, slightly acidic, ripening in December. Api. Small, flattened fruit, pale yellow on one side and bright red on the other, good, ripens in December and keeps until April. Black Api. Similar to the previous variety, but flatter and reddish-black; mediocre quality; ripens at the same time. Double Api, starry Api, daughter-in-law. Small, very flat, five-ribbed fruit, yellow on one side and red on the other; mediocre quality; ripens in December and keeps until June. Gros Api, Pink apple. Medium-sized, very flat, cherry-red fruit, darker on the sunny side, very mediocre quality, ripens in December and keeps until May. Fenouillet gray, aniseed. Small, flattened, gray and rough fruit, good, ripens in December and keeps until March. Pomme d'or, drap d'or. Fruit quite similar to yellow fennel, but more elongated, slightly larger and slightly acidic. Ripens in December and keeps until March. Pigeon, Jerusalem, Coeur de Pigeon. Small, turbinate fruit, light yellow on one side, dark pink ! 1 with a few red dots on the other, very good, ripens at the end of December and keeps until February. Court pendue or Capendue. Medium-sized, rounded fruit, very deep red on the sunny side, excellent cooked, ripens in mid-December. Pomme de sinale. Medium-sized fruit, turbinate, yellowish yert, very pleasant, ripening from December to February. Reinetle princasse noble. Large, elongated, yellowish-green fruit, striped with red on the sunny side, pleasant, ripens during the month. Rainette francatz, large, flattened, grayish-green fruit, tinged red on one side, acidic, ripens in December and keeps until February. Reinedle d'Angleterre. Large, elongated, ribbed fruit, yellow, slightly reddish on one side, very good, ripens in December. Reinette dorée, yellow tordive, Reinatie Pourse. Medium-sized fruit, a little flattened, rough, dull golden yellow with gray speckles, slightly acidic, ripening in December and January. Rainette de Ceux. Fruit very large, slightly turbid, beautiful yellow, very pleasant, ripening in December and keeping until February. Reinette krise de Granville. Medium-sized, flattened, grayish-yellow, russet on the agleil side, quite pleasant acidity, ripens in December and keeps until February. Postophe d'hiver. Large, light-red fruit, darkened on the sunny side, with firm, pleasant flesh, ripens at the end of December and keeps until May. Haule-Honté, Reipette-grise Haute-Ronté Fruit groe, rounded, greenish, with fine flesh and pleasant acidity, ripening in March. Reinque ģrise de Champagng. Medium-sized, compressed, tawny-gray fruit, striped with red on the sunny side, firm and fairly good POM 323 chais. Ripens in January. Reinette grise bec-de-livre. Elongated, medium-sized fruit with good white flesh, ripens in January and keeps until March. Montalivet. Very large, irregular, yellowish-white fruit with tender, proud and pleasant flesh, ripening in January. Fenouillet rouge, Bardin, Azerolly. Small, round, gray fruit, striped with red, with firm, sweet, slightly musky flesh, ripening in February and March. Reinette rouge. Medium-sized, slightly elongated fruit, yellow and pitted, red on the sunny side, with acidulous flesh, wrinkling when ripe in February. Reinette blanche or d'Espagné. Medium-sized fruit, swollen at the base, pale yellow, white flesh, tender, pleasant, ripening in February. Reinelle franche. Fruit usually rounded and medium-sized, light green with gray spots, yellowing and wrinkling a lot when ripe; flesh white, firm, very pleasant; this apple ripens in February and keeps until June. We omit to mention here a fairly large number of other varieties, some of which are quite good, but not comparable to those we have just mentioned. PRIMEUR. As apples are easily preserved throughout the year, it would be pointless to break into apple trees. However, if an amateur wanted to have fun experimenting on this subject, he could apply to this species everything we have said about pears. ORDIARY COETURE. Apple trees succeed almost everywhere, except in very sandy soils, clays or chalk; however, they are more at home in frank, soft and substantial turres reposenz on carcaireh rock bottoms. When sowing, choose seeds according to what you want to obtain. The seeds of wild apples produce the most vigorous, tallest trees, such as the wild apples we find in the woods. The others provide less vigorous trees, diminishing in strength in this order: 1. cider fruit seeds; 2. knife fruit seeds; 3. doucins. All trees obtained from seeds are called francs, and are generally more robust than the others. The seedlings are sown and the nursery cultivated as described in the article on pear trees. The difference is that apple trees need to be hoeed less deeply, because their roots sink less vertically into the ground. Dwarf apple trees, such as cattails, goblets, bushes, etc., can be grafted onto doucius offshoots, or onto paradise. As for the rest, apple trees are so similar to pear trees in cultivation that it would be pointless to repeat here what we have already said elsewhere. PORRUM (Allium Porrum); this garlic, native to Switzerland, is perennial like its congeners, whatever the good gardener may say, but it is cultivated as a biennial. Everyone knows how it's used in cooking. Two varieties are grown: the long variety, which supplies more and is more widely cultivated. The short variety, larger and much more resistant to extreme cold. PRIMEUR. Porreaux are usually grown one after the other with no interval, so it is not customary to grow them for primeur. However, in order to delay their emergence until July (the time when the year's seedlings begin to sow), here's how to do it. At the end of June, sow in the usual way, and water as necessary. After the first frosts, if you've sown long porreau, carefully uproot it and place it in the vegetable greenhouse, with the stem buried in sand. In spring, transplant it to the ground, where it will grow until June and July, if you take care to eradicate as needed those that are inclined to grow. When short porreau has been sown, it can be left in the ground without any problem, but it must then be uprooted and transplanted in the spring to delay vegetation. ORDINARY GROWING. Porreaux do well in all soils, provided they have not been smoked for two or three years, but they do much better in soils that are both substantial and light than in all others. They are sown in February or March, thickly and broadcast, then walked on if the soil is light, and raked to even out the soil. If the season is dry, water to facilitate germination. Until the plant has grown to the size of a typewriter pen, all it needs is a few weedings to free it from weeds. Then, taking advantage of rainy weather, we transplant it into place, and plant it in rows, six inches apart. Holes six inches deep are made with the planting tool, and the porreaux are planted in them, taking care not to bundle their roots together; on the contrary, they should be spread out as far as the width of the hole will allow, and the same applies not only to the porreaux, but to all the plants. If the soil is dry, water well to facilitate recovery. Some gardeners are in the habit of cutting off root and leaf tips: they are wrong. Weed the plantation, or water it often during hot spells; this last method hastens the development of the plants, and makes them fit for consumption from July onwards. 28 As soon as the first frosts begin, we pull up the long porreau and transport it to the vegetable greenhouse, where it is buried in sand as described above; or we open a trench at the foot of a wall on dry, south-facing ground, and place the porreau stalks in dry sand, close together but not touching. To prevent frosts from penetrating to them, they are covered with litter or dry leaves. We take them out as we need them for consumption, and keep the biggest and healthiest to make seedlings. These are planted in March, and usually go up in May. The stems are supported with sticks to prevent them being blown over by the wind, and when the seeds are ripe, the umbels are cut off and dried by laying them on a cloth and shaking them often. The first seeds to come loose are always the best, and are likely to germinate for two years. If you don't shake the umbels and keep them with their seeds, they may germinate in three or four years, but in this case you need to sow them much thicker, because not all are equally good. Before sowing other vegetables on land previously occupied by pigs, it should be properly fertilized, as this plant is a great drain on the soil. POURPIER (Portulaca oleracea); annual plant, growing spontaneously in the south of France. It is used as a salad when young, and cooked, but rarely dried, when large. Some people preserve it in vinegar. There are two varieties: Common purslane, with green leaves. Golden purslane, with yellowish leaves. This latter variety easily reverts to its type, provided its cultivation is neglected. PRDIXUR. In December, on the warm bed for small vegetables, either under cloches, under a frame, or under a tarpaulin, sow lightly and do not cover the seeds, which are very fine; just press them into the soil with the flat of your hand or a small board. Seedlings are sown month by month until the end of March. Water lightly with an apple watering can pierced with extremely fine holes, and that's all there is to it. As this plant is extremely sensitive to cold, and the slightest frost will kill it, it must be protected from it with the most scrupulous precision. To grow it from the moment when the harshness of the season no longer allows it to produce in the open ground, to the moment when it begins to produce in the beds, young plants are lifted with their root ball, and transplanted into the potting soil of the bed, where they are governed like those sown there. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. When frosts are no longer to be feared, i.e. at the end of April or the beginning of May, earlier or later depending on the climate, loosen the soil perfectly in a bed at the foot of a wall facing south. Sow the purslane lightly and cover the seed with a light stroke of a rake, or, much better, spread a layer of fine loam about a line thick. Water, and the seeds are ready to sprout. This is the best way to preserve the yellowish-golden color of the leaves, which makes them the most sought-after variety. A few of the most vigorous and golden plants from the first sowings are kept to provide seeds. These are harvested as soon as they ripen, which happens when the capsules begin to open. When stored in a dry place, sheltered from the elements, they retain their germinative power for five or six years. PLUM (Prunus); medium-sized tree, some species of which are exotic. We know a great deal about their fruits and the uses to which they are put. We will mention here the best species and varieties. MYROBOLAN PLUM (Prunus mrrobolana); from North America. Cherry-sized fruit, turbinates, attractive red color, pleasant flavor. CULTIVATED PLUM (Prunus domestica); this species is indigenous and has produced a large number of varieties, the best of which are: Prune de Catalogne or yellow hative. Small, elongated, yellow fruit of mediocre quality in wet soils. They ripen at the beginning of July. Précoce de Tours or hative black. Small, oval fruit of mediocre quality, ripening around mid-July. Royale hative. Purple fruit, fairly large, good, ripening in early July. Bisère, twice-yearly boune. Yellow fruit, long, very good, ripening on the fifteenth of July and the fifteenth of September. Monsieur. Round, large, beautiful purple fruit of mediocre quality, ripening around the middle of July. Monsieur hatif. Similar to the previous one, but darker in color. Ripens around July 15. Plum-Peach. Very large, superb fruit, quite good, ripening at the end of July. .Royale de Tours. Rounded fruit, large, purple on one side and red on the other, very good, ripening at the end of July. Damas musqué. Small, dark purple fruit, quite good, ripening around mid-August. Damas Maugeron. Medium-sized fruit, black, dark, assobon, ripening in September. Reine-Claude, ventc-bonne. Round, large, green, excellent fruit, ripening in August. Reine-Claude is generally considered the best of all plums. Reine-Claude-Dauphine, green apricot. Round, large fruit, slightly flattened at both ends, yellowish-green, excellent, ripening from August to October. Reine-Claude violette. Fruit differs from the previous one only in its violet color, very good, ripens in August. Petite Mirabelle. Oval, rounded, small, yellow fruit, very good, ripening around mid-August. Grosse Mirabelle, drap d'or. Fruit larger and rounder than the previous one, excellent, ripening at the same time. Prune de Jéruzalem, OEil, de-Rœuf. Fruit elongated, very large, slightly mamelonned at the top, reddish purple or bluish, ripening in September. Damas de Septembre. Fruit a little elongated, small, dark purple, quite good. Monsieur ierdif, Prune-Alletze. Medium-sized, round, purple fruit, good, ripening from September to November. Perdrigon blanc. Small, elongated, white fruit, very good, ripens at the beginning of September. Rrignole. Fruit a little elongated, medium, pale yellow, quite good, ripening in September. Sainte-Catherine. Medium-sized, elongated, yellow fruit, fairly good, ripening in September and October. Diaprée blancha. Fruit elongated, small, pale green, very good, ripening in early September. Soint-Mgrtin. Round, medium-sized, purple fruit, ascoz good, ripening from October to November. PRIMEUR. I don't think we've ever forced all plum varieties, and cola because we assume that many would be unsuccessful. That's not our opinion; on the contrary, we think that treating these trees as we did the apricot tree would produce equally good results. In any case, jordiniers are hardly ever used to force plums, whose fruit is known as Catalan plum, Saint-Barnabé plum or hative yellow plum, no doubt because it is one of the earliest. Here's how they do it. They graft the former onto the small Saint-Julien or small black damask, and place it in a pot of a size proportionate to the strength of the subject. They bury this pot in a flowerbed with favorable exposure, and give the tree the same care as if it were in the ground, with the precaution, however, of giving it a graver vase when the need arises. They don't think of training until the tree is in full bearing. Then they prune it as soon as it begins to leaf out, and transport it to a furnace-heated tarpaulin, or a hot greenhouse. They put the pot in a warm layer, and there, they give it the care we taught in the apricot article. With light, air and warmth, the tree gathers and ripens fruit perfectly. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Plum trees like open, light, chalky, slightly cool soil; however, they do fairly well everywhere, provided the soil is neither too dry nor boggy. In Paris, they are most productive when exposed to the east or south, but below this latitude they can be placed in the north. They can only be propagated by sowing, as they can only be grafted onto their own species. Some varieties reproduce from the stone, for example, monsieur plum, musk damask, greengage, September damask, etc., but never identically, and the fruit usually loses more or less of its size and quality. For sowing, robust varieties such as Saint-Julien, cherry, etc., are preferred. The pits are stratified in January, and planted or nursed once they have germinated and there are no more frosts to worry about. Young trees are cared for in the same way as other stone fruit trees. Plum trees are also sometimes propagated by suckering, but as these trees are never very vigorous, and have the serious disadvantage of always growing back by their roots, which exhausts them, they are rarely used except for grafting trees intended for espalier or cattail training. Plum trees can be slit-grafted in spring, but budding and dormant eye grafting are usually preferred. For the operation to be perfectly successful, it is important to pinpoint the right moment, i.e. the moment when the bark can easily detach from the sapwood, without tearing, and without the sap being too abundant to drown the bud. A few sprinklings can help determine this precise moment. Plums are cultivated and pruned in the same way as peaches, apricots and other stone fruits, only with slightly longer pruning. Great care must be taken to destroy offshoots as they appear, and to cut them right down to the root to prevent them from growing back. These trees often bear such an abundance of fruit that we are obliged to cut off part of them or support the branches with stakes. If a large quantity of fruit is left, it should be pruned back short the following year. 14 WILD RAIFORT (Cochlearia armorica); see COCHLEARIA. RAIPONCE (Campanula rapunculus); native perennial plant whose fleshy, mild-tasting root is eaten as a salad, and more rarely cooked. In addition to this species, two others are grown in the same way and for the same purpose: Gloved bellflower (Campanula trachelium); perennial and native. It likes shade and humidity. For excellent results, instead of potting soil, sprinkle the seedling with moss and dry leaves. Venus mirror campauula (Prismatocarpus speculum) requires sandier soil than raiponce, is cooler and less shady, and likes more manure. It is common and indigenous. PRIMRIR. We don't usually force this plant onto a bed, because it's not widely used, and perhaps it wouldn't succeed either. In fact, it could be grown all year round, by sowing in autumn and spring. The autumn crop would supply from June to September, and the spring crop through the winter. In all cases, it would be managed as described in the article on ordinary cultivation. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Campanulas like fresh, light, slightly shaded soil, amended with leaf compost; nevertheless, they do well everywhere. A good ploughing will loosen up the soil perfectly; sow the seeds in the air, in juia; then cover them lightly with fine compost. Water with a watering can fitted with a knob pierced with very small holes, and continue watering daily until the seeds have sprouted; then simply baste from time to time, especially during hot spells. All that's left to do is to destroy the weeds and do some weeding. They spend the winter very gently, without any care, and we start to pull them up for use in February, which lasts until May. At this time, they begin to set seed. Some gardeners are in the habit of covering the seedlings with chopped moss, and sowing through the camopanules a quantity of radishes, whose stems provide shade for the camopanules. The seeds ripen in July and keep for three years. RAVE, RADIS, PETITE-RAVE (Raphanuś sativus); annual plant, native to China. A fairly large number of varieties are available, distinguished into raves, whose roots are long, and radishes, whose roots are rounded. 1. Raves. Rave hative is red and very suitable for bedding. Rave de corail, or long red, does very well in open soil. Rave tortillée, to succeed perfectly, requires deep, soft soil. It should be sown lighter than the others. The white variety requires a lot of water if it is to be as mild as the others. Salmon or rose-colored. 2. Radishes. The half-long rose, sent to M. Vilmorin from Metz, is very early, not very leafy, bright pink, very good for growing. The small gray radish is sown a little light, and does not grow very fast in summer. The yellow variety has the same qualities as the previous one and should also be sown light. Ordinary white is hardy; it is the most commonly grown in middle-class gardens. Gros blanc d'Ausbourg should be sown very lightly from May to the end of August. It requires frequent watering. Petit noir is excellent for summer and autumn sowing. Horseradish or large black radish should be sown very lightly from June to the end of August. Its flesh is firm, with a very piquant flavor. It can easily be stored all winter by burying it in sand, or simply in soil, and protecting it from frost with dry litter or straw mats. The white hatif, acquiring all its delicacy only when sown in beds. Petit rouge, saumoné or petit rose, rouge paile, rouge tendre, violet, and red-fleshed are six varieties that also acquire all their qualities only when sown in beds. They are excellent and have many similarities. PRIMEUR. If you want to have small radishes during the winter, without the hassle of growing them on the bed, you can easily achieve this by doing what we're going to say. Sow them in the usual way, at the end of September. In November, prepare a layer of potting soil at the foot of a south-facing wall; pull up the radishes and plant them on this layer, taking care to bury them until the leaves begin to form. During hard frosts, we cover them with litter or leaves, on which we throw mats if necessary. This method preserves them very well until spring, but they are far from having the delicacy of those grown on bedding, by the means we shall detail. From October to March, we raise beds for this type of cultivation, either in the open air or under a frame or tarpaulin. They are filled with seven to eight inches of potting soil, which is walked on as much as possible if round radishes are to be sown. When the hot weather has passed, early varieties are sown, lightly watered and covered with cloches or glass panels. When the seeds have emerged, thin them out. When the cold becomes very intense, cover the bells or panels with litter and straw mats, all during the night. You mustn't lose a favorable moment to give the plants air, because if they don't get it, they wither and don't produce their roots. If you're growing under cloches or frames, you need to probe the layers from time to time, and as soon as you notice that they're losing heat, you revive them with heaters. The seedlings continue to be planted with the same care throughout the winter, but usually in February they can be covered with cloches. A few doormats are enough to protect them from the cool nights. In England and some northern provinces, radishes are grown to make a very good salad. Here's how: the seed is soaked in water for twenty-four hours, then placed in a small canvas bag and hung in the sun. The seeds are sown very thickly in potting soil, on a bed in winter, or in the ground in summer. Five days later, they have emerged, and the young leaves and cotyledons are sufficiently developed for them to be used by cutting very close to the ground with scissors. OBDINARY CULTIVATION: In March, start sowing turnips and radishes in light, loosened soil, covered with an inch of potting mix, and in warm conditions. We walk, water, destroy parasitic weeds, give one or two light weedings, and this care is sufficient. Seedlings can be sown again every fortnight, but when the heat starts to make itself felt, the little turnips are prone to becoming hollow, prickly and climbing. To prevent this, sow in cool, shady, north-facing soil and water so that the soil is constantly moist. Seeds are collected from the purest varieties. They may germinate for five or six years. RHUBARBE (Ahcum); two species are grown, whose thick, fleshy ribs are used in cooking, after being peeled and cut into sections. In England, they are used to replace the fruit used in pastries. The species cultivated for this purpose are: Wavy Rhubarb (Rheum undulatum); perennial and native to China. The least esteemed, yet the most widespread. Redcurrant Rhubarb (Rheum ribes); perennial like the previous one, and native to Asia. This one is much better than the other, but is still so rare that it is very difficult to obtain. Rhubarb (Rheum compactum) and Rhubarb (Rheum palmatum) are also very popular in England for cooking. PRIMEUR. I don't think anyone has yet tried to force rhubarb into cultivation. If we wanted to have it in winter, all we'd have to do is plant a few plants in baskets in spring. In autumn, the baskets would be immersed in potting soil in a warm, tarpaulin-covered or under-roof greenhouse. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: These plants do very well in free-flowing, light, round soil, amended with fertilizer and exposed to the sun. They can be propagated in two ways: by sowing and by separating suckers. Seeds are sown as soon as they reach maturity, in small pots that Ton dips into a warm layer of potting soil. When they have risen and the plant is strong enough, it is planted with its root ball. It's much quicker to propagate these plants by rooting suckers, separating them from their mother in spring and planting them out in rows and staggered rows, three or four feet apart. During the first year, they require some care: weeding, hoeing and watering are necessary to ensure a good start. In subsequent years, however, they can be left to their own devices, after being lightly ploughed each spring. ROQUETTE (Brassica eruca); a small, annual, native plant whose young shoots can be used as a salad ingredient. As it grows, it acquires a pungency that causes it to be rejected for ordinary use. PRIMEUR. A shallow plough is used to prepare a spot on the bed for small vegetables, and seed is sown every two weeks, from October to March. Lightly baste every day, and the arugula is soon ready for cutting. It grows back for a while, but soon wears out. In any case, whether grown under cloches, trays or tarpaulins, it requires no more care than that given to other supplies. ORDINARY GROWING: in light, warm soil in spring and autumn, damp and shady in summer, suitably ploughed and loosened, sow lightly and broadcast, covering sparingly with a rake. Weed, light and water as needed. It's especially in summer that you must not spare water, if you don't want the plant to contract a pungency that becomes quite unpleasant. Spring-sown seed is the best. It ripens in July and August, and keeps well for three or four years. S SALSIFIS or CERCIFIS (Tragopogon porrifolium); biennial and native plant, whose long, fleshy roots, white on the outside and inside, serve the same purpose as those of scorsonera. PRImEUa. No special equipment is needed to grow salsify all year round. Spring-sown salsify can be harvested from November26 to spring; all you need to do is sow in July and August, and you'll have salsify the following year, from spring to November. The only special care required for the latter sowings is to water them more abundantly during hot spells. REGULAR CULTIVATION. Salsify likes deep, substantial soil that has been thoroughly ploughed and loosened, and which has not been fertilized for some time. They are broadcast from February to the end of April, with frequent watering to prevent the seeds from drying out before germination. Sometimes sowing is prolonged until the beginning of June. We hoe and weed. If you fear that the soil will freeze too deep in winter for you to be able to pull them out easily if necessary, you can spread a good layer of litter over them; but it would be even better to pull them all out at the end of December, and place them in a vegetable greenhouse, in fresh sand, or else open a trench in the garden, arrange them properly and in potting soil, and cover the whole with litter or dry leaves to defend them against the rigors of frost. Salsify seeds usually ripen in July, and retain their germinative power for no more than two years. SARRIETTE DES JARDINS, SAVOURÉE ou SADRÉE (Satureia hortensis); annual plant, native to Italy, aromatic, much used in cooking to season bog beans, peas and sauerkraut. Another species, Satureia montana, is native to the same country and is used for the same purposes, but has the advantage of being perennial. PRIMEUR. In Holland, savory is dried out for year-round use. Before the flowers have developed, they are plucked, tied into bundles and dried in the shade in an airy place. Thus treated, it can be used for at least a year. Fresh sowings can be obtained throughout the winter by sowing them on a warm bed near glass; but they are quite delicate, and if they are not given plenty of air and light, they wither very easily. If mountain savory is grown, a few plants are lifted in November, along with the root ball, and transplanted into the warm bed of a vegetable bed, where they provide young stems for quite a long time. When the plants are exhausted, they are replaced by new ones. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: This small, tree-like plant grows to no more than nine or ten inches and is extremely easy to cultivate. It likes light, warm soils, where it is sown in February. It requires no special care. When the seeds begin to ripen, cut the stems, bundle them together and hang them from the floor in a dry place. They keep well for four or five years. STRAIGHT OR OFFICINAL SWEETBERRY (Salvia officinalis); native, frutescent perennial. In Paris, the only use for this aromatic plant is as a seasoning for rabe soup and to flavor fresh pork and ham. In Holland and even in northern France, it is widely used to season almost all stews. PRIMEUR. Sage is excellent dried as a seasoning, so no special care is needed in its cultivation. If you want to use it to dress fresh pork, you can pick it all winter long, as it retains its leaves even during the hardest frosts. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Sage likes light, dry, slightly warm soil, but can be grown successfully in all types of soil. It can be propagated from seed, splinters or cuttings. It is sown on a bed in spring, and when the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted with the root ball into the place it is to occupy. Cuttings are also taken in spring, in pots or terrines sunk into a warm layer of compost. To ensure that they take root again, water them well. They are replanted in the same way as seedlings. The easiest and quickest way to propagate is by splitting the clumps. The clumps are separated in spring, and replanted seven or eight inches deep. The soil is pressed down with the foot around the collar, to strengthen the plants, and watered. When sage is grown as a border plant, it must be replanted every four or five years, as it is easily thinned out indoors; but as an isolated bush, it keeps for many years. Several species and varieties are cultivated, but they are not widespread except in ornamental gardens, although many can be used for the same purposes as the one discussed in this article. SCORSONERA, SALSIFIS D'ESPAGNE (Scorzonera hispanica); biennial plant; native to Spain, whose roots, black on the outside, are used for the same purposes as those of salaifis. PRIMEUR. Scorsonera can be eaten all year round, without any particular care, because the roots remain tender and tasty even when the stems have gone to seed. CULTURX ORDIMAIRX. Scorsonera likes warm, leesy and especially deep, perfectly loosened soil. It can be grown in two seasons, from February to April, and from the end of July to the end of August. It requires the same cultivation as salsify. In substantial, mild soils, it often happens that in autumn you can already make use of those sown in spring, but more usually, you don't start pulling them up until spring. When the plant has grown and its seeds are ripe," says M. Noi- sette, "the stems are cut off at ground level, and the collars immediately sprout new leaves; the following year, the plant can still be preserved by the same means, and its roots, delicate as they are, will be much larger. = Scorsonera seed can only be preserved for two years. The best is that collected from two-year-old plants. COMESTIBLE SOW THISTLE, EARTH AMANDA (Cyperus esculentus); This perennial plant is native to Spain, where it grows spontaneously in marshy soils. Its roots bear small, numerous tubers, which are used as food and to make oil and a kind of orgeat. PRIMEUR. Yellow nutsedge has never been subjected to forced cultivation, not only because it is not widespread enough, but also because, being perennial, its roots can be enjoyed all year round. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: In March, in light, moist, perfectly loosened soil, make furrows two or three inches deep, at least ten inches apart. Swell the nutsedge tubers in water for twenty-four hours, and plant them in clumps of three or four together, a foot apart along the rows. Cover with soil; hoe, weed and water if the soil does not retain constant moisture. In October and Movember, we pull up the tubers like potatoes, and keep them the same way through the winter, for consumption and for replanting the following spring. SPILANTHE, CRESSOR DE PARA, ADÉCÉDAIRE (SpiVanthus olefacee); creeping, annual plant from the Indies, used in cooking as a seasoning because of the pungent flavor of its leaves. Another species is cultivated for the same purpose: Brazil cress (Spitanthus fusca), also an annual. PRIMEUR. In October, we sow them on the warm bed with small vegetables, and give them enough watering to keep the soil in a permanent state of humidity. They must be protected from the cold with the utmost care, as the slightest frost will kill them. In any case, they require no more than the ordinary care of other ornamental plants. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: Spilanthes are usually sown in warm soil in spring, and transplanted to light soil with warm exposure, when the plants are strong enough to withstand transplanting. All that remains is to give them plenty of water. Sometimes it's enough to sow them in the ground, against a wall facing south, in soft, loose soil, and cover the seeds with half an inch of potting soil. They often resow themselves. I Tetragonia expansa; annual plant, native to the South Sea islands, where it was brought by Dr. Banks during Captain Cook's voyage in 1772. - Like all new things (as stated in the journal of the Société d'Agronomie de Paris), Tetragonia has been praised excessively; we've tried to spread it in our vegetable gardens, where, incidentally, it hasn't made much of a fortune, and we've suggested it as a replacement for peel during the summer, a season in which peel is usually lacking because the heat makes it rise very quickly. PRIMEUR. The perpetual secretary of the Paris Horticultural Society, Mr. Soulange-Baudin, has suggested that market gardeners grow this plant as a primeur. However, we feel that this would be impractical because of the large amount of space it would take up in a tarpaulin, which would produce results of very little interest, and because it would be of no use during the nine months of the year when spinach is produced. These are undoubtedly the reasons why, to date, no grower, at least to our knowledge, has been tempted to follow the advice of the perpetual secretary of the Horticultural Society. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: Sow on beds and under cloches or trays, in February and March, either in potting soil, spacing the seeds four or five inches apart so that they can be lifted with the rootball when transplanting, or in small pots. When the plant is strong enough, and there are no more frosts to worry about, we transplant it into soft, terra-cotta soil with warm exposure, spacing the plants at least two feet apart in all directions. All that's left to do is to weed it and water it frequently during hot spells. M. Vilmorin believes that it can be successfully sown in the field at the end of April, either on ados or in terreautée beds. In the three years I've been experimenting with it, it hasn't yet succeeded. It's true that I get a few good harvests of leaves, albeit a little late, but I haven't yet managed to get seeds ripe enough to sow. The same grower, in his article Tetragone in the Bon. Jardimier, adds: "From tetragonia we take the leaves and the tender tips of the shoots, which are constantly renewed. "I can affirm, if this plant has the same mode of vegetation in other gardens as in my own, that this learned horticulturist is mistaken. Once stripped of its leaves, it doesn't grow back, only the bare stems emit a few twigs at the tips and at certain points along their length, and these twigs only produce a small number of thin, very small leaves. The seed is harvested in autumn, from plants sown on beds in February. If we consider tetragonia from a culinary point of view, it is a far cry from spinach, and even loses all its flavor if reheated. We believe that brède or black nightshade, which requires no care and produces equally well in the heat of summer, is preferable in every way. For further details on this subject, please refer to the journal of the Société d'Agronomie pratique, November 1829 issue. TOMATO or PONME-D'ANOUR (Solanum Lycopersicon); annual plant native to Mexico. Today, everyone knows how to use its fruit in cooking. There are several varieties available: The large red, most widely grown. It is furrowed. The small red, which differs from the previous one only in size. The small yellow tomato, remarkable for its color. The pear tomato, oval in shape. Cherry Tomato, very small and rounded. PRIPIRUR. Until now, we haven't made many tomato primes, because in their season we prepare a syrup that has almost the same qualities as the fruit in its freshness, when it comes to using it in sauces. Moreover, this plant is very easy to force, acting as we shall say. At three different times, in July, August and September, fill baskets ten inches wide by eight deep with good, light, substantial soil; bury them in the piod of a wall facing south, and sow a few tomato seeds in each, covering them with half an inch of compost. Water and care for the plants as usual. When the seeds have risen, only one plant is left in each basket. When the season threatens with the first white frosts, to which young plants are very sensitive, we remove the baskets and bury them in potting soil in a warm layer, under a tarpaulin or under a frame. Give them plenty of air and light, and moderate watering. When the young plants are eighteen inches to two feet tall, or rather when they are showing the buds of their first flowers, we stop them by pinching the tops of their stems and the tips of their branches. The fruits soon set and develop. When they have reached about half their size, to facilitate their ripening and coloring, they need to be given as much light as possible. To do this, remove any leaves that may hide them, and raise the flattened stems, supporting them with sticks. The fruit is harvested as it ripens, usually from December to March. To obtain fruit from March to the time of the regular harvest, we sow under a frame from the beginning of December to February. The plant is thinned out so that there are five or six inches between the young plants in all directions. When the plants are five or six inches high, remove them with the rootball, and transplant them into baskets of the same size as those mentioned above, one in each. Water to facilitate recovery, and press the baskets into a new warm layer of potting soil. The usual care is given to greenhouse plants until the frosts have passed. At this point, we set up a muted layer on which we transport the plants. Shelter them from the cool of the night with glass panels, and doormats if necessary, and remove the shelters every morning. The tomatoes soon set fruit, and require no more than ordinary care. We would point out, however, that they should only be gradually brought into the open air, for fear of over-sprouting their vegetation, or even altering it by too abrupt a transition. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Tomatoes like light, warm soil. They are sown in February, on warm soil, and when the plants are strong enough, they are transplanted into the ground, spaced at two to two and a half feet apart. We hoe, weed and, most importantly, give copious watering during hot spells. When the stems have reached fifteen or twenty inches in height, we support them with sticks, and pinch them off as we said in the early article, as well as the branches. When most of the fruit has reached half their size, or thereabouts, we start to thin out the leaves a little, so that they can benefit from the influences of the air and the sun. When they start to take on color, we remove all the leaves that obscure and surround them. When spring is warm and starts early, they can be sown in well-soiled soil, but the fruit can only be enjoyed after the end of the season. The small red variety always ripens well, but the large red variety does not. TOPINAMBOUR (Helianthus tuberosus); a perennial plant native to Brazil, whose fleshy tubers are used in cooking and have the flesh and taste of artichoke bottoms. Before potatoes were known, Jerusalem artichokes were much more widely grown than they are today. The stems of this plant commonly rise to five or six feet and end in pretty yellow flowers, which differ from those of the ordinary sun only in their smaller proportions. PRIMEUR. As only the tubers of this plant are used, and as it provides tubers all year round that can be extracted as needed, it would be perfectly useless to subject it to forced cultivation. ORDINARY CULTIVATION: Tubers are planted at the end of February or beginning of March, in the same way as potato tubers. Once the young plants have emerged, they are weeded and hoeed once or twice. They require no further care, and multiply so much that it's very difficult to destroy them once they've appeared in a garden. What's more, they are frost-resistant and can withstand the coldest weather. Jerusalem artichokes grown in France quickly become sterile; if you want to sow them, you have to bring seeds from America, or at least tubers, to harvest them. TOUTE-ÉPICE; see NIGELLE. TRIQUE-MADAME; see WHITE ORPIN. VINE (Vitis vinifera); the vine is a shrub native to Asia. It was brought to France in very ancient times, and if we are to believe ancient historians, it was the Phocaeans who founded Marseilles who were responsible for its cultivation. It soon spread to all parts of Gaul where it could succeed, i.e. as far north as the forty-eighth degree of latitude. My learned collaborator Mr. Noisette has described nearly forty varieties of table grapes in his Manual; but he considers it unnecessary to mention them here, as we are not in the habit of forcing them in greenhouses. The varieties he indicates as preferable for this purpose are: 1. Chazselas de Fontainebleau, also known as Cheselas doré, Raisin de Champagne. Its bunches are long, large, loosely packed, with rounded berries of varying size, light green or yellowish in color, slightly shaded on the sunny side. Its flavor is mild and sweet. 2. Petit Chasselas hätif. Its bunches are loose and elongated; its berries are small, less colorful and less pleasant-tasting than those of Chasselas. Its merit lies mainly in its earliness. 3. Muscat blanc, Frontignan grape. Its bunches are narrow, elongated and of medium size. Its berries are tightly packed, hard, greenish to dark yellow on the sunny side, with a very distinctive flavor. If it is sometimes grown in greenhouses, it is less to force it than to ensure its maturity, which rarely occurs in the Paris climate, unless the summer is very favorable and care is taken to remove the tightly packed seeds. 4. Muscat d'Alexandrie, Passe-Longue musquée. Long, stalked bunches, very large. Oval berries, nearly an inch long, light green, slightly shaded on the sunny side. Their musky flavor is very appealing. It is only found in a few flying greenhouses for the same reasons as the previous variety. To ripen in the open air, in the Paris climate, it needs very warm exposure. 5. Morillon blanc. Slightly elongated, compound bunches; medium-sized, loosely packed, rounded, whitish-green berries with a sweet, musky flavor. 6. Précoce de la Madelelne, July grape. Small, tightly-packed bunches; oval-rounded, small, blackish-purple berries, very covered with glaucous dust, not very sweet in flavor. The main merit of this fruit is that it is very early; nevertheless, it looks much earlier than it is, as it begins to color long before ripening, which takes place in August in the open air. We will limit the list of grapes suitable for forcing in greenhouses here, although most of the species grown in gardens, and even in vineyards, lend themselves equally well to this type of cultivation; and many of them, such as muscats in general, white and purple corinths, verdal, verjus or bordelais, white and purple gherkins, long-fruited franconias, etc., need to be cultivated in the Paris climate, need, in the Paris climate and in ordinary years, a flying greenhouse to acquire a perfect degree of ripeness. PRIMEUR. In England, where grapes ripen very poorly in the open air, the art of forcing vines into greenhouses and tarpaulins has been pushed to a high point of perfection, and it seems that it is in this country that this type of cultivation should be studied. Nevertheless, in Paris, and even in our northern départemeus, we have simple growers who are perfectly successful and can supply the rich man's table with perfectly ripe grapes every month of the year. The father of my collaborator Mr. Noisette, when he was in charge of the gardens of Monsieur, in Brunoy, cultivated vines in more than a hundred toises of greenhouse, and it is according to the various methods which he employed successfully for a great number of years, that we are going to treat this article, one of the most interesting in our work. First, we shall deal with the greenhouses, tarpaulins and panels that are necessary for the gardener who wants to practice this kind of industry. 1. Greenhouses. We assume here that you want to build a greenhouse entirely dedicated to this crop. The first step is to choose a site in the best exposed and warmest part of the garden, on condition that the soil is light, deep and substantial, and 30 capable of providing the vines with the elements for vigorous vegetation. If possible, the greenhouse should be built against a high wall, such as that of a neighboring house. If you have to build one, make it thick enough to prevent the coldest frosts from penetrating it, and raise it as high as economy allows. The higher a wall is, the more light and heat it reflects, and the less the cold winter winds have a hold on the greenhouses it shelters. As for the proportions of the greenhouse, they can vary from plus to minus. The length is indeterminate, but not the width. Six to eight feet seems to us the most manageable dimension. We base this rule on a fact that experience has always confirmed: vines always grow very well in greenhouses in all positions, but only produce fruit when they are exposed to daylight and can receive the sun's rays. The same is true of all other trees, though less remarkably so than this one. We therefore say that the greenhouse should be given a width of six to eight feet, to avoid an advanced coping or roof that would shade the espalier, since by following these proportions, the glazed panels can be applied directly against the wall, and the trellis will enjoy all the influences of light. (See figure II.) The height of the greenhouse can hardly be less than six feet, but it can advantageously be taller, and the average height seems to us to be between eight and twelve. Brunoy had much taller greenhouses, and Mr. Noisette's father found it advantageous to be able to grow a few other fruit trees, such as cherry, apricot, etc., under the vines. Some Paris establishments have square greenhouses for vines, because the walls against which they are leaning prevented them from reaching the desired length, and so they were designed to gain in width what they were forced to lose in length. In this case, the vineyard, instead of being wallpapered only against the wall, is also wallpapered against the sides, which are glazed like the front, and the roof must be entirely glazed. We won't go into the details of construction, because we must leave it up to each individual to build according to his or her means, and we'll confine ourselves to teaching the conditions that are indispensable for successful cultivation. If a gutter, or for any other reason, requires a hood to be built over the greenhouse, it should be glazed, if practicable, as shown in figure 12, or at least raised enough to receive the sun's rays and reflect them back into the greenhouse. Sometimes, for special reasons, we want to give a greenhouse a greater width than we have indicated, and in this case a roof becomes a great saving. A roof can therefore be made, but its width will never be more than a third or half that of the greenhouse, and it will have the same slope at the back of the greenhouse as that of the panels at the front. If this inclination is great enough to allow the sun's rays to strike against the plastered panelling of this roof in the greenhouse, it will do little harm to the success of the crop. Nevertheless, it will always be much better to make a glazed roof, as we have already said. To sum up, the architect building a greenhouse must not lose sight for a minute of these four indispensable conditions: to make it easy to 1. ventilate at will; 2. concentrate heat evenly everywhere; 3. leave as much freedom as possible for the greatest possible amount of light to circulate; 4. avoid humidity. If these conditions are rigorously met, whatever construction method is employed will have achieved its goal. Above all, he must avoid two dangerous pitfalls. The first and most common is petty economy in the choice and use of materials. The second, much more common in England than in France, consists in an architectural luxury that sacrifices the useful to the apparent. In our view, for a greenhouse to be beautiful, it must be good, perfectly adapted to its intended use, and nothing more. If you want it to play the role of a landscaped garden factory, as the gardens around Paris offer many examples, it's almost certain that it will only very poorly fulfill the useful purpose it should have. 2. The flying greenhouse. This is the same as the one we described in the apricot article on page 9, and which we drew in fig. 11. We won't go back over that article. We would point out that we regard the flying greenhouse as having the immense advantage of being able to be transported each year from one place to another, which means that we can with the greatest ease preserve all the vigor of a trellis, by heating it only in parts and alternately every three years. Nevertheless, we must say that this advantage is less noticeable for vines than for other fruit trees, as we have seen vines planted in hot greenhouses and heated every winter for twenty years or more without appearing less robust than others placed in the open air. 3. De la bache. This name is given to a buried greenhouse (see fig. 10), usually six to eight feet wide, covered with glass panels in the same way as a frame. It is rarely used for forcing vines, although it can be used in the absence of any other greenhouse, in which case it is necessary to forge in baskets, as we will explain below. Forcing in baskets. Few gardeners use this method, because it produces very little. However, it is useful to know about it, if only to provide the rich with the expensive pleasure of seeing on their table, in winter, a charming shrub, adorned with all its greenery and loaded with fully ripened bunches. After selecting the earliest species most suited to this type of cultivation, they are pickled according to the usual method, with the only difference being that instead of being simply planted in the ground, the pickling is done at the mother's foot, in a manna or basket filled with light, substantial soil. This basket is buried, but in such a way that later it can be removed with the rooted marcotte it contains. During the first year, the marcotte is cared for in the same way as full-ground plants, but with constant attention to maintaining a level of humidity favorable to root development. The following year, the marcotte is weaned from its mother, but without changing location. It is pruned short to produce vigorous, well-fed sarmens, and if any fruit is produced, it is cut off before flowering. If the marcotte has vegetated vigorously during the second year, i.e. after weaning, this is proof that it is sufficiently rooted to be forced. If, on the other hand, it has only produced short, weak sarmen, it should be left in place and not transported to the tarpaulin until the following year. Usually in autumn, as soon as the leaves have fallen, we lift the marcotte with its basket, taking extreme care not to break or split the root ball, so as not to tire the young roots in any way. Pruning is carried out according to the usual method, but as the wood is sacrificed, it can be loaded a little more than usual, while proportioning the pruning to the vigor it shows. The marcotte is transported in a tarpaulin or a warm greenhouse, and is placed in the bed with its basket. Care must be taken to ensure that the heat inside the layer is not too great, otherwise the root hairs will be burned and the shrub will perish. You can protect it from dangerous heat by making a hole in the bed larger than the basket, and placing a bed of light earth or loam between the basket and the walls of the hole, as thick or thin as you see fit. All the care to be taken from this point until the fruit ripens is absolutely the same as for vines forced into place, so we won't go into it here. All that remains to be done once the fruit has ripened is to lift the basket carefully, and transplant the fruit-filled plant into another vase suitable for its intended use. It should be noted that the vine should only be moved a few hours before it is to be placed on the table where it is to be planted, as the sudden transition of the roots from the high temperature of the bed to a cold temperature has a rapid influence on the plant, whose foliage loses its brightness and freshness. Forcing in place. This is the method most commonly and usefully employed by gardeners aiming for abundant produce. There are two methods of forcing in place, both of which are more or less equally used. The first is to heat an ordinary trellis using the "flying" greenhouse; the second is to plant and cultivate vines in a permanently heated greenhouse, built or adapted for the purpose. To heat with the flying greenhouse, the most suitable vines for this operation are selected from a trellis. They should be of average age, vigorous, well-trained since planting, and above all perfectly furnished with good spurs. To ensure that no space is wasted, the espalier must cover the wall perfectly, but without there being enough wood to cause diffusion. You also need to take into account the variety that is more or less suitable for this crop, and above all, it must not have been heated for at least two years. Once the choice has been made, it's time to prepare the vine, and if you need to heat the vine to obtain fruit as soon as possible, i.e. in January, it's a good idea to start caring for it the previous spring. This care consists in properly disbudding the vine, i.e. scrupulously leaving only the vigorous sarmens, and cutting back all the others with the pruning knife. All bunches must also be removed as they appear. Nature herself has marked the first favorable moment to begin the forcing operation. It's when, at the second sap, we see what gardeners call under-buds striving to pierce all over the vine, and sometimes even developing on very vigorous vines, the buds of the year's wood. We then begin to place the mounts and crosspieces of the flying greenhouse, absolutely as we said in the apricot article, page 9; but to support the panels, we establish a plank balustrade, as shown in our engraving fig. 11, and not a layer. The bed is lightly ploughed, fined with good fertilizer and pruned. This operation is carried out according to ordinary principles, with the only difference being that, as the wood is not yet mature, regular pruning must be sacrificed to the need to sometimes keep a well-ripened but poorly placed shoot, in order to cut down a well-placed but poorly grown one. For the rest, we also prune a little longer, and if there is too much wood, we are even-handed in removing the wood that is not bearing bunches as soon as the vegetation is sufficiently advanced to make it stand out. Panels are placed only at night, and only when the temperature begins to cool. The vines soon start to grow vigorously, and as the buds lengthen, they soon begin to show the rudiments of young bunches. Care must then be redoubled. Whatever the outside temperature, we place the panels every night, and even during the day when it's foggy or humid. Artificial heat can even be generated by laying a layer of small vegetables along the inside of the balustrade, as shown in fig. 11. But this layer should only be eighteen inches to two feet thick and three feet wide until the first white frost. Whenever it's sunny, lift the panels and let in some air, or even open them completely if you think it's warm enough. The moment of flowering is critical, and the success of the crop depends almost entirely on it. For the flowers to set perfectly, there must be sufficient heat, i.e. from 15 to 18 degrees Réaumur; there must be plenty of light, and the air must be free of humidity. If the gardener is lucky enough to have a few fine days during flowering, he will eagerly take advantage of them to give air while the sun's rays are beating down on the vine or in the greenhouse. But if, on the other hand, the sky is misty and humid, and the air full of fog, he will scrupulously keep the greenhouse closed. This is of the utmost importance, and people who know how fertilization works in flowers will feel it as we do. In fact, the stamen dust consists of small yellowish vesicles filled with a fertilizing liquor, which must be carried to the ovary by the stygma and the pistil. These vesicles have received from nature the singular property of bursting and releasing the liquor they contain as soon as they come into contact with moisture, so the stygma of all flowers is constantly moist. That's enough to explain how fertilization takes place. But if the air is laden with moisture, the pollen vesicles, coming into contact with it as soon as the anthers open, immediately burst, and disperse the generative liquor at random. This is the cause of crop failure when the sky is rainy during flowering. When the white frosts herald the approach of winter, care and attention must be redoubled. The warmth of one layer is no longer enough to keep the greenhouse at a suitable temperature. It's time to heat with fire. Between the greenhouse door and the bed should be a brick stove, or a stove that has been carefully insulated from the bed, to avoid accidents. The pipe, which can be made of sheet metal or cast iron, but is best made of terracotta, must cross the entire length of the greenhouse, at the surface of the ground, in the middle of the pathway. Once it reaches the end, it bends upwards and exits at the top, near the last panel. To keep the passageway clear, stacks of bricks are placed at intervals, over which boards are laid to conceal the pipes. Thermometers are placed at intervals along the wall where the trellis is installed, to maintain the temperature at a suitable level. We'll build a fire, but we'll take great care to light it from the outside, and to plug with clay any holes in the stove or pipes that might allow smoke to escape, since smoke is fatal to all plants. Every day, the trellis is scrupulously inspected in all its parts, and cleared of mold, rotting leaves and generally of any garbage that may have accumulated on the branches or leaves. Insects that heat attracts or causes to hatch are destroyed, the pathway is swept, and the utmost care is taken to maintain cleanliness. It helps to keep the air clean and prevents humidity. If you see the vine growing whitish, thick roots at its joints instead of buds, it's a sure sign that it doesn't have enough light and that humidity is harming it. The lack of light is often the result of a common ne- gligence. During the night, the steam raised by the temperature in the greenhouse condenses into water against the glass panels, attaching itself in the form of droplets, which evaporate during the day, leaving behind a kind of grime that thickens every day and causes the glass to lose some of its transparency. When this inconvenience is noticed, the glass should be wiped daily with a large sponge or cloth, to keep it as clean as possible. This kind of vine erosion we've just been talking about also sometimes proves that the mats are left on the panels too long in the morning, and replaced too early in the evening. We're well aware that this is an excellent way of keeping the heat in and saving wood for the furnace, but this misguided economy can sometimes be costly, ruining harvest hopes. As for humidity, if, despite careful cleaning and frequent airing, it invades the greenhouse, you need to find the cause and attack it at its source. In most cases, the cause will be found in the fumes from the vegetable bed. In this case, it must be destroyed without hesitation. In all cases, thick manure stoves should be placed all around the outside of the scrre, and raised two or three feet against the balustrade, i.e. as high as it. When the grapes are perfectly tied, and especially when the outside temperature allows air to be breathed in from time to time, don't be afraid to turn up the heat a little, and push it up to twenty degrees and beyond. This will save time and hasten maturity. But if you see the green of the foliage fading, and the vines inclined to wither, it might be wise, on the contrary, to lower the thermometer a little, in order to halt the force of vegetation. If a few bunches of grapes find themselves hidden by leaves that intercept the sun's rays, these leaves should be cut back, but only soberly, and only those that cannot be changed direction enough to prevent them from shading the grapes. When the cold has reached a certain intensity, every sbir, as night approaches, the greenhouse panels should be covered with good doormats, which should be doubled if the severity of the frosts so requires. These mats should be lifted every morning. In addition, you should take all the other care we have taught you in the course of this book for the various sections of fruit trees, and particularly for apricot trees. When it comes to obtaining fruit from the month of January to the time when the vine naturally produces in the open ground, the care is more or less the same, only we start heating later, and if we have a sufficient quantity of panels, we can start a new crop every month. This does not mean having several flying greenhouses, which would be too expensive, especially because of the heating, but simply extending the one you have by a few panels each time. For example, let's suppose a trellis of twenty toises, more or less, and that we start heating in September. Using panels three feet wide, we'll start by establishing a greenhouse of eight panels, which will initially give four toises or twenty-four feet. In October, we'll add eight more panels to the same greenhouse; one month later, eight more, and so on. We would point out that a single, well-built stove can easily heat twelve toises of greenhouse, especially when they have layers inside; so, with two stoves placed one at one end, the other at the opposite end, with pipes that meet in the middle of the length of the greenhouse, we can heat one hundred and twenty to one hundred and forty feet of greenhouse without excessive expense. The dwarf strawberries, peas and beans produced on such a long bed will compensate, and beyond, for the maintenance and heating costs. The same would not be true if you wanted to have as many greenhouses as seasons. Growing vines in permanent greenhouses does not always imply the intention to force. For example, in Russia, England, Holland and even Paris, for some grape varieties, we are obliged to grow in greenhouses to obtain maturity even at ordinary times of the year.

In this case, the vine doesn't need to be heated in winter; it just needs to be protected from the cold. We don't start lighting the stoves until spring, around February or March. Care is taken as we have said, up to and during flowering, and then, in summer, the panels are removed, leaving the fruit to ripen naturally. In Brunoy, Mr. Noisette's father cultivated several varieties in this way, which would otherwise never have reached maturity. Vines treated in this way require no more care for pruning and disbudding than trellises exposed to the open air. Let's now take a look at how to manage the cultivation of vines planted permanently in a greenhouse. If a greenhouse is to be built specifically for this purpose, it's a good idea to take advantage of a trellis that is already in use, and five or six years old if possible. If there are no trellises against the wall on which the greenhouse is to be built, they can be brought in by overlaying, if there are a few vines nearby, even if they are on the other side of the wall. If recoating were impossible, we could simply introduce the stems or branches into the greenhouse through a hole, and - a rather singular fact, which would be hard to believe if we hadn't experienced it several times in the superb establishment of my collaborator, Mr. Noisette, and with other growers - although the plant remains exposed to all the rigors of the season, the branches nonetheless vegetate with great strength and produce fruit as quickly as those whose plants are placed in the greenhouse. Nevertheless, if this method is employed, it would be wise to cover the soil around the stock with a good thickness of manure and long litter, and to wrap the stems right up to the greenhouse with a thick shirt of straw tied all the way round. If none of the above means could be used, planting would have to be done in the greenhouse, but then you'd have to obtain plants that have already reached a certain strength in baskets, so as not to have to wait too long for their produce. During the first two years, the greenhouse would be used for other crops. It would also be necessary, during this time, to prune and disbud the young plant, so that it gained body, and its stems, by lengthening excessively, did not remain thin and spindly. Despite all these precautions, vines grown in greenhouses always have this defect to a greater or lesser extent, no doubt due to the deprivation of air and full light during the peak vegetation period in winter. In the third spring, the vines are disbudded, fertilized and ploughed to prepare them for fruit production the following winter. As the panels are removed throughout the summer, vegetation takes place as usual, and the leaves begin to yellow and fall off at the same time, or not much later than for those in the open air. If you like, you can start heating from September 34 to January, but in Paris, this is usually at the end of October or the first few days of December. Then we lay the panels, light the furnaces, and start pruning. This last operation is carried out according to the usual principles, but there are two important modifications. The first is to save space. The arms are directed in such a way as to take up as little space as possible, and the spandrels are brought much closer together, so that no empty space is left against the wall. The second observation to make is that since the vine has to suffer throughout its life due to the effect of forced vegetation at the wrong time, it needs to be very sparing when pruned. This will not only maintain its vigor, but will also make the bunches of grapes much more beautiful if there are a few less. These observations should be taken into account when disbudding, trellising, and so on. Up to the moment when the fruit ripens, the care to be taken is absolutely the same as that described in the article on the flying greenhouse, so we won't return to it. When the grapes start to turn, extra care is needed to ensure they are as beautiful as they are good. The leaves are removed to let in as much light as possible, and if the grapes are leaning against the wall, they are brought closer to the light. We visit it every day and peel it so as not to leave any garbage inside. If the kernels are too tightly packed, intercepting the passage of air and light into the interior of the cluster, we remove some of them, but carefully, to avoid bruising or shaking the others. If any are spoiled, they must be scrupulously removed, as their contact would inevitably cause the others to rot. Finally, the leaves, like the rest of the plant, must be kept scrupulously clean. When the harvest is done, if there is still a fear of frost (which never happens if you haven't started heating until October or December), simply lift the panels, first for a few hours in the first few days, then for longer, and finally, when the full-ground vine enters vegetation, remove them altogether. Usually, around May and June, the vine makes a fresh effort to grow, and develops a few buds. But the sap soon stops, the wood ripens, the leaves come off at the usual time, and we start heating again in autumn in the same way as we said. A vineyard so artfully managed and cared for can produce for a large number of years without being much more altered than when grown in the open air. But the same applies to this shrub as to all the others. Despite all that we could say in an article even much longer than this one, despite all the efforts we would make to foresee everything, only practice and a few years' experience can put a gardener in a position to walk with a firm step and without trial and error in the difficult art of early growth. As for the others, we are convinced that we could never teach them enough, even if we had made a volume ten times larger. If we wanted to heat a vine that wasn't leaning against a wall, we could easily do so, using the espalier method with frames, invented by our learned collaborator, Mr. Noisette, and described in the article "Apricot trees", page 15. ORDINARY CULTIVATION. Vines do well in all types of soil, provided they are neither cold nor damp, but they prefer light, deep and sometimes rocky soils. It does not veg well and rarely ripens above 48 degrees latitude, and needs good exposure everywhere. In the climate of Paris, it needs the south; in our southern provinces, it does very well in the east, and even in the west. However, the earliest varieties, such as Chasselas, etc., ripen in Paris if placed in espaliers against a wall facing east. Grapevines are usually propagated by marcottes and cuttings. Cuttings are taken in spring, at the same time as pruning. The operation consists in lowering a shoot, without detaching it from its mother, and burying it in the middle of its length, so that it can take root. The following year, it can be detached from the stock, lifted and planted. The cutting or crossette is made from a previous year's shoot, which, when detached from its mother, is left with a heel of old wood about an inch long. If it is cut at the time of pruning, and the soil is not warm enough for planting, it is dipped in water up to half its length, and kept that way until the right moment for planting, i.e. until the end of April or the beginning of May. Before planting, the ground must be broken along the bed, at least four or five feet wide, and fifteen or eighteen inches deep. We amend it with good consummate fertilizer, appropriate to the quality of the soil, and loosen it as best we can. After marking the spot for each vine, holes are dug two feet wide and nine to ten inches deep. In each one, place a crossette or marcotte, taking care to incline it so that its upper end is close to the wall; first cover it with four to five inches of earth, which you tamp down a little with your foot, in order to secure the shoot in the arched position you've made it assume. Finish filling the hole, and spread three or four inches of spent manure over the soil, to keep it cool and prevent it from plummeting. The vine shoot is cut at two eyes out of the ground, and in the first year, all care consists of hoeing, weeding and giving the soil a few wettings in case of drought or excessive heat. The following spring, pruning is again carried out on two eyes; the same care is given to ploughing, weeding, etc., and the buds are placed against a trellis, or on the loqne. In the third year, we begin to establish the cords. (The first is assumed to be six inches above ground, the others should be eighteen inches by eighteen inches above). A single vine can easily provide two rows, one on top of the other, but it's much better to form only one, and plant closer together if you want several rows. A vine pruned on two branches is easier to manage and produces better-nourished fruit. The shoot is pruned just above the eye at the height at which you want to obtain the two arms, and the development of this eye is encouraged, as well as that of the eye below, in order to obtain two good buds. To do this, disbud the other eyes if they develop. When trellising, extend these two buds, one on the right, the other on the left, in the same line, to form the two arms. At each pruning, these arms are lengthened more or less, depending on the vigor of the subject, but never more than fifteen to eighteen inches. If you want to raise a vine to form two or three rows of cords, you shouldn't make the vertical buds longer each year; it would be better to wait to obtain a strong, vigorous stem. Every year, try to obtain three new buds on the arms, six inches apart. The first two should be pruned over two eyes, to form spurs; their buds should be trained vertically. The third will be trained horizontally, to form an extension of the arm. The same procedure will be followed each year, until we have obtained arms of the desired length. Nevertheless, we would point out that if you extend them too much, the sap will constantly be carried to the ends, and will abandon the part of the branches close to the stems. The inhabitants of Thomery, who supply the capital with the finest grapes, never leave them more than four to eight feet long. We would point out that a spur should never be pruned over more than two eyes, that it should never provide more than two buds, that it should be kept as short as possible, and that it should never form horns. When disbudding, the young wood is palisaded and supported in a good position, taking care not to break it; all misplaced buds which have no grapes are cut off, even those which would have grapes if they were harmful, or more than two on the same spur. Tendrils are removed, and fruit-bearing buds are pinched off after flowering. When the fruit is ready to ripen, it is gradually stripped to accustom it to the sun's rays, which should color the fruit and enhance its good qualities. We will confine ourselves to this brief overview of table vine cultivation, referring readers who would like to learn more about this subject to the excellent work of our collaborator, Mr. Noisette. END. TROYES. - IMPRIMERIE DE CARDON. 621 Googlo pw (60g1e - - - -4 1 1 uel du Jardinier der Prumeun. ttcg~ Vicesciccice, R 12 E4 be9 - E I H3 ~ 11. ~~ ~~~~ 10 IERE. "T 2 EE COogl0 VAS 1 Google F dla aladacoamammemmaamm dnso COO te 4 - - -- - ------ 651 Google 99UCoogle 1I 1 3