Source gallica bnf fr/ Bibliothèque nationale de France The author and publisher reserve the right to translate or have translated this work into any language. They will prosecute in accordance with the law and international treaties any infringement or translation made in breach of their rights. The legal deposit of this work was made in Paris in good time, and all the formalities prescribed by the treaties are fulfilled in the various States with which literary conventions exist. Any copy of the present work which does not bear my signature, as shown below, will be considered counterfeit, and the manufacturers and distributors of such copies will be prosecuted in accordance with the law. PES Typ. Rouge frères, Dunon et Fresné, r. du Four-St.-Germ.. 43. BIBLIOTHÈQUE DES PROPESSIONS INDUSTRIELLES ET AGRICOLES Serie H. N. h1. MANUEL PRATIQUE D JARDINAGE CONTENANT LA MANIÈRE DE CULTIVER SOIME UN JARDIN OU D'EN DIRIGER LA CULTURE PAR COURTOIS-GÉRARD Marchand grainier, horticulteur. SEPTIÈME ÉDITION PARIS LIBRAIRIE SCIENTIFIQUE, INDUSTRIELLE ET AGRICOLE Eugène LACROIX, Éditeur LIBRAIRE DE LA SOCIÉTÉ DES INGÉNIEURS CIVILS QUAI MALAQUAIS All rights reserved. The progress that time brings with it, even more rapidly in the practice of horticulture than in the other branches of human work, has occurred in large numbers, not only since the first edition of the Gardening Manual, but also since the sixth edition, which this one replaces. We must therefore point out that several sections have been thoroughly reworked to bring them up to date with current horticultural knowledge; any gaps that may have appeared over the years have been carefully filled. The calendar, revised and recast, has been expanded with important new details. Interesting and lucid explanations complete the chapter on vegetable gardening. The Assolement article, the first to be published on gardening, can be consulted with advantage by all those who want to obtain the most abundant harvests that a well-kept vegetable garden can produce; for not a fact advanced by the author has been taken outside what is consecrated by practice. In the section on the fruit garden, in addition to more detailed explanations of a number of operations, we find lists of the most esteemed fruit trees in each series - lists which are constantly being enriched by the many advances in Pomology - and data of great practical value for the treatment of tree diseases. But it is above all in the section devoted to the pleasure garden that we find the most remarkable improvements to the Gardening Manual, in its seventh edition, from the composition of lawns, a pitfall where so many inexperienced gardeners fail, to the direction of the most difficult plants to obtain in all their beauty. Indeed, it is not enough for the floriculture enthusiast to pile up, in the beds or flowerbeds of his parterre, the infinite variety of beautiful ornamental plants of every season that contemporary horticulture has at its disposal; it is above all necessary that these plants grow and flower with all the charm that is theirs; otherwise, instead of generating the most harmless and varied pleasures, floriculture offers only a long succession of misfortunes and setbacks. Numerous examples of flowerbeds made up of plants that can advantageously contribute to the ornamentation of gardens will enable amateurs who consult this work to often make the most of the resources at their disposal. Books which, like the Gardening Manual, smooth the way, enable the amateur to foresee and overcome difficulties, and ensure the success of his amusing work: these books are important services rendered to horticulture as a whole; for, by removing obstacles, they propagate the taste for it; and the extension of the taste for horticulture in all social ranks benefits everyone. As for the care given to the material execution, avoiding a luxury which would unnecessarily make the price of a work which by its nature should be within everyone's reach, it is what it should be, as in previous editions, from the point of view of neatness and the most scrupulous typographical correction. As you can see, this new edition of the Gardening Manual combines everything that can earn this book the continuation of the fame it has enjoyed since its birth. CHAPTER ONE. General layout of a vegetable garden. The advice we give here on how to set up a garden may seem superfluous to those who are forced to accept fixed locations, bastard layouts and arrangements made in advance; but we feel it is our duty to set out the conditions that it is essential to meet whenever you are master of choosing or laying out your plot. As for the interior layouts, they are designed to make the work as easy as possible, and are intended to show how crops can be grown one after the other without interruption, which is very rare in gardens cultivated by people unfamiliar with horticulture, and yet requires only a little attention and practice, and a book they can trust. The most suitable soil for cultivation is one that is 1 metre deep and made up of good soil, with the surface composed of free, soft earth, and the subsoil of sand suitable for vegetation. With this kind of soil, manure and water, we can be sure of successfully cultivating all the plants used in everyday farming. We don't mean to imply that soils of different kinds are unsuitable for vegetation; they are all suitable when they are light enough to be permeable to air, without moisture remaining too long, and yet cool enough to give the roots time to absorb the fluids they need for nutrition. Our aim is simply to highlight the most fertile soils, and those whose cultivation most amply rewards the gardener for his care. If the soil is not as we have indicated, manure, soil improvers and ploughing will make up for the qualities it lacks. The vegetable garden we represent (fig. I, at the end of the volume) forms a parallelogram of 54 ares 52 centiares; but this extent, chosen arbitrarily, in order to have more varied examples of cultivation, can change without there being the slightest alteration in the rotation or succession of crops we indicate; only, when the land is smaller, only one bed of each vegetable will be planted, instead of two or three. To make the work easier, we have combined crops of the same species wherever possible. Crop rotation should be carried out in such a way that one bed does not produce the same vegetables two years in a row. From every point of view, the kitchen garden should be enclosed by walls to the north, east and west, giving us southern, western and eastern exposure. To the south, the wall can be replaced by a hedge. Walls must be at least 2.65 m above ground level, and must be plastered on the inside. If they are built of plaster or stone, the espaliers can be trellised with rags; but if they are of hard rubble, they must first be lined with trellis. The coping should be lined with tiles projecting from Om, 12 to Om, 15, to protect the fruit from the damaging effects of rain, and to preserve the grapes well into the future. By suspending cloths or mats from the wall and keeping them at a distance, you can protect the blossoming peach trees from spring frosts. The southern walls will be planted with peach trees. To the east, grapevines will be planted and taken to Thomery. To the west, peach trees will be planted, with pear trees in between. To the north, the walls will be lined with Pear trees, and when planting at this exposure, care must be taken to choose the earliest varieties, so that the fruit can reach perfect ripeness. You can also plant plum trees and a few late cherry trees, which ripen at a time when we are usually deprived of these fruits. A hole should be dug away from the vegetable garden, and as far as possible from view, to dispose of weeds, vegetable peelings and plant debris, which can be used as fertilizer once reduced to potting soil. An important point to observe in setting up a garden is water distribution. In the vegetable garden, this should be done via underground pipes, which should be laid in the paths, so that any necessary repairs can be made without disturbing the plantations. The water will be collected in one or more basins placed in the middle of the garden, or, as indicated on the plan, in a basin in the center n. 62, and in barrels placed at the end of boards n. 8, 9, 24, 25, 34, 35, 50 and 51. These arrangements are all the more important in view of the vital importance of watering, not only in times of drought, but also to accelerate germination of seedlings and facilitate the recovery of newly transplanted plants. The middle aisle will be 3 meters wide, while the circular and cross aisles will be only 2 meters wide. The small alleys around the beds should be Om.60 wide, and lined with sorrel, civet, watercress, parsley, chervil, wild chicory, salad burnet, strawberry plants, etc. The width of the beds should be 1.60 meters. The width of the beds will be 1u, 33, with a senlier of Om 35 between each one, which will suffice for passage; for the first row of each bed must always be at least Om, 10 from the edge. The flowerbeds n. 61 on either side of the middle and cross aisles will be Im, 65 wide, and lined with Boxwood. A row of cattail Pear trees will be planted, spaced about 8 meters apart, with a dwarf Apple tree between each Pear tree. The square formed by the first eight beds will be used for sowing and transplanting the vegetables and flowers needed for the beds and flowerbeds of the pleasure garden. N. 9 to 29 and 50 to 30. Planting beds for cultivation. N. 51. Site for diapers. N. 52. Currants to be planted. N. 53. Raspberry plantation. N. 54. 2m, 75 wide hillside for vegetable cultivation. N. 55. Shelf 2 metres wide, where a row of English Rhubarb will be planted. N. 56 and 57. Tray of same width to be cultivated. N. 58. Counter-row of vines, part of which can be heated each year. N. 59. Tray approximately 1 metre wide. N. 60. Rows of vines supported by stiles placed at the end of each plank, so as not to obstruct the paths. N. 61. Tray 1m, 65 wide. N. 62. Basin. N. 63. Manure entry door. N. 64. Path leading to pleasure garden. CHAPTER II. Timetable. In drawing up this calendar, our aim has been to indicate, in a manner that is at once succinct and precise, the various operations that must follow one another without interruption in the course of a year, so that vegetable, fruit and flower production is always abundant, and the soil never rests. To achieve this result, it was necessary to do more than outline the work involved in each month; it was also necessary to indicate with precision the time of sowing, that of harvesting, the place occupied by each type of crop, and the nature of the plants that should succeed those that have completed their period of vegetation. We believe we have achieved this last goal by referring to the numbers on the plan (see pl. 1), which leaves no uncertainty as to the choice of location to assign to each plant; and as the calendar indications would have been insufficient in the form we have given them, or would have required developments that a synoptic table does not include, we refer, for the cultivation specific to each species, to the special article devoted to it. Contrary to custom, we begin the year with the month of August, because that's when the horticultural year begins, whereas starting with the month of January, as is common practice, separates autumn work from that of spring, with which it is intimately linked, since it is the necessary preparation. AUGUST. Mean barometer height, 756 mill. 380 (1). Mean temperature, maximum - 21°,20. minimum - 160,46. Quantity of rain, 48 mill. 59. Hygrometer reading, 700.5. GENERAL WORK. - This month is one of those that demands the gardener's utmost care and activity. Not only does he maintain, by watering and basking, the vegetation of the plants he expects to harvest towards the end of the season, but he is also already busy sowing and planting the plants destined to overwinter and produce the following year. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - There is little need for beds in this month, and the only work to be done is to plant cauliflowers on the melon beds, and to make a mushroom wheel at n. 8. Coastal n. 9 - In the second fortnight, Scarole is planted, sown in the open ground in the second fortnight of July. (1) BOUVART, Observations météorologiques faites à l'Observatoire de Paris. Open ground, n. 14 - Dutch spinach is sown. N. 23: Savoy cabbage sown in July. N. 32: Turnips are sown. N. 37. Turkish Celery, sown in the first half of June. Sow bulbous chervil and pink radishes. White onions, winter red Romaine, Passion lettuce, Passion chicory, Chervil, York, beef and sweetbread cabbages are sown in the second fortnight. Carrot, Lettuce, Onion, Chive, Leek, Parsnip, Parsley, Crambe and Maritime seeds are harvested. FRUIT GARDEN. - Finish trellising espaliers; remove branches that tend to get carried away. Water peach trees and uncover fruit nearing maturity. Graft fruit trees and ornamental trees and shrubs. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - All care consists of watering, raking, hoeing, cutting lawns, putting autumn flowers in place, such as Balsamines, Daisies, Carnations, etc., if these tasks have not already been carried out; finishing carnation marcots. Graft tree peonies onto tubers of herbaceous peonies. (See page 74, the Grafting article.) Separate and replant double Juliennes, bed out seedling Carnations or plant them in flowerbeds. Plant Imperial Crowns and Martagon Lilies. Sow seeds of herbaceous Peonies; this method of propagation is extremely time-consuming, and is rarely used except to obtain new varieties. Sow large-flowered pansies in September, transplanting them to a nursery with good exposure, and planting them out only in spring. Also sow Pelargoniums, Calceolaria, Cinerea, Mimulus and Giroflées quarantaines, but in pots and under frames. GREENHOUSES. - Towards the end of the month, cut back and repot Pelargoniums and plants whose pots have been buried during the summer, so that they will be ready when you bring them into the greenhouse. Take cuttings of Pelargoniums, Calceolaria, white-flowered Chrysanthemums, Cuphea, Ageratum Mexicanum, Fuchsia, woody Veronica and Verbena. SEPTEMBER. Average barometer height, 156 mill. 399. Mean temperature, maximum - 170.87. minimum - 13°.74. Rainfall, 57 mill. 26. Hygrometer reading, 750.2. GENERAL WORK. - Gardening work is beginning to diminish, as the year draws to a close, and maintenance requires less diligence. Watering is becoming less frequent, and only takes place in the mornings; because of the cool nights, evening watering has to be stopped. On the other hand, it's harvest time: the seeds are ripe or about to be, and it's time to think about picking them. The careful gardener will lay out his greenhouses and fruitbeds to bring in his fruit, vegetables and plants when the time comes. We also need to make the necessary repairs to the trunks and panels, so that they'll be in good condition as soon as the cold weather arrives. fortnight, we top up the bed with potting soil and plant gotte lettuce, sown in the first fortnight of the month. As the cold approaches, these lettuces are covered with frames and given as much air as possible, to prevent rotting; with care, they can be kept until December. Coastal, n. 10 - Passion Lettuce, Passion Chicory and Winter Red Romaine, sown in August, are planted in the first fortnight. Open ground. - In the first days of the month, sow cauliflower, York and beef cabbage. Chicory is sown under cloches, but cold. We sow salad burnet and pink radishes on teens, and we continue to sow ordinary chervil, bulbous chervil, lamb's lettuce and spinach. Cardoons and Celery are being blanched. N. 56. Early carrots are sown. N. Al. Long leeks are sown. N. 42, 43, 44 and 45. Five rows of four-season strawberries are planted in each bed, and placed at Om, 35 on the row. N. 46 and 47. Plant four rows of Queen's Strawberry seedling, or any other large-fruited species, in each bed, and set them at Om, 50 on the line. Chicory, celery, beet, pear and cauliflower seeds are harvested. FRUIT GARDEN. - This month's work is limited to little else. Nevertheless, we are keeping an eye on Peach tree vegetation, in order to maintain the balance of the sap. Trees that had grown too vigorously during the previous month are grafted, and the fruit is protected from the voracity of birds and insects. We give the last hoeing. 1. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Same care and maintenance as in previous months. This is the best time to sow lawns with grass, as there is still enough time for it to cover the ground before winter, and in spring it is in a position to resist drought, which is very contrary to it. This is also the time to mow boxwood borders, sow Clarkias, Collinsias, Coréopsis, Crépis, Énothères, Alyssum maritimum, Gilias, Mufliers, Némophiles, Œillets de Chine, Silènes, Saponaire de Calabre. Thlaspis, etc., and prick out the plants in the nursery before winter, before planting them in the spring. Sow Anagallis, Brachycomes, Centranthus, Eucharidium, Leptosiphon, Nemesia, Nycterinia, Malopes, Phlox Drummondi, Schizanthus, Trachymene and Viscaria in pots and winter them under a frame. Also plant Iris Germanica, sow Giroflées quarantaines to transplant on teens, or in pots, which we bring in as soon as the cold sets in. Sow Ranunculus and Anemone in pots or in the ground. Separate and replant herbaceous Peonies, but in such a way that the buds are only covered by about Om, 5 or Om, 3 of soil. Plant Pancratiums Illyricum, bulbous Fumeterres and Alstræmerias, which can withstand full soil; also plant Daffodils Om, 5 or Om, 6 deep, as well as Muscaris, Hyacinths, Crocuses, early Tulips and Narcissus, which you want to heat through the winter. You can also take cuttings of Calceolaria, Ageratum Mexicanum, white-flowered Chrysanthemums and Verbena. GREENHOUSES. - Around the 15th, we bring in the warm greenhouse plants, which will suffer from the drop in temperature. Temperate greenhouse and orangery plants are repotted, so that they can be taken up before they are brought in, and panels are put back on greenhouses and tarpaulins. OCTOBER. Average barometer height, 754 mill. 465. Mean temperature, maximum - 14°.73. minimum - 90.46. Rainfall, 48 mill. 10, Hygrometer reading, 82°,5. GENERAL WORKS. - Start winter ploughing, planting work and changes to garden layout; make tree holes, plant even if in a hurry. Separate borders and clumps of perennials, prune hardy trees, start mowing hedges, cover delicate plants; harvest seeds, fruit and vegetables. If you have land to move for certain garden layouts, you can get started. In the evening, we make mats, so as to be able to cover the frames and greenhouses in the course of the following month. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - Green asparagus is first heated, and pineapple eyelets are planted in pots proportionate to the strength of each; immediately after planting, the pots are placed on a layer, and from this time until spring, the heaters must be reshuffled every month. Plants planted at the same time the previous year should be removed from the soil and placed in the greenhouse. In the first fortnight, we sow small black lettuces under cloches and on ados; we raise these lettuces without ever giving them air. At the same time, we sow Romaine verte maraîchère, and in the second fortnight Laitue rouge, Laitue gotte and Romaine blonde ou grise maraîchère. When the plant begins to have a few leaves, place three rows of bells along the length of the bed, and transplant around thirty plants under each row. For the first week after planting, give the plant some air by raising the bells by about Om, 3, then after this time, gradually increase to Om, 8, and only lower the bells when it freezes at 2 or 3 degrees. When properly cared for, this plant will be used for all plantings from December to the end of February. Early cauliflowers and cabbages are transplanted in the nursery. N. 6 Towards the end of the month or at the beginning of November, fine Chicory sown in the first fortnight of September and two rows of Cauliflower sown in the first days of September are planted on the ground, but under a frame. If, towards the end of the month, we fear frost, we should put the panels on the Lettuces planted n. 3. Open ground, n. 19 - Spinach is sown for spring. In the second half of the year, white onions sown in the second half of August are transplanted to n. 18, and chervil or lamb's lettuce are sown in between. The last sowings of bulbous Chervil are made. Towards the end of the month, or at the beginning of November, cut off the old Asparagus stems, and give each bed a light hoeing with a fork, then spread a good mulch of manure. Celery and cardoons continue to be blanched. FRUIT GARDEN. - There's nothing left to do to the trees until it's time to prune them; however, we can mark those we intend to remove, so that they can be lifted the following month. This is the time to pick the fruit and place it in the fruit garden, which should only be done when the weather is dry and as the trees stop vegetating. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Cut the stems of perennials that have stopped flowering. Clean, smoke and plough flowerbeds before planting plants that will flower in the spring. Collect leaves that have fallen into the pathways and give them a final facelift. Sow in place Cynoglosses, Larkspur, Poppies, Mahon's Clover, Adonides, etc. Redo borders of Mignardise, Boxwood, Marjoram, Thyme and Hyssop; wean Carnation marcots, and plant them in pots or in the ground. Plant Hyacinths at Om, 10 deep, and pot those intended for heating. Plant Spanish and English irises at Om, 3 deep; Crocus in pots, borders or lawns, where they will produce a charming effect in spring and will be deflowered before it is necessary to cut the lawn. Tulips should be planted about Om.6 deep. You should also plant Golden Garlic and Italian Scillium, and raise Gladioli planted in spring. As soon as the first frosts set in, remove Dahlias, Erythrins and Balisiers from the soil, and place them in the orangery or in a dry cellar to overwinter. Do the same with all greenhouse plants planted in the spring to line beds and flowerbeds. They should be pruned and potted; then, to restore them, put them under a panel for some time. GREENHOUSES. - Pelargoniums are brought in during the first fortnight, and orange, pomegranate and laurel trees during the second, unless there is premature cold. The most delicate plants, those that need air and light, are placed close to daylight, and the hardiest are placed behind. When all the plants have been brought in, we hoe the soil in the pots or crates, and give them a light watering. NOVEMBER. Average barometer height, 755 mill. 614. Average temperature, maximum - 10°,15. minimum - 4°,74. Quantity of rain, 55 mill. 87. Hygrometer status, 820.2. GENERAL WORKS. - We begin planting and plowing, as well as clearing the land for new planting. Care is taken to preserve plants that fear frost, and leaves are collected to make layers and cover frames. When you have a choice, Oak and Chestnut leaves are the ones to be preferred. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - We continue to heat green asparagus and start heating white asparagus. In the first few days of the month, we sow Peas under chassis, but in the ground, for replanting under chassis. We sow Georges Lettuce under cloches and on ados, and treat the plant as we have indicated for red Lettuce and gottes. Green Romaines are lifted and immediately replanted under cloches, but this time only twelve or fifteen are planted per cloche. If the Romaine blonde or gris plant advances too much, it must be transplanted a second time, as with the Romaines vertes. In the event of severe frosts, the bells covering the Lettuce and Romaine plants should be lined with dry old manure or leaves, and a stove raised to the surface of the bells should be used to line the back of the bed. The cover should be increased according to the intensity of the cold, and the bells uncovered when the sun is shining; but it is necessary to check first whether the plant is not affected by frost, because then, instead of uncovering, the cover should be increased and the plant should be allowed to thaw gradually. Open ground. - We pull out the Celery planted in n. 37, to replant it in rows in a trench; when heavy frosts come, we cover it with litter or leaves, which we remove when the weather becomes milder. N. 31. Towards the end of the month, we sow Michaux Peas, and, in the intervals, Lettuce for cutting. Artichoke stalks and the longest leaves are cut off, then mounded, an operation which consists in raising the soil around each clump, so that it is buried almost to the top. When there's a hard frost, we cover them with litter or leaves, which are removed when the weather is mild. To make sure you don't run out of supplies during frosts, all vegetables that could be damaged by frost or prevented from being pulled out, such as carrots, beets, turnips, chicory, scarole, celery and cardoons, should be pulled out and placed in a gauge, either in the vegetable greenhouse or in the vegetable garden. You'll need to cover with straw or leaves any plants you've straddled in the garden, such as leeks, salsify, scorzonera and turnips, and uncover them whenever the weather permits. Also, during the month, pull out the cabbages from which the apples are made, and put them in gauges, so as to be able to use them during the frosts. Later in the month, but as late as possible, cut cauliflower heads, which should only be done when the weather is dry, and put them in the vegetable greenhouse, where they can be stored until April. FRUIT GARDEN. - Prune old or debilitated trees, to prevent the sap from rising in the buds that need to be removed, and the tree from becoming exhausted. Grub out trees that you intend to remove. Start planting fruit trees in chalky, light or sandy soils, where it is always preferable to plant in autumn, except for Mulberry and Fig trees, which should only be planted in spring. Fruit trees intended for heating the following year should also be planted in pots. If a few panels are available in the first fortnight, they should be placed in front of the vine espalier; in this way, grapes can be preserved in all their beauty until January. Towards the end of the month, Fig trees can be stuffed, or, if the branches are flexible enough to be lowered to the ground, they can be secured with wooden hooks, then covered with soil. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Spade lawn edges. Pull up defoliated annuals. Plough flowerbeds and beds. Divide and replant perennials whose clumps have become too large. Put yellow Giroflées in place, as well as Hollyhocks, Poetic Carnations, Golden Corbels and Thlaspis. Finish planting tulips, hyacinths and daffodils. Sow the first Sweet Peas. Weed out Dahlias in the second half of the month, if the weather has been favorable enough to leave them in the ground until then. Butter the free-standing roses, which usually suffer in our winters. Start planting ornamental trees and shrubs, except for resinous trees, Catalpas, Magnolias grandiflora and Tulip trees, which should not be planted until spring. When it starts to freeze, pot carnations, large-flowered wallflowers and Cocardeau should be covered or placed in the greenhouse. GREENHOUSE. - All greenhouse plant care consists in renewing the air as often as possible, keeping them clean and only wetting them with the utmost reserve. We start covering the warm greenhouse at night, and continue until April. When, in the evening, the weather is clear, the wind is easterly, and the thermometer registers no more than 3 or 4 degrees above zero, cover all the frames and greenhouses with straw mats. DECEMBER. Average barometer height, 754 mill, 953. Average temperature, maximum- 70.93. Minimum -3°, 53. Rainfall, 43 mill, 60. Hygrometer reading, 870.5. GENERAL WORKS. - Work in the open ground is very limited; fertilizers can be transported and spread on the soil in which they are to be buried. Plowing continues, frost permitting. Towards the end of the month or at the beginning of January, the trenches are emptied of the old melon beds, so that the site can be laid out. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - The cessation of work in the open ground gives gardeners time to take care of their beds, which require all their care. As soon as the beds indicated for this month are made, they should be covered with panels, so that the manure will ferment more quickly; and, unless there is weather to the contrary, those on which you have sown or planted can be uncovered every day, taking care to cover before nightfall. Continue heating white and green asparagus. In the first fortnight, sow early Raves, and in the second fortnight Leeks. N. 3. around the 15th of this month, sow early short carrots on beds and under frames, and plant small black lettuce sown in the first fortnight of October. N. 4 Plant clumps of sorrel on beds and under frames. N. 5. in the first fortnight, transplant Peas sown in the first days of November to the ground, but under a frame. Open ground. - At the onset of frost, Broccoli are lifted into clods and planted close together, deep enough for the stem to be buried up to the first leaves. Cardoons are tied, lifted into clods and moved into the vegetable greenhouse. Parsley is covered with straw or leaves, and when the weather is mild, artichokes are uncovered a little; but it's wise to cover them in the evening; and, if the frost increases, they should be covered with a greater quantity of leaves or litter. We continue to sow Michaux Peas, and in the first fortnight we plant at n. 12 York Cabbages sown in the first days of September. FRUIT GARDEN. - Planting continues, and in heavy, clayey or damp soils, holes are made only for planting in February or March. The soil is ripped, smoked and ploughed, and towards the end of the month the mobile greenhouses are placed on the Vines and espaliered fruit trees to be heated. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Continue with layout changes, prune trees, break up old lawns for reseeding, repair damaged paths and continue planting. Renonculas can be planted in the second fortnight. GREENHOUSE. - Maintain the temperature of the pineapple greenhouse, fill the strawberry shelves, renew the air in the temperate greenhouse and orangery when it's not freezing, and close them before the sun disappears. Cover Camellias, Rhododendrons, Magnolias and other hardy shrubs. Although they can remain three months without light and without any care, it is nevertheless a good idea to visit them occasionally to remove the mildew that the absence of air can produce. JANUARY. Mean barometer height, 757 mill. 759. Mean temperature, maximum - 7°,10. minimum - 4°,41. Rainfall, 36 mill. 27. Hygrometer reading, 86°,5. GENERAL WORK. - This month is usually cold and wet; but, weather permitting, we continue the ripping and plowing that could not take place during the previous month; and we open the asparagus pits for spring; we also bring to the field manure destined to be buried; we pile up that which will be used to make layers, stoves, etc.. When the weather is severe enough to prevent outdoor work, the necessary repairs are made to the gardening tools, the seeds are cleaned and everything necessary for subsequent operations is prepared. The gardener who has greenhouses and beds has a constant occupation, and at this time of year they require all his care. If the weather is wet, you must remove the bedding covering the artichokes and cover them as soon as you fear the return of the cold. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - Layers must be cared for, stoves must be refilled, and those that don't need refilling must be filled so that they are always as high as the surface area of the panels. Unless the weather is unfavorable, uncover the panels every day, and give the plants some air when the sun is shining by lifting the panels on the side opposite the wind; it's a good idea to cover them before frost forms on the glass. We start heating pineapples that are ready to bear fruit, continue heating white and green asparagus, and plant Marjolin potatoes. The first fine Chicory is sown on very hot beds, for planting under frames. Parsley is also sown in trays, or new plants are planted. Continue planting sorrel clumps. Early Peas are sown in cloches or under frames, to be transplanted into the ground, and towards the end of the month, frames are put over the Strawberry plants that we want to force into the ground. N. 4 In the second half of the month, transplant Dutch Beans sown in the first half of the month, on a bed and under a frame. N. 7. we make a layer on which we place three rows of bells. Under each bell, plant four small black lettuces (sown in the first fortnight of October), and in the middle a green Romaine, chosen from those sown in the first days of October. Open ground. - There is little work to be done in the open ground; however, if it doesn't freeze towards the end of the month, you can plant York and Oxheart cabbages, sown in the first few days of September, and Romaine verte, sown in the first fortnight of October, in light soil with good exposure; then sow early carrots and leeks among them. FRUIT GARDEN. - Continue planting and, weather permitting, start pruning espalier and cattail apple and pear trees when it's not freezing, continuing until March, always starting with the least vigorous; remove dead wood and destroy caterpillar nests. Cut branches for grafting, or take cuttings and bury them in sand to the north, away from frost and atmospheric influences. When cold weather or other circumstances prevent trees intended for planting from being put in place immediately, they should be laid out in gauges and their roots covered to protect them from frost. Dull the trees and treat them with lime milk, to destroy lichens and insects that attach themselves to the bark. For the same purpose, whiten the walls of espaliered trees, which can be done with a garden syringe similar to the one used to wash greenhouse plants. Start heating Vines, Cherry, Peach, Plum and Fig trees. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - There is little work to be done in the harsh season; however, we take advantage of the favorable weather to do the groundwork, plow the beds and bury the leaves. Planting can also continue. In the second half of this month, we can start sowing Madagascar Periwinkle on a hot bed. GREENHOUSE. - Put potted Hyacinths, Narcissus, early Tulips, Bengal Roses, Lilacs, Rhododendrons, etc., whose flowering is to be brought forward, under chassis or in the greenhouse. Uncover the greenhouses every day, unless the weather is adverse, and, when the sun is shining, give the orangery and the temperate greenhouse a little air; lastly, carefully visit the plants placed in the greenhouses, and make sure they are not affected by rot. FEBRUARY. Average barometer height, 757 mill. 706. Mean temperature, maximum - 70.08. minimum - 00.94. Quantity of rain, 40 mill. 50. Hygrometer reading, 830.2. GENERAL WORKS. - Finish all ploughing that could not be done during the previous month, and complete work that winter has suspended; you must hurry to finish them, so as not to be stopped when vegetation starts up again. Whenever the weather permits, give air to artichokes and celery, which you cover when you fear frost. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - Same care as last month. We sow the first frame melons and cucumbers; we continue to heat white asparagus, sow fine chicory, Dutch beans to be planted under frames, wild chicory, pink radishes and early carrots on beds, but in the open air. We sow kohlrabi, red cabbage, savoy and Brussels sprouts. Towards the end of the month, Aubergines are sown, and early Cantaloupe melons, sown in the first days of the month, are planted at No. I. Coastal. - If the weather does not permit earlier planting, green Romaine, sown in the first fortnight of October, is planted at no. 9, and cauliflowers, sown in the first fortnight of September, are counter-planted in the Romaine; then early Carrots and Leeks are sown among the rest. Open ground. - Sowing starts again this month, and has grown in importance; we are beginning to butter Crambes to blanch them. N. 15. Early carrots and radishes are sown. N. 21. Beef heart cabbage is planted in the first days of September, and after planting, spinach is sown between the cabbages. N. 22. plant York sprouts, also sown in early September, and sow with chervil or spinach. N. 34. sow early dwarf broad beans. N. 48. Sow Scorzonera. N. 49. Sow Salsify. Towards the end of the month or in the first days of March, sow n. 40 with Oignon jaune des Vertus; n. 14 with Pois Michaux de Hollande, sown on a bed in January or February, and n. 29 with Pommes de terre Marjolin or fines hâtives. FRUIT GARDEN. - Start planting in heavy, clayey or damp soils; continue pruning Pear and Apple trees, and start pruning Apricot, Plum, Cherry, Peach and Vine trees. Prune redcurrant bushes and cut back raspberry bushes, to obtain more fruit. Dull trees and apply whitewash, if this operation has not been carried out at the time previously indicated. Plant Müriers, finish ploughing. Stratify almonds to be planted in spring, and sow pear and apple trees. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Plough copses and beds, as well as lawns to be sown at the end of the month. Prune hardwood roses, such as centenaries, Provins, non-remontant hybrids, etc. Replant borders of Boxwood, Lavender, Sage, Hyssop, Mignardise, Pâquerette, etc. Plant resinous trees. Planting can continue until March. Sow larkspur, poppies, Mahon wallflowers, Thlaspis, reseda, if not sown in autumn. Plant Ranunculus, Om, 05 deep. Sow in the bed: Giroflées quarantaines, Amarantes, Pervenches, Petunias, Mimulus, Lobélias; almost all annual plants, except autumn ones; then, when the seedling is strong enough, transplant it in the nursery, to be planted out only in April and May. Cuttings of Coleus, Lantana, Lobelia, Heliotropes, Nierembergia, Petunia, Salvia and Verbena are also taken from the bed and, if properly cared for, can be planted in the pleasure garden in May. GREENHOUSES. - Renew the air in the temperate greenhouse and orangery, remove dead leaves. Hoe pots and water moderately. MARCH. Average barometer height, 755 mill. 852. Mean temperature, maximum - 9°,94. minimum - 20.66. Quantity of rain, 39 mill. 89. Hygrometer reading, 75°,0. GENERAL WORKS. - This month's work is the first of the year to require the full activity of gardeners. We must hurry to finish ploughing, bury manures and fertilizers and redo the borders everywhere. Plants that have been ridged and covered to protect them from frost are uncovered; seedlings and plantations must still be covered with a small layer of compost or light mulch, to protect them from spring frosts and sunst, and seedlings that have been stored in a gauge or in the vegetable greenhouse are planted. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layering. - During this month, the beds require a great deal of supervision, as the frames often have to be shaded during the day and covered at night. We raise the cauliflower, bean, etc. trays whenever necessary; and if, towards the end of the month, the weather is favorable, we remove the cauliflower panels; but, as at this time of year the nights are often very cold, we have to cover them with straw mats during the night and in bad weather. We start heating second-season pineapples. We continue to sow frame melons, cucumbers, eggplants and wild chicory. Potato cuttings are taken, and towards the end of the month, Tomatoes and Peppers are sown. N. 7 In the first fortnight, three Lettuces gottes sown in the second fortnight of October are planted under each bell. N. 2. in the second fortnight, we plant on a trench bed Melons sown in the second fortnight of February, on which we bring back the frames that were on the Carrots sown in n. 3. Coastal. - Sow a row of parsley along the wall. Open ground - Potatoes and all seed carriers are planted. Sow white onions, Saint-Denis, quintal, Milan and Brussels sprouts, lettuces, Romaine, parsnips, celery, pear blond, spinach, chives, peas, broad beans, salsify, scorzonera, wild chicory, salad burnet, parsley and chervil. N. 13. Two rows of Crambes are planted. N. 14. Sow pink radishes in the first fortnight. N. 17. Blonde Romaine is sown towards the end of October. N. 20. Plant red lettuce sown around October 15, and counter-plant cauliflower sown in the first fortnight of September. N. 25, 26, 27, 28: Plant four rows of Dutch asparagus, spaced about Om, 40 apart along the row. N. 32. Auvergne peas and wrinkled peas are sown. 39. Semi-long Carrots are sown. Broccoli and turnips are sown in the second fortnight. FRUIT GARDEN. - Finish planting, complete pruning of fruit trees, except for those that are too vigorous; plough the base of espalier trees. Graft Vines, and at the time of the first movement of the sap, make the transverse incision to develop the branches necessary for the framework of the trees that you want to raise in a regular shape. Plant Fig trees and uncover stuffed ones; cut out dead wood and cut back branches that are too thin. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - In addition to the work indicated at the top of this month's calendar, complete the planting of trees, shrubs and perennials; completely clean and sand the paths. Uncover all roses that have been stuffed or stubbed out. Finish pruning them, except those that have suffered from the cold; wait until they have started to vegetate, and prune them long rather than short, except to shorten them a fortnight later. Rebuild boxwood borders and plough heather beds. Sow grass lawns in areas where it has not been possible to sow in autumn. Plant Ranunculus and Anemones that have not yet been planted. Plant Tigridias Om.5 deep, Gladiolas Om.10 deep and St. Jacques Lilies in pots or in the ground Om.15 deep. Separate and replant perennials. (See page 69, Multiplication by roots.) 27 Sow Crépis, Malopes, Lavateres and Reseda, which you can continue to sow throughout the summer. Sow, for transplanting, Yellow Wallflowers, Chinese Carnations, and almost all the annuals you have previously sown in the bed. Sow Coreopsis and Thlaspis too, if you didn't sow them in autumn. Sow Tuberoses in the bed, and put Dahlias tubers under a frame to encourage bud development. Sow verbenas, balsamines, amaranths, amarantoids, Indian Senecon, zinnias, etc. on beds, and when the plants are strong enough, transplant them to the nursery bed for planting out in May. Also sow Cobeas, and as soon as they have a few leaves, transplant them into small pots and leave them on the bed until the end of April or the beginning of May, when they can be planted in the ground. You can also take cuttings of Coleus, Lantana, Lobelia, Heliotropes, Nierembergia, Petunia, Salvia, Verbena, when those taken in February do not promise a good recovery. GREENHOUSES. - In this month, there is no longer any need to light fires, as the sun has gained enough strength for its rays to heat up the atmosphere, and it is often necessary to shade the greenhouses, so as not to let the plant leaves burn. Watering will gradually become more frequent and abundant. We clean everywhere, and syringe plant leaves as often as the temperature demands. APRIL. Mean barometer height, 754 mill. 789. Mean temperature, maximum - 120.70. minimum - 50.59. Rainfall, 45 mill. 53. Hygrometer reading, 650.8. GENERAL WORKS. - We are continuing the work that was not completed during the previous month; but, as frosts are less to be feared, we can plant seedlings of all kinds. Weed out and thin out seedlings, mulch plantations to protect them from sunstroke, and, if watering is necessary, do it in the morning and during the day only, because of the cool nights. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - We sow Melons to be planted under cloches, Cucumbers, Gherkins and Pumpkins to be planted in the ground; under a frame, Flageolet Beans to be transplanted also in the ground; and on a bed, but in the open air, Fine Chicory and Cauliflower. N. 3 In the first fortnight, we plant Melons sown in the first fortnight of March, on which we bring back the frames which were on the Cauliflowers planted n. 6. N. 7 We plant under cloches two rows of Eggplants sown at the end of February. N. 4 In the second half of the month, we make a dull layer, and plant under cloches a row of Melons sown in the second half of March. N. 8. Towards the end of the month or at the beginning of May, plant a row of Potatoes, 2. Tray-band, n. 55. - A row of English Rhubarb is planted. Open ground. - Potatoes continue to be planted. We sow cauliflower and continue to sow Broccoli, Savoy, Brussels and Pomeranian cabbage, Peas, Broad Beans, Carrots, Radishes, Spinach, Lettuce and Romaine, Celery for cutting, Parsley, Chervil, Burnet, Wild Chicory; and, towards the end of the month, semi-hard Cauliflower, Alen cress, etc. N. 30. Savoy cabbage, sown towards the end of February. N. 37. Sorrel is sown. N. 50. Quintal cabbage sown around March 15. N. 51, 52, 53 and 54. Two rows of artichoke carnations are planted in each bed; they are placed one meter apart on the row. FRUIT GARDEN. - Complete pruning of vigorous trees and peach trees; use canvas or straw mats to protect flowering trees threatened by frost; finish plowing and planting; take cuttings and bedding; spread mulch to prevent drought; split graft cherry, plum, pear, apple, mulberry trees, etc.; transplant almonds that have been stratified. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Plant Magnolias grandiflora and Tulip trees, which, at this time of year, recover much better than at any other time. Complete ploughing and all clean-up work in the ornamental garden. Sow resinous tree seeds; sow (Fillets; repot or put in the ground the previous year's marcottes; sow in place large and dwarf Nasturtiums, runner beans, Volubilis, annual Lupins, Belles-de-nuit, Nigelles, etc.; and sow, for transplanting, India Carnations and India Roses, which can be sown successively until June; divide Chrysanthemum clumps. GREENHOUSES. - Give air when the weather permits, to strengthen plants that will soon be able to be exposed to the open air; start greenhouseing plants around mid-day, and give moderate watering. In the second fortnight, we start to bring out the less delicate plants. MAY. Average barometer height, 754 mill. 863. Mean temperature, maximum - 17°,67. minimum - 100,98. Quantity of rain, 56 mill. 80. Hygrometer condition, 700.0 GENERAL WORK. - We won't go into detail about this month's horticultural operations, which are many and varied. The gardener needs all his activity, and each part of the garden requires all his care. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - We make a layer of Om, 50 thick, which we cover with Om, 25 of good soil, to plant Pineapples in full ground, under frame. In the first fortnight, we sow Gherkins and the last Melons; then on a layer, but in the open air, we sow Fine Chicory, Meaux Chicory and Scarole; we make a dull layer at n. 5, and we plant under cloches a row of Melons sown in the first fortnight of April. In the second fortnight, a muted bed is made at n. 6, and a row of Melons, sown in the second fortnight of April, is planted, on which the cloches that were on the Aubergines planted at n. 7 are brought back. Côtière, n. 9 - In the second fortnight, white Cucumbers and green Gherkins, sown on beds in April, are planted. N. 11. Chervil is sown. N. 10. Beans are sown in clumps or rays in the second half of the year. Open ground. - The last potatoes are planted. Cardoons, kohlrabi, Turkish celery, black radishes, blond pear, golden purslane are sown, and cauliflower, broccoli, savoy, Brussels and Pomeranian cabbages, carrots, radishes, spinach, lettuces and Romaine, peas, broad beans, sorrel, parsley and watercress continue to be sown. Around the 15th, potatoes can be planted in the ground. In the first days of the month, we plant, at n. 15, semi-fine Chicory sown on beds in the first days of April. N. 19. Blonde Romaine sown in the second half of April is planted, and towards the end of the month, cauliflowers sown on an old bed towards the end of April are counter-planted. N. 35. Chicory always white is sown. N. 33. Row beans are sown. N. 23. Dwarf beans are sown. In the second fortnight, we plant, at n. 22, Grey Lettuce sown in the first fortnight of the month, and we counter-plant two rows of Tomatoes sown on beds towards the end of March. N. 17: Fine Chicory sown on beds towards the end of April, and four rows of Celery root sown on beds in February. N. 24. Two rows of Cardon de Tours are sown immediately in place, and three rows of Romaine sown in the first fortnight of the month are counter-planted. N. 41. Plant one row of pumpkins sown in April. N. 36. Towards the end of the month or at the beginning of June, plant four rows of Pomeranian cabbage sown towards the end of April. N. 51, 52, 53 and 54. Between each row of artichokes, plant a row of Brussels sprouts sown towards the end of April. FRUIT GARDEN - In addition to general work, the gardener must take care to maintain the balance between the different parts of his trees and to encourage their development. Disbudding begins; the first hoeing operations are carried out, and budding begins. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Plant the last evergreen Magnolias. In the second half of the month, plant Dahlias; but there is no advantage in planting them earlier, as they often fail to bloom by September, when they are at their most beautiful. Start mowing the lawns, which should then be cut as often as possible, because if you want beautiful lawns, you must avoid letting them go to seed. Now is the time to plant Erythrina, Balisier, Pelargonium zonale, Heliotrope, Calceolaria, Coleus, Petunia, Verbena, white-flowered Chrysanthemum, etc., in the open ground. Prune Lilacs and Ribes sanguineum as soon as they are out of bloom, as they only produce beautiful flowers on young wood. Replant yellow Amaryllis in borders. Sow Giroflées quarantaines, then Giroflées grosse espèce, and transplant them in the nursery towards the end of June; in September, raise them to plant them in pots. GREENHOUSE. - Bring out the orangery plants and some of the Pelargoniums (leaving the more advanced ones in the greenhouse), and when the first flowers begin to bloom, bring them in to enjoy the beauty of their bloom, which lasts for the whole month, and sometimes for the first fortnight of June. During the middle of the day, a canvas is laid over the greenhouse to protect the flowers from the sun's heat. Around the 15th, we take out the orange trees, and a few days later the hot-house plants, which can spend four months of the year outside. We proceed with repotting, and return to the greenhouse those plants that cannot remain outdoors in the Paris climate. Remove the frames from temperate greenhouses, and uncover the covers for Camellias, Rhododendrons, etc. JUIR. Average barometer height, 756 mill. 966. Mean temperature, maximum - 21°,19. minimum - 14°, 42. Rainfall, 54 mill. 34. Hygrometer reading, 67°,8. GENERAL WORK. - We refer to each of the sections dealing with cultivation specific to that month for 35 all the work to be done. Maintaining cleanliness by weeding, hoeing and raking; not sparing with watering when the weather is dry; hunting down harmful animals and insects: these are the general tasks requiring the gardener's attention. VEGETABLE GARDEN. Layers. - In this month, we can do without making new beds, as the plants do well in the open ground; we remove the boxes and frames, and after harvesting the Melons planted n. 1, we plant two rows of Cauliflower sown in May; then Chicory or Scarole sown on beds in the first fortnight of May. Open ground. - We sow Chicorée de Meaux and Scarole, Rapunzel, Vaugirard cabbage and cauliflower for autumn, and Ciboule and Poireau for winter. Broccoli, Savoy and Brussels sprouts, early carrots, Turkish celery, pink, Madras and black radishes, lettuces, Romaine, turnips, sorrel, purslane, chervil, Alençon cress, peas and beans continue to be sown; it's even time to sow all those you want to net. In the first fortnight, plant four rows of Romaine (sown in the second fortnight of May) in n. 21, and in the second fortnight, plant three rows of Poirée à cardes (sown in the first days of the month) in the Romaine, at Om,50 on the line. N. 18. four rows of Lettuce sown in the second half of May. N. 31. Turnips are sown. N. 30. Beans are sown. In the second fortnight, four rows of Turkish Celery sown in the first days of May are counter-planted in the Chicory planted n. 15. N. 14. four rows of Scarole sown in the first days of the month are transplanted, and a few days later, kohlrabi sown towards the end of May is counter-planted. Towards the end of the month or in the first few days of July, we sow Chicorée de Meaux (n. 29) immediately in place. Later in the month, Rhubarb stalks are cut to make jam. Chervil, watercress and lamb's lettuce seeds are harvested. FRUIT GARDEN. - We start trellising vines and espaliered trees, finishing towards the end of the season. We continue disbudding, pinching and removing useless buds, the only way to keep trees looking good and producing a guaranteed product. We pinch off the terminal buds of Fig trees, to ensure fruiting. Towards the end of the month, or at the beginning of July, we prune Muriers whose leaves have been used to raise silkworms. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Mow lawns, hoe flowerbeds and beds, water annuals and perennials, stake Dahlias, Hollyhocks, etc. Graft all varieties of roses. Prune overgrown Chinese Glycines later this month. Transplant seedling carnations, repot Chrysanthemums and cut them back; lift Belladonna Amaryllis and replant shortly afterwards. Sow Hollyhocks, Jerusalem Crosses, Dandelions, Campanulas, Golden Corbels, Delphinium, Poet's Carnations, Forget-me-nots, Perennial Linen, Primroses and all perennials suitable for the pleasure garden. GREENHOUSE. - Take Pelargoniums out of the greenhouse as soon as they have deflowered, put them in a shady spot for a few days, then place them in a well-ventilated position; to prevent the soil in the pots from drying out, bury them about halfway down. If you don't want to remove the frames from the Pelargonium greenhouse, you can reline it with double Laurel-roses, which will flower better and more reliably than in the open air. JULY. Average barometer height, 756 mill. 193. Mean temperature, maximum - 21°,19. minimum - 16°,99. Rainfall, 47 mill. 21. Hygrometer reading, 680.2. GENERAL WORK. -Same as June. Redouble activity and care, as all parts of gardening are of equal importance, and demand the gardener's solicitude. VEGETABLE GARDEN. - Layers. In the first fortnight, remove the manure from layer n. 2, fill the trench with the soil taken from it, plough the whole, and, after having dressed the ground, plant Cauliflower sown in the second fortnight of June; then counter-plant Chicory or Scarole sown in the first fortnight of June. N. 3. in the second fortnight, the manure is also removed from the bed, and, as in n. 2, the trench is filled in and cauliflowers sown in the first fortnight of the month are planted; then Chicory or Scarole sown in the first fortnight of the month are counter-planted. FULL GROUND. - Final sowings of Savoy cabbage, Carrots, Chicory, Scarole, Roman lettuce, and continue to sow Turnips, Rapeseed, Pink Radish, Rat-tail Radish, Golden Purslane, Chervil, and anything else that can mature before winter. N. 18. In the first days of the month, we counterplant the Lettuce with Chicory or Scarole sown in the first fortnight of June; then we plant on each side of the bed a row of Vaugirard Cabbage sown in the second fortnight of June. N. 20. Rapunzel is sown. In the second fortnight, four rows of Romaine blonde or Lettuce sown in the first fortnight of the month are planted at n. 16, and two rows of Cauliflower sown in the first fortnight of June are counter-planted. Harvest seeds for sorrel, spinach, cabbage, peas, salsify, scorzonera, etc. FRUIT GARDEN. - Visit the espaliers, maintain the balance between the different parts of the trees, trellis, disbud, uncover without stripping them the fruits whose ripening you want to accelerate. During hot spells, water the trees at the base and syringe the leaves in the evening. From the end of the month to mid-September, graft cherry, plum, peach, apricot, pear and apple trees. ORNAMENTAL GARDEN. - Start disbudding Dahlias; plant Lilies Om, 15 or Om, 20 deep as soon as they are defoliated. Remove Ranunculus, Anemones, Daffodils and Daffodils as soon as the leaves have dried out. Sow perennial Lupins as soon as the seeds have ripened; in autumn, transplant them into pots, which you can then overwinter in the orangery or under a chàssis, and in spring put them in the ground. Towards the end of the month or in August, marcot Carnations and start grafting Roses, in dormant-eye patches. GREENHOUSES. - Greenhouse plants are almost all outside and require only watering. Those that remain in the greenhouse should be given fresh air, sheltered from the sun's rays and watered as needed. CHAPTER III. Gardening tools. All the instruments listed in this chapter are indispensable for cultivating a garden; and, although we have no intention of charging those who draw information from our book, we advise them to obtain most of them, in order to simplify operations. § I. - Tools for ploughing and planting. BÈCHE DE SOISSONS. - The blade is a little hollowed out in the middle; it is Om, 27 long by 0.20 wide at the top, and Om, 16 at the bottom. Instead of having a socket, the blade is fixed to the handle with two riveted pins. BÈCHE DE SENLIS. - The handle is 1 meter long, not including the part inserted in the socket; the iron is Om, 30 high, Om, 22 wide at the top and Om, 18 at the bottom. BINETTE. - The hoe is a small hoe whose blade is just Om, 16 long by Om, 12 wide. It is used to stir up the soil between plants whose rows are a little apart, and to make holes for planting beans and potatoes. FANG HOE. - This hoe has a double blade, with a cutting edge on one side and two long teeth on the other. HOYAU. - A tool for making trenches, uprooting trees and preparing compact soils for ploughing with a spade. The handle has Om, 76, and the blade, which forms a right angle with the handle, Om, 32. HOULETTE. - The houlette is a small spade whose blade, about Om, 15 long, Om, 10 wide, is folded cylindrically on its sides: it is intended for lifting cloddy plants. PICKAXE OR TURNER. - This instrument is particularly used for earthworks; it is also useful for making holes and removing large trees. PLANTOIR. - To make a planter, select a tree branch bent at the end, then taper the part to be driven into the ground, and to make it more durable and penetrable, have it lined with iron or copper. TRIDENT TRACEOIR - The advantage of this instrument is that you don't have to move the chalk line as many times as you need rays in a board. To trace six rays, you need only stretch the string twice, and for five rays only once, placing it in the middle of the board. The spokes can be made more or less widely spaced, as the two side branches are fixed at the bottom by means of a hinge, and on the crosspiece by a small movable pin, which enables them to be moved further apart or closer together as required. SHEARING SCISSORS. - These are large scissors, Om 40 in length, whose handles form a very open angle with the blade; they are used for mowing hedges, lawns, borders, etc. The blades should have some play and not be too sharp. The blades must have some play and not be tightened by a nut. To use them, the blades must be pressed together with opposing forces. SIMPLE IRON-TOOTHED RAKE. - Used to clean paths, smooth the surface of newly-ploughed ground, then lightly cover seedlings. You need at least two of them, one about Om, 30, and the other about Om, 45. RATISSOIRE A POUSSER. - Handle, 1m, 40 long; blade, Om, 20. SHOOTING SHOVEL. - Used in areas where the earth is hardest. The blade, which is Om, 20 wide, is made from a piece of old scythe. The handle is 1m, 15 long. ROLLER. - The roller is a large cast-iron or stone cylinder, fitted at each end with a rounded auricle, turning like an axle in an iron loop; it is used with advantage for rolling earth and turf. SARCLOIR. - This instrument is used to weed between plants that are not sown too thickly. Its total length is Om, 25. SII. - Transport tools. WHEELBARROW WITH TRUNK. - The proportions of a wheelbarrow are: length, 1m,50 to 1m,60; width of the trunk, Om, 50 to Om, 55; spacing of the arms at their ends, Om, 65; outside diameter of the wheel, Ou, 48. HOOK FOR CARRYING BOXES. - These hooks are made of iron, and one end forms a loop through which a 2-meter-long stretcher is passed; with the help of these hooks, two men can easily transport very heavy crates. DIABLE. - This device is indispensable for entering and removing crates that cannot be transported using the hooks. To remove them, approach the device in such a way as to engage the chins under the crate; chock the wheels, and press down on the jib so that the crate is positioned obliquely; you can then easily direct it wherever you wish. FOURCHE ORDINAIRE (ORDINARY FORK) - This instrument is used to make beds, transport manure and harrow vegetable garden beds. HOTTEREAU (pronounced HOTTRIAU). - Used to transport manure and potting soil. In market gardens, it replaces the wheelbarrow. WOODEN SHOVEL. - As this instrument is more or less the same everywhere, we think it unnecessary to give its proportions; it is used to remove earth and potting soil, to pile them up, and so on. SIII. - Watering instruments. WATERING CAN. - This instrument, which must be made of copper to last longer, holds about ten liters of water. SPRINKLER for wetting greenhouses. It should be at least a third smaller than the apple watering can. To water seedlings and cuttings, use the apple instead of the extension spout. POMPE A MAIN ET A JET CONTINUUU, by M. Petit. - This instrument, which sprays water from a height of 5 or 6 meters, is used to water trees that are too high to use a syringe. SERINGUE for washing tree heads and orangery and greenhouse plants. Its total length is Om, E0. § IV. - Instruments for pruning and trimming trees. GROWING. - This instrument, whose blade is placed at the end of a more or less long handle, is used for pruning trees and weeding; but for the latter purpose, it is advantageously substituted for the weeder, whose operation is much less tiring. BUD CUTTER. - A type of secateur with curved blades, used for disbudding and facilitating this operation. ECHENILLOIR. - In certain circumstances, this instrument can be replaced by the crescent, but the latter is always less convenient. SEWER. - The choice of this instrument is of the utmost importance, for if it is badly made, it will skin the branches and harm the tree's vegetation. Its advantage over the pruning knife is that it makes pruning easier, but it cannot compete in all circumstances with the latter, which always makes sharper wounds. HAND SAW, designed to remove branches that cannot be cut with pruning shears. Its overall length is Om, 25. EGOHINE, used to cut branches in places where the hand saw cannot reach. SERPET. - Various sizes are made, but the most commonly used have a handle about Om, 12, long, and a blade from Om, 08 to Om, 09. SERPE. - Used for felling large branches, making the points of stakes and stakes, etc. CHAPTER IV. Ripping and Lahours. When establishing a new garden, the first thing to do is to assess the condition and depth of the soil, which is essential, especially if trees are to be planted. If the top layer of soil is poor, or has been under cultivation for a very long time, and the fertility has been exhausted, it must be broken up. If, as is often the case, the land is covered with tall grasses, they should be pulled up, piled together and burned when dry enough. The ashes should be spread over the site after breaking, which should be done in autumn or winter as follows: At one end of the site, open a trench 1.60 to 2 meters wide (called a gauge). Usually, all you need to do is remove two spade-heads, and dig the bottom of the trench before filling it. However, in some areas, the trench must be dug much deeper. The site is divided into two, three or four parts, depending on the number of workers. The earth from the first trench is deposited at the end where the work is to be completed, to fill the void in the last trench. Each trench is successively replaced by another of the same length, taking care to bring the soil from the bottom to the surface. Remove all the bad earth and stones, and place them in the large alleys, from which all the good earth will be removed. Once the earth has been broken up, give it a good blow with a fork to break up the clods and even out the surface; then rake out the stones, which will be used to fill in the alleys. 1. Ploughing - In light soils, deep ploughing should be carried out annually on fine winter days; in compact, damp soils, chains of ploughing should be carried out in autumn, i.e. the soil should be removed from the surface of the ground, and brought together in mounds or, better still, in parallel lines. Frosts will dry them out, and in spring they will be much easier to cultivate. In gardens, work is done with a spade. Before starting, remove soil to form a gauge a good spade-shank deep (Om 25 to Om, 30 approx.), Om, 30 to Om, 35 wide, and the length of a single man's plank. If two planks are to be ploughed side by side, the soil from the gauge is placed on the next plank and on the same end. If you only have one, place it at the end where you want to finish, so as to have enough to fill the last gauge. As it is also at this time of year that manure is buried, it should be spread evenly over the whole plot, which often makes it possible to plough during frosts; without this precaution, the cold would harden the surface of the soil and prevent any work. We plough backwards, taking the soil by spadeful, which we replace on the other edge of the gauge, turning it over each time so that the bottom one is on top, then we push manure into each gauge, taking care not to bury it too deeply, so that it is within reach of the roots. The clods of earth should be picked up with a spade, and any stones thrown aside. When ploughing, be especially careful to put the 3. soil from the paths into the bed, as it will have had a year's rest. For winter ploughing, the surface of the land should not be too even; only when planting or sowing is required, it should be levelled with a fork. Proceed as described for the entire garden, always maintaining the same gauge width. When ploughing at the foot of trees, care must be taken not to damage their roots. Whenever you want to follow one crop with another, you should plough the land, but not as deeply as in winter, and take care to remove weeds beforehand, whose seeds will germinate quickly once buried. In extremely thin soils, where some fertilizer is always necessary, it should only be used very sparingly. 2. Weeding. - Weeding consists in removing foreign plants and weeds from the soil. This operation is carried out by hand, and requires a certain amount of practice to distinguish at a glance which plants need to be removed and which need to be kept. It is easy to understand that this work must be very difficult when the soil is dry: that's why, in this case, you must take care to baste, at least one hour before starting this operation, the beds that need to be weeded. 3. Hoeing. - Hoeing is an operation no less necessary for vegetable plants than weeding; it is carried out with the hoe, and, as required, with the blade or teeth. The purpose of hoeing is to divide the soil surface, making it permeable to atmospheric influences and watering. In some circumstances (e.g. for transplanted plants), hoeing can replace weeding, and sometimes a rake can be used instead of a hoe. CHAPTER V. Manure and fertilizers. We will only discuss the most common fertilizers; the others, such as horn shavings, animal black, dried blood, bone powder, guano and perazote fertilizer, are used only in large-scale cultivation. The ones we recommend, and which are easiest to obtain, are decomposing plant debris. You can also use pond sludge and street sweepings, which are also good fertilizers, but only after they have been left in piles for a long time, stirred several times during the winter and matured by the influences of the atmosphere. The pomace of grapes and cider pears is also very good, when it has been left in the heap long enough to prevent the seeds from germinating once in the ground. Pigeon and hen droppings should only be used very dry and reduced to dust, and, like poudrette, lightly broadcast, and only in strong soils. This type of manure can only be used in very limited circumstances, whereas manure made from litter mixed with the urine and excrement of domestic animals can be found in abundance everywhere. The hottest manures are horse, mule, donkey and sheep; the most compact and coldest are beef, cow and pig. Whatever manure is used, we believe it should be buried only after fermentation, without waiting until it has been fully consumed; fresh manure does not act as fertilizer, but as an amendment; therefore, in strong, damp and cold soils, which need to be divided, only unconsumed manures should ever be used. Another disadvantage of these manures is that they still contain seeds whose fermentation has not been able to destroy the germinative principle, and which quickly cover the soil with weeds. For light, hot soils that need to be bound, use cow manure; if this is not available, use another type, but it should only be used when half consumed. Manure should be spread in all areas where it is to be buried, in winter and during the first frosts. Whatever fertilizer you use, you should apply as much as possible every year, especially to vegetable beds that are always under cultivation. Manures and leaves almost consumed from old beds should be reserved for spreading each year as mulch on flowerbeds and all growing areas, which is still a good fertilizer; but garden weeds should not be mixed with these manures until they have been completely reduced to potting soil. Fertilizers should be buried early enough so that they have had time to consume themselves before plant roots can reach them, especially fleshy roots. Some vegetable plants, such as Leeks and Onions, do better in smoked soil from the previous year. Watering. 49 As water is one of the main agents of vegetation, it is indispensable in a garden. When you don't have a watercourse to dispose of as you please, it is necessary to obtain water by every possible means. Rainwater, which is more beneficial to vegetation than any water flowing on the surface of the ground, must be collected with care; to this end, all roofs must be fitted with gutters, so as not to let any rainwater escape. The water should be collected in a reservoir placed at a certain height, to facilitate the distribution of water through pipes to all parts of the garden. In the absence of running or gushing water, you will have to resort to well water. In this circumstance, you will need to consider the best way of drawing it; for it is deplorable that in many localities we are still reduced to the necessity of using rope and buckets, an exercise that is as long as it is tiring; whereas with a triple-acting pump, we can easily obtain 12 to 1,500 liters of water per hour. It's true that you need a horse to do this, and that many people are so unconcerned about their gardener that they'd rather leave their horses in the stable than put one at his disposal for a few hours each day during the summer months; however, this would be highly advantageous, as well water almost always contains carbonate and often sulfate of lime; In some places, these substances are so abundant that the water deposits a layer of calcareous salts on the soil and plant leaves, preventing the roots from benefiting from atmospheric influences and the leaves from fulfilling their physiological functions, which sometimes leads to the loss of crops, or more often to a state of languor no less detrimental. In such cases, it is essential to have a reservoir so that the water can be used only a few hours after it has been drawn off, allowing the harmful substances it contains to settle. It's also a good idea to let the water warm up in the sun; for the watering of delicate plants or those grown on beds, the water should never be less than 8 to 10 degrees hot. The same is not true for large vegetables; on the contrary, the water should be used as soon as it is drawn from the well, otherwise it would activate their vegetation too much, and they would not be able to develop to their full potential. Soil fertility can be enhanced by watering with manure, cow dung, sheep dung or other animal matter. Pellets, poudrette and guano, used in small doses of around 3 or 4 kilograms per hectoliter of water, also make a good liquid fertilizer, and can be used to water potted or outdoor plants once a week during the summer. The quantity and frequency of watering cannot be determined in advance; we can only say that it should be more or less abundant, depending on the temperature and nature of the soil. To ensure that plants benefit as much as possible from watering during the hot days of June, July and August, water only in the afternoon; in spring and autumn, when nights are usually cool, water in the morning. The most frequently used watering cans, especially for wetting seedlings and recently transplanted plants, are those with knobs; spouted watering cans are used for wetting potted plants. Apple watering cans are used to wet delicate, newly transplanted plants. CHAPTER VII. Diapers. In northern climates, where vegetation is suspended by the cold for varying lengths of time, gardeners resort to artificial means to compensate for the sun's heat and produce premature crops. Even in the humblest garden, it is impossible to do without a bed, even if only to sow certain flower or vegetable seeds that cannot succeed in the open ground or only produce late. I. LAYERS FOR EARLY PLANTS. - Layers should always face south, and the site on which they are planted should be dug out by about Om 20. Their thickness depends on several circumstances: 1° Those made in December, January and February should be thicker than at any other time of the year; 2° On cold, damp soil, they should be thicker than on sandy soil; 3° The narrower they are, the thicker they should be. We usually make them Im, 30 wide, plus a path of Om, 40 which we leave between each one and which we fill with manure; to maintain and revive the heat, we surround the layers with stoves of new manure, which we renew from time to time. New horse manure, i.e. that which comes out of the stable, is preferred for the layers: the more it is soaked with urine, the better it is. We mix it with half tree leaves, grape marc or a third of manure from old layers. The heat is not as strong as with manure alone, but it lasts much longer, is more regular, and you have less to fear from excessive heat development, which can sometimes lead to the loss of young plants. In the absence of manure, you could even make do with leaves or grape marc. New manure alone should be used only for warmers and some seedlings, such as melons. Before starting to build up a layer, to mix the manures evenly, place them as close as possible to the place they are to occupy. Always work backwards, taking care to mix the dry parts with those most impregnated with urine, and to distribute the manure evenly. The edges of the layer should be raised vertically; and as soon as a bed of manure has been formed, it is wetted more or less, as required, with the apple watering can, so that everything is damp enough to produce prolonged fermentation and prevent the manure from drying out in the center, which could compromise the result of the operation. To give the layer an even density at all points, it is tamped down with the feet and the back of the fork; then manure is added in the hollow places, so that the thickness is even. The same is done with each bed, until the layer has reached the desired height, after which the paths are filled in and the troughs are placed. Once the coffers have been placed, the layer is loaded with potting soil; then the panels are laid, which must be kept covered for a few days to facilitate fermentation. Before sowing or planting on a new layer, it is advisable to wait until the initial heat has moderated. If, in spite of this precaution, the heat develops too much, the stoves should be quickly removed from the trunk; and if this is not enough, a few watering cans should be poured around the bed to cool it down. Thermosiphon. - In some circumstances, manure layers can be replaced by thermosiphon heating. This is usually done by laying a very thin layer (1) to protect the plants from the dampness of the soil, and then running the pipes over the layer. Alternatively, a wooden floor can be laid underneath (1) Figure 2 shows a double-walled copper boiler filled with water; the A feed pipe is also used to introduce the water into the boiler; it communicates with the B circulation pipes by means of an elbow of the same diameter. As soon as it is exchanged, the water in the boiler expands, pushing the water in the pipes up to point C, where it is circulated by the thermosiphon pipes; but plants grown on this floor require too frequent watering; This is why we think it would be better (for crops where it would be necessary to heat the soil) to run the pipes in the paths, i.e. between the chests; and in this case we would cover them with boards and straw, or any other poor conductor of caloric. What leads us to believe that this method would be applicable to the cultivation of vegetables forced under panels is that, for certain crops, it is only by means of stoves that the heat required by the plants can be obtained. II. MUTED LAYERS. - It's hardly until April that we start using these kinds of beds. To establish them, we make a trench Om, 75 to I mêtre wide and about Om, 35 deep. The same materials are used to make them, as are used to heat the boiler and circulate it back through the pipes when it is sufficiently hot. As for the pipes, when the course is of a certain extent, they are given a flat shape, in order to heat a larger surface area than in cylindrical pipes, and to contain a smaller quantity of water that can reach boiling point more quickly than in the latter. These pipes are generally given a thickness of Om,02 to Om, 03 over a variable height of Om, 10 to Om, 15, depending on the cube of air and the need to raise the temperature. Pipes measuring Om, 21 by Om, 2 are quite commonly used. In fact, cylindrical pipes with an external surface corresponding to that of the Om, 21 high on Om, 2 pipe contain 4 liters 20 of water, and the same length of pipe with a similar external surface, i.e. with a diameter of Om, 15, would contain 15 liters 17. It's true that the hot water contained in the cylindrical pipe will cool less vitc than in the other; but also it will have been necessary to burn more fuel to bring it to the boil without having obtained more heating surface, and consequently more heat, the previous ones; they are given Om, 60 to Om, 80 in thickness; they must be slightly domed in the middle. They are filled with potting soil or good earth, depending on the type of crop to be grown; then covered with a long bed of manure to concentrate the heat. 1. stove. - Throughout the cold season, i.e. from the end of November to mid-April, it is necessary to maintain or revive the warmth of the layers, without having to repeat them. This is achieved by means of reheaters, which consist, as we said earlier, of filling the paths around the layers with new or annealed manure, and reshuffling them every fortnight or every week; then, as required, adding a portion of new manure each time. In doing so, the state of the atmosphere must be taken into account, i.e. if the weather is dry, wet manure should be used, and if it's damp, dry manure; then care should be taken to cover them with straw mats during bad weather, in order to concentrate the heat. 2. Teens. - Ados are a safe and economical way to encourage the cultivation of early crops: plants do better there than on horizontal ground. They consist of a slope of Im, 33, facing the sun. To set up an ados, proceed as follows: after choosing a favorable site, the soil is ploughed well, taking care to remove the soil necessary to recharge the backside by about Om, 20; after which the soil is united; then about Om 10 of earth mixed with loam is spread over the whole. These ados are first used to sow Radishes, and then three rows of bells are placed to sow lettuce and transplant young plants. CHAPTER VIII. Plant propagation. Under this heading, we cover the series of operations involved in multiplying plants, but we have only given each of them a scope proportionate to the actual difficulty they present. We invite our readers to read this chapter carefully, so as to become fully acquainted with the principles it sets out; and, by faithfully following our instructions, they will acquire the manual skill necessary to count on certain success. S I. - Sowing. Whatever the method of sowing, preparation of the soil is a preliminary operation of the utmost importance. The soil must be carefully ploughed, so that the clods are well divided, and after ploughing, the stones and clods on the surface are removed with a fork and a rake. Most vegetable seeds can be sown in spring, then successively, at intervals calculated according to the length of vegetation of each plant. With the exception of some lettuces, vegetables that are to be eaten in the same year should not be sown later than July. Before sowing, therefore, it is necessary to know not only how long the seeds will germinate, but also how long it will take for the plants to reach full development. The time of sowing should then be brought forward or back according to the nature of the soil; for the colder and wetter the soil, the later the sowing and the less the seeds need to be covered; and the finer the seeds, the less they need to be buried; for some, it is even sufficient to spread a little potting soil over them after harrowing and treading; others need not be covered, but only shaded with a little litter. There are two main methods of sowing: overplanting and sowing in the ground. I. SOWING ON A BED. - As it is often necessary to sow at a time when the temperature does not allow the seeds to be delivered to the soil, it is necessary to sow on a bed. Although the heat of the bed must vary according to the different species of seed, we can say that 12 to 15 degrees seems to be the most favorable temperature (except for Melons, Eggplants and Chicory, which require more heat); for all the vegetable seeds we have subjected to this temperature have succeeded perfectly. Sowing on a bed does not differ in any way from sowing in the ground, i.e. the seeds must always be covered in proportion to their fineness. These seedlings are often much more successful than those sown in the ground, because the temperature, light and humidity conditions required for perfect seed development can be altered at will. II. SOWING IN THE GROUND. - These seedlings are broadcast, in rows or rays, and in pockets. 1. Broadcast sowing. - The soil is prepared as described above, and a small amount of fine soil is raked to the edge of the bed. A handful of seeds is then taken and spread over the soil, passing between the fingers with a brisk, regular back-and-forth movement. In order to sow more evenly and avoid spilling seeds into the pathways, sow the width of the bed in two passes, starting at the edges. When the seeds are good, they should not be sown too thickly, in order to produce vigorous plants; and if, despite this precaution, they are too thick, they should be thinned out by hand.

mix with dry sand or fine tere. After sowing, the soil should be harrowed lightly with a fork, then trodden a little, although this should not be done if the soil is damp. To cover the seeds, use the back of the rake to spread the soil around the edges of the bed, leaving a little to retain water from watering. You can also spread a little well-consumed manure over the seedlings. If the weather is dry, germination should be encouraged by watering the seeds with an apple watering can. 2. Sowing in rows or rays. - Using either a hoe or a tracing knife, draw rays about Om, 3, or Om 5 deep, and more or less distant from each other, depending on what you want to sow; after scattering the seed, cover it lightly, raking up some of the soil from the sides with the back of the rake. When the seedling is out of the ground, we finish filling the rays by passing the rake or hoe between each row. This method of sowing is highly advantageous, especially in areas where frequent hoeing is required. 3. Sowing in pockets. - This consists in making holes with the hoe, arranged in a chessboard pattern, the distance and depth of which will be calculated according to the development that each clump should take; then, after placing a few seeds in each hole, we cover them by folding back the soil a little, and, when the plants are high enough, we finish filling the holes by passing a stroke of rake between each clump. SII. - Transplanting. Transplanting is necessary for all plants which cannot be sown in situ; and, to be sure of the success of the operation, you must not wait until the plant is too old, because not only is recovery more difficult, but the products are less beautiful; for plants which take root slowly, you must, before putting them in situ, transplant them in a nursery, i.e. put them in a good position and very close to each other. Successive transplanting has the advantage of producing a large quantity of shoots, which will ensure that the plants take root again when they are finally planted. Transplanting should only take place in well-prepared soil, on which a short mulch of manure has been spread, to ensure that the plant benefits as long as possible from watering, and that watering does not cause the plant to stick to the soil, which often leads to leaf rot. Transplanting in summer should, as far as possible, be carried out when the weather is overcast; and, if the weather is not favorable, the operation should be carried out towards the end of the day, and the recovery facilitated by watering. When you have a lot of plants to transplant and the weather is very dry, don't wait until you've finished before starting to water. SIII. - Onions. The only care to be taken to obtain success with bulbous plants you wish to propagate is to choose them in good health and plant them in circumstances most favorable to their growth. § IV. - Bulbs. This is the name given to the small bulbs or onions which form around the crown of bulbous plants such as Tulips, Hyacinths, etc., and which serve to multiply them. Caiuses should only be removed when they are ripe, which is when the leaves are completely dry. Cloves should always be planted in soft soil, at least one month before flowering onions, as they dry out more quickly due to their small volume. These onions usually wither after three or four years. § V. - Bulbils. Several bulbous plants produce on their stems, often in place of seeds, small onions called bulbils, which serve to multiply them; they should be removed when ripe, and treated like bulblets. §VI. - Tubers. Tubers are fleshy masses of underground stems, from which small fibrous roots usually grow. Some plants, such as Potatoes, Potatoes, etc., have eyes capable of providing new stems; and, to multiply them, they can be cut into as many pieces as there are eyes: each section will produce a new plant. Others have eyes on only part of the plant: these are Dahlias, Iris Germanica, herbaceous Peonies, and in such cases, when dividing them, care must be taken to leave each part of the collar of the plant; otherwise they would not grow. § VIF. - Claws or Paws. These are the names given to the roots of Ranunculus, Anemones, etc.; they are separated by splinters, but in such a way that there is always an eye for each. SVIII. - Eyelets. This is the name given to the offshoots that grow around certain plants (artichokes, etc.); they are separated from the old plants, taking care to remove them as far as possible with a heel; they should not be left to wither, so that they will grow again more quickly. S IX. - Root separation. Some perennial plants, such as Peonies, have roots that start from a common collar, and have one or more eyes that develop the following year. To multiply them, they can be split into as many parts as there are eyes. Other plants, such as Chrysanthemums, have their roots almost at the surface of the soil, and form thick clumps which can be divided into small parts; they must then be lifted from the ground, and, after separating them, only the circumference is replanted, which will produce much more beautiful clumps than if the center were replanted, which, being the oldest part of the plant, is naturally the least vigorous. SX. - Stolons or Flowers. Some plants, such as Strawberries, have runners, which produce offshoots at each node, rooting into the soil. Separated and transplanted in a favorable season, they produce as many new plants. SXI. - Marcottes. Marcottes are branches that are laid down in spring, either in the ground or in pots, and only separated from the mother branch when they have produced roots. When the branches you wish to propagate are placed in such a way that they cannot be lowered to the ground, you need pots or cups with slits in the sides, which you hold on a small board nailed to a support, the end of which you push into the ground. There are several ways of marcotting: we will only mention the most commonly used; but, whatever the method used, the soil in which the marcottes are placed must be constantly moist, to encourage the roots to emerge; and, to preserve the moisture of the watering, it is a good idea to cover the soil with consumed manure or moss. 1. simple Marcottes. - These are used to propagate plants that root easily, such as Vines, etc. The whole operation consists in laying a branch down in a trench of varying depth, depending on its size. After removing any leaves or buds on the part to be planted, the end is carefully bent to avoid breaking it. If you don't need to bury them deeply, you can secure them in the ground with a wooden hook. 2. Marcottes by strangulation. - These differ from the previous ones in that the bark is tightened, without cutting it, with a wire on the part which is in the ground; the result is a bead from which new roots sprout. 3. Marcottes by incision. - We'll describe this poeration as it's used to propagate carnations. In July, stop watering for a while before layering, to make the branches more flexible, and choose stems long enough to be laid down. Cut off the lower leaves, so that the part in the ground is free of them; then lower each stem into a small trench made with a finger, and straighten the end of the branch above the bend. Using the blade of the grafting machine, make an incision about Om, 02 in length, so that the notched part forms a tongue, the end of which is cut cleanly below a node, taking care not to cut into the other half of the stem. Each marcotte is held in place by a hook or a piece of wicker passed underneath, the two ends of which are pressed into the earth; then the whole is covered with earth fine enough to penetrate everywhere, taking care to let a little of it penetrate between the separate parts, which usually remain apart due to the effect of the curvature. Once the operation is complete, we usually cut off the tips of the leaves to prevent them from withering; then we spread a light mulch of half-consumed manure and wet with a watering can with very fine holes, so as not to shake the marcottes, which usually take root after a short time. 4. Sprouting by cutting. - This method involves cutting a tree or shrub at ground level in spring and covering the stump with soil. It soon produces suckers, which are removed once they have taken root. This is how the coignassier is propagated, to provide subjects for grafting. 5. Root marcottes. - To make this type of marcotte, cut the end of a root and leave the wound open to the air; the sap forms a bead from which buds soon develop; from among these, choose the most vigorous, and remove the others; then, in autumn, weed it by cutting the root close to the stump. S XII. - Cuttings, Almost all serous plants can be propagated by cuttings. This operation, which is extremely simple, consists in cutting off any part of a plant, even a leaf for some species, and making it produce roots. Some plants are very easy to propagate, but others require a great deal of care, and can only be propagated by horticultural merchants, who have special tarpaulins for this operation. We will therefore limit ourselves to indicating which cuttings can be taken in the open air, and which need to be smothered, but which are very successful if you only have cloches and a frame. 1. Open air cuttings. - This is the way to propagate many ornamental trees and shrubs. In January, cut the year's twigs into trunks of Om, 10 to Om, 20 in length, depending on the species; cut the lower part cleanly below one eye; group them by species and bury them at half their length in sand or fine earth, but in a place sheltered from sun and frost; from the end of February to the beginning of April, they are planted in well-prepared soil and, as far as possible, in a shady spot; they are planted in such a way as to leave two or three eyes above ground; after planting, the soil is mulched, and when dryness begins to make itself felt, the humidity of the soil is maintained by watering. 2. Cuttings under cloches and frames. - Many orangery and temperate greenhouse plants can be propagated from cuttings in spring on a warm bed; this is done in February and March. For this purpose, prepare a thin layer, so as to obtain only gentle heat; surround it with a stove, and cover it with a bed of fine potting soil, to which a little heather may be added; then place cloches over it, or cover it with a frame; but in this case, the height of the layer should be calculated so that the cuttings are not far from the glass. When the layer has warmed up, cut the cuttings with or without heel on the most vigorous branches; top them by giving them Om, 08 to Om, 10 in length, always taking care to cut the lower part cleanly below one eye; then transplant them immediately onto the layer using a small planter, pushing them in from Om, 02 to Om, 03. These cuttings can also be transplanted into pots which are then pressed into the bed: this is how Heliotropes, Petunias, Verbena, etc. can be propagated. After covering the borders with clochies or frames, shade them when the sun is shining, and cover them at night with straw mats. They should be watered from time to time with a small watering can, as the cuttings can only take root if the soil is kept constantly fresh; when they start to grow, and you're sure they have roots, give them a little air during the day, by lifting the cloches or frames, and after a while pinch off the longest ends, then lift the cuttings, trying to keep each one a small root ball. They are then planted in pots, which can be replaced on the same layer after watering, and, if deemed necessary, the warmth of the layer is rekindled by making new warmers; other 4. care is limited to gradually airing them and watering them as needed. All plants treated in this way will be strong and hardy enough to be put in the ground at the same time as they are planted in beds and flowerbeds. The same operation can be carried out in summer, in a shady spot; only, at this time, there is no need for a bed: this is how Pelargoniums, etc., are propagated. The best time to take these cuttings is from the end of July to the end of August. After preparing them as described above, transplant them at Om, 03 or Om, 04 apart into pots filled with soil and heather mixed with a little potting compost, and after transplanting, water them lightly; then place the pots under a bell or under a frame, but away from the sun. In autumn, the cuttings will have taken root, and can be separated, which is done by dividing the pot into as many parts as there are cuttings; then they are potted separately; having been treated in this way, you are sure to have plants with the strength to flower the following spring. The following procedure can also be used for plants that are difficult to root: take an ordinary pot, then another pot, narrower, but as high as possible; invert it into this one, fill the space with soil appropriate to the needs of the cuttings you intend to make, put a small pinch of soil on the hole, then transplant the cuttings; finally, bury the whole on a layer, and place a bell on top, 3. Cuttings by root sections. - Some plants can be propagated by cutting a root into sections, which are planted either in the ground or on a bed, but leaving the end exposed to the air, from which buds soon emerge. CHAPTER IX. Grafting. We will not describe grafting at length, as this operation is too widely known for that; we will only say that its purpose is to multiply, conserve and perfect useful and pleasant varieties, and to make a wild trunk bear brilliant flowers or tasty fruits destined to embellish our gardens and increase the no less appreciable products of our orchards. This operation, which has been written about so many times and at such length, simply requires a little observation and a certain manual skill. It is based on three fundamental points: 1° an appreciation of the circumstances in which the grafting is to be carried out, i.e. the moment when the plants, watered by sap, are ready to vegetate; 2° the choice of the subject, which must be in a suitable state of vigour and health, and above all suitable for grafting, which can only be carried out on species united by close affinities, 3° the manual operation, which requires only a short apprenticeship and can be considered the least difficult of the three, since by observing the two preceding conditions, success can be achieved which cannot be attained, no matter how careful the grafter, if the circumstances in which he operates are unfavorable. There are various types of grafting, but most are purely for pleasure. We shall therefore limit ourselves to describing the main ones, which can be considered as the type of all the others that can be performed once you are familiar with those we have indicated. 1. escutcheon graft. This is the most commonly used graft, and can be carried out at several times of the year: firstly, from May to July, which is known as budding grafting; this name comes from the fact that these grafts start to grow as soon as the escutcheon is taken up; there are even some, on Roses for example, which in autumn of the same year already form a beautiful head. The second period is from August to September, when the sap begins to slow down, and is known as "dormant eye" grafting, because at this time the escutcheon only becomes attached to the subject, and doesn't grow until the following year. Fruit trees are best grafted at this time of year. Some time before the operation, you need to prepare the tree to receive the graft, i.e. select the branches on which you want to graft, and remove the others, especially those below the grafts. If the trees you want to graft start to lose their sap, you need to water them to revive their vegetation. When the time is right, select the best eyes of the species you wish to propagate, cut off the leaf above the eye without damaging the petiole, and remove any prickles from the bud. Then, using the blade of the grafting machine, surround the eye so that you can remove it with part of the surrounding bark, which will be shaped roughly like the bud (see A, fig. 3). To detach it, lift it slightly with the tip of the grafting tool, then with the spatula, taking care to remove all the woody parts adhering to the escutcheon, which would prevent it coming into contact with the wood of the subject, unless the branch is tender enough for this operation not to be necessary; And if the root of the eye were to be removed, as is easy to see from the resulting gap, the crest would have to be reformed, and its recovery would be doubtful. Another method can also be used to lift the escutcheon, and is particularly advantageous when the grafts are small. Fig. 3. - Escutcheon graft. consists in detaching the escutcheon with a silk thread or horsehair (see B, fig. 3), after lifting the upper part. 3), lift the edges of the wound by sliding the spatula under the bark, so as to easily place the escutcheon, which is inserted by holding it by the petiole and pressing lightly on the upper part; If it is not possible to insert the entire length of the escutcheon, its end must be cut off to ensure that it coincides with the subject; the edges of the notch are then brought together on the escutcheon, and the whole is wrapped with a wool ligature, taking particular care not to engage the eye (see D, fig. 3). The ligature is shown further apart than it should be, so that the position of the escutcheon can be seen. Early petiole fall is a sign of graft recovery, which usually takes place ten or fifteen days after the operation; the tree should then be cut back to a few centimetres above the graft. Be sure to remove any shoots that appear on the subject, and pinch the terminal bud of the grafts so as to encourage the development of the lower eyes. 2. Ring grafting. - The months of April and August are the best times for this type of grafting. Fig. 4 - Ring grafting. Suitable for hardwood trees, particularly walnut. A branch of the same size as the tree to be grafted is selected from the tree to be propagated; the bark is encircled circularly below and above an eye, so as to form a ring which is detached by splitting it perpendicularly on the part adjacent to the eye (see C. fig. 4); it is then removed using the spatula of the grafting machine. A ring of the same width is then removed from the subject (see B, fig. 4), and the section of bark removed is returned to its place on the tree to be propagated. To be sure of success, the bark must be joined at the top and bottom; then the grafts are secured with a wool ligature, taking particular care not to engage the eye. Do not cut back the branches or the head of the tree until the graft's recovery is assured. This grafting technique has the advantage of never mutilating the tree, because if the graft does not vegetate, the ring of bark remains and takes the place of the one that was removed. 3. Split grafting. - This graft can be done in spring or autumn; and, to be sure of success, there must be enough sap to make the graft grow, but still enough to weld it to the subject, so that it doesn't dry out in the winter. To graft in the spring, you need to take the precaution of cutting off the previous year's shoots from each species of tree you wish to propagate, and then bury them in sand in a northern exposure, so as to delay vegetation as long as possible. To be sure of the success of these grafts, the sap must have begun to rise in the subject, but not yet have swollen the buds of the shoot you wish to graft. The first fortnight of April is usually the most favourable time for this operation: we then cut the head of the tree horizontally, and split it in the middle of its diameter, so as to make a notch of Om,03 to Om,06, depending on the strength of the tree, and taking care that this notch is always a little deeper and wider than the graft to be inserted would appear to require. When the subject is large and vigorous, several notches can be made (see A, B, fig. 5); but they must be opposite each other, so that they do not meet. Once the tree is ready to be grafted, select a branch with good eyes, from Om, 06 to Om, 10 in length, so that after insertion in the notch, there are at least two or three eyes on the outside. The lower part of this branch is then pruned to form two bevels of Om, 03 to Om, 06 in length (see C, fig. 5), whatever the thickness of the outer part, care is taken to preserve its bark; then open the slit with the spatula of the grafting machine or with a wedge, and insert the graft so that its bark coincides exactly with that of the subject; then wrap the whole with a 14 M Fig. 5. - Grafting in slit. ligature, and cover the end of the subject with grafting wax (1). Finally, take care to remove any shoots that develop on the subject, as they will live at the expense of the graft. 4 - Slit graft on tuber. - This graft is particularly useful for multiplying tree peonies. In August, take a tuber of herbaceous Peony, cut the top transversely, make a slit on one side and insert a branch with the lower part bevelled, then plant the tuber in a pot, but in such a way that the whole graft is buried. The pots (1) The grafting wax is composed of two parts of pitch-resin, two parts of yellow wax and one part of tallow, melted together. are placed on a warm layer, and the grafts are covered with a bell which must be shaded for fifteen or twenty days. The following spring, each of these grafts can be planted in the ground. 5. Veneer grafting. - The branch to be grafted is pruned into an elongated flute-beak shape (see A, fig. 6), then a portion of bark is removed (see B, fig. 6) Fig. 6. - Veneer graft. exactly the same size as the pruned part of the graft; the two parts are joined together, and a ligature made. These grafts grow back easily, but for this to happen, they must be smothered under a bell. 6. Vine grafting. - In March, cut the subject at the root collar, at about Om, 08 to Om, 10 in the ground, and leave the wound to dry for a few days; if you grafted immediately, the sap would rise so abundantly that it could drown the graft. The branches are prepared as for other split grafts, then one or more notches are made, depending on the strength of the subject, and the grafts are placed, leaving two or three eyes above ground. The graft and the tip are then covered with grafting wax; some people even compress the soil around the graft, taking great care not to disturb the branches. In the south of France, modified split grafting is used in the following way: after removing the heel of the stock used as a subject, it is cut a little above the ground, split right through, and a knife-edge graft is inserted laterally about halfway along its length, with the lower end plunging into the ground at Om, 15 to Om, 20; this serves to feed the graft until it is perfectly fused with the subject. Herbaceous graft. - This graft differs from the split graft only in the time at which it is performed. It can be used to propagate almost all plants still in the herbaceous state, particularly resinous trees and some ornamental shrubs. The time for grafting varies according to the state of the season; usually, the best time is May. The tip of the bud is cut off above one or more leaves, which must be carefully spared to attract the sap to the graft. The tree is then split from about Om, 03 to Om, 06 in length, and the shoot is prepared as for split grafting, taking care not to thin it too much. For this operation, a sharp, well-sharpened instrument must be used, in order to make a clean cut. Once the graft has been prepared, it is inserted into the subject's cleft, and secured with a wool ligature. To avoid cutting the head of the tree, we can proceed in another way: we make an incision, as if to place a crest; then, after having cut the branch into a bevel elongated on one side, like a flute's beak, we introduce it between the wood and the bark, and as always, we maintain the graft with a ligature, which must be removed about a month after the operation. To ensure that the grafts take root again, they must be protected from the sun and the sun's rays; so, if you're working on potted plants, you'll need to put them under a frame, which you'll need to shade; and if you're working on plants in the ground, you'll need to protect them by wrapping them in a paper cone, a vine leaf, or some other shelter, which you can remove ten or fifteen days after the operation. Grafting can also be used to propagate tuberous plants: in spring, young shoots of the best Dahlia varieties are grafted onto tubers of inferior varieties. To do this, take a tuber, cut off the top horizontally and split it on one side, then choose a branch that is not yet hollow, which happens when they are already strong, and cut the lower part with a slightly sharp bevel, taking care to remove only the epidermis; then insert it into the slit in the tuber, which is planted in a pot, so that the whole graft is buried. The pots are placed on a warm surface and covered with a cloche, which must be shaded for several days. Herbaceous grafting is also performed on grapevines. This operation should be carried out in May or June, on buds of Om, 20 or Om, 25 in length. It differs in no way from ordinary slit grafting; the only difference is that, after wrapping the graft in wool or wax, it is placed in a wide-necked bottle (canning jar), attached to a stake or other support, and corked with fresh moss. After twelve or fifteen days, when recovery is certain, the bottle is uncorked to fortify the graft, and soon afterwards left to air. These grafts sometimes bear fruit in the very first year, which means that this process can be used with advantage, not only as a means of propagation, but also to judge the merit of new varieties. Crown grafting, known as Pliny grafting. - This graft is used when the subject is too strong to be split grafted; it must be done at the same time as the latter graft, and care must also be taken to cut off, during the winter, some of the raE Fig. 7. - Crown graft. meaux of the subject to be propagated, to prevent them from coming into vegetation too early. The head of the tree to be grafted should be cut horizontally (see fig. 7), and the tip should be wrapped with a ligature to hold the bark in place, lest it split when the cuts are made; a small wedge of iron or hardwood is then driven to a depth of about Om, 05 between the bark and the wood, then the shoot is bevelled, and after removing the wedge, the graft is driven in so that the entire bevel is hidden (see fig. 7). The number of grafts placed on the same subject should be proportionate to its size. They should be placed about Om, 05 apart; and, as soon as the operation is complete, the tip of the subject and the edges of the bark should be covered with grafting wax. 7. Ordinary approach grafting. - This operation consists in applying a branch of the variety to be grafted against a branch or stem of a tree of the same species; it can be performed while the trees are in vegetation. The procedure should be as follows: after bringing the two branches together in parallel (see fig. 8), remove part of the bark on each one, so as to form a longitudinal wound, the length of which should always be proportionate to the strength of the individuals; then apply them one Fig. 8 - Grafting by approach. It is often necessary to loosen the ligature as soon as the grafts have been taken up, so that the force of the vegetation does not cause strangulation, which not only forms bulges, but also hinders the taking up of the grafts. The grafts should not be detached until it is certain that they are solidly welded; in fact, it is often more prudent to start by cutting off the head of the subject, only half-cutting the part that is to be cut off, and not weaning it completely until some time later, when it should be cut as close as possible to the graft, so that the sap covers the wound more easily. This operation requires great care, so as not to cut the subject with the grafting blade. 8. Grafting by complicated approach. - This graft differs little from the previous one: it is specially used to give solidity to hedges. The branches are crossed so as to form a rhombus; at the point where they meet, a longitudinal wound is made on each branch, taking care to ensure that the bark coincides; the two parts are held together by means of a ligature, and the operation is repeated as the branches grow. CHAPTER X.. Plant Conservation. In this chapter, we will limit ourselves to saying that the northern situation of our country, the irregularity of the seasons, and the humidity of our springs and autumns would make the cultivation of certain exotic plants impracticable, if we did not have recourse to artificial means of conservation and multiplication. These means are of several kinds: starting with the simplest, they include the most complex: I. cloches; 2. frames; 3. the orangery or cold greenhouse; 4. the temperate greenhouse; 5. the hot greenhouse. 1. cloches. - Glass cloches are the simplest of all shelters; they serve to protect delicate plants and cuttings from cold and humidity, and to concentrate heat on those that need a higher temperature than that of the atmosphere. Choose cloches with the whitest glass, as they are prone to tarnishing after a few years. Take the precaution of washing them from time to time, and when they are no longer in use, place them one inside the other, taking care to separate them with a bit of straw to avoid breakage. 2. Chassis. - The purpose of frames is to activate the germination of certain seeds, to increase the heat of the layers, to enable the cultivation of vegetable plants that do not succeed in the open air, and to protect delicate plants from the insults of the air. They [consist of two parts: the trunk a, a (fig. 9), and the panels c. Each trunk is usually 4 meters long and Im, 33 wide; it is made of four boards nailed to four feet placed internally at the four corners. The back of the trunk should always be higher than the front, so that the panels are inclined to the south. The spacing is maintained by two bars b. b, dovetailed at the top and bottom, which support the panels. The glazed panels should be made of thick oak. They consist of a frame 1.33 m wide and of arbitrary length, divided by three small bars of equal thickness, which can be advantageously replaced by iron uprights, fixed to the crosspieces from top to bottom. A handle is placed at each end, so that they can be removed, and before glazing, they are painted with oil, an operation that should be repeated every year in autumn. Doormats. - Doormats are used to cover diapers, bells, frames, greenhouses and so on. With the gardeners' doormat loom, you can easily make your own doormats. This loom consists of a wooden frame 2 meters long by Im, 33 wide, with as many headless pegs at either end as you want to stretch strings through it, depending on the length you give the doormat. It is customary to make only three rows; however, it would be better to make four, for greater solidity. The strings are tied to the bottom pegs with a fixed loop, and to the top with a slipknot, allowing them to be stretched as much as necessary. Once each string has been tightened, it is left twice the length of the frame; this excess length is used to sew the mat, after which two layers of rye straw are laid across it, as evenly as possible, and laid head to tail; and, after rolling the middle row of string onto a kind of shuttle made from a piece of wood Om, 08 in length and hollowed out on the sides, we take a pinch of straw, and pass the shuttle from right to left under the straw and over the string, then return to the top to engage it in the loop formed by the string, and tighten by pulling straight ahead, taking care to press the straw between the thumb and forefinger of the left hand, so as to obtain a flat rather than round mesh; then continue with the same shuttle along the length of the mat, and when you've reached the end, tie a knot to stop the string. You then move on to the other rows, which you sew in the same way, guiding the edge stitches onto the middle ones; and, once the doormat is finished, you cut off the overhanging ears on either side. Although these doormats are intended to cover panels Im, 33 wide, they should be given a length of 2 meters, because when damp they shorten by about Om, 50, leaving them only as long as required. 3. Orangery. - The orangery, or cold greenhouse, is designed to keep out the cold for certain plants that require only a small amount of heat. Its shape is a long square, and its dimensions, both in height and width, must be in proportion to the number of plants it is designed to contain. The walls must be thick enough to prevent frost from easily penetrating them. The front will be fitted with windows as large as possible, and the entrance door, placed in the center, will be glazed and open in two parts. A stove will be built, with pipes running around the interior walls, but fire will only be needed in the event of extraordinary feoids. To preserve the health of the plants, it is sufficient to prevent frost from penetrating into the greenhouse; to this end, a thermometer should be placed in the greenhouse, to be consulted often, in order to maintain the necessary temperature for each plant. Water intended for watering orangery plants, and even those in adjoining greenhouses, should enter the building through underground pipes, and be collected in a basin or barrel to warm up a little. 5. §I. - On the entry of orangery plants and their treatment in winter. Plants should be brought into the orangery in the second half of October, rarely later. They should only be brought in when the weather is dry, and care should be taken to place the highest plants at the back, so that they form a tier, and all get as much light as possible. In addition to orange trees, laurel, pomegranate and many other hardy plants can spend the winter in the orangery; they can even be placed behind or between the orange trees, without any inconvenience; but this is not the case for myrtles, which can also be placed in the orangery; they must receive direct light, otherwise they will lose their leaves. Large Pelargoniums zonale (Red Geraniums) can be placed on the shelves: their hardiness is such that they are perfectly happy in the orangery; they should be watered very little (but not allowed to dry out), to prevent them from vegetating during their stay in the greenhouse, when the shoots are so tender that they have to be cut back as they come out. During the frosts, you can still place potted carnations and large wallflowers in the orangery, but you need to put them outside as soon as the temperature permits. At first, leave the orangery fully open day and night. When it starts to get cold, close it at night; then, when it's freezing, close it during the day. Then all the windows must be hermetically sealed and fitted with mats on the outside. Whenever the thermometer outside registers 3 or 4 degrees above zero, air is given in, unless the atmosphere is too humid or the wind too violent. Plants in the orangery should be watered only when they need it, and only as much water as is absolutely necessary for their maintenance. As winter is a time of rest for plants, it is important to avoid reviving vegetation at this time, which would exhaust them. §1I. - The plants can only be brought out in the first fortnight of May, and we always start with the hardiest; but to accustom them to atmospheric influences, we must give them as much air as possible a long time in advance, and wait for overcast or rainy weather before bringing them out. All plants should be placed (as is almost always the case) close to the house, but always with a good exposure and sheltered from the wind; double-flowered oleanders and pomegranates should be placed in the extreme south, if you want them to flower every year. As soon as they have been removed, any plants needing to be re-boxed, either because they require more space or because the boxes need replacing, should be re-boxed only after they have been placed in their proper positions, to prevent them from being shaken in transit. In all circumstances, we advise you to give larger crates only gradually, and with a great deal of reserve; because if they are too large, Laurel and Pomegranate trees grow a lot, but do not flower, and Orange trees languish. Up to the age of eight or ten, Orange trees should be pruned about every two or three years, and then every five or six years; but Laurel and Pomegranate trees should be pruned more frequently, as the development of branches and twigs is always related to that of the roots, and as these shrubs vegetate much more vigorously than Orange trees, they should be pruned more often. If, while waiting for the time for re-embedding, the leaves of the shrubs turn yellow, without this being due to excessive humidity, they should be given a half-embedding, which consists in cutting away Om, 05 to Om, 10 of the soil around the box and replacing it with new soil suited to the plant's needs. At the end of this chapter, we will indicate which soil is suitable for each plant. Since potting differs little from repotting, except in the way it is carried out, which must be modified, we refer you to this article for the details. After the operation, we cover the surface of the soil with a mulch of consumed manure, and give each plant a good watering. As with winter watering, the water used should be left in a barrel for some time; it would even be a good idea to water from time to time with water in which animal or vegetable substances have been left to decompose. Watering should take place at least once a day in summer. Finally, they should be more or less abundant, depending on the temperature; then gradually decrease as the temperature cools. Towards the end of August or the beginning of September, orange trees need to be pruned, which involves removing dead wood and all unnecessary or misplaced branches, such as those on the inside, which make the head too compact and hinder the circulation of sap. Finally, whether you're growing Orange trees in a rounded or cylindrical shape, you need to cut off the tips of all slender branches, so as to give each tree a regular shape; it's also at this time that you can reduce the head of those that are growing too much, or which, no longer growing, need to be rejuvenated, which is done by cutting back all branches more or less close to the trunk, depending on the tree's strength. Laurel trees can be subjected to the same treatment when they overgrow; but they must not be pruned annually, as this would deprive them of flowers. As soon as they are out of bloom, cut off the ends of the branches that used to bear the flowers, so as to obtain trees with well rounded heads. Myrtles need to be sheared regularly, as soon as they are defoliated; Grenadiers also need to be sheared every year, to keep their shape as graceful as possible; but this pruning should only take place at the time of re-entry. To complete our information on orangery plants as much as possible, we'd like to point out that Pelargoniums zonale should also be trimmed before being placed in the greenhouse. §111 - Soil composition for the following plants. ORANGERS. - One quarter free soil, one quarter good vegetable garden soil, one quarter heather soil, one quarter fat compost. MYRTS. - Pure heather soil. GRENADIERS and ROSE LAUREL. - Good vegetable garden soil mixed with fatty loam. 4. Temperate greenhouse. - This greenhouse differs from the orangery in that it is much brighter, an indispensable condition for the preservation of the plants we recommend placing there; it will be adjoining the orangery, and will communicate from one to the other: it will be 8 meters long by 3 wide, and, starting from the interior floor, it will be 2m, 45 high at the back; the front will be Om, 80 high and will be glazed. The small sashes that will close it will be hinged at the top, and will open horizontally from bottom to top; they will bear from below on a small support wall covered with a slab, and they will beat on the uprights that support the lower part of the rafters, which must be, like the rest, made of oak and placed at Im, 33 one from the other, so as to receive the glazed panels with which the greenhouse is to be covered. The first row of panels will be 2 m long by Im, 33 wide; they will bear from the bottom on a gutter board designed to discharge rainwater, and from the top on a crosspiece called a spacer, which must run from one rafter to the other. The panels of the second row will be only Im, 36 in length, and so that they can bear on the rafters, it is necessary to apply a sole on each of them, so as to form the thickness of the bottom panels, on which those of the second row will have to bear about Om, 03, and from the top on a crosspiece which, like that of the bottom, must go from one rafter to the other. The panels will be fixed at the top by hooks placed inside, and to give air, the bottom will be raised and held open by small iron racks. At the top of the greenhouse, a small roof will be placed over which you can walk to service the doormats. To prevent you from slipping on the panels, place a handrail along the entire length of the greenhouse. Inside, a pathway Om, 75 wide, supported by a supporting wall, will be provided at orangery floor level, as the rest of the greenhouse must be Om, 50 lower. The middle will be occupied by a tier Im, 25 wide, made up of six shelves; the height of the tier must be calculated so that the plants are no more than Om, 60 or Om, 80 from the glass; in front of the tier we'll make a path Om, 50 wide, so that we can circulate all around it, then we'll, establish a shelf against the back wall, and another path Om, 50 wide on the front of the greenhouse and under which will circulate the pipes of the stove, whose mouth must always be outside. An opening will be made in the gable of this greenhouse, and it will be fitted with a double door, which will serve as an entrance during frosts, thus avoiding having to open that of the orangery. §IV. - Temperate greenhouse plants and their winter treatment. The plants must be brought in during October, but it is impossible for us to determine the exact time; we will only say that it is important to avoid as much as possible that they remain exposed to the autumn humidity, and especially that they are not affected by the first frosts. By the beginning of the month, the panels should be ready to be placed on the greenhouse; the interior should be cleaned and any repairs made; finally, by this time, it should be ready to receive the plants, which should be placed in the following order, although this should only be done after cleaning the pots and lightly scraping the surface of the soil, so as not to leave any grass or moss. Pelargoniums, Calceolaria, Cinerea and Verbena are placed on the tier, while Hydrangea, Erythrina, Balisier or Dahlia tubers can be placed underneath. Succulents or plants requiring little care during winter are placed on the shelf against the back wall, but the front shelf is reserved for Camellias, which should always be placed in the brightest part of the greenhouse. All these plants should be placed on the shelves, in rows of the same size, spaced so that their heads do not touch each other; and during their stay in the greenhouse, they should be turned over from time to time, so that all their parts are successively exposed to the light; for without this precaution, they would all be inclined to the same side, leaving them with an unsightly shape. From the moment the plants are placed in the greenhouse until spring, watering should be moderate and only be carried out as and when the plants really need it. Watering should be done with a small watering can, to which an extension spout should be added to reach distant plants, and the water used should have been kept at greenhouse temperature for some time. Other care consists in keeping the house clean and renewing the air as often as possible, while avoiding opening the frames on overcast or rainy days, so as not to introduce humidity into the greenhouse; Then, as soon as the cold approaches, all openings should be hermetically sealed with moss, and when the weather clears in the evening and the outside thermometer registers only 3 or 4 degrees of heat, the greenhouse should be covered with mats, as it is likely to freeze overnight. In December, the small frames at the front of the greenhouse should be fitted with a stove made of dry manure; and, whatever the temperature, it is advisable to cover the greenhouse every night, taking care to remove the mats during the day, unless the weather is overcast and the cold is severe. Moreover, you can uncover the greenhouse without any inconvenience whenever the thermometer shows no more than 4 or 5 degrees of cold; however, you must be careful to replace the doormats before frost has formed on the windows; and if at that time you have to let in some air, you must always close the door before the sun disappears, in order to concentrate the heat in the greenhouse, which can often save you the trouble of making a fire at night; finally, either by doubling the mats, or by making a small fire (which should only be done with great reserve), care should be taken to ensure that the temperature of the greenhouse does not fall below 5 degrees of heat, and if it is necessary to make a fire, it should not be raised to more than 6 to 8 degrees, as the essential point is to maintain the plants in a state of rest from which they should only emerge towards the end of winter. As almost all the plants we have mentioned are prone to aphid attack, tobacco fumigation should be used as often as necessary, after closing everything (1). Once March arrives, there's no longer any need to light a fire in the greenhouse, as the sun usually heats the atmosphere sufficiently. Often, when the sun shines directly on the greenhouse, it's even necessary to spread a light-colored cloth over the panels, to prevent (1) This operation must be carried out using a cylindrical copper device called a fumigator. It consists of two parts: the upper part rubs against the lower part; a plate with fine holes is fixed internally to receive the tobacco and prevent it from passing through the pipes. To operate the unit, the end of a bellows is inserted into the pipe at the bottom of the unit, and as it blows, the smoke escapes through the tube attached to one side of the upper part. This prevents the foliage of the plants from being burnt. From this point onwards, watering should gradually become more frequent and more abundant; it is even necessary to syringe the plants from time to time, an operation which at this time should take place in the morning. But however beneficial these waterings may be, they should be suspended as soon as the first Pelargonium flowers bloom, as they will quickly dull their radiance. In the first days of April, gradually introduce more air into the greenhouse, depending on the temperature, to fortify the plants, which will soon be exposed to the open air. If you want Pelargoniums to bloom brilliantly, take them out of the greenhouse as soon as the temperature permits, and place them in a good position, taking care to arrange them so that they can be easily covered at night, should the temperature so require; then leave them there until the first flowers begin to bloom, at which point they can be returned to the greenhouse: In this way, the plants will be less slender, more robust, and the flowers more vividly colored. If some circumstance prevents the Pelargoniums from being put out as soon as indicated, air should be supplied through all the openings in the greenhouse to remedy the situation as far as possible. § V. - Removal of temperate greenhouse plants and their treatment in summer. In the first fortnight of May, and as much as possible on an overcast day, take the plants out of the greenhouse, except for Pelargoniums and Calceolaria, which should be taken out only after they have deflowered, in order to enjoy all the beauty of their flowering; and then treat them as we shall indicate when talking about the plants to be taken out. Place them in a shady spot for a few days, to strengthen them; and before putting them in place, repot those that need it, which must be done every year for those that grow a lot. But not all plants can be repotted at the same time; for this operation to be carried out properly, it must always take place some time before the plants come into vegetation, and it is wrong that many gardeners still indiscriminately repot all plants in autumn. It's easy to understand why we find this practice so reprehensible: repotting can hardly take place without damaging the roots; it often happens that, once the hair has completely covered the root ball, it becomes necessary to cut it back; it's certain then that this operation can be useless, if not harmful, when it takes place at a time when the plants are due to rest for several months. It is therefore preferable to repot plants in spring. However, plants like Pelargoniums, which vegetate towards the end of winter, should be repotted towards the end of August or the beginning of September, in a word, in time for them to put down new roots before winter. Now that we've come to the subject of Pelargoniums, we'd like to point out that they should always be pruned a fortnight before repotting; this operation consists in removing any thin or badly placed branches, and cutting back the current year's branches two or three eyes below their insertion, depending on their position and the vigour of the plants, but always so as to form a well-rounded head. Immediately after potting, details of which will be given in the next chapter, water the plants with the apple watering can, then place them in pruning rows in a well-ventilated spot, but in part-shade as far as possible; and, if there is no natural shelter, form palisades from small reeds attached at the top and bottom to gaulettes held in place by stakes; keep watering as required; you can even continue syringing, which, during the hot days of June, July and August, should only take place towards the end of the day. If heavy rainfall occurs shortly after potting, the pots should be temporarily laid to one side, to prevent excessive humidity from rotting the roots. Although we have given a general description of the care to be given to temperate greenhouse plants, it can be applied to all pot-grown plants, unless the plants are planted in the ground with their pots, which can only be done for Verbenas, Petunias, Hydrangeas, Pelargoniums and some varieties of Calceolaria, all plants with which you can form very graceful groups. There's no need to protect them from the sun's rays; they just need to be cut back and repotted in time for them to have recovered by the time they return to the greenhouse. SVI. - Repotting. Before repotting, the soil should have been prepared for each plant, as described at the end of this chapter. When everything is ready, take advantage of overcast weather as much as possible, or, failing that, move to a shady spot. We then take each plant in turn, carefully unstacking it by placing the left hand on the surface of the soil, so that the stem passes between the fingers, then we turn the plant upside down, and, supporting the pot with the right hand, we lightly tap its rim on a point of support, and once the rootball is out of the pot, we visit it. If, as is often the case, the lining of the rootball is made up of a tissue of dried-out roots, it is cut away cleanly, then, by scraping lightly, a greater or lesser part of the old soil is removed, depending on the degree of decomposition; broken or rotten roots are then removed. After preparing the clod in this way, if it happens to be very dry, we plunge it into water until it is well soaked. After draining, place it in the pot intended for it, which should always be proportionate to the volume of the roots and the vigor of the plant. However, this should only be done after placing a shard or a bed of gravel at the bottom of the pot, to facilitate drainage of the water used for watering. Next, a bed of soil is placed, the thickness of which should be calculated so that the surface of the rootball is 0.04m to 0.05m below the rim of the pot; then soil is poured between the rootball and the sides of the pot, taking care to keep the plant stem right in the middle, and, to ensure there are no voids, it is tamped down with a spatula; The bottom of the pot is lightly tapped, then filled with soil, this time compacted with the thumbs, leaving the surface of the soil about Om, Ol lower than the sides of the pot, to receive water for watering. This is all the care that temperate greenhouse plants require. Although given in a very succinct manner, this advice will always suffice for the cultivation of all plants that do not deviate from ordinary cultivation. §VII. - Composition of the soil to be used for the following plants. PELARGONIUMS. - One third heather soil, one third free-range soil, one third leaf compost, or, in the absence of manure, a little well-sieved poudrette (1). CALCÉOLAIRES. - Heather soil, free earth and leaf compost. VERVEINES. - Heather soil mixed with a portion of good vegetable garden soil. CINEMA. - Heather soil and compost. CAMELIAS. - Pure heather soil. HORTENSIAS. - Pure heather soil. SUCCULENTS. - Heather soil mixed with a little well-sieved powdered earth. 5. Warm greenhouse. - Like the temperate greenhouse, this greenhouse communicates with the orangery. As its structure is exactly the same as that of the temperate greenhouse, we refer to the latter for its construction, and will only discuss the interior layout. The inside path will be Om, 75 wide, and the bed 2m,25, including a small supporting wall Om, 45 high to support it; and another on the front of the (1) As in all circumstances the soil for potting must be very loose and well mixed, it must always be screened. The claie consists of a wooden frame, lined vertically with iron rods spaced about 0m,015 apart. These rods are supported by a crosspiece placed in the middle of the frame. To use it, you lean it (taking care to tilt it slightly) on a good stake. The sieve is a basket whose bottom is lined with wicker or wire mesh of varying widths, depending on the degree of loosening required. ANUEL DE JARDINAGE. greenhouse, where the pipes of the stove run, the mouth of which will always be on the outside. The shelf placed against the back wall is designed to hold potted strawberry plants. The manure layer can be replaced by a thermosiphon, with pipes running under a floor covered with a bed of tannin thick enough to bury the pots, and the inside temperature can be produced by the same device using pipes running above the layer. As the cultivation of greenhouse plants is very limited, we will limit ourselves to saying that during the winter, the temperature of the greenhouse should be maintained between 15 and 18 degrees centigrade. In April, we start to crimp the plants and give them a little air around mid-day. In the second half of May, we take out the hardiest plants, and bring them back in during September; finally, we can say that the general care to be given to hot-house plants is the same as that indicated for temperate greenhouse plants. CHAPTER XI. Vegetable garden. GARLIC (Allium sativum). - Multiplies from cloves planted in beds and borders towards the end of February and beginning of March. All soils are suitable, but it prefers those that are light and substantial. At the beginning of June, we tie a knot with the leaves and stem, in order to stop the sap flowing to the bulbs, which we pull off as soon as the leaves begin to dry out. Before putting them into bunches, we leave them on the ground for some time, where they finish ripening; then we hang them in a dry place to keep them until spring. Spanish garlic or Rocambole. - This species, less widespread than the previous one, differs in that it produces bulblets instead of seeds, which can be used for reproduction. Cultivation is the same. ANANAS (Ananassa sativa). - To raise pineapples and prepare them for fruiting, you need frames 1.65 m long by 1.33 m wide, and a well-exposed greenhouse with one or two gentle slopes, so that the plants are not too far from the glass. The first half of October is the best time to plant crowns and eyelets, because the young plants won't need any more care to overwinter in the ground than the old ones, and by spring the plants will already be strong and well rooted. Towards the end of September, prepare a good layer about Ou. 60 thick, made up of half new manure, half mixed leaves, or, failing that, part manure from old layers. The height of the layer should be calculated in such a way that, after being reloaded with Om, 20 or Om, 30. of tannin, or, failing that, moss, the plants are as close to the glass as possible. Eyelets for planting should preferably be taken from the leaf axils, where they are always strongest. After removing the eyelets, keep the old plants only if you are short of plants, and then only until they have produced the number of eyelets you need. Before planting the carnations, remove the leaves from the part to be planted (about Om, 05 to Om, 06); then cleanly cool the wound, and plant them immediately in pots Om, 10 to Om, 12 in diameter, depending on their strength. What we recommend for eyelets is, in all circumstances, applicable to crowns. If need be, crowns can be stored for at least a month in a shady, dry place. For planting, use pure heather soil or, failing that, a soil composed of one-fifth free earth, half heather soil and one-sixth compost, all prepared at least six months previously, stirred several times and put through a sieve. At the time of potting, this soil must not be damp, but must not be parched, although it is better to use it dry than damp. Immediately after planting, the pots are placed in the bed, starting with the top row and always choosing the highest plants. This must be observed each time they are replaced, because of the slope that must always be given to the frames. Take care to space them according to their strength. At night, cover the frames with straw mats; during the day, reduce the intensity of the sun's rays with canvas or mulch, which is spread over the frames; finally, for a month, the time needed for them to take root, care for them like cuttings. When they begin to vegetate, we give them a little air by lifting the frames when the sun is shining; then we water them at the base, but only as and when necessary. Around the beginning of November, i.e. when it's cold and wet, we surround the trunk with a good manure warmer, which should go down to the same depth as the bed, and from then until spring, it should be stirred at least every month, adding a portion of new manure each time. When the cold is severe, double the mats at night, spread a good layer of bedding over them, and keep the stoves at frame height; then uncover the panels every day, unless the thermometer falls below 4 or 5 degrees Celsius. In spring, watering should be more frequent and abundant, and more and more water is given as the sun gains strength. In the first days of May, a bed is laid, which must be much longer than the autumn bed, due to the development of the plants; but, as the temperature is milder, it need not be as warm as in autumn. The same applies to the stoves, which we don't make as deep and only remodel from time to time. This time, we replace the tan with a 32-centimeter-thick layer of soil, similar to that used for potting carnations; then we unstuff the pineapples, inspect the roots, and if any are rotten, we remove them; if not, we spare them all; After this, they are planted on the bed, taking care to press them in so that the old root ball is covered by a few centimetres of soil, to encourage new roots to emerge from the collar. Some time after planting, you begin to give the plants a little air; then you gradually increase the amount, depending on the temperature. At this point, it's preferable not to accustom pineapples to being shaded; in this way, you'll have much hardier plants, but you'll understand that you need to give them more air. During hot spells, they can be watered with a watering can, especially if planted on a good bed, as humidity is only really harmful in winter. Treated in this way, the pineapples will have developed by autumn to a degree that would scarcely be found in those grown constantly in pots for two years. Towards the end of September or the beginning of October, the Pineapples are lifted from the ground; all the eyelets are removed, followed by a few lower leaves; and as the Pineapple is one of the plants whose roots perish each year and are replaced by new ones, all the old ones are removed by cutting them close to the plant; after which the Pineapples are tied with a straw tie, so as to make them easier to repot, which should be done in pots of Om, 24 in diameter only. This operation is called bare-bottom potting. After potting, we place them on a new layer, and until they have new roots, we give them the same care as we would for first-age carnations. Around January, we place them in a greenhouse, where we've prepared a layer about 6.65 m thick and the full width of the recess, which must not be less than 2 meters wide. This layer should be filled with a good bed of tannin or moss, so that the pots can be easily buried in it, and placed about Om, 50 apart in all directions; finally, depending on the strength of the plants, they are left in this way until they set fruit, i.e. from April to July, when they are planted in the open ground on the same layer, after reshuffling it and replacing the tannin with a bed of soil. For as long as the pineapples remain in the greenhouse, the layer mentioned above can be replaced by thermosiphon heating; in this case, the tanning bed, and consequently the soil, is placed on a floor under which the heating pipes run. The heating is adjusted so as to maintain a temperature of around 25 to 30 degrees Celsius in the layer, which is quite sufficient for the needs of these plants. In spring, we start heating less, and stop completely in May, because from then until September, the sun's heat is sufficient. The greenhouse in which pineapples are placed is usually divided in two by a glass partition, so that there are two seasons. The strongest plants are placed in the first compartment, and we usually start heating them towards the end of January. From then on, the temperature of the greenhouse should be maintained at a constant 25 to 30 degrees; at night, until the end of April, the greenhouse is covered with mulch, which must be removed every day. For watering at the foot of the plants, use water in which animal or vegetable substances have been decomposed. In winter, watering should be subordinated to the warmth of the bed, and care should be taken to ensure that the water is at the temperature of the greenhouse; in summer, however, watering should be abundant, with occasional ponding. As we have already indicated, it is necessary to provide plenty of air, to avoid shading. First-season fruit usually ripens from July to September. Care should be taken not to raise the temperature on the side of the greenhouse where the second-season plants are placed to more than 12 degrees; but in March, when we usually start heating them, we should observe all that has been indicated for the first season. Second-season fruit usually ripens from September to December. As we can see, treating pineapples as we have just described will produce fruit that can be harvested twenty or twenty-six months after the eyelets have been planted, conclusively demonstrating the superiority of this method of cultivation over that used in the past. Varieties. - From Martinique. - Cayenne. - From Jamaica. - From Providence - From Mont-Serrat. - Duchesse-d'Orléans. - Comte-de-Paris. - Enville. - Poli blanc. - Charlotte Rothschild. ARROCHE DES JARDINS. Belle-Dame, Bonne-Dame (Atriplex horensis). - This plant is grown only to soften the acidity of sorrel. It is sown in spring and requires no care; it usually reseeds itself and, when you have a few plants, it is rarely necessary to sow them. Arroche seeds keep well for only one year. Varieties. - Arroche blonde. - Arroche rouge. artichoke (cynara scolymus). - To grow artichokes successfully, you need soft, substantial soil; they like warmth, and fear cold humidity. They can be propagated from seed sown on a bed in February and March, or immediately placed in April and May; but, as they rarely reproduce their varieties, it is preferable to propagate them by eyelet. This is done as follows: In April, the shoots born at the collar of old plants are broken off, taking care to remove them with the heel or portion of the root collar; then the strongest are selected, the leaf tips are shortened, and, after preparing the soil well, they are planted in a chessboard pattern, at about Om, 75 in slightly poor soils, and at I meter in those where vigorous vegetation is hoped for. If well hoeed and watered, a good proportion of these carnations will bear fruit in autumn, and all will bear abundant fruit the following spring. Each year, in the autumn, the old stems and the tips of the longest leaves must be cut off; then, in November, in a word, before the frosts, they must be "buttered", an operation which consists in raising the soil around each plant; and when the frosts begin to make themselves felt, they are completely covered with leaves or litter, which is removed every time the weather gets milder. In March, when frosts are no longer to be feared, we destroy the artichoke mounds and give them a good ploughing; then, in April, we grommet them, as previously indicated, so as to leave only the two or three most beautiful grommets on each plant. Artichoke plantations only produce abundantly after four years, so replant every three years to avoid any interruption in harvesting. As artichoke roots do not grow very deep, they do not exhaust the surrounding soil, and young artichokes can be counter-planted in advance between those to be destroyed, so that when the old artichokes are uprooted, the soil is covered with young plants in full ratio. It's easy to bring forward the artichoke production period. Whether you force them into place, or raise them in clods in November to plant them in a trunk, care consists in surrounding the trunk with a manure stove during frosts, covering the panels at night and providing air during the day. Artichokes treated in this way produce in April. Alternatively, and much more simply, Artichokes can be forced as follows: In the first fortnight of February, remove the soil from the paths around the bed to a depth of about Om.50, and replace it with a stove of new manure; then place hoops far and wide across the bed, to support the mats used to cover the artichokes at night and in bad weather; The soil is then covered with hot manure, to activate vegetation, and the stoves are changed every ten or fifteen days, each time adding more or less new manure, depending on the temperature. Artichoke seeds keep well for up to five years. Varieties. - Vert de Provence. - Vert de Laon. - Camus de Bretagne. - Violet. ASPARAGUS (Asparagus officinalis). - Two varieties are grown: the common or green asparagus, and the large purple or Dutch asparagus. Asparagus from Marchiennes, Ulm, Besançon and Vendôme are only varieties of the latter, the result of local influences. Asparagus is propagated from seed, which is sown in March, either in the field or in a nursery, in the ground or on a bed, for subsequent planting. Planting methods vary from country to country, but the one described here has produced excellent results in all the localities where it has been used, so we feel we should give it preference. After selecting a favorable site, in autumn Om, 25 to Om, 30 of soil is removed from the entire surface of the land to be planted. If, at this depth, the soil is not of good quality, we remove an extra spade shoe, which we replace with an equal quantity of good soil taken from the surface of the ground or from any other part of the garden. You could even mix in some old, consumed turf or the remains of old layers, if the soil is too damp or too compact and able to retain water; but, in either case, you spread a good bed of cow manure or other good fertilizer at the bottom of the trench; for Asparagus to do well, it needs soil that is not only light and sandy, but also well amended; Then, on top of all this, a bed of good soil is brought in, the thickness of which must be calculated so that the Asparagus claws are planted at Om, 15 deep, instead of Om, 35 which used to be indicated as a result of an error that experience has shown to be necessary to modify. In the course of March, a good ploughing is given, and a rake is passed over the whole area to remove clods and stones; the land is divided into plots Im, 33 wide, between each of which a path of about Om,50 is left; after which four rows are marked out, which must be equally spaced from each other, and in such a way that the two outer rows are Om, 16 from the edges of the plank. Then take one- or two-year-old seedlings, carefully pulled out with a fork, so that the roots are not broken; place the claws about Om, 40 apart on the line, and, after spreading the roots well, cover them with loose soil; it would even have to be put through the rake, if it were mixed with stones from clods or badly broken soil. Once the beds are evenly covered, we spread a good mulch of half-consumed fnmier over each one. Each year, in autumn, old stems are cut off, lightly hoeed and then mulched with half-consumed manure. If you proceed in this way, the asparagus will be in full ratio by the third shoot, and the larger ones will be cut off with an asparagus knife. This can be done at this point without affecting the following year's harvest. Sowing can also be done in situ, after preparing the beds as described above. You sow in rows in February or March, and when the plant is strong enough, you thin it out, leaving only the most beautiful plants at a distance equal to the one we have indicated; after which the other care to be given is the same as for planted Asparagus. We would like to add another procedure, communicated to the Cercle Général d'Horticulture by Mr. Lenormand, who has been practicing it successfully for many years. We'll leave it to this skilled horticulturist to explain how he establishes his asparagus plantations: "In April 1834, I made trenches Im, 30 wide by Om, 33 deep, in which I made layers, which, trodden and wetted, were from Om, 38 to Om, 40 thick; after covering them with well-levelled earth, I placed the boxes intended to receive the frames, and in each frame I planted twelve claws of Asparagus of one year's sowing. After planting, I covered the soil with a good mulch and planted two vines of Melons, which came up perfectly without harming the Asparagus. When the melon plants were three-quarters strong, I added four cauliflowers per frame, and after the melon harvest, in September, I sowed lamb's lettuce for the winter; the whole thing was a complete success. "The following February, the layer having settled, I reseeded my claws with soil from the paths, then planted Lettuces and Romaines on top, with two rows of Cauliflowers per bed, which made all traces of the layer disappear. The whole thing grew with amazing speed and strength, as I got Asparagus of Om, 07 in circumference. By improving the soil in this way, we can obtain two harvests a year, independently of the Asparagus, which we can force from the second year, and continue in this way, leaving them one year of rest out of three. This plant, established in 1834, still exists today, which proves that the claws lose none of their vigor, even though they are brought into relationship three years earlier than they could have been by the old process." Argenteuil growers, whose market garden produce enjoys a justly-deserved reputation, cultivate asparagus in rows, usually between vines, of which there are large tracts in this locality. Planted shallowly, I meters apart in all directions, Argenteuil asparagus is regularly smoked every two years. They are hoeed as often as necessary, and dethatched every year in November, which involves removing a few centimetres of the soil surface; they are then ridged in February or March. If practised intelligently, this method of cultivation gives such remarkable results that it can be adopted with confidence by all those who wish to harvest very large quantities of asparagus. If you want to have early Asparagus, you can start forcing a bed in the first days of November, and continue successively until February, which is done in the following way: after placing the trunks on the beds you wish to force, spread a bed of potting soil over the Asparagus, then remove the soil from the paths to a depth of Om, 50, and place it on the beds in such a way as to reload them with Om, 33 approximately, in order to obtain much longer Asparagus; then replace the soil in the paths with a new manure stove, which should be raised to the height of the panels with which you cover the boxes; but before placing the panels, spread a bed of manure on the boards, to activate vegetation; take care, however, to remove this fu nier as soon as the Asparagus begin to emerge from the ground. Whatever the state of the weather, don't give the asparagus any air. During the night and in bad weather, we cover the panels with good straw mats, to concentrate the heat. The stoves are changed every ten or fifteen days or so, adding more or less new manure each time, depending on the temperature, so as to obtain a heat under the panels of not less than 15 degrees, and no more than 25. These Asparagus are usually good to cut twenty or twenty-five days (depending on the temperature) after you start forcing them. Old asparagus or asparagus to be destroyed can be planted on a bed, where they will produce, once only, thin, green asparagus to be eaten as peas. To do this, prepare a layer of Om, 60 to Om, 80 thick, with a heat of 20 to 25 degrees; lay down boxes, fill the layer with a few centimetres of potting soil, then fill the paths, but only halfway. When the layer has caught its first fire, we take the asparagus claws and, without subtracting anything from the length of the roots, we place them on the layer one beside the other; we leave them in this state for a few days, after which we pour a little potting soil between the claws, so as to cover them slightly, then we finish filling the paths, and reshape them if necessary. At night, we cover the panels with straw mats, and as soon as the asparagus start to grow, we give them air during the day, unless the temperature is too unfavorable. After twelve or fifteen days, the Asparagus starts to produce, and we cut for as long as it lasts, which is about three months. Asparagus seeds ripen towards the end of October, and are good for four years. AUBERGINE or MÉLONGÈNE (Solanum Melongena). - In the Paris climate, Aubergine is sown towards the end of December or at the beginning of January, on a bed with a temperature of 20 to 25 degrees. Two or three weeks after sowing, the seedling is transplanted into the nursery, but on a layer less warm than the first; after a while, it is lifted and transplanted a second time before being put in place. When the plant has recovered and the temperature permits, we start to give it some air. In the course of March, a final layer is prepared, the length of which should be proportionate to the number of plants to be grown; the boxes are placed, the layer is filled with potting soil, and when the layer is warm enough (15 to 20 degrees), four eggplants are planted under each 1m, 33. panel; After that, we start to give a little air, either from the top or from the bottom of the panels; then we gradually increase the amount as the season progresses, so as to remove the panels and trunks in the course of May. Other care consists of watering as needed, and cleaning leaves attacked by kermes. Eggplant seeds are good for seven years, Varieties. - Violet, - white, - variegated, - giant. BASELLE (Basella). - Climbing plant whose leaves replace spinach. Sow in March on a bed, and when there are no more frosts to worry about, plant out in the open ground, at the foot of a wall, with good exposure. Baselle seeds germinate for three years. Varieties. - Red Baselle, - White Baselle. COMMON BASILICO (Ocimum Basilicum). - An annual plant used, along with its varieties, as a seasoning. All are sown in March, in the soil, to be replanted in May in a shady spot. Basilie seeds can be stored for six years. BETTERAVE (Beta vulgaris). - It is sown at the end of April or beginning of May, in rows or broadcast, in deeply ploughed and smoked soil from the previous year; then, when the plants have five or six leaves, they are lit so that they are about Om, 35 apart, and replanted in places where they are lacking, an operation that should only be carried out in rainy weather. During the summer, they are hoeed several times, and towards the end of October or the beginning of November, the roots are harvested after the leaves have been cut off. Put them in the greenhouse or in a healthy cellar, where they can be stored until May. Beet seeds ripen in September and keep well for five or six years. Varieties. - Rouge, - rouge de Castelnaudary, - rouge foncé de Whyte, - Turnep, - jaune, - jaune de Castelnaudary. BOURRACHE (Borrago officinalis). - A plant whose flowers are used to decorate salads; it grows in all types of soil, and is planted in spring and autumn. Borage seeds germinate in three years. LARGE CAPUCIN (Tropœolum majus). - Sow in April at the foot of a wall, in a well-exposed spot. It can also be sown on its own, but must be raked. The flowers are used to dress salads; the seeds, picked while still green, can be preserved in vinegar and used in place of capers. Nasturtium seeds last five years. CARDON (Cynara Cardunculus). - Cardoons need soft, deep soil and frequent watering in summer. They propagate from seed sown in April on a bed, or better still in May, immediately in the field. Holes are made about a meter apart, filled with potting soil, and two or three seeds are sown in each. When the seeds have sprouted, the most vigorous plant is chosen and the others removed. If you have to fear the ravages of grubs or crickets, you should sow them in pots at the same time, so that you can replenish the empty spaces. Around September, when they are strong enough to be blanched, they are stuffed by attaching a tie made of litter to the plant's collar, then rolling it up and down so that only the tips of the leaves are visible. After a fortnight or three weeks, the ribs are white and must be eaten immediately, otherwise they will rot; they must therefore be stuffed one after the other. Before heavy frosts, we pull up the Cardoon clods to replant them close together in the vegetable greenhouse, where they will blanch without covering; but we must visit them often and remove all rotten leaves. In this way, they can be kept until March. Cardoon seeds ripen in the first half of September, and are good for seven years. Varieties. - Cardon de Tours, - d'Espagne, - Puvis, - plein inerme, - à côtés rouges. CARROT (Daucus carota). - The first seedlings are sown on a bed in December. A layer of Om, 35 to Om, 40 thick, with a heat of 15 to 20 degrees, is prepared; the boxes are placed, the Om, 15 layer is filled with potting soil, and, unless it's very cold, the paths are only half-filled. When the layer is warm enough, sow the variety known as Early Short Carrot or Dutch Carrot. Among the carrots, you can transplant a few small black lettuces, or sow a few pink radishes. During the night, we cover the panels with straw mats; when the sowing is well under way, we rework the warmers, which we then make the full height of the trunks. These carrots are usually ready for harvesting in April. If, in the second half of March, the weather is mild and the panels covering the carrots are needed, they can be removed, along with the trunks, but harvesting then takes longer. In the open ground, the first sowings can be made as early as February, and continued until July. However, this can only be done for the Early Short Carrot; for the other varieties, sowing should not go beyond April, so that they can reach full development before winter. Whatever the time of sowing, the soil must be well prepared, after which it must be broadcast. The soil is lightly harrowed with a fork, tilled and a layer of compost is spread over each bed. Rake lightly over the whole area, and water whenever necessary. When the carrots have emerged, we thin out the plant, which is almost always thick if the sowing has been successful. In November, we cut off the collar of each carrot; we put them in gauge, then we cover them with large manure during the frosts, or we deposit them in the vegetable greenhouse, in order to have some during the winter. In light, healthy soils, there's no need to uproot them; simply cover the carrot plants during the frosts. Carrot seeds are harvested in August; their germination period is four years. Varieties. - Rouge courte de Hollande, - demi-longue, - longue, - d'Altringham, - jaune longue, - rouge pâle de Flandre, - blanche, - violette d'Espagne. CULTIVATED CELERY. - A variety of Apium graveolens, it is sown on a bed in the open air as early as February; the seed should be very lightly covered. In April, plant in the open ground at a distance of about Om, 33 cm. From April to June, sow in the ground in a shady spot and plant out immediately. We encourage seed germination by frequent watering, and if the plant is too thick, it should be thinned out to prevent it withering away. In June and July, the seedlings are transplanted into place. Four rows of Om, 33 wide are drawn per bed, then planted at Om, 33 apart along the line. Immediately after planting, water to facilitate recovery, and continue until the Celery is strong enough to be blanched: a trench 1 m wide is opened, with the soil thrown in to the right and left, after which the Celery is lifted in clods and planted in the trench; eight clods are placed in each row, then potting soil is poured in between each row, so that it is completely buried, except for the tips of the leaves. After a fortnight, it's usually white enough to be harvested; but as it doesn't keep for long after that, you should only bleach it successively, so as to prolong the harvest as long as possible. During frosts, it is covered with litter, which is removed whenever the temperature permits. With care, it can be kept until the end of February. Varieties. - Plein blanc, - Turc, - Cole's superb red, - Plein rose, - violet, - for cutting. Celeriac. - Sowing can take place in April, in the open ground, in a shady spot; but it's better to sow in February on a bed, transplant the seedling on a bed; then put it in the open ground, after cutting off the large leaves and all the lateral roots. Water abundantly during the summer; then remove all unnecessary leaves, taking care to spare those in the heart, an operation which should be repeated as often as necessary to encourage the development of the tuber. Celeriac is pulled out at the beginning of winter to put it in gauge, and covered during the frosts; or it is put into the vegetable greenhouse after the leaves have been cut off. Treated in this way, it can easily be stored until March. CERFEUIL (Scandix cerefolium). - Sow almost year-round; in spring and autumn, at the foot of a wall and with good exposure, and in hot weather, in a northern exposure. Curly chervil. - This variety requires nothing more than ordinary Chervil; it is used for the same purposes, and has the advantage over the latter of not being confused with Hemlock. Chervil seeds ripen in June, and keep for two years. Bulbous chervil (hœrophyllum bulbosum). - Bulbous chervil is an edible plant whose roots do not extend beyond the base of the plant.

proportions of a small Dutch Carrot. It is very starchy and has a pleasant flavor. Bulbous Chervil is sown in September, i.e. as soon as the seeds have been harvested; otherwise, they won't germinate until the second year, unless you take the precaution of storing them in sand until sowing time, which may not be until spring. After sowing, the seed is covered with a good layer of potting soil; once this is done, bulbous chervil requires no special care other than the weeding and watering that all garden produce requires. Regardless of when it is sown, bulbous chervil is good for harvesting in July. Bulbous Chervil seed is harvested in July. It is only good for one year. COMESTIBLE MUSHROOM (Agaricus edulis). - The success of mushroom beds depends on the choice and preparation of the manure and the care given to the beds. To set up a Mushroom wheel, you need to use manure from horses that do hard work; as it is renewed less often, it is softer, i.e. more impregnated with urine, and contains more dung than that of luxury horses. The manure is first deposited in a heap, to allow it to ferment; then, about a month later, it is taken up with a fork to form a layer (called a planchée) about Om, 65 thick by Im, 33 wide. We spread a first bed, taking care to remove the longest straws, ties and hay, then mix the dry parts well with those most impregnated with urine; and to form the edges of the layer we turn the manure on its sides, so that the ends are inside. Once a bed of manure has been formed, it is wetted with the watering can, then trodden down with the feet. We then make a second bed, which we treat in the same way, and so on until we have reached the height indicated. Eight or ten days later, the bed is reshuffled, starting at one end, then turned over in the same way as the first time, but taking care to return what was on the edges and on top to the center. After leaving it to ferment for a further eight or ten days, the manure should finally be ready for grinding, i.e. it should be fat but not too wet, and should have only the right amount of heat for the operation. As summer thunderstorms often abort the spawn, we don't start cultivating mushrooms in the open air until September, and then continue successively until December. After ensuring that the manure is in good condition, we start erecting the millstones, which should be Om.50 wide at the base and the same height. The manure is tamped down as the wheel is raised, to ensure that it is compacted as little as possible. It is mounted in the shape of a humpback, so that it is only Om, 10 wide at the top. During the operation, the sides of the grinding wheel are carefully firmed by lightly tapping with the back of the shovel, then the long straws protruding from each side are removed with the rake. If, after the millstones have been set up, heavy rain should fall, they should be wrapped in a shirt (a large litter blanket), which, in favorable weather, should only take place after the millstones have been gobbled up, an operation we'll talk about later. After eight to ten days, check the degree of heat with a diaper thermometer, and if it doesn't mark more than 15 to 18 degrees, you can larder the millstone, i.e. cut a row of small openings on both sides, at Om, 10 or Om, 15 from the ground, depending on whether it's dry or damp, a row of small openings to be made by hand, at Om, 33 from each other, in which to place the spawn (1) flush with the side of the wheel, then ap(1) Mushroom spawn is the name given to small white filaments, rather like mold, that form in manure. They can be found either in manure that has been in piles for a long time, where very good ones are often formed, or in old melon beds; failing that, they can be taken from a millstone that is already in use, but where only one harvest has yet been made. Mushroom spawn can be kept in a dry place for up to two years. lightly stink to bring the spawn into perfect contact with the manure; but if you fear that there is still too much heat, bring the manure closer only after a few days. If, eight or ten days after larding the millstone, small whitish filaments begin to spread over the whole surface, take light, lean earth, salped as much as possible, pass it over the claie and spread it out to a thickness of about Om, 03, which you press down lightly with the back of the shovel, which is called gobetering. If you don't notice the traces we've mentioned, you'll have to repeat the operation, putting new white into openings next to the old ones. If the weather is mild and dry, the grinding stone can be cooled by lightly dabbing it with water, but care must be taken not to give it too much water at once, as excess humidity will destroy the nascent mushrooms. After gobbling, cover the wheel with a liner of Om, 05 to Om, 06 of large bedding (a thicker liner could cause the manure to ferment again, which would destroy all hope of harvesting), increasing it during frosts and according to the severity of the cold. About six weeks later, we'll start picking the first mushrooms. To find them, carefully lift the bedding, and after picking them, fill the holes they occupied with soil of the same type as that used to gobet the millstone. If you find a few small places where the young Mushrooms have perished, remove all the destroyed part and replace with new soil. At all times, even after one side of the wheel has been used up, it should be carefully covered with bedding. A millstone can produce for three to five months at any time, but 7. best in summer. You can set up your millstones in a dimly-lit cellar, and then, given the equality of temperature that prevails in these localities, it becomes unnecessary to cover the millstones with litter. CHENILLETTE (Scorpiurus vermiculata), VeRS (Astragalus hamosus). LIMAÇON (Medicago turbinata). - Native annual plants of the Papilionaceae family, whose fruits imitate caterpillars, worms or limacons, and which should be sown in place, in April and May, about Om, 30 apart. CHERVIS or CHIROUIS (Sium sisarum). - A plant whose fleshy, very sweet roots can be eaten like Scorsonera. Sow in spring or September, in loose open soil, then hoe and water frequently. Chervis seeds germinate in two years. CHICORICE. Wild chicory (Cichorium intubus). - The emerging leaves of this species are used to make a highly prized salad, which can be obtained almost all year round by sowing in beds from March onwards, then in the open ground from April until autumn. If the roots are to be used to make the salad known as Barbe-de-capucin, they must be sown in rays in April, with hoeing and watering being all that's required; then, as frost approaches, the roots are pulled out, lifted with a fork to avoid breaking them. In October, when this work is usually started, a layer about Om40 thick is prepared, at a temperature of 15 to 20 degrees Celsius. The best place for this operation is a low cellar with no air or light. Once the bed has caught its first fire, the roots are put together in bunches, but only after careful removal of old leaves and any parts likely to cause mildew; they are then placed upright on the bed, and watered frequently with the apple watering can; but, as always, watering must be in proportion to the heat of the bed; as soon as the Chicory starts to grow, watering must be done very sparingly to avoid rotting the inside of the bunches. Chicory is usually long enough to be harvested after fifteen to eighteen days. Chicory can be successively blanched from October or November to April. Chicory can also be blanched by burying roots on a bed covered with solid-framed panels, to intercept light, or with ordinary panels, which are kept constantly covered with straw mats. Wild chicory seeds ripen in September, and keep well for eight to ten years. Curly chicory (Cichorium endivia). - The first seedlings can be sown in September under cloches, but cold. From then until June, curly or Italian chicory is sown. In the first days of October, the seedling is transplanted, also under cloches, and towards the end of October or the beginning of November, Chicory is planted on the ground, but under panels; air is given as often as possible, and during frosts, the panels are covered at night. In January or February, sow on a warm bed under panels. The bed must not be less than 20 to 25 degrees hot, because to obtain a plant that doesn't bolt, the seeds must germinate within twenty-four hours, regardless of the time of year; it's better to start sowing again 'than to transplant a plant that has languished. Twelve or fifteen days after sowing, the seedling is transplanted into the nursery, to be planted a fortnight or three weeks later, still under panels, but on a softer layer. In the second half of March, you can start transplanting Chicory in the open ground, but under cloches or panels, which you remove as soon as the weather is favorable. In April, May and June, Chicory is still sown on beds, but then the plant can be transplanted immediately into the ground. Draw four rows per bed, Im, 33 wide, and plant Om, 40 apart along the line. In June and July, Chicorée de Meaux is sown in the ground in a shady spot. However, in many areas, it would be better to continue sowing in the soil, but in the open air. When the plant is strong enough to be transplanted, spread a good mulch on each bed, then plant at the distance indicated above, and give it a good watering to help it take root; other care consists of pulling out weeds and wetting if necessary. When the Chicory is sufficiently covered, take advantage of dry weather to lift the leaves, which are then tied with rushes or straw to whiten the inside; but as they whiten in a short time, they should only be tied in proportion to consumption. As soon as they are bound, they should be watered only at the neck, to avoid wetting them, which could cause them to rot, and, as soon as the first frosts set in, they should be covered with straw mats or bedding, which should be removed whenever the weather permits; then, as the frosts increase, they should be uprooted and returned to the vegetable greenhouse, where they should be half-buried in sand: in this way, they can be kept until January. Chicorée frisée de la Passion. - This interesting variety, which we owe to the kindness of M. Charvet, owner at La Cellette, near Blois, is just as hardy as the Lettuce whose name it bears. Sown in August, transplanted in September and planted out in October, Passion Chicory is good for harvesting in March and April, a time of year when garden produce is generally scarce. As such, Curly Passion Chicory can be considered a good buy. Ever-white chicory. - This variety is not as widely grown as it deserves, as it can be a good substitute for spinach, especially in summer, when spinach is often hard to come by. It can be sown in the field or in the ground, from February to August. Scarole. - Scarole is a variety of Chicory whose cultivation is very similar to that of Chicorée de Meaux. The seeds are good for harvesting at the end of September, and keep for five or six years. Varieties. - Frisée de Meaux, - fine d'été or d'Italie, - de Rouen, or corne-de-cerf, - de la Passion, - always white, - sauvage, - panachée, - améliorée, - Scarole ordinaire, - blonde or à feuilles de laitue. CABBAGE (Brassica). - Cabbages need cool, well-smoked soil, because the more fertilizer they receive, the fatter they become. They come in many varieties, but all can be divided into five main races: 1° cabbages, 2° savoy cabbages, 3° green cabbages, 4° kohlrabi, and 5° cauliflowers and broccoli. N. 1. head cabbage. - Towards the end of August or in the first days of September, early cabbages are sown. In October, transplant the seedlings in a nursery along a wall with good exposure, for planting in late November or early December, and in February or March in cold or damp soils. If winter is harsh, it will be necessary to secure the plant, either with bedding or with mats laid on top of gaulettes. If you run out of plants in spring, you can sow them in February on a bed and in March on a well-soiled bed. Second-season and late-season cabbages are usually only sown in February or March; however, they can also be sown in August. Whatever the time of sowing, these cabbages should be transplanted immediately into place, 50, 60 or 80 centimetres apart, depending on the proportions of the varieties to be grown. The soil should be well fertilized, as it should not be forgotten that it is only by dint of manure and water that we can obtain all that this plant should produce. Varieties. - Cabus hâtifs, d'York, - cœur-de-bœuf. - Pain-desucre. Cabus 2nd season, Pomerania, - Winigstadt, - Joannet, - Schweinfurt. Cabus tardifs, from Saint-Denis, - from Holland, - vert de Vaugirard, - from Germany dit Quintal, - dark red. Cabbage preservation. - As heavy frosts are very detrimental to cabbages, in November, all cabbages with apples should be uprooted and placed on a plank, close to each other and with their heads slightly inclined. When there is a heavy frost, cover them with litter or leaves, and remove them as soon as the weather is mild. In light soils, you can bury the head instead of the roots: in this way, cabbages can be kept until May without covering; it is a good idea, however, to cover part of them, so as to be able to pull them out during frosts. N. 2 Savoy cabbage. - They are sown from the end of February to June, and transplanted immediately into the ground like Savoy cabbages. More hardy than the latter, Savoy cabbages usually withstand winter without shelter. Varieties. - Hâtif d'Ulm, - pied-court, - Victoria, - ordinaire, - doré, - pancalier, - des Vertus, - de Bruxelles. N. 3 Green cabbages. - We divide them into the only ones grown in the kitchen garden; the others are grown extensively as fodder, and some as plants are even more pleasant to eat when frost has softened them. Varieties. - Big-ribbed cabbage, - Fringed big-ribbed cabbage, - Strawberry cabbage. Cabbages of the second category are sown in July and August, or better still in March and April, and the seedling is transplanted immediately; but they can also be sown in place, either in rows or broadcast. These cabbages produce leaves throughout the winter and into their second year. Varieties. - Cavalier or Tree cabbage. - Caulet de Flandre. - branchu de Poitou. - de grand Jouan. N. 4 Kohlrabi. - The first sowings take place towards the end of February, and can continue until June; they are sown on a composted bed, and later put in place. These cabbages differ from the others by their neck, which is swollen and fleshy, and which is used in cooking like turnips; but, to keep them tender, they must be watered frequently in summer. Varieties - White or Siam, - early white. - violet. - early purple. Chou-navet, quite similar to the preceding variety, produces a fleshy tuber with the same flavor as kohlrabi. It is sown in the field in May and June, either in rows or as a broadcast crop. The next step is to thin out the plant so that the cabbages are about Om.40 apart. They have little fear of frost, and, barring a severe winter, can be pulled up only as and when needed. Cabbage seeds ripen in July; they keep well for five or six years. Varieties. - White turnip cabbage, - Rutabaga or Swedish turnip. N. 5 Cauliflower. - These are much more delicate than the other cabbage varieties, and like light, well-smoked soil, with plenty of watering in summer. Several varieties are grown, but it is impossible to recommend one over another, as results depend solely on local causes. The first seedlings are sown in September, in a well-soiled bed or on an old layer, to be transplanted in October, in a nursery, on a bed; and when it freezes, cloches or panels are placed over the plant. Care must be taken to provide air every day, as long as the temperature permits. If, in spite of this precaution, the plant should advance too far, it should be uprooted and replanted to delay vegetation; then, when the cold becomes severe, surround the bells with litter, and cover the whole with straw mats; uncover whenever the weather permits, and provide air. In December, you can plant some of your cauliflowers on beds and under panels, with a few lettuces in between. During the night, cover the panels with straw mats, water as needed, and provide air whenever the temperature permits; then, when the cauliflowers reach the stained-glass windows, take care to raise the boxes; if the weather is favorable in the second half of March, remove the panels. These cauliflowers will produce in April and May; in March, we plant the other part in the ground, and they will give from the end of May to July. They can also be sown on a bed in February and March, and shortly afterwards transplanted on a bed and planted out in late March or early April, producing in June and July. The last cauliflowers are sown in June: this is the time when most cauliflowers are sown, and when cultivation is easiest: it's the same as for ordinary cabbages, and all success depends on abundant watering, which must be very frequent, especially during the first few months. Sow in a shady spot in a well-soiled bed; when the plant is strong enough, transplant immediately. These cauliflowers produce from the end of August to November; they can even be kept until February, and sometimes until April. To do this, cut them as late as possible, and especially when the weather is dry, so as not to bring them in until they are well dried out, as this will determine how long they can be kept. Preserving cauliflowers. - After removing all the leaves from cauliflowers, place them on the shelves of the vegetable greenhouse, or, which is even better, hang them upside down. As they shrink a lot as they dry out, the day before you want to eat them, refresh the tips of the cores and soak them in fresh water for a few hours, taking care not to get the heads wet; they soon regain their original shape, without losing any of their quality. Cauliflower seed is harvested in September. They germinate for five years. Varieties. - Tender or petit Salomon, - demi-dur or gros Salomon, - Lenormand, - dur de Paris, - d'Angleterre, - de Hollande. Broccoli. - Broccoli is sown in March, April and May, starting with the earliest varieties. When the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted to the nursery, and later planted in rows like cauliflower. Early varieties sown in March are good for harvesting in September. Others produce successively during winter and spring. More hardy than cauliflower, Broccoli can withstand a few degrees of cold without suffering. However, it's a good idea to remove the clods as frost approaches, and replant them in a trench over which frames or straw mats have been placed. Broccoli seeds germinate for five years. Varieties. - Early white, - Late white, - Early violet. - Sprouting (this last variety produces small apples like Brussels sprouts). CHOU MARIN (Crambe maritima). - Crambe is a very good vegetable, whose emerging leaves are eaten and blanched by ridding the stalk; it is hardy and easy to grow. Under favorable conditions (i.e. sandy, well-smoked soil), it produces for a very long time. We have seen a plantation of Crambés in full report, which for fifteen years has given several harvests each year. It can be propagated from seed sown in the field or in the nursery soon after harvest, as autumn sowings are generally more successful than spring ones. Crambes can also be propagated by root cuttings, but sowing always produces, as is easy to understand, more vigorous plants. Crambes are planted in autumn or spring. Two rows are drawn in an Im, 33-wide bed, and planted at Om, 50 apart along the line. Each year, in autumn, the dead leaves are removed, the plants are hoeed, and a good bed of half-consumed manure is spread over the beds. You could start cutting the leaves off the Crambes as early as the second flush, but it's better to wait until the third, by which time they'll be in full vegetative growth, and you'll be able to keep them much longer. We usually start buttering Crambes towards the end of January or the beginning of February; but, so that they don't all give together, we only butter part of them, and the rest a fortnight later, which is done in the following way: we place on each plant a heap of compost (or light earth) of about Om, 20, and cover the whole with a good bed of manure or leaves, in order to activate vegetation; about a month later, when the tips of the leaves begin to appear, we cut them back to the ground, but taking care to spare the eyes at the neck of the plant, as without this precaution it would no longer grow. After harvesting, they are ridged again, and produce a second crop that is often as abundant as the first. After the second cut, destroy the mounds, spread some of the compost on the beds, and remove the rest. You can also force Crambé under panels, like Asparagus: this simply involves placing boxes and panels over the Crambés in January or February, after having ridged them; if you don't have solid-frame panels, you can use ordinary panels, provided you keep them constantly covered with straw mats. To stimulate Crambé vegetation, you can surround the boxes with a manure stove, as heat does nothing to harm this plant. You can even, as is done in England, place large clumps of Crambes in the greenhouse to be forced during the winter, so as to have good ones to harvest ahead of time, or give the forced ones away on the spot. Crambé seeds are harvested in August; they keep well for three years. CIBOULE COMMUNE (Allium fistulosum). - The first seedlings are sown in February, in the field and broadcast; from then on, sowing can continue successively until July. After sowing, the seeds are covered with a light layer of compost, and watered whenever necessary. If you don't want to run out of Ciboule in winter, pull it out in November, put it in gauges, then cover it with dry litter during the frosts. The seeds ripen in August, and keep for two years. Perennial Ciboule - Multiplies by splinters in spring or autumn. CIBOULETTE. Civet (Allium Schœnoprasum). - This plant multiplies by its cloves, which are separated in February and March for planting in borders. The more often it is cut, the more tender it becomes and the better it grows. To overwinter, cut at ground level and cover with compost. CUCUMBER (Cucumis sativus). - Cucumbers are sown in January, February and March, on a warm bed and under panels. When the cotyledons and first leaves are well-developed, they are transplanted into small pots, sown on a warm bed and planted some time later, also on a bed and under panels. Later, when frosts are no longer a threat, cucumbers can be planted in the ground. In light soils that are easy to warm up, cucumbers can even be sown in place, in small pits filled with potting soil. Like melons, cucumbers need to be pruned to produce good fruit, as described in the Melon article. Small green gherkin cucumber. - Sow in early May on beds and under panels. Shortly afterwards, the seedling is transplanted to the nursery, also on beds and under panels. As soon as it has taken root, we start to give it a little air, to strengthen it, and towards the end of May or the beginning of June, we raise it in clods to put it in the ground in good exposure, Om, 60 apart. Gherkins can also be sown in the ground; they are even hardier than other cucumbers, and don't need pruning. In naturally damp soils, Cucumbers and Gherkins should be rowed like Peas and Beans, so that they do not lie on the ground, in order to harvest good fruit. Cucumber seeds germinate for five years. Varieties. - Early white, - large white, - long yellow, - English long green, - Russian, - snake. PUMPKIN (Cucurbita maxima). - Pumpkins are sown in March, on a warm bed and under panels; in April, they are transplanted in the nursery, also on a bed and under panels. A few days after transplanting, we start to give them a little air, in order to strengthen the plant; and, in May, we prepare holes which we arrange so that the Pumpkins are at least 1m, 65 from each other. The holes are filled with manure and covered with about Om, 15 of compost. If, after planting, there are small white frosts during the night, cover the Pumpkins with cloches, or, failing that, with litter. While they are growing, they should be watered abundantly, and other care consists in pinching the first stem above the second eye, to encourage the development of one or two branches on each. When they are about Im,50 in length, we marcotte them, which consists in laying the branches in the ground, so that they produce roots; in this way, we obtain much more vigorous vegetation. As soon as a fruit is knotted and deemed worthy of preservation, the branch bearing it should be pinched off two or three eyes above the fruit; and if you want to obtain large fruits, you should leave only one or two on each plant, except for the Dutch variety, whose fruits are smaller but of excellent quality; In fact, this is the variety best reserved for winter provisions: picked before the frosts and placed on the shelves of the fruit tree or orangery, it often keeps well into March and April. Marrow squash, full squash from Naples, Ohio, Valparaiso, Barbary, Madeira, Patagonia, Giraumont turban and Patisson, are grown in exactly the same way as Pumpkins. The germination period of pumpkin seeds is five years. Varieties: - large yellow, - Spanish, - Dutch, - white, - Corfu. FONTAINE CRESSON (Nasturtium officinale). - This plant, hitherto used in cooking only as a salad and supply, can also be prepared in the manner of spinach, and in this form has a very pleasant flavor. The consumption of watercress has become so considerable that, in a radius very close to Paris, large areas of land are devoted to this crop. These cressonnières are fed by natural or artificial springs, and arranged so as to be submerged at will. The land is divided into pits, each about 3 meters wide by Om, 40 or so deep, separated by raised beds for various types of crops, such as artichokes, cabbage and so on. Cress can be propagated from seeds sown in spring, or even better from cuttings taken in August. Before planting, the soil should be well consolidated, and if it is not sufficiently moist, a little water should be left to run off. Once the soil is well prepared, watercress is taken and placed at the bottom of the pits in small pinches, about Om, 12 to Om, 15 apart. After a short time, it has taken root and completely covers the soil; then a light layer of well-consumed cow manure is spread over the whole surface; by means of a board with an obliquely placed handle, the whole is slightly compressed; after which, Om, 10 to Om, 12 of water is introduced, a quantity quite sufficient for this crop. In summer, watercress is picked every two or three weeks. To make harvesting easier, a plank is laid across the pit. As soon as a pit has been harvested, we dry it out and spread a little cow manure over it, pressing it down with the above-mentioned instrument, an operation that must be repeated immediately after each cut. When a pit has been in production for a year, it is destroyed and replanted as described above, but only after removing the old roots and manure debris, which form a fairly considerable thickness at the bottom. It can also be sown or planted on the banks of watercourses, as is often the case in pleasure gardens. The stems spread quickly, and can be cut back every year until the frosts, provided this is done often enough to prevent them from going to seed. Watercress seeds germinate in four years. Cresson de terre, Cresson vivace (Erysimum prœcox). - It can be used in place of watercress, and has all the flavor of watercress. Sow in spring, in rays, in clean, light, moist soil. The germination period of watercress seeds is three years. Watercress (Lepidium sativum). - As this plant goes to seed very quickly, it is necessary to sow it very often; sowing is done in rays, in spring on a bed, and in summer in a shady spot. Cresson alénois seeds ripen in June, and keep for five years. Varieties. - Cressou alénois frisé. - Golden cress. ECHALOTE (Allium Ascalonicum). - Successfully grown only in light, substantial soil smoked from the previous year. It multiplies from cloves planted in February and March, at Om, 08 or Om, 10 apart, and almost flush with the ground, to avoid humidity, which is very harmful. For replanting, choose the thinnest and most elongated shallots, as they produce the most beautiful bulbs. Pull them up in July or August, when the leaves are dry, and leave them for two or three days in the sun, then store them in a dry place. SPINACH (Spinacia oleracea). - They are sown in rows or broadcast from March to the end of October, and as they remain in the ground for only a short time, they are often sown among newly transplanted plants or to line beds to be used for another crop a month or so later. Summer seedlings should be sown in a shady spot, and watered frequently to prevent them from bolting. Spinach seeds ripen in July, and keep for five years. Varieties. - Spinach from Holland, - England, - Flanders, - Esquermes, with lettuce leaves. ESTRAGON (Artemisia dracunculus). - It is propagated from seed, but more frequently by splintering plants and replanting them in spring in good exposure. Cut the stems at the onset of winter, and cover the clumps with a few centimetres of compost. FENOUH, (Anethum feniculum). - Several varieties are grown, but as a vegetable, sweet fennel is the most highly regarded. It is propagated from seeds taken from Italy every year; those harvested in our gardens degenerate quickly. Sow from March to June, either in the field or in a nursery, and transplant to Om, 40 cm apart; then hoe and water frequently during drought. When Fennel is strong enough, it is blanched in the same way as Celery. The roots and young shoots are eaten. Fennel seeds germinate for five years. BEANS (Faba vulgaris). - The first broad beans are sown in January, under panels (to sow at this time, early dwarf broad beans are preferred); in February, they are transplanted in slightly deep rays, which are traced at Om, 35 from each other; During bad weather, they are covered with litter, and when they are a few centimeters high, they are hoeed, then the rays are filled in, which increases the vigor of the plants and the produce; when they are deflowered, all the ends are pinched off, to force the sap to 135 bear towards the fruit. In February, we sow in the open ground, in clumps or in rays; from this time onwards, sowing can be continued successively until the end of May; finally, whatever the time of sowing, care consists in giving a few hoeings and pinching the ends of the stems, as previously indicated. Bean seeds germinate for six years. Varieties. - Early dwarf, - Julienne, - Marsh. - de Windsor, - evergreen, - violet, - purple flower, - long pod. STRAWBERRY (Fragaria vesca). - We propagate Strawberry plants from seed or from nets, which should only be taken from one-year-old plants; those from old clumps produce much less, and the fruit is less beautiful and of poorer quality. Sow in March, in a shady spot; cover the seeds with a light layer of fine soil mixed with compost, and keep the soil cool by watering. As soon as the plant has four or five leaves, it is transplanted, two by two, onto an old bed. Immediately after transplanting, we baste with an apple watering can, and continue to do so as needed. For a few days, we protect the young plants from the sun with a little litter, which we spread lightly. At the beginning of July, the clods are lifted and planted out in the ground, about Om, 15 apart, and, as after the first transplanting, the new growth is protected by frequent watering. The result of these transplantings is to encourage the development of a large number of young roots; and the more the Strawberry plants are furnished with them, the more productive they become. From this time onwards, until they are ready to be planted, we take care to remove all the flowers and netting that develop on the young plant, and to pull out those that appear to be degenerating, which can be easily recognized by their vigor and the absence of flowers. Towards the end of September, the beds in which the Strawberry plants are to be planted are given a good ploughing; and if the soil is not of good quality, only well-consumed fertilizers should be used to improve it: for when the Strawberry roots reach the unconsumed manure, the leaves dry up successively, and often the clumps perish. After preparing the soil well, draw five rows per bed, Om, 33 wide; then plant your Strawberry plants at Om, 35 apart on the line, which however should only be done for Four Seasons Strawberries, as for those with very large fruits, such as Keen's seedling Strawberry, draw four rows only, and plant at Om, 50 apart on the line; after which, we continue to cut the flowers and netting from each clump before they are rooted, in order to concentrate the reproductive power they are endowed with on each plant. In spring, we hoe each bed; as soon as the flowers begin to appear, we cover the soil with a slightly long mulch, which on the one hand has the advantage of conserving soil moisture, and on the other prevents the fruit from bearing on the soil. Watering should be done with apple watering cans, in the morning in spring and in the evening in summer. The following year, the same care is continued; but, as the produce degenerates after a few years, Strawberry plants should not be kept for more than two years. However, in good soil, they can be kept for three or four years, taking care to replant them each spring with new soil. Strawberry plants propagated from nets should be planted in July, and as what we have just said about Strawberry plants from seed is entirely applicable to the latter, we believe it unnecessary to deal with this subject at greater length. Forced strawberry plants. - Strawberries grown for forcing are: Fraisier des Quatre-Saisons, Keen's seedling, Princesse Royale, Marguerite Lebreton, Victoria Trolopp, Elton. In January or the first few days of February, boxes, then panels, are placed on the boards of the strawberry plants to be forced; the soil is removed from the paths surrounding the boxes to a depth of about Om.45, after which the paths are filled with manure, but only up to ground level, and in the first fortnight of February the filling is completed. From then on, care must be taken to maintain them to the height of the panels: for this, manure is brought in as and when it is needed. We cover the panels at night with straw mats, and give them air when the sun is shining. Towards the end of April, we start giving a few basins, if the temperature requires it, which we continue to do as needed. Strawberry plants treated in this way will begin to ripen in April. After harvesting, we remove the panels (which can still be used to cover the melons), which will not prevent the strawberry plants, especially those from Quatre-Saisons, from bearing fruit until the frosts. However, Keen's seedling and other large-fruited varieties can also be harvested a second time. To do this, they must be deprived of water for 8. some time, in order to stop their vegetation; and when the clumps are almost wilted, remove most of the leaves, hoe them lightly, then encourage their vegetation with good watering. In the first days of August, a second fruiting will take place, just as abundant as the first. Instead of destroying potted strawberry plants after harvest, as is usually done, you can remove the old roots and renew the soil in the pots in autumn. After this operation, treated like the young plants that are renewed each year, these strawberry plants produce fruit just as beautiful and abundant as the young plants. In Tours, at the home of Mr. Bellanger, a friend of ours, we have seen strawberry plants that have been subjected to this treatment for fifteen years, and whose vigor leaves nothing to be desired. Since the adoption of thermosiphon heating, the forced cultivation of strawberry plants has been modified. Thus, after having treated the strawberry plants as we have indicated, towards the end of September or the beginning of October, they are lifted in clods and planted in Om, 15 pots. For potting, we use good, soft soil, which has been raked, and immediately after planting, we place the pots next to each other in a trunk, so as to protect them from heavy rain and frosts, by placing frames or straw mats over them; then we water them to make it easier for them to recover, and, as for plants grown in the open ground, we remove the netting and flowers as they appear. In January, we prepare the boxes to receive the strawberry plants; then we place them on the ground, all next to each other, or on a tier under which we run the thermosiphon pipes. Once everything is in place, we hoe the soil in the pots, remove any dead leaves, and lay the panels, which we cover with straw matting overnight. At this point, we start heating them, which should be done only moderately and in such a way as to maintain a temperature of 12 to 15 degrees under the panels, and, as we indicated for Strawberry plants forced into the ground, we baste and give air whenever the temperature is favorable. In this way, you can have ripe fruit as early as the first days of March. Like those grown in the open ground, Strawberry plants forced into pots are likely to produce a second crop; all you need to do is remove the soil, plant them in the open ground and give them the care indicated above. Strawberry plants are divided into several sections, each containing a large number of varieties. We will only mention those most commonly grown. Strawberry seeds germinate for three years. Varieties: - Des Quatre-Saisons, - Ambroisia, - Amiral Dundas. - British Queen, - Eleonor Myatt, - Elton. - Jacunda, - Keen's sedling, - Lucas, - Marguerite Lebreton, - Napoléon III, - Princesse royale, - Sir Harry, - Victoria Trolopp, - Vicomtesse Héricart de Thury. BEANS (Phaseolus vulgaris). - The first Beans are sown in December, on beds and under panels; but, as at this time there is often a complete absence of sun, which is very unfavorable to this type of cultivation, it is preferable not to start this work until January, and from then on you can continue until the end of March. Sow on beds and under panels, and as soon as the cotyledons have developed, transplant the beans in the nursery, always preparing a layer about Om, 50 thick with a heat of 20 to 25 degrees; lay the boxes, load the layer with Om, 12 to Om, 15 of light soil, and plant the beans. Four rows are marked out per box, and the beans are planted at about Om, 15 on the line; after which, the care to be given consists in re-stoking from time to time, in order to maintain the necessary heat in the layer; covering the panels during the night; giving air whenever the temperature allows it; When the beans are about Om.25 in height, they are placed on top of the trunk, and held in this position by means of small wooden rods placed on the stems. A few days later, the ends of the stems are raised (the rods can then be removed), but the lower part remains lying on the ground. Treated in this way, the first beans are usually picked six weeks after sowing. It is often a mistake to destroy beans as soon as they have been harvested, because if you clean them carefully, removing dead leaves and any fruit found too small to be picked, after a while they will produce a second harvest as abundant as the first. Thermosiphon heating can also be used to grow beans under panels. All that's needed is to prepare a very thin layer, with the sole aim of protecting the beans from the dampness of the soil; then the pipes of the appliance are wired above the layer; the heat is maintained at 15 to 20 degrees under the panels; and as the heating can be regulated at will, the beans are uncovered every day, regardless of the state of the temperature, and air is given as often as necessary, which contributes greatly to the success of the operation. In April, we still sow on beds, but we transplant in the open ground and under cloches. Three beans are transplanted under each cloche; after a few days, air begins to circulate, and the cloches are removed when frosts are no longer to be feared and the temperature is favorable. It goes without saying that either cloches or panels can be used. Sow in the open ground in May; in light soil, sow in the first fortnight of the month; in heavy soil, only in the second fortnight, in clumps, or better still, in rays, as this produces much more vigorous vegetation, and consequently more abundant produce. Rays are traced about Om, 05 deep, Om, 40 apart, after which the beans are sown one by one, Om, 15 or Om, 20 apart on the line, then covered with about Om, 02 of soil. To sow in clumps, holes are made Om, 05 to Om, 06 deep, arranged in a checkerboard pattern, Om, 40 apart; five or six Beans are sown in each, then covered with the same amount of soil as those sown in rays. Some time later, we hoe to facilitate seed emergence; but it's only when the beans are well up that we finish filling the holes or combs. From the time indicated above, beans can be sown in the open ground until mid-August, to be eaten green (the beans grown particularly for this purpose are: Nain de Hollande, Flageolet and Bagnolet); but if you want to harvest dry, don't sow after May, except for a few early dwarf varieties, which can still be sown in the first fortnight of June. We still grow a large number of bean varieties, which can be divided into two categories. Bean seeds have a germination period of three years, and can be eaten green or shelled. Om, 30, - Belgian black, h. Om, 35, - Soissons dwarf, h. Om, 50 - Chinese, h. Om, 35, - Flageolet, h. Om,35, - Fl. yellow, h. Om, 40,- Swiss white, Om,45, - S. gray, h. Om45, - de Chartres, h. Im,40,- de Soissons, h. 2m, - Sabre, h. 2m, - Rice, h. Om,60. Beans without parchment or Mange-tout. - White dwarf, h. Om, 50, - Sabre dwarf, h. Om, 50, - marbled Prague dwarf, h. Om,45. - Princess dwarf, h. Om, 40, - Canadian yellow, h. Om, 40, - Butter dwarf, h. Om, 35, - Predomme, h. 1m,50, - Princess, h. 2m. - Butter 2m,50, - White butter, h. 2m. - Prague red, h. 2m,50, - marbled P., h. 2m, - P. bicolor, h. 2m,50, - Villetaneuse, h. 2m. CHINESE IGNAMUS (Dioscorea Batatas). - Introduced to France in 1848, this plant has stood the test of time, under which many new plants have succumbed. It increasingly justifies the hopes founded on the services it renders in its native country, and we can now say that it is worthy in every respect of first place on the list of our vegetable plants. The taste of the tuberous roots of the Chinese Yam differs little from that of the Potato; they are also rich in starch, and can, like the Potato, be used for all kinds of seasonings. The roots of the Chinese Yam grow every year, but only after having given birth to new roots, which grow from the collar of the plant. The Chinese Yam is propagated by planting, in March or April, with no more care than is required for the well understood cultivation of the Potato, either the bulbils which are born in the leaf axils, or the young roots produced by the bulbils, or finally the collar of the roots destined for consumption. Chinese yams are planted in rows, Om, 20 or O,, 25 apart, in all directions. In siliceous soils, which are better suited than all others to the cultivation of this plant, Chinese yams can be harvested the same year they are planted. Harvesting costs are not significantly higher than those for long carrots, for example. Nevertheless, to get the most out of this plant, the roots must be left in the ground for two years. From what we have been able to observe in our own cultivations, the root yield of Chinese Yam always far exceeds in the second year what the same area of land could have produced of Potatoes. The result is that, despite two years of cultivation and the cost of uprooting, this operation still offers definite advantages. Although the stems of Chinese yam are climbing, they don't need to be raked, and can be left to crawl along the ground. If they grow too much in the second year, they can be fed to cattle, which are happy to eat them as fresh fodder. Chinese yam is not very sensitive to the cold; in the climate of Paris, it survives ordinary winters very well in the open ground. However, it is advisable to uproot Chinese yams as soon as the stems are completely dry. Placed in the same conditions as potatoes, 3 Chinese yams can easily be kept for five or six months out of the ground. LATTUE (Lactuca sativa). - Two main breeds are grown: head lettuces (Lactuca capitata) and romaine lettuces (Lactuca romana). Lettuces. - These are divided into head, spring, summer, winter and cutting lettuces. Spring lettuces. - In the first fortnight of October, we sow the variety known as petite noire, on a south-facing bed; when the cotyledons are well developed and the first small leaves begin to appear, we place three rows of bells on the bed, and transplant around thirty plants under each one; then we raise these Lettuces without ever giving them air. But this is not the case for the other varieties, which are sown in the second half of the month: when the plant is well established, as can be seen when it begins to vegetate, we give it a little air by lifting the bells by about Om, 03 on the opposite side to the wind. After a few days, the amount of air is gradually increased, depending on the temperature and to strengthen the plant. The bells should only be lowered when it freezes at 2 or 3 degrees. When the frost becomes more severe, the bells are lined with dry manure, which is increased according to the intensity of the cold. The bells are uncovered as soon as the sun comes out, but first check that the plant is not suffering from frost, because then, instead of uncovering, you'd have to increase the cover and let it thaw gradually. In the first fortnight of November, we plant on beds (under panels or cloches), and from then on, we continue successively until the end of February. In March, we plant in the open ground, in good exposure, always with plants taken from the same bed. Towards the end of February or at the beginning of March, we sow on beds and under panels; and when the plant is strong enough, we transplant it into beds that we have carefully mulched before planting. Varieties. - Crepe or little black. - Gotte. - Georges. - Red-edged. - Bigotte. These varieties are also sown in August and September; they are planted on old beds, topped up with compost, so that they are close to the glass; but only when it freezes are they covered with panels, taking care to give them as much air as possible. They are often kept until December. Summer lettuces. - They are sown from the first days of April through to July, successively every two weeks, so as to have a succession of lettuces throughout the season. Care is the same as above, but because of the time of year, watering must be much more frequent. Varieties. - Blonde de Versailles. - Blonde d'été. - Berlin blond. - Batavia blonde. - Bl. brown. - Maltese. - Turkish. - Imperial. - Green of Genoa. - Big lazy brown - Palatine. - Chartreuse red. - Red with yellow seeds. - Bloody or flagellated. Winter lettuces. - Start sowing in August, and continue until mid-September. In October, they are planted in a bed with good exposure, and are protected from heavy frost and snow by covering with litter, which is removed whenever the weather permits. Varieties. - Passion. - Morine. - Winter brown. Cutting lettuces. - You can easily have them almost all year round, starting with bedding in January and February, then in the open ground from March successively until November. Varieties. - Pinch. - Chicory. - Spinach. Romaine lettuces. - Several varieties are grown which, like head lettuces, can be classified as spring, summer and winter Romaine. Spring Romaine. - In the first fortnight of October, we sow the early green Romaine, and in the second, the blond and grey Romaines maraîchère; we treat the plant like that of the head lettuces grown at that time; only, in the course of November, we raise the plant of the green Romaines to replant it immediately; but then we only place twelve or fifteen per bell. Towards the end of December or the beginning of January, we start planting under panels or cloches, and from then on we continue successively until the end of February; in March, we plant in the open ground, with good exposure. Summer Romaine. - They are grown in exactly the same way as summer lettuces, with the only difference being that varieties that do not cover themselves are tied with one or two straw ties to make them blanch. This operation should only be carried out when the weather is dry, and the leaves should not be allowed to get wet when watering. Varieties. - Alphange, - blonde de Brunoy, - Monstrueuse. - Panachée. - Golden. - Oak-leaved. Winter Romaine. - They are treated like winter Lettuces, and when sowing at this time of year, preference is generally given to the red winter Romaine, a very hardy variety that withstands frost the best. Lettuce and Romaine seeds ripen in August, and keep well for five years. LENTILLES (Ervum lens). - This plant is grown more in open fields than in gardens; it is weeded into rays in March and April. In dry, sandy soil, it produces much more than in greasy, damp soil, because it vegetates a lot, but produces very few seeds. The Gallardon variety is generally preferred. Lentil seeds germinate in three years. HOLLAND MACHE (Valerianella olitoria). - It likes soft, well-smoked soil. Sowing begins in August and continues until the end of October. It is sown broadcast, and after harrowing with a fork, lightly covered with a rake, and watered if the weather is dry. If sown in October, it will do well in spring. There is a new variety of Lamb's lettuce with variegated leaves, which can be grown in exactly the same way. Italian or Regency Lamb's lettuce. - This is a broader-leafed but later variety, often sown among the Dutch variety to extend the sowing period. Lamb's lettuce seeds are good for harvesting in June, and keep for four or five years. Corn (Zea maïs). - In the garden, Corn is particularly cultivated for its young ears, which can be pickled in vinegar like gherkins, or eaten boiled like potatoes. We sow it in May in the open ground, or in April on a bed, and then transplant it Om, 60 cm apart. As the plants gain strength, they are ridged, and the buds at the base are cut off. Corn seeds germinate in two years. Varieties. - Early white. - Quarantain, - for chickens. - Sweet. MELONS (Cucumis Melo). - The cultivation of melons, on which many treatises have already appeared, rarely written by practitioners, could not be easier; however, in our countries it requires assiduous and intelligent care, especially for those in the first season: Good cultivation has such an influence on the quality of the fruit that, despite being grown in far less favorable conditions, our Cantaloupe melons are usually superior in quality to those grown in southern regions, where they are sown in open fields and left to their own devices. They can be grown in three ways: under panels, under cloches or in the open ground. Panel-grown melons. - Only Cantaloup Prescott fond blanc and its varieties are grown under panels. The first melons are sown in the early days of January, but in ordinary cultivation, they are only sown in the early days of February. A layer about Om, 75 thick is prepared, made up of half new manure, half annealed manure. This is filled with Om, 10 of potting soil, so that the seedling is not far from the glass. Surround the trunk with a good manure stove, and when the heat of the layer is favorable (25 to 30 degrees), trace out rays, sow seeds, which are lightly covered; keep the panels covered with straw mats for two or three days, until the seeds have risen; then uncover every day, taking care to cover before dark. A few days after the seeds have emerged, we start to give a little air through the top of the panels whenever the weather permits, in order to strengthen the plant. When the cotyledons are well developed, we prepare another layer, of the same thickness as the previous one, but whose length should be proportional to the number of plants we want to transplant; then we load it with potting soil. The boxes are placed, the potting soil spread evenly, and when the layer is warm enough, the most vigorous seedling is chosen and transplanted with the finger, as you would with a planter. We usually make ten rows per trunk, and transplant our Melons at Om, 12 apart on the line, taking care to press them down to the cotyledons; or we press Om, 08 diameter pots onto the bed; These are filled with good soft soil mixed with loam, lightly treaded, and when the heat is favorable, a melon plant is transplanted into each pot (1); in this case as in the other, the panels are kept covered with straw mats for three or four days, to make it easier for the plant to grow. (1) These two transplanting methods are still used in market gardening. However, many market gardeners have abandoned pot transplanting, as experience has shown that a melon whose roots are twisted (which necessarily happens to pot-transplanted plants if planting is delayed by a few days) should vegetate less vigorously than one transplanted on a bed, and whose roots have not been hindered in their development. the plant's recovery, after which it is uncovered every day and given a little air when the sun comes out. First pruning. - When the primitive stem has three or four leaves, it is cut above the second leaf (fig. Il); then the cotyledons are removed, lest the humidity rot these organs and spoil the stem. In the second half of February, layers of Om, 60 thick and Im, 33 wide, made up of new manure, tree leaves and grape marc; or new manure and a third of manure from old layers, are prepared. We load them with about Om, 15 of good vegetable garden soil mixed with loam; we place the trunks, and after spreading the soil well in the trunks, we place the panels, fill the paths halfway, and, when the layer has thrown its first fire, we plant two feet of Melon under each panel. Before planting, we make a row of holes in the middle of the bed; then, if we've transplanted onto the bed, we lift the plants with a good clod, and plant a melon plant in each hole, taking care to press it in up to the first leaves. If you've transplanted into a pot, carefully remove the plant from the pot. To do this, take the pot with your right hand, place your left hand on the surface of the soil, so that the stem is between two fingers. Turn the pot upside down, tap lightly on the edge of the trunk, and when the rootball is out of the pot, plant the melon as described. Immediately after planting, water the root ball a little; when the sun is shining, shade the panels with a little bedding, and for a few days refrain from letting in air. A few days after planting, we surround the trunks with a good manure stove, and finish filling in the paths. During the night and in bad weather, we cover the panels with mats, then give air whenever the temperature permits. Second pruning. - The first pruning, i.e. the pinching of the primitive stem, having determined the development of two lateral branches, we direct one towards the top of the trunk and the other towards the bottom; and when they Fig. 12. - Melon, second pruning. are about Om, 33 in length, we prune them above the third or fourth leaf (fig. 12), depending on the vigor of the plants. At this point, and before any new branches develop, spread a good mulch of half-consumed manure over the entire layer. Third pruning. - The second pruning determines the development of three or four branches on each side branch. While they are growing, they are directed so that they do not cross each other; and when they are about Om, 33 in length, they are pruned above the third leaf (fig. 13), without taking into account the flowers, which are removed, because the first flowers of the melon are usually male flowers, called false flowers; if by chance there are some female flowers called meshes, we also remove the branches where they are, because then the plants are not yet strong enough, and the fruits would be much inferior to those obtained later. After the third pruning, we carefully monitor the development of the new branches; and when we have young knotted fruits, we choose the best one; we pinch the branch that bears it two eyes above the fruit, which we secure with the surrounding leaves, so as to& E Fig. 13. - Melon, third pruning, so that it is not affected by the direct rays of the sun, which would harden it; then immediately remove all the other fruit on each plant, to encourage the development of the one left, and pinch off all the other branches above the second leaf (fig. 13). As it sometimes happens that the young fruit does not have a regular shape, or that it elongates too much, in this case it is removed, and another mesh is chosen. Finally, when the fruit has just about reached its full size, if the plants are vigorous, a second fruit is selected from among the newly-knotted ones on each plant, but always under the same conditions as for the first, after which all the others are removed, making one or two melons on each plant. Other care is limited to cutting off all new branches above their first leaves, and removing the tips of any branches that may have grown out of the trunk. For all operations requiring removal of the panels, choose the time of day when the temperature is mildest, so that the cold does not seize the Melons, which are excessively tender. When watering becomes necessary, use the apple watering can; but at this time, the water used must be at the same temperature as the atmosphere in which it is poured, so as not to delay vegetation. If melons are growing very vigorously, it's a good idea not to water them, or to give them very little water, until they have knotted fruit, because the more vigorous they are, the less likely they are to bear fruit. Every day, when the sun is shining, give the panels some air, taking care to lift them away from the wind. As far as possible, you shouldn't get them used to being shaded; it's better to give them more air as the sun gets stronger. Indeed, once you've started, you need to keep going, and with great precision, because often it only takes a ray of sunlight to burn the leaves. We continue to cover the panels every night; and from the time of planting, we must maintain the stoves at the height of the panels and reshape them every month or so, adding at least half as much new manure each time, in order to maintain the warmth of the layer; but we must not reshape the stoves to their full depth once the Melons are growing vigorously, as they have roots that crawl almost to the surface of the soil; and as they develop rapidly9. This is why it's important to refrain from any operation that might stop their development. With this treatment, first-season fruits begin to ripen in the first fortnight of April, and those sown in February produce in May (1). Early melons are among the plants that benefit from thermosiphon heating, as one of the most unfavorable conditions for this crop is the absence of sunshine, which often occurs in January and February; and since, despite the rigorous temperature, it is necessary to baste the melons, because of the heat of the layer, it often happens that the atmosphere of the frame is loaded with moisture and that numerous droplets of water form on all the interior surface of the panels; now, if the temperature does not make it possible to give air, this excess of moisture causes the flowers to drop. This is where the beneficial effect of the thermosiphon can be appreciated. As you can adjust this heating at will, you (1) A fact that's quite important to know is the precise point at which melons ripen. On this subject, we'd like to say that it's not always essential to wait for a melon to reach full ripeness before harvesting it; it's enough for it to be struck, i.e. to begin to change color or hue; when it has reached this point, it can be picked and placed in a cool place, where it will finish ripening without losing any of its quality; in this way, the harvest can easily be prolonged. Although it's not always easy to tell when a melon is ripe, we'd say that it's ready to be eaten when it takes on a yellow color, which becomes quite intense in light-colored varieties; when the tail becomes encircled at its point of insertion, as if it were about to detach; and finally when the fruit gives off a pleasant odor, and when, by gently squeezing the umbilicus (the point opposite the tail), you feel it flex under your finger. Thin-peeled varieties are the easiest to distinguish, while Cantaloupes are more uncertain. can give air whenever it's needed. In this way, care is exactly the same as above, except that the layer is much thinner, and the pipes of the machine are run underneath. A second season of melons is sown in the second half of February. At the time when these melons are ready to be planted, the temperature starts to become more favorable, so the layers are not as thick, and the reheaters do not need to be repeated as often. A fortnight after transplanting, we choose a site with good exposure to the south, but where we haven't grown melons the previous year; for this crop to be a complete success, we mustn't plant two years in a row on the same plot. A first trench is made, one metre wide and Om, 33 deep; the soil is deposited at the end of the square, i.e. where the last trench is to be made; then a good layer is prepared, about Om, 66 thick, made up, as for first-season Melons, of manure, leaves or grape marc. Then open a trench Om, 66 from the first, and with soil, if it's not too compact, load the Om, 15 layer; make a layer in the second, and so on to the end of the square, where you'll find the soil from the first trench to load the last layer. After that, we plow the paths, place the chests, spread the soil inside the chests, lay the panels, then surround the chests with a good manure stove, and fill the paths. When the layer is warm enough, plant two melon plants under each panel and give them the same care as first-season melons. Melon under cloches. - For planting under cloches, you can still sow Prescott cantaloupe melons, but many gardeners prefer embroidered melons, which fruit much better. Towards the end of March or the beginning of April, sow in beds and under panels, taking care to observe all that has been indicated for the education of the first-season plant. Some time before planting, we make a trench Om, 65 wide by Om, 40 deep, then prepare a layer about Om, 75 thick. This is lightly crowned in the middle, and covered with a bed of good soil mixed with loam. When the layer is warm enough, plant the melons in a row, Om, 66 apart. Immediately after planting, each Melon is covered with a bell, which is wrapped in litter for two or three days, to encourage the young plant to take root; during the night, the bells are covered with straw mats. As soon as the melons start to vegetate, the cloches are lifted during the day to give them a little air, then gradually increased until the time comes to remove them, which takes place when they can no longer hold the branches, but which should only be done in fine weather, as it would be better to delay this operation than to remove them in wet weather. From the above-mentioned time to Midsummer's Day (June 20-25), you can successively plant several seasons of Melons sous cloches. Plant training, pruning and other care are all the same as for melons grown under panels. Melons grown on mounds. - We will now describe a simple and inexpensive method recently indicated by M. Loisel. In May, cone-shaped mounds of half-consumed manure, leaves or moss are raised on the ground. They should be about Om 50 or Om 60 in diameter at the base, Om 60 in height, and set about I meter apart. The manures should be prepared in the same way as for the other layers, i.e. they should be mixed well, and wetted if too dry; then, as they are used, they should be trodden down so that the mounds are compacted as little as possible; and, whatever the nature of the substances used to build these mounds, they should be covered with about Om, 15 of good soil, prepared as previously indicated. At the top of each mound, make a small hole of about Om, 10 and sow three or four seeds in each one, leaving only the two most vigorous plants, or, even better, plant them high up. In both cases, they should be immediately covered with a bell, which should be removed when it can no longer contain the branches. For the care to be given and the first pruning, we refer you to what was said about Melons under frame. Before removing the bells, lightly hoe the mounds, taking care to preserve their rounded shape, as well as the surrounding soil, then cover them completely with a mulch of manure, which can be spread about 1 m around. This cover has the advantage of keeping the watering fresh. Visit the mounds from time to time. The care to be given consists in pulling down any branches that are going in the wrong direction, pulling out weeds as they appear, and when the branches have reached about the middle of the mound, pinching off the ends. This operation will give rise to new branches, which will soon be loaded with flowers and fruit; and as they quickly reach the bottom of the mound, all the ends should be cut off one last time, when they begin to crawl along the ground. Once you've reached this point, all you need to do is water them as needed, and place a tile or a piece of plank under each fruit when it's about half its size. In addition to saving money, these mounds offer the advantage of being more easily penetrated by the sun's rays, which is an important point in crops of this kind. On the other hand, the inclination of the branches is so favorable to fruiting, that each mound can easily produce 10 or 12 good Melons in the course of the summer; the first ones usually begin to ripen in the second half of July, and continue to give fruit until September. Melons are divided into three breeds, whose best varieties we will describe below: Melons brodés. - Maraîcher. - Sucrin de Tour. - S. with white flesh. - Ananas d'Amérique, - d'Arkangel, - de Grammont. - de Honfleur, - de Cavaillon. Cantaloupe melons. - Orange. - Noir des Carmes, - de VingtHuit Jours. - Prescott white background, - Pr. grey background. - Galeux green background, - de Portugal. - Holland black. Smooth-peel melons. - Maltese, - M. red-fleshed. - Winter, - Persian (1). Watermelons (Cucurbita Citrullus). - They are grown in the same way as bell melons, with the difference that (1) These melons, stored in a dry place, can be kept unaltered until January, and sometimes longer. The germination period of melon seeds is five years. NAVET (Brassio Napus). - Turnips do well in all types of soil, but prefer soft, sandy soil; only in this type of soil do they acquire good quality. They are broadcast sown from May to the beginning of September, whenever possible in wet weather. When the plant is strong enough, it is lighted more or less, depending on the size of the variety. Those intended for winter consumption should be sown in July and August. As cold weather approaches, we pull them up and cut off the tops, so that they don't grow back; then we gauge them and cover them with straw during the frosts; in this way, we can keep them until April. A large number of varieties are grown, divided into tender, semi-tender and dry turnips; for the first and last sowings, it's the tender ones that should be chosen, as they are the earliest. Turnip seeds ripen in June, and keep well for five years. Tender turnips. - Des Vertus. - Early flat white. - Early flat red. - Snowball. Semi-tender turnips. - Holland yellow. - Scottish yellow. - Malta yellow. - J. of Finland. - Rose du Palatinat. - Rond de Croissy. - Gris de Morigny. Turnip sces. - De Freneuse, - de Meaux, - de Berlin petit. - Long yellow. ONION (Allium cepa). - Onions like soft, substantial soil, smoked from the previous year; they are broadcast in the second half of January, if the weather is favorable, or even better in February and March in strong soils. After sowing, the ground is harrowed and trodden; in light soils, the soil should even be firmed up before sowing; then the seeds are raked and covered with a light layer of compost. If the weather is dry, water from time to time, to encourage germination; then, when the seeds have sprouted, thin out where the plant is too thick, and transplant in places where it is lacking. During their growth, onions require no care other than hoeing and watering, which should be stopped as soon as they begin to turn. Quite often, when they have reached their full size, the tops are cut off with the back of a rake, to stop the flow of sap to the onion. Onions are harvested towards the end of August or the beginning of September; after being pulled, they are left on the ground for two weeks to ripen, after which they are placed in an attic. If you take care to spread them out and remove anything that could cause rot, you can keep them until the end of May. Varieties. - Dark red. - Pale red. - Vertus yellow. - Spanish soufflé. - Pyriform, - Madeira. They can also be sown in August: in this way, onions are even produced two months earlier, but many often go to seed in spring. White onion. - Sow in nurseries and broadcast in the first fortnight of August, for transplanting in October, and towards the end of the same month for transplanting in March. In October in light soils, and in March in heavy soils, we prepare the ground for planting the white onion. Mark out 10 or 12 rows per bed, Im, 33 wide, and transplant the onions Om, 10 apart along the line. In harsh winters, it's a good idea to cover the plant with bedding. White onions can be harvested towards the end of April or the beginning of May. If, due to unforeseen circumstances, there is a shortage of plants or the quantity is insufficient, they can be sown in January or February on beds and under panels; they can also be sown in the open ground in February and March; these onions will produce much earlier than other varieties sown at the same time. Varieties. - Early white onion. - Large white onion, Egyptian onion or Rocambole. - It differs from the others in that it bears bulblets on its stem, which serve to multiply it. They are planted in March, at Om, 12 from each other, and each of these bulblets produces a good, large onion, which is pulled off when the leaves turn yellow; they are placed in a very dry place to be used for consumption, taking care to reserve the necessary number for planting, which must take place in the following March. Each of these onions grows up the stem, producing bulblets which are kept for replanting at the time indicated above. Onion Potato. - It is planted in February or earlier, weather permitting, at Om, 30 or Om, 40 apart; during its vegetation, it is ridged several times, to encourage the development of the bulbs which grow around the mother Onion. Onion seeds are harvested in August, and keep for two years. GARLIC (Rumex acetosa). - This plant is propagated in the spring by splitting plants or sowing seeds, which are sown in rays from March to July. After sowing, cover the seeds with a light layer of potting soil, and water frequently: it's usually used as a border plant, but to make sure you don't run out of it in summer, it should also be grown in beds, with copious watering during drought. The last crop is harvested towards the end of October, after which it is hoeed and a good mulch of half-consumed manure is spread over each bed, or, at the same time, the sorrel clumps are lifted to make them more manageable for winter heating. For this purpose, prepare a layer of Om, 35 to Om, 40 thick, with a heat of 10 to 12 degrees; place the boxes, and load the layer of Om, 15 to Om, 20 with potting soil; then plant 10 to 12 rows of sorrel per box. During frosts, we cover the panels with straw mats; we give air as often as possible. You can also force sorrel into place. To do this, place boxes on the boards, then panels. The paths around the chests are dug out, and a dung stove is raised and remodeled from time to time. We start heating sorrel towards the end of November or the beginning of December, and can continue successively until the end of February. Sorrel seeds ripen in July, and keep for two years. Varieties. - Vierge, - de Belleville, - de Frévent. Sorrel Spinach. - Garden Patience, Rumex Patientia, is grown under this name. This plant has large, elongated leaves; its flavor is milder than that of sorrel, and it multiplies easily, either from seeds sown in spring, in the field or in a nursery, to be transplanted, or by sprouting. Place them about 1 m apart. Patience seeds germinate for three years. OXALIS CRENELÉE (Oxalis crenata). - This plant is very easy to propagate and grow; it produces a large number of small tubers, but the flavor is generally not very appealing. The leaves and tops of the shoots can be eaten like spinach. It is propagated by tubers or cuttings, which are planted in April and May, 1 metre apart; as soon as they have grown about Om, 12, we begin to: butter them in the center, to force each shoot to take a horizontal direction; then, as they lengthen, we successively load them with soil until September, when the tubers begin to form. As frost approaches, a layer of manure or leaves is spread on the ground, so that harvesting doesn't take place until as late as possible, as the tubers grow until quite late in the season. PANAIS (Pastinaca sativa). - They need deep, substantial soil. They can be grown in the same way as carrots, but they need to be thinned out more, as the tops are much wider. They can be left in the ground over winter, as they have no fear of frost. Parsnips ripen towards the end of August and are good for only one year. Varieties. - Long parsnip. - Round parsnip. SWEET PATATO (Convolvulus Batatas). - Sweet potatoes are grown on beds and under frames, or on bare beds and in the open ground. They are propagated from seed, which is sown in March on a bed and under a frame; but as they are rarely harvested, they are most often propagated in the following way: in the early days of January, a few of the best-preserved tubers are selected; they are placed on a warm bed and covered with a frame, over which straw mats are spread overnight; shortly afterwards, they begin to grow. They are then covered with Om, 05 or Om, 06 light soil, and at planting time, the seedling is detached from the mother tuber and planted immediately in place; or, if you want to have seedlings that are easier to take up, the young shoots are removed as they reach Om, 06 or Om, 08 in length, and transplanted into pots of around Om, 06 which are buried on a bed; When the cuttings have taken root, which happens fairly quickly, we start to lift the bell a little, and gradually increase the pressure to remove it completely when they can stand the air without wilting. 1. Potatoes on beds and under frames. - In the first fortnight of February, prepare a layer of Om, 60 to Om, 70 thick, half manure and half leaves. The height of the layer should be calculated so that after it has been loaded with about Om, 25 of good soil mixed with loam, the whole is no more than Om, 10 from the glass. After placing the boxes, the panels are laid, and when the warmth of the layer is favorable, the Potatoes are planted in two rows and Om,60 apart on the line. When planting them, care must be taken to spread the roots well; for if they were contorted, this would essentially harm tuber production. During the night, the panels are covered with straw mats, then the stoves are rearranged from time to time, to maintain the heat of the layer; the soil is basked if necessary, and air is given whenever the weather permits. As the tubers grow, they often emerge from the ground, and care must be taken to cover them with a few centimetres of earth. Potatoes treated in this way can be harvested in May or June at the latest; the larger ones are removed, and if the roots are carefully covered, they will continue to vegetate until autumn. Watering should be suspended in September, so as not to prolong vegetation, which would be essentially detrimental to tuber maturity. 2. Potatoes on a deaf layer. - In the course of April, prepare a deaf layer about 1 m wide and Om, 50 thick; cover with Om, 20 to Om, 25 of good, light, substantial soil, and towards the end of April or beginning of May, plant the potatoes in a row and Om, 65 apart; After a few days, you begin to give them air, lifting the bells during the day, and removing them when they can no longer hold the branches. During vegetation, care is limited to watering whenever necessary. Towards the end of August or the beginning of September, tubers are ready to be eaten, but it's only in October that the harvest is complete. This must be done with great care, as potatoes that are broken or crumpled rot quickly. 3. Potatoes in the ground. - In May, make holes from Om,60 to Om, 60, Om, 50 wide and Om, 35 to Om, 40 deep; fill the bottom with manure, cover with about Om, 20 of light, substantial soil, and plant three Potatoes in each hole, arranging them so that they are about Om, 8 apart. Water, cover with a bell, and shade as needed. In light, healthy soils, in the Paris climate, potatoes can be grown simply in the ground, on mounds 0.80 m high, or on planks about 1 m wide, with a ridge in the middle, on the crest of which a row of potatoes is planted. After planting, they are protected from the sun's scorching rays until they recover perfectly, after which all care consists of watering them as needed. 4. Preserving potatoes. - The simplest way to preserve potatoes is to store them in a dry place where the temperature, being as even as possible, does not fall below 12 degrees. In this way, potatoes can easily be kept unaltered until February and March. Potatoes can also be preserved in situ, as M. Souchet, gardener at the Château de Fontainebleau, does, by covering them with glass panels and doormats, so as to prevent the cold from penetrating under the panels. Varieties. - White - Yellow - Yellow - Malaga pink - Violet. PERCE-PIERRE. Sea fennel (Crithmum maritimum). - We sow it as soon as the seeds are ripe or in March, on a bed, to transplant it at the foot of a wall, facing south or east; we cover it with litter during the winter, because it is delicate and sensitive to frosts. Perce-pierre seed retains its germinative quality for only one year. PARSLEY (Petroselinum sativum). - It is sown in rays from February to May and June, and to avoid running out in winter, it should be covered with leaves or litter as soon as the frosts approach. Finally, in January or February, you can sow on the ground, but under panels; in this way, you'll have young Parsley in the second half of March. Parsley seeds ripen in August, and keep for three years. Varieties. - Curly. - Very curly dwarf with large root. PEPPER (Capsicum annuum). - Sow in a bed in February or March, in April in an earthen bed, and plant out at the end of April or beginning of May in the open ground, in good exposure. Pimento seeds germinate for four years. Varieties: -Long,-round,-Chile,-Spanish sweet,-Tomato. PRIPRENELLE (PETITE) (Poterium Sanquisora). - Sown in spring or autumn, it is usually used for borders, which are extremely hardy. Pimprenelle seeds ripen in September, and keep for two years. DANDELION. Lion's tooth (Taraxacum dens leonis). - This plant is not widely cultivated, as it is found in abundance in meadows; however, when dandelions are sown in spring, they are more beautiful and of better quality, especially if the seeds are harvested from the individuals with the broadest leaves. In addition to the salad they produce towards the end of winter, they can be blanched in autumn. Simply cover them with Om, 12 to Om, 15 of well-consumed compost, and as soon as they begin to break through the layer of compost, cut them off at the root collar. Dandelion seeds germinate for two years. PEAR (Allium Porrum). - Leeks are sown at the end of December or beginning of January, on beds and under panels; at the end of February or beginning of March, the plant is transplanted into the ground and broadcast; at the end of April, i.e. when the plant is strong enough, eight or ten rows are laid out in beds 1m, 33 wide, and the leek is transplanted at Om, 15 apart on the line. We pull out the plant needed for planting by thinning out the seedling, and we start to eat the plants left in place, which gives the new ones time to form. It can also be sown in July and transplanted at the beginning of September; then, in the second half of September, a final sowing is carried out, and, as always, the seed is broadcast, but very lightly, as it is not then transplanted. This leek is good for harvesting in June. Leek seeds are good for harvesting in August, and keep for only two years. Varieties. - Short, - long, - monstrous from Rouen, - yellow from Poitou. BLONDE PEAR (Beta vulgaris). - It is dried in rays, from May to August; and to keep the leaves 169 tender, they must be cut often and watered frequently during the drought. To make sure you don't run out of leaves in winter, as soon as the frosts are approaching, you can lift the roots and plant them on a bed; or you can place boxes and panels on boards laid out for this purpose. Lift the soil from the paths, then surround the boxes with a stove made of old manure, and give them air as often as possible. Poirée blonde can be eaten as spinach if required. Poirée à cardes. - Sow in nurseries in May and June. When the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted immediately. Three rows per bed, 1m 33 wide, are planted out at Om, 50 apart along the line. During drought, water abundantly to ensure large, tender chard. During frosts, we cover them with litter, and only in spring do we start to harvest them. Poirée seeds ripen in September, and keep well for five or six years. Varieties. - White chard. - Red chard. - Yellow chard. - From Chile. The most remarkable of all chard pears for the development and rich coloration of its ribs. PEAS (Pisum sativum). - At the beginning of November, we sow the first Peas on the ground, but under panels, to transplant the plant also under panels. In the course of December, the boxes for planting are placed, and a good spade-head is removed from each one, so as to have Om, 45 to Om, 50 deep under the panels; the soil is deposited in the paths, which serve to support the boxes; after which the ground is levelled, the rake passed, and four rays about Om,08 deep are traced in 10 each trunk, taking care to space them equally, but in such a way as to leave more space towards the bottom of the trunk, which is naturally the wettest part. Once the site has been prepared, and as soon as the plant is Om, 08 or Om, 10 high, it is lifted, so as not to break the roots by pulling it out, then it is transplanted by 3 or 4 together and about Om 20 apart on the line. When the Peas are Om, 20 to Om25 high, all the stems are laid down towards the top of the trunk; and to keep them in this position, they are covered with a little earth. A few days later, the ends of the stems rise and continue to grow; they soon flower; then we pinch all the stems above the third or fourth flower, to make them bear fruit more quickly. During the night, we cover the panels with straw mats; we give air whenever the temperature allows it, and we make some basins, which must take place with a lot of care, in order not to determine a too vigorous vegetation, which would essentially harm the harvest. When you have a good coastline and are short of panels, you can sow peas under cloches towards the end of January and during February; then, depending on the temperature, you transplant them into slightly deep rays; then you cover them with litter during bad weather. These peas bear fruit after those grown under panels, but much earlier than Peas.

sown in November and December. In-ground. - In the open ground, the first seedlings are sown in the second half of November, in a coastal location in the south of France. Rays are planted slightly deep and at Om, 25 from each other. After sowing, cover the peas with a few centimeters of compost, and when they are Om, 15 or Om, 20 high, hoe them and fill in the rays. If the winter is harsh, we cover the peas with litter, which we remove as soon as the temperature permits; but we must first check whether the peas have suffered from frost, because then, to avoid losing them, we must let them thaw gradually and uncover them only if the weather becomes milder. From the above-mentioned time, you can sow successively until July to eat green; to harvest dry, sow in March. Whatever the time of sowing, care consists of a few hoeings, pinching the tips of early species above the third or fourth flower to hasten maturity, and putting oars on the larger varieties. A large number of varieties of Pea are grown; we will only mention the most widespread, which we will place in their order of earliness; however, we will say that for sowings that will take place in the open ground before February, the ordinary Michaux should be used, as the earliest Pea is less hardy and could suffer from the winter; but the latter, sown in February, produces just as early as the Michaux sown in autumn. Pea seeds germinate for four to five years. Peas for shelling. - Carter, h. Om, 80 - Prince Albert, h. Om,45. - Early dwarf wrinkled, h. Om, 25 - Michaux de Hollande, h. Om, 90 - M. de Ruelle, h. 1m. - M. ordinaire, h. 1m,20. - Nain de Hollande, h. 0m,60. - N. with frame, h. Om,20. - N. de Bretagne, h. Om,36. - N. gros sucré, h. Om, 30 - English green N., h. Om, 46 - Prussian green N., h. Om, 60 - Imperial green, h. Om, 50 - Bishop with long pod, h. Om,48. - Scottish champion, h. Om,60, - de Clamart, h. 1m,30. - de Marly, h. 1m,35. - d'Auvergne, h. 1m,20. - à la moelle de Victoria, h. Im,50. - Ridé or Knight, h. 1m,40. - R. green, h. Im,30. - Turkish, h. Om,85. Pea without parchment or Mangetout. - Dwarf, h. Om,75. - with white flowers, h. 1m,65, - with red flowers, ha1m,60, - with white pod, h. 1m,45, - with yellow pod, h. 1m,20. - Giant, h. 1m,90. POTATOES (Solanum tuberosum). - Only varieties that are not widely grown, or that are recommended for their qualities and ripening time, are usually cultivated in gardens, as the others belong mainly to field cultivation. Potatoes can be planted for the first time, on beds and under panels, towards the end of January or the beginning of February. To this end, prepare a layer Om, 40 thick, surround it with a stove, then load it with Om, 20 of good soil; mark out four rows per trunk, after which the potatoes are planted Om, 33 apart on the line (the variety known as Marjolin is the most advantageous for planting at this time); during the night, cover the panels with straw mats, and give air as often as possible. In this way, you can have new potatoes in the first fortnight of March. The larger ones are removed and the others covered, so that they can be harvested some time later. Full soil. - The first potatoes are planted in the open ground in February. The land to be planted must be ploughed and smoked in advance. If smoking is necessary during planting, only half-used fertilizers should be used. Potatoes are usually planted in holes similar to those in which beans are sown, only deeper and closer together than for beans. In damp, cold soils, instead of making holes for planting Potatoes, the seed is laid out in rows on the ground, then a trench is made between each row, and the soil from the trench is used to cover the Potatoes. Whatever the method of cultivation, the seed must be chosen with care, i.e. the tubers must be healthy and perfectly ripe. Larger tubers can be divided. To bring the harvest forward, potatoes can be germinated before planting, as many growers around Paris do, by placing them in a room in the house. During the summer, potatoes should be hoeed several times, then ridged when they have reached the middle stage of their development. This operation, considered unnecessary by some and recommended by others, is as necessary in light soils as it can be harmful in wet ones. In recent years, trials of autumn planting have been attempted with the aim of harvesting potatoes much earlier. Despite all the care taken in this operation, we have so far found no appreciable difference in the results of this crop, compared with those obtained by planting in spring, and, in our opinion at least, it would be preferable, rather than planting in autumn, to look for early varieties that can be harvested before the time when potato disease begins to run rife. Early Potatoes planted in February are harvested in the first fortnight of June; and, as we have said with regard to bed-grown plants, only the largest are detached, and the roots are carefully covered, in order to prolong the harvest. From the 10. time indicated above, successive plantings can be made until the end of June. Varieties. - Round yellows, early dwarf, Schaw, Cordilleran regent. - Long yellows. Marjolin, lapston kidney, second-season marjolin. - Round reds. August truffle, Strasbourg truffle, Montreuil truffle. - Long red. Grows upright. Vitelotte. Xavier. - Violets. Plate hâtive, - de Vincennes. - Smith secdling. POURPIER (Portulaca oleracea). - It is sown on a bed in February and March, and in the open ground in May and throughout the summer; the seeds should hardly be covered, but they should be assiduously drenched until they have sprouted. Purslane seeds germinate for eight years. Varieties. - Green purslane. - Golden purslane. RADISH (Raphanus sativue). - The first seedlings are sown around September 15, on teens. If it gets cold at night, cover with straw mats. In December, we sow on beds and under panels; in February, we sow again on beds, but in the open air; then in March, we start sowing in the open ground, which can continue until autumn. As a result, they are usually only sown among other plants, both on beds and in the ground. Summer sowings should, as far as possible, be made in the shade and watered in the breeze, and all varieties can be sown indiscriminately at this time of year; but early or half-long pink radishes are preferred for bedding. Varieties. - Early white from Holland. - Early violet. - Early round pink. - Half-long pink. - Half-long rose with white tip. - Summer gray. - Yellow or red. RAVES. - Cultivated in exactly the same way as pink radishes. Winter radish, horseradish. - They are broadcast from June 1 to July 10; as they are almost always sown too thickly, the plant must be thinned out. These radishes can be stored all winter long by placing them in gauges and covering them during frosts, or by placing them in the vegetable greenhouse. Varieties. - Black, - Chinese rose, - Gournay violet. Snake radish, Rat-tail radish (Raphanus caudatus). - Sown in June, July and August, I meter apart in all directions, these Radishes develop rapidly and produce a prodigious quantity of siliques that can be eaten like ordinary Radishes, with exactly the same flavor. Radish seeds are good for harvesting in August, and can be stored for up to five years. RAIFORT SAUVAGE (Cranson, Cochlearia armoracia). - The roots of this plant have an extremely pungent flavor; when grated, they can replace Mustard. It is propagated from root sections in the autumn, but it is not until the third year that the roots are large enough to be used. Rapunzel (Campanula rapunculus). - Rapunzel is broadcast in June and July. As the seed is extremely fine, it must be mixed with sand or fine, very dry soil, otherwise the sowing will be uneven or too thick. The seed is not covered, but simply raked over and lightly trodden, after which a small amount of bedding is spread over the whole, which is removed as soon as the seeds have sprouted, and the germination of the seeds is encouraged by frequent watering; a small amount of spinach or radish is usually sown among the Rapunzel to protect the young plant. We don't start harvesting Rapunzel until February, and harvesting can continue until it goes to seed. Rapunzel seeds ripen in July and August, and keep well for up to five years. RHUBARBE (Rheum). - Rhubarb is grown in gardens for its leaf stalks, which are used to make excellent jams, or to replace the fruit sometimes used in pastries. It can be propagated by sowing seeds immediately after maturity, or even better, by separating the plants and dividing them in spring, taking care that each shoot has at least one reproductive germ. Whatever the method of propagation, they are planted about 1 m apart, and all care consists in cutting off the old leaves and hoeing them every year in spring. We usually start cutting the petioles at the end of May or beginning of June. Rhubarb seeds are harvested in June, and keep well for three years. Varieties. - Myatt's linnaus. - Myatt's Victoria, - Prince Albert. WHITE SALSIFIS (Tragopogon porrifolium). - Sow in March, April and May, in rows or broadcast, in deep, substantial soil, smoked from the previous year. If the weather is dry, the seedbed is thoroughly basked to encourage seed emergence; if the plant is too thick, it is thinned out, then hoeed a few times. We start harvesting the roots in October, then successively until spring. To make sure you don't run out of them in winter, put them in gauges towards the end of November, or cover them in place during the frosts. Salsify seeds ripen in July, and are only good for one year. GARDEN WILLOW (Satureia hortensis). - It is sown in spring, after which it resows every year on its own, without needing any care. Perennial savory (S. montana). - It can be propagated from seed sown in spring, or by splitting plants at the same time. Savory seeds keep well for three years. SCORSONÈRE D'ESPAGNE or SALSIFIS NOIR (Scorzonera Hispanica) - Sown either in August, or in March and April, in rows or broadcast: care is exactly the same as for white salsify; only, as it goes to seed in the same year, the stems are cut in July; and as the roots rarely grow large enough to be eaten in the first year, this operation must be repeated the following year. Harvesting begins in October, and continues successively until spring. Scorsonera seeds are harvested towards the end of July from two-year-old individuals, and keep well for two years. SUMMER SPRINGS (Tetragonia exponsa). - This plant is an excellent summer substitute for spinach, as it has all the flavor of spinach. After soaking the seeds, sow them in a bed in February and March. When frosts are no longer a concern, transplant the seedlings into the ground, about Om, 60 apart in all directions. As soon as the stems begin to cover the ground, the leaves and tips of the young shoots are cut off. Seeds ripen in autumn, and keep well for up to five years. TOMATO or LOVE APPLE (Solanum lycopersicum). - The first tomatoes are sown as early as September, and placed in pots in the pineapple greenhouse, or on beds and under panels, for planting on beds in January. Planted at this time, the fruit begins to ripen in the first days of May. In January, we sow on beds and under panels, and when the plant is strong enough, we transplant it to the nursery, also on beds and under panels. A few days after planting, we start to give the plant a little air, in order to strengthen it. In February or March, we prepare a second layer of Om, 50 thick, with a heat of 20 to 25 degrees; we fill it with Om, 25 of compost, after which we plant four tomato plants under each panel. During the night, the panels are covered with mats, basked if necessary, and given air when the sun is shining; and when the plants begin to develop, two branches are selected on each, then lowered so as to prevent them from touching the inner surface of the panels. To keep them in this position, we tie them to small stakes which we drive into the bed at a certain distance from the base; then we remove the other branches; and when the plants are sufficiently full of flowers, we pinch off the ends of all the branches. From this time onwards, all new buds are carefully removed, and when the tomatoes start to turn red, the leaves are completely removed from the fruit, to bring forward ripening. Tomatoes are sown again in February and March, and when the plant is ready for planting, a layer of Om, 40 thick and Om,80 wide is prepared. Fill it with Om, 25 of potting soil, draw two rows, and plant the tomatoes Om, 80 apart along the line. Put a bell on each one, and give it air whenever the weather permits; then remove the bells as soon as frosts are no longer to be feared. When the plants begin to develop, select three or four branches from each, tie them to a stile and remove the others; Then, when they have reached Om, 75 to I mêtre in height, we pinch off all the ends, if the plants have flowers, otherwise we only cut them back when they are higher, and, as we said earlier, we take care to remove all the new buds; we remove a few leaves, and when the tomatoes start to turn red, we remove all the leaves from the fruit. To plant in the open ground, sow in February and March, equally on beds and under panels; transplant the plant in the nursery, and when frosts are no longer to be feared, lift the clodded plant to put it in the open ground. Mark out two rows per bed, and plant the tomatoes Om, 80 apart along the line. Water abundantly during hot spells, after which pruning and other care is similar to that described above. Tomato seeds keep well for five years. Varieties. - Early red. - Large red. - Stiff or monstrous stem. - Yellow. - Pear. - Cherry. Vegetable greenhouse. - We don't always have a suitable place to store our vegetables, and are often obliged to accept an inconvenient shed or a damp, poorly ventilated caye, where vegetable plants cannot be kept without deterioration. In such circumstances, there's nothing to be done, and you have to resign yourself to keeping only small provisions; but when you have access to a spacious cellar, deprived of light, and whose air can be renewed at will through doors or window wells, you find yourself in the most favorable conditions for preserving vegetables. The vegetable greenhouse should be divided into several compartments, into which the plants to be preserved are placed in beds, with a little sand or dry earth between each one. This method is suitable for plants with roots; as for cabbages, cauliflowers, cardoons, chicory, etc., they should be pulled out with their roots and planted in the sand at a sufficient distance apart to avoid contact which would cause rotting. In this way, vegetables from the previous year can be kept until April and May. CHAPTER XII Diseases of Vegetables. Knowledge of the diseases that attack vegetable plants is of little importance, especially as they can rarely be cured, and nature alone can bring about the cure. Whenever a plant finds itself in a pathological state as a result of unfavorable environmental influences that have developed a morbid state within it, and its tissues no longer have sufficient vital energy to fight the evil, disorganization begins, and the only means of recovery is a redoubling of care to restore the plant to its original vigor. The parasites that grow on diseased plants are not the cause of the disease; they are simply its effect. So why bother knowing that Puccinia asparagus grows on asparagus, Sclerotium varium on cabbage, and several species of Uredo on celery, beans, salad burnet and leeks? Botrytis effusa on spinach; Fusisporium on melon; Acrosporium monitioides on onion; Erysiphe communis on peas; Botrytis infestans on potato, etc.? These are, we repeat, effects, not causes. In cold, wet seasons, in unfavorable exposures, due to lack of care and precautions, plants suffer and fall ill; but with water, manure and shelter, we can prevent all this evil, which we could not repair once it existed. CHAPTER XIII Fruit garden. As the people for whom we are writing this book rarely have a fruit garden as distinct from a vegetable garden, we have not thought it necessary to give any special provisions for the orchard; we have limited ourselves to bringing together all 11 the notions that it is important to possess in order to make the most of one's fruit trees. This chapter contains the general principles of planting, pruning, disbudding and trellising, without taking into account the differences that exist between trees of different kinds. Special articles will deal with the care to be given to each particular species. § 1 - Planting. Successful planting depends on several conditions which, unfortunately, are not sufficiently observed. The first is to be aware of the nature of the soil, which should guide the choice of trees; for a tree grafted onto one subject will languish in a soil where it would, on the contrary, have thrived, had it been grafted onto another. The choice of trees is also very important, but presents many difficulties; for nurserymen are so little concerned with the future of the trees they raise, that they too often neglect their initial education and thus prepare many disappointments for the planters. They must be young and vigorous, the bark must be smooth, the subject must always be well proportioned to the graft, and above all, they must have been uprooted with great care. The best time to plant is immediately after leaf fall, in light soils; but in heavy, damp soils, plant only in February and March. Before planting, the roots should be inspected, and the ends of any broken ones cut off cleanly, without cutting any off, and taking care to preserve all the hair. If, at this time, the land is not ready for planting, or if planting requires several days' work, the plants should be placed in rows in such a way that they can be removed one by one during planting. If some circum stance prevents planting at the times indicated, from the end of March to the time when they can be put in place, they should be lifted every fortnight, and immediately put back in gauge, then watered. The more the season progresses, the more precautions need to be taken: they will have grown a lot of young roots, which you must take care not to break. If you follow our advice, you won't be able to plant them definitively until June. These late plantings should be watered during hot spells; it's even a good idea to put one or two watering cans in the hole before planting. For planting at ordinary times, the holes should always be made in autumn, even in soils where planting is not due until March. They should be wide and deep, in proportion to the volume of the roots, so that they can spread out at their ease. In very light soils, a good result will always be obtained if, after having made holes at least one meter deep and of a proportionate width, we put, at the bottom, sods placed in such a way that the roots are on top. In damp soils prone to retaining water, very wide and expensive holes should also be made, and small plaster placed at the bottom; they should then be filled to the necessary height with good soil mixed with consumed manure; finally, it would be better to delay planting for a few days than to plant in the rain or in overly damp soil. When it's time to plant, place the tree in the middle of the hole, as plumb as possible, while another person sinks the loose, fine soil between the roots; then, to leave no gaps, gently lift the tree, keeping it upright. Trees should only be buried up to the collar, i.e. about Om.10 above the roots; and those grafted on the ground should not be covered over, so that the roots do not become too deeply buried as the soil settles. When the tree is at the right height, cover all the roots with fine earth, then fill the rest of the hole with earth mixed with spent manure. To secure the tree, lightly tamp down the soil with your feet, pressing harder on the edges. Then add more soil to complete the hole. Some people sow fruit trees intended for grafting, in order to have more vigorous trees that are not delayed by transplanting. To do this successfully, you need to know your subsoil well, because if you don't have good soil, you'll get very poor results. As these trees always have a pivot that descends very deeply, when they reach bad soil, they turn yellow and have only languid vegetation. § 2 - Pruning. Pruning fruit trees is a very important operation: 1° Its purpose is to distribute sap evenly throughout the tree, and to give it a pleasing shape; 2° It prepares trees to bear more beautiful fruit of better quality; 3° If a tree were not pruned, its superfluous branches would infallibly exhaust its strength, and it would not last as long; thus, when pruning is well reasoned, it prolongs the life of trees. Of all gardening operations, tree pruning is the least advanced. In this respect, it would be desirable for practitioners to devote themselves to the study of plant physiology; indeed, how can such an important operation be carried out, if we do not know the functions of each part of a tree? The instruments used for pruning are the pruning knife and the pruning shears. Although the latter greatly shortens the work, it cannot completely replace the pruning knife, as its use requires a great deal of practice, and the pressure it exerts often bruises the branch below the cut. But it is very useful for cutting back branches that would be difficult to remove with the pruning knife, and for pruning vines and roses. In addition to these two instruments, it is sometimes necessary to use the handsaw or egohine to cut large branches. We usually start pruning at the end of January and into March, and sometimes even at the beginning of April; but it's impossible to give a precise indication of the most favorable time to start this operation, as it varies according to exposure and temperature differences from year to year. It would be much more natural to carry out pruning in the order of vegetation, starting with apricot trees, followed by peach, plum, pear, cherry and apple trees. However, to save time, it is customary to start with pear and apple trees, as they have little fear of frost, and are almost always finished by the time you start pruning peach trees. As a general rule, you should start with the weakest trees and finish with the most vigorous, in order to slow down their vigour a little; however, you should always prune before the sap is in motion, because later on you will greatly damage the health of these trees, and you will only obtain very weak shoots. There are also a few general principles from which we must never deviate: 1° When pruning, always make a clean, slightly oblique cut, opposite the eye on which you are pruning, and at Om, 03 or so above, so that the sap can easily cover the wound; it is also for this reason that whenever it is necessary to cut back a branch, you should cut it as close as possible to its insertion, and make a clean wound, which is always easier to cover. 2° Trees should not be pruned too short, as they will then grow too vigorously and yield little fruit. 3° Pruning too long exhausts the trees, because they set too much fruit, and there is really no advantage; because the fruit is less beautiful, the trees are tired, and they usually remain several years without bearing fruit. We will now describe the different parts of a tree, which it is essential to know how to recognize before starting to prune. 1. Stone fruit trees. The trunk or stem is the part of the tree that rises from the root to the base of the branches. The mother branches are so called because they are the ones that give birth to all the others; they grow directly from the trunk. The limbs are the branches that grow on the side of the mother branches, and whose development is encouraged to form the framework of the tree. Bifurcation branches are limbs designed to fill the gaps left by the extension of mother branches and limbs; they should only ever be established on the third or fourth bud above the previous pruning. Wood branches are those which form the framework of the tree and the extension of each limb; they are easy to recognize on all trees, by their size and the eyes with which they are furnished, eyes which are always thin and pointed. Fruiting branches are generally thin and elongated; in Peach trees, the bark is green on the wall side and reddish on the sunny side. These branches must be renewed annually, as they only bear fruit once. Replacement branches. - Fruiting branches of. Peach tree only produce in the second year, and only bear fruit once, as we've just said. It is therefore essential to replace them every year, which is very easy, as each fruiting branch has several eyes at its base; once these eyes have developed, it is sufficient to choose the most vigorous bud as close as possible to the insertion of the fruiting branch, and to remove the others. These new branches are called replacement branches; once they have borne fruit, they must be replaced in their turn, and so on. Greedy branches. - On espaliered trees, gourmands are generally placed at the top of the limbs. They are easily recognized by their wide spread and their vigour, which is so detrimental to the other branches that their development must be stopped by all possible means; they should never be seen on a well-treated tree. Buds are young shoots of the year; in the second year, the bud becomes a woody or fruit-bearing branch, depending on its position. False or early buds are those born between the leaves of the current year's shoots. 2. Fruit-bearing trees. Since the woody branches on all fruit trees have more or less the same characteristics, we'll only talk about the buds they bear: those on Pear and Apple trees are wrapped in a scaly membrane, but are always thin and elongated, as on Peach trees. Flower buds are much larger than wood buds, rounded in shape and enveloped by a large number of scales. Twigs are small, slender, elongated branches ending in a leaf or flower bud. Their eyes are very tightly closed, and easily transform into flower buds. They should be kept, as they can bear fruit for several years. The lambourdes are essentially productive; they grow on twigs, and often on wood branches too. They almost always end in a flower bud, which often doesn't blossom until the second year. The eyes with which they are furnished are much closer together than on other twigs, and always very ready to bear fruit. They remain several years before reaching full development, are much larger at their base than at their tip, and are covered with a circularly wrinkled bark whose folds become deeper as they age. §3 - Disbudding. This operation begins in May, and continues throughout the vegetation period; it consists of removing any poorly placed buds that need to be removed at the next pruning. Disbudding takes place on branches from previous years, and can be carried out using the disbudding tool. As for disbudding the current year's buds, as this involves removing the false buds, it is done with the fingernail. In both cases, on espaliered trees, buds on the front and back of the branches, and those on the sides that are too close together, are removed; on other trees, buds on the top and bottom of the limbs, and those that are too close together, are removed. This operation should be started as soon as the buds to be removed are from Om, 02 to Om, 03 in length, so that the sap which would be needed for their vegetation, if we waited until later, immediately turns to the benefit of those to be kept. § 4 - Trellising. Trellising consists in securing the buds of espaliered trees to trellises or walls, using wicker and rushes for trellises, and rags and nails for walls, which are soft enough to be driven in easily (1). (1) As a ladder is always essential for this operation, we recommend Mr. Forest's ladder. Butt-trees describe an arc of a circle which, when the feet of the ladder enter the ground, prevents damage to the branches on which it rests. 11. The time to start trellising is indicated by the development of buds; it is usually in June that it is essential to start, to finish only towards the end of the season. The aim of this operation is not only to fix the buds, lest they be broken by the wind, but also to slow down the vigor of the most advanced by training them earlier than the others. When trellising, always place the buds in a straight line, at equal distances and without ever crossing them. It's during the first trellising that you should remove any poorly placed fruit, and thin out any that are too tightly packed, which could harm each other. § 5 - Fruit trees. Most people who cultivate fruit trees choose the healthiest room in their home, and sometimes even the first one they see. Nothing is more difficult than preserving fruit. There are certain conditions that are not generally observed, but which are nonetheless indispensable. To preserve fruit for as long as possible, and with the best possible chances of success, a special room must be set aside for the purpose, half-buried, in an area where the temperature is least likely to vary, and where air and light can be renewed or intercepted at will. Shelves of Om, 50 to Om, 60 in width, with a rim to prevent the fruit from falling off, are laid out and covered with a bed of new, fine, dry, odorless straw. It is in this room that we place, by species, the fruits that the advanced season prevents us from leaving on the trees, and which must ripen at more or less distant times. A few days before placing them in the orchard, they should be carefully sorted to separate those not worth keeping, and left to dry out. When the fruit box is full and dry, close it to the air and light, and do nothing more than visit the fruit once or twice a week. Grapes can be stored on shelves like other fruits, or rather hung from the ceiling; but they require scrupulous supervision, and are generally quite difficult to preserve. People who attach great importance to preserving their fruit can line all the walls of their orchard with wood, and increase the chances of preservation. You could also place quicklime on the last combs, taking care to renew it each time it is extinguished. Because of its drying properties, this lime will keep the atmosphere always dry. The method we have described is the only one used by orange-tree growers; all other recipes for preservation are either unsafe or completely impractical, and we advise you to make do with an orange-tree grower, observing the preservation conditions we have described here. § 6 - Cultivation of the best fruit species, ABRICOTIER (Armeniaca vulgaris). - All soils are suitable for apricot trees, provided they are not too damp. They are usually grafted onto the Saint-Julien plum tree, but as they grow very vigorously and bear little fruit in strong soils, they should be grafted onto the Cerisette plum tree, which grows much less than the Saint-Julien. As the fruit of open-air apricot trees is much more fragrant than that of espaliered trees, only a few of the latter are usually planted, in order to obtain fruit that ripens a little earlier, or in localities where it does not ripen well in the open air. High-stemmed apricot trees are planted about 6 mềtres apart. Once the young trees have been given the right direction, it will still be necessary to prune them every year; otherwise, the branches would easily recede from the bottom; but by a reasoned and timely pruning we will easily force the sap to flow back into the lower parts; we will treat the high-stemmed trees in the same way, and in addition we will cut back all the branches that would point inwards, so that the air can circulate easily. Apricot trees can be rejuvenated by cutting back the larger branches, choosing the most vigorous and well-disposed young shoots to replace them. It is difficult to advance the ripening of apricot trees; nevertheless, if you want to try it, you should give them very little heat and only start heating them in February. Varieties. - Early or Apricot, - Angoumois, - Common, - Dutch, - Alberge, - Peach. AMANDIER (Amygdalus communis). - Cultivated almond trees are grafted onto the common variety, and are rarely planted except in the open air, where they require no care. However, in the North, they need to be planted in espaliers, with good exposure, and pruned accordingly. The almond tree often flowers as early as February, which is why it is so often planted in pleasure gardens. Varieties. - Amandier à gros fruits, - Amandier de Tours, - Amandier Princesse ou des Dames, à coque tendre. CHERRY (Cerasus). - Cherry trees are not difficult when it comes to choosing a site: high-stemmed cherry trees are grafted on to wild cherry, and other forms are grafted on to Sainte-Lucie. To obtain fruit a little earlier, you can plant a few English Cherry trees in espaliers or form cattails, which produce a lot; but you're more likely to plant high-stemmed trees, which always produce more. If planted in rows, they should be spaced about 6 meters apart. It is only necessary to prune them during the first few years, to form the framework of the tree; and for espaliers and cattails, once formed, remove as few branches as possible. The only thing to be done is to give good direction to each limb, as they grow in size. When Cherry trees cease to bear fruit, they can easily be rejuvenated by cutting back the large branches near their insertion; they promptly provide new ones, with which to form another té̂te. De la culture forcée du Cerisier. - To bring forward the maturity of fruit trees, we must take into account the average temperature at the time when each species begins to vegetate, to enter into flower, and finally to that which ordinarily reigns at the time of ripening of the fruit, so that, in a space of time which must always be less long than in the natural state, we subject the trees to the various modifications of heat through which they ordinarily pass; for, in one case as in the other, they can only bear fruit after having completed all the phases of vegetation. We can bring forward the maturity of espaliered cherry trees by placing glass frames in front of them, or, better still, by planting dwarf English or Royal cherry trees in pots in autumn, which are the most successful. They should be as well-branched as possible. Bury the pots in a well-exposed spot, and the following year, in January, place them in a glass greenhouse, where the temperature need only be maintained at 12 or 14 degrees. Air can be supplied when the sun is shining. You could even combine them with plum trees and give them the same care. If you put them in the greenhouse at the right time, the fruit is usually ripe by the beginning of April. In this way, they can be heated for several years running. Varieties. - English. - Royal. - Reine-Hortense. - Belle de Choisy, - de Portugal, - Belle magnifique, - du Nord tardive, - Grosse, - Guigne noire, - Guigne ambrée, - Gros bigarreau noir. COIGNASSIER (Cydonia communis). - Coignassiers are generally grown as grafted pear trees. They should be planted at the same time as pear trees. They are rarely grown as fruit trees, although their fruit is very beautiful, but the smell they give off when they begin to ripen is generally unpleasant and forces us to relegate these trees to areas far from our homes. In this case, there's no need to choose the land as you would when grafting Pear trees, because they grow well everywhere, even in damp places. You don't need to prune them; just remove the dead wood. The only cultivated variety is the Portuguese variety, grafted on the common Coignassier, whose fruit ripens in October. VINE THORN (Berberis). - It grows in the most arid soils, and in autumn produces fruit that makes excellent jams. Fig tree (Ficus Carica). - All soils are suitable for Fig trees, provided they are not too damp. These trees should only be planted at the end of March or in April, and as they are difficult to get going again, they should be planted in rootballs or raised in pots. They are best planted close to a wall and in the warmest location; in some places, it would even be preferable to espalier and trellis them like other trees. However, whatever form they take, fig trees need to be covered in winter to protect them from frost. Towards the end of November, all the branches are gathered together and wrapped in straw held together with ties. When the stems are young and not very high, we lower them to the ground and hold them there with wooden hooks; then we cover them with Om, 15 earth or straw, until the end of March. Whichever way you shelter them, you must take great care to secure the base, and, should the stems be affected by frost, you cut them off at the collar, an operation you can also perform when they have become too strong. They quickly regrow new stems, which bear fruit in the second year. Fig trees usually produce two harvests, but in our climate it's extremely rare for the autumn crop to ripen, so we'll only talk about the first, which ripens in July and August. To encourage fruit development and bring forward ripening, in June we pinch off the terminal buds of fruit-bearing branches, preventing them from falling off before ripening. Fig trees cannot be pruned, as amputations are very harmful to them, due to the large amount of sap they lose each time. In spring, simply cut off dead branches and cut back those too thin to produce fruit. DE JARDINAGE. fruit. However, if they are growing too vigorously, you can pinch the ends of the branches, a method often used with advantage to make them bear fruit. A large number of varieties are grown in the south of France, but only two are successfully cultivated in Paris: the white rondo and the violet. Forced cultivation of the Fiquier. - In January, we cover the Fig trees with a small mobile greenhouse, and start heating them to 15 degrees; then we gradually raise the heat to 25 degrees without inconvenience, and in the first days of May, we obtain ripe fruit. We will only briefly mention a process that has fallen into disrepute in our country, but is now being revived: caprification. Recent facts seem to prove that this operation is not as useless as has been claimed, although it is not essential for the fertilization of Fig trees. . It increases the number of fruits, which ripen more reliably. In the absence of the fertilizing insects found in the fruit of the wild Fig tree, a branch of which is hung on the Fig tree you wish to caprify, you can simply prick the eye of the Fig with a needle dipped in olive oil, and wait for the result. This operation, which we offer to our readers for what it may be worth, at least has the advantage of not compromising the fruit on which the test has been carried out. RASPBERRY (Rubus Idœeus). - Raspberry bushes grow everywhere, but they prefer fresh, light, well-amended soil, as they considerably deplete the earth, and it is necessary, in order to obtain good fruit, to plant them in autumn with new soil or used fertilizer. They are planted in autumn, or in February and March, depending on the variety, about 1 m apart. After planting, they are cut back to a height of about Om, 15. Each year, in June, select the five or six best buds from each clump, and cut off the others. This removal will benefit the stems left behind, and the fruit they produce will be much more beautiful; they ripen in July. In March, cut down to the ground the stems that have borne fruit, and prune the others back more or less, depending on their vigor. Depending on the soil and the care they have received, they should be moved every four, five or six years. Varieties. - Red raspberry, - Fr. with flesh-colored fruit, - Fr. white. - Four seasons. GRAPEBERRY (Ribes rubrum). - Although not very fussy about the choice of soil, redcurrants will produce more beautiful fruit and of better quality in soft, cool soils, without excess humidity, than in other soils. They can be given any shape you like, but because of the pruning they have to undergo, it is preferable to grow them in clumps. Currants can be espaliered, and usually ripen from June to July; but ripening can easily be brought forward by placing frames in front of them. They are planted about 1.30 m apart, in autumn or February, depending on the soil. They are pruned in February: the first year, they are pruned short, to encourage the development of the lower eyes; but for subsequent prunings, they should be pruned longer, and it should always be remembered that redcurrants only bear abundant fruit on two-year-old wood. Each year, let the branches necessary to form a good clump develop successively, and take care to remove the buds that start at the base, then cut back the large branches as they reach their sixth year (which is easy to see by counting each year's shoots), as they then become too high, receding at the bottom and giving only mediocre-quality fruit; then replace each branch cut back with a young bud. Forced cultivation of redcurrants. - Currant bushes can easily be heated on site, if planted in counter-trellises; if planted in pots, they can be treated in the same way as cherry trees. Varieties. - Red currant. - Gr. white. - Flesh-colored, - Cherry, - Gondouin, - Queen Victoria. GROSEILLIER A FRUIT NOIR, CASSIS, POIVRIER (R. nigrum). - Treated exactly like the ordinary currant tree, it can be cut back more often, as the wood bears fruit. SPINY OR CURRANT (R. uva crispa). - A considerable number of Gooseberry varieties have been sown, many of which are remarkable for the size of their fruit. To maintain good fruit, branches that have been producing for three years should be removed. MURRY (Morus). - Mulberries are very hardy trees, adapting well to almost all soils, even those of mediocre quality, except those that are constantly damp. Whatever the species, it should not be planted before February, nor should any branches be cut off; after which, all care consists of a few hoeings. As a fruit tree, only the black Mürier is grown, with fruit ripening from July to September. It cannot be pruned, and only the dead wood is removed. When these trees are too old and produce only small fruits, they should be cut back, i.e. the branches should be cut back to within a few centimetres of the trunk; they will produce very vigorous young shoots which will soon bear fruit. The White Mulberry is grown as an ornamental tree, but more particularly as a grafting plant for the broad-leaved species grown to feed silkworms. The most favorable time for grafting is the end of April, and the most advantageous variety, among those grown for the above-mentioned purpose, is the Moretti, whose leaves are very wide and much preferable to those of the Multicaule. Its hardiness is at least equal to that of the ordinary White Mulberry. It reproduces very well from seeds sown in spring. Mulberries can be grown as spindles or clumps, to form hedges which, if well trained, will produce many leaves. It is preferable to cut off the branches whose leaves you want to feed the worms; but you must take care to leave all the small branches, and not to detach the leaves, so as not to completely block the circulation of the sap. At the end of June or the beginning of July, or as soon as the worms have been fed, the Mulberries should be pruned immediately, so that the shoots that develop during the August sap are strong enough to withstand the frosts. NEFLIER (Mespilus Germanica). - Néfliers do very well everywhere, even in very poor soils. They should be planted in autumn, unless the nature of the soil does not allow it; as the fruit comes at the end of the branches, these trees should not be pruned, and it would be impossible to give them a regular shape. Preference should be given to large-fruited medlar trees. The fruits should be picked in October and November, and laid out on straw or on shelves, where they ripen. HAWTHORN (Corylus). - Hazelnut trees are very hardy, and should be planted in autumn; they grow in all types of soil and in all types of exposure. They can be grown in clumps or on stems, and fruit equally well in either case. Fruit ripens in August and September, and falls as soon as ripe. Several species are grown solely for ornamental purposes in pleasure gardens. Varieties. - Red-fruited hazelnut. - N. grosse aveline de Provence, - N. avelinier rouge, - N. à fruits en grappes. WALNUT (Juglans regia). - Walnut trees deserve to be cultivated in many respects; however, they are rarely given a place in gardens, because of the space they cover (at least 20 or 30 meters are needed between plants) and the extent of their roots, which exhaust the soil and are very harmful to surrounding crops. They like soft, substantial, deep soil. They tolerate transplanting fairly well when they're young and cared for, but it's especially important to avoid cutting them back when planting, which would be very detrimental to their growth. It is better to sow them in situ. In this case, choose the most beautiful and ripest nuts of the variety you want to sow, and either put them in the ground in autumn, or stratify them in sand and sow them in spring. They will bear fruit after six to eight years of sowing. If you wish to change the variety you have sown, or if you fear that it will not reproduce identically once the trees have reached a height of around 1 metre and a diameter of Om, 03, you will need to graft them in spring, either in a cleft or in a ring; they will then grow a little less. Walnut trees do not need pruning; however, when they are old, it often happens that the end of the branches dies; they must then be cut back to about Om, 60 from the trunk, and a new head is formed. Varieties. - Soft-shelled walnut, - Late walnut, - Jewel walnut (for fruit size). There is a very interesting new species, known as Juglans prœparturiens. It doesn't grow very tall and produces good-quality fruit from the second year of sowing. Walnut trees ripen towards the end of September or the beginning of October, but can be eaten in kernels as early as the end of July. Several species of American walnut are also grown as ornamental trees. PEACH (Amygdalus Persica) (1). - In deep soils, we prefer to plant Peach trees grafted on the Almond tree; but in those with only a shallow layer of good soil, and with a tuff or clay base, trees grafted on the Plum tree should be planted, as they have tracer roots that are content with shallower soil. Peach trees can be planted in espaliers at all exposures; only in the north and west, early varieties should be planted, with slightly less spacing than at other exposures. The usual distance is 8 to 10 meters, depending on their shape and the nature of the soil. A pear tree can be planted in between, to provide fruit until the peach trees are removed as they develop. It is almost always preferable to plant eighteen-month-old grafted peach trees; given the right circumstances, they are more likely to succeed than those that have already been pruned several times. When planting, care should be taken to place the strongest roots at the front, and the collar of the tree should be about Om.15 from the wall on which the stem is inclined. (For planting times and other precautions, see Planting, page 182). To maintain the vigor of the trees, it is necessary to fertilize the bed where the peach trees are planted; but it is not possible to determine the time that should elapse between two fertilizations, as this depends on the nature of the soil. Preference should be given to new soil, turf or half-used manure. In years when it is necessary to fertilize peach trees, they should be pruned longer, and every year, after pruning, a hoeing operation should be carried out at the foot of the trees. In July and August, water the leaves of the peach trees using a hand pump. This operation is very useful, but should only be carried out when the sun is no longer shining on the espalier. The high temperatures of this period often make it necessary to water the base of the trees, so hoe them and form a basin around each tree, filling it with short manure, which retains moisture longer. As soon as the trees have been planted, it is important to determine the form in which they will be grown. Without going into the advantages and disadvantages of other methods of cultivation, we will limit ourselves to indicating the one used in Montreuil as the simplest and one of the most advantageous. To achieve a good result, we recommend tracing a quarter-circle on the wall (fig. 17), where we will indicate each year the place the main branches should occupy according to their development. First year. After planting, cut the stems of the young peach trees we recommend at Om, 15 or Om, 20 above the graft. This determines the development of several buds. Disbudding. - When the buds are Om, 25 to Om, 30 in length, select the two most vigorous, one on each side, to form the two mother branches b (fig. 14), then remove the others. Trellising. - In case of breakage, they should be tied, but in such a way as not to hinder their development. If one of the two buds is more vigorous than the other, it should be tilted more to restore the balance of the sap, a principle which must never be deviated from, as the whole future of the tree depends on it. Second year. - In February, i.e. when the sap begins to swell the buds, and not when they are in flower, as some people advise, after the tree has been stripped, the wall should be cleaned, as well as any limbs on which gallinsects may be found, which should be done every year; after which the snag a (sig. 14) should be cut, and the wound covered with swelling wax. Mother branches 6 will be pruned to Om, 35 or Om, 40 in length, according to the shape of the tree immediately above the eye intended to extend the branches. In the absence of the front eye, the top eye can be used, which should be observed at each pruning. At this point, the development of the mother branches makes it possible to establish a lower sub-mother branch on each side of the tree, by means of lateral eyes placed at the base of the mother branches.  Fig. 14 - Peach tree, 2nd year. When attaching the two mother branches b, give them about 10 degrees of opening. Disbudding. - In May, remove with the fingernail, or with the tip of a pruning knife, all buds which are too close together, those which have double or triple use due to the development of double or triple eyes, which are so numerous on peach trees; those placed on the front or back of the branches; all those which should be removed during pruning in order to encourage the development of buds which will provide the second lower mother branches. Forced to make a choice, we prefer to remove the bud in the middle of the triple eyes, which, always more vigorous than the others, could later be a source of embarrassment. As for the other buds, in either case, only the best placed of the two should be kept. The same reason for removing the most vigorous bud from the ordinary eyes means that this same bud should be kept when disbudding the terminal eye of each branch; since it is intended to prolong the branch, this bud must always dominate the others. Later on, false buds should also be removed, and those that should be kept should be pinched off above the seventh or eighth leaf. From the time indicated above, disbudding continues successively until July, when the tips of any buds whose development needs to be moderated are pinched off with the fingernail. Trellising. - As the buds develop, they are trellised; but this operation requires a great deal of care, as the buds are so tender that they will break cleanly unless great care is taken to bring them into the position they should occupy. Always give them the most direct position possible, so that the circulation of the sap is not slowed down by any obstacle, and always avoid crossing the buds one on top of the other. Third year. - At the time of pruning, and before untrimming the tree, we examine the vegetation of each limb, and judge whether it would not be necessary, by pruning, to re-establish the balance of the sap in the event of one limb being much more vigorous than the other. 12 Cut the mother branches b (fig. 15) at about Om, 40 or Om, 50 in length, depending on their vigor, taking care that the eye on which you are pruning is placed so as to extend them as directly as possible, which must be observed at each pruning and for each branch. Fig. 15 - Peach tree, 3rd year. All buds from the previous year, which cover the woody branches, should be pruned back two or three eyes from their insertion, so as to have as many fruit-bearing branches the following year as the tree's vigor will allow; then remove any buds that are poorly placed. If the buds at the base of the mother branches are very vigorous, they should be pruned short, to determine the development of the fruiting branches; otherwise, they should be pruned to five or six eyes. When reattaching them, give the mother branches about 25 to 30 degrees of opening, if they are of equal strength; if not, the least vigorous should be given a more upright position, which should be observed every year. Disbudding. - We remove buds and false buds that are in the wrong position, taking the same precautions as the previous year. The buds at the base of the mother branches should be encouraged to develop, as they should provide the first upper sub-mother branches; this should also be done for the buds of the fruit-bearing branches closest to the main branch, as these are the ones which should replace the fruit-bearing branches at the next pruning; for the rest of the disbudding, observe what has already been said. Trellising. - When the buds are about Om.25 to Om.30 in length, they are trained, always starting with the most vigorous. Fourth year. - After stripping the tree, as in every year, we prune the tips of the mother branches b (fig. 16), at point 3 for example, to varying lengths, depending on their vigour. We also prune the lower sub-mother branches according to their strength, and always on the eye most favorable to their extension; we cut back the fruit-bearing branches on the replacement branches, which should always be as close as possible to the main branches, so that the latter always seem to be rejuvenated by new shoots; then we prune the replacement branches, to bear fruit, at five or six eyes, according to their strength and the tree's vigor, but always with the aim of obtaining a replacement bud as close as possible to their insertion. As always, false buds should be pruned back to two or three eyes.... Reattach the mother branches, giving them about 35 to 40 degrees of opening, always taking care to observe what was said on this subject for the previous year. Disbudding. - Watch out for woody branches that tend to establish themselves where there should only ever be fruit-bearing branches. Pay particular attention to encouraging the development of buds, which should provide the second upper sub-mother branches and Fig. 16. Peach tree, 4c year. =- bifurcation branches, as well as buds destined to form replacement branches. Care should be taken to pinch off the fruiting buds; if there are no fruits, or if they have fallen before maturity, these buds should be cut back immediately onto the replacement bud, unless one of them is too vigorous, in which case it would be preferable to bring it closer only at pruning. For the rest of this operation, please refer to what has already been said about disbudding in the second year. It is especially important to pinch off buds which, because of their vigor, threaten to become "gourmands". Trellising. - Trellising should be carried out according to the same principles, and successively, as in previous years. As the tree is expected to bear fruit, it should be uncovered gradually as it approaches maturity, a precaution that should always be taken. Fifth year. - The aim of this year's pruning is to extend and strengthen all parts of the tree (fig. 17). We will shorten the terminal branches according to the same principles as for previous prunings, and, when pruning the fruit-bearing branches, we will leave fruit on them according to their vigor and the health of the tree; we will prune the false buds to two or three eyes, as in previous years, and we will give the mother branches about 45 to 50 degrees of opening. Bifurcation branches e and f should be encouraged to grow longer, as should buds g, which can then be used to make new bifurcation branches. Finally, by disbudding young shoots and removing misplaced false buds, pinching and trellising, all parts of the tree will be maintained or brought back to a perfect balance of vegetation. As the tree advances in age, pruning and other operations will become more complicated, but the principles will always be the same; bifurcation branches will be established successively, to fill the gaps, and care must always be taken to keep the mother branches, as well as all the others, in the proportions relative to their various functions. 12 IOVNIdAVT ad TANV LAE Fig. 17 - Peach tree, 5th year. = 211 Peach trees grown in this form are particularly suitable for people who want to have their hearts quickly filled. Planted one meter apart, they can bear abundant fruit from the third year onwards, without any special care.  - 2 Fig. 18 - U-shaped peach trees = e Like all espalier trees, U-shaped peach trees should be cut back after planting to Om, 15 or Om, 20 above the graft, to encourage the development of buds destined to supply the two mother branches. During the course of their growth, these two buds should be directed so as to form a single or double U (fig. 18), taking care to leave the ends free so that they are not hindered in their development. At this point, U-shaped peach trees are just as easy to manage as oblique peach trees, over which they have a distinct advantage. Forced peach tree cultivation. - We can easily bring forward the ripening of espaliered peach trees, especially the early varieties; and, to be more certain of the success of the operation, we prefer to bring forward those placed to the east or west. In January, place a small mobile greenhouse in front of the peach trees, covered by 2-meter-long frames supported by rafters, the top of which will be Fig. 19. - Greenhouse to be forced. sealed into the wall, and which will bear at the bottom on a plank base Om 85 high, which will produce Om, 90 internally, sufficient space to provide the necessary care, which, incidentally, is absolutely the same as that indicated above. After pruning, start with a temperature of 12 degrees; then gradually increase to 18 degrees, but no higher; and as the heat will be much higher when the sun is shining, provide air; cover the greenhouse at night with straw mats, syringe the leaves if necessary; and as the fruits are usually more numerous than outdoors, it is often necessary to remove some of them, so as not to exhaust the trees. After ripening, which takes place in April, the frames are removed. Usually, peach trees that have been forced into frames are allowed to rest for a year or two, but we can safely say that this operation can be repeated the following year. Varieties. - Avant-Pêche blanche. - Petite Mignonne, - Grosse Mignonne, - Malte, - Madeleine, - Chevreuse, - Chevreuse tardive, - Admirable Belle de Vitry, - Brugnon musqué, - Madeleine rouge tardive, - Alberge jaune. - Galande, - Vineuse pourpre hâtive, - Madeleine de Courson, - Violette hâtive. - Veloutée tardive, - Teton de Venus, - Bourdine, - Bon ouvrier, - Pourprée tardive, - Belle de Doué, - Reine des vergers. PEAR (Pyrus). - Planting. - Pear trees grafted on Coignassier succeed in almost all soils, even those with little depth, provided they are not loamy or damp; otherwise, despite all care, they would perish after a few years. Whenever you have to plant in deep soil, it's best to plant pear trees grafted on franc, as they are much more robust. It is wrong to say that these trees are too slow to set fruit, because they grow too vigorously; for if, by well-reasoned pruning in proportion to the trees' strength, we establish an equal distribution of sap in all the limbs, we will often succeed in making them bear fruit from the very first years; once these trees have set fruit, they give abundantly, and live to be very old. If you are planting Pear trees grafted on Coignassier, you will need trees that have been grafted for eighteen or twenty months; but if they are grafted on Franc, as they grow much more vigorously, they can sometimes be planted grafted this year. For planting in flowerbeds, we recommend taking pear trees raised in cattails; in this position, this is really the most advantageous form, as it takes up little space and produces a lot of fruit. A dwarf apple or pear tree, pruned into a goblet shape, should be placed between two vines. They should then be planted about 4 or 5 meters apart. 1. Cattail pear trees. Pruning. - In the first year, prune the terminal branch to seven or eight eyes, depending on the tree's vigor, Fig. 20 - Cattail pear tree. in order to obtain three or four new limbs. Care should be taken to prune on the most favourably placed eye, to extend the stem as vertically as possible (fig. 20). The terminal branch of each branch should also be pruned on an eye positioned so as to extend the arm horizontally. As the lower arms are the oldest, they will be more elongated than those above them, and care must be taken at each pruning to maintain the same proportions. On each limb, we remove the twigs that are placed above and below, then we prune to about Om, 03 in length those that are not necessary to the shape of the tree. It is the lower eyes of these twigs that will give rise to the twigs. If there are a few twigs ending in a flowering bud, they should not be pruned, as this would deprive you of some fruit. If, in the place where a limb is needed to complete the regularity of the tree, there is no bud to form it, one can easily be obtained, either by placing a crest, or by circling the eye closest to the place where a limb is needed, which should be done in the following way. At pruning time, make a transverse incision immediately above, then a second one at Om, 02 or Om, 03 above the first, more or less, depending on the strength you want to give the bud. Then, starting from the second incision, a longitudinal incision is made at Om, 02 or Om, 03 on each side of the eye, and the portion of bark between the two transverse incisions is removed. The eye is thus encircled, and develops as vigorously as if the entire part above it had been removed. This operation can be performed successfully not only on the stem, but also on all the limbs of a tree where there are gaps to be filled. Disbudding. - To encourage the development of the terminal bud, the two or three buds closest to it should be pinched very short, unless the first bud has produced too weak a shoot, in which case it should be replaced by the most vigorous and closest to the tip. From the others, select the best-placed ones to form members for the next pruning, always observing that they must never be placed just above those of the previous year; for the members of a cattail must be arranged in such a way that, starting from the insertion of the first member, the others spiral around the stem. Pinch off the two or three buds closest to the terminal branch of each arm, and remove all the buds born above and below each limb. On the previous year's limbs, any buds growing too vigorously should be pinched off; then twigs should be pruned to Om, 16 or Om, 18 in length. Prune terminal shoots in proportion to the tree's vigor, and always on the eye best placed to extend them according to their position. Other twigs should be pruned to about Om, 05, even those that have been pinched off during disbudding; twigs that have borne fruit should be pruned to Om, 12 or Om, 15, and if those that have been broken off during disbudding have grown, they should be pruned above the shoot. Fruit-bearing branches will be protected successively, and those that grow too vigorously will be watched over, so that gourmands cannot form on any part of the tree; finally, the cattails will be treated in the second year as they were in the first, and so on; only, with each pruning, the operations will become more complicated. As it often happens that the limbs of a cattail tend to rise vertically, which is not only contrary to the principles, but also detrimental to the subsequent development of the tree (as these limbs then grow with such vigor that they absorb a large part of the sap necessary for the vegetation of the other limbs), we must, in such circumstances, seek a way to remedy such a state of affairs. We often resort to the use of small buttresses, but as this method presents many difficulties and serious inconveniences, we will share with you a procedure communicated to the Société centrale d'horticulture by Mr. Chevalier Gérolme: "I have placed four stakes at the foot of each pyramid, with a notch of Om, 028 at the head of each; I have attached a circle of wire at Om, 081 above ground level, in order to be able to hoe and clean. With this simple device, which I call a horizontal trellis, and which offers me the resources of a Montreuil wall, I become master of my tree. Equipped with a large number of leather straps pierced at both ends, and a bundle of wicker, I take the branch to be tilted, whether small or large, short or long, it doesn't matter; at the appropriate point, I encircle it with my strap, which I close with one end of a wicker strand, and stop the other on the circle at the place required by the inflection of the branch or the emptiness of the tree. With this procedure, I've been able to rectify a thousand irregularities independent of size, like proportioning spaces, destroying the confusion that always exists in pyramids, facilitating the circulation of air, the movement of light; in a word, satisfying all the conditions of development and equilibrium that until now had not been fulfilled." 2. Espaliered pear trees. To form an espalier of Pear trees, take young, vigorous dwarf trees, and plant them in a pre13 3 218 GARDENING MANUAL. ference to the east or west. They can be grown in several forms, but we consider fan-shaped (fig. 21) and palmette-shaped (fig. 22 and fig. 23) to be the easiest to manage and the most advantageous. Fan-shaped pear trees should be planted 5, 33, 6, 66 or 8 meters apart, depending on the nature of the soil and the height of the walls. ~~ 9th of the walls, with preference given to grafted trees of the year. They should be cut back so as to obtain five buds on each side to form the framework of the tree. If, in the first year, the number of buds required to form the tree is not obtained, the terminal bud should be directed vertically to extend the stem, and the following year it should be cut back to obtain limbs a, b, c, d, e. As the buds develop, they should be trellised, placing them as parallel as possible and at equal distance from each other. Pinch the tips of those that grow more vigorously than the others, so that each limb has roughly equal growth. The buds in front and behind the branches should also be pinched very short, to dismantle them as a result of pruning. By disbudding, we encourage the extension of the terminal bud of each member, and we pinch very short all those which are badly placed. In subsequent prunings, bifurcation branches, f, g, h, i (fig. 21), are established on each limb successively, as needed, to fill in the gaps. To complete the regularity of espalier-grown Pear trees, we can, independently of what we have indicated for those grown in cattails, resort to approach grafting, which should be done in the following way. When the buds are still in the herbaceous state, choose the one closest to the place where you need to establish a limb, lower it carefully so as not to break it, and, after making a longitudinal wound on each part, apply them one on top of the other, then hold them in this position by means of a ligature which is loosened as soon as the grafting is resumed; when the bud is woody, a notch is made at mid-wood, just below the graft, but the graft is not completely weeded until pruning time. As many grafts as necessary can be placed on the same tree, as we have been able to observe on an espalier of Pear trees entrusted to the care of Mr. Fourquet, a skilled horticulturist, who, with the help of approach grafting, succeeded in a very short time in giving a regular shape to Pear trees whose limbs were in complete disorder. If trees are planted which already have the number of branches needed to form them, all branches should be pruned back to about Om, 04 and over an eye arranged so as to extend the limb in the direction required by the shape of the tree. The others should be dismantled, taking care to preserve the joists and twigs. - e hu Fig. 22 - Palmette pear trees. ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ua e Those destined to be grown as palms should be planted 5 or 6 meters apart; the stem should be bent back so as to obtain a few buds on the right and left, from which the first limbs a (fig. 22) should be formed, setting them at around Om, 30 to Om, 35 one above the other. Those on the right should alternate, as far as possible, with those on the left; when trellising, they should be inclined more or less, depending on whether you wish to encourage the development of one or restrict that of the other. In subsequent years, they should be lowered further, but never placed horizontally. In subsequent years, we prune the vertical branch so as to obtain two lateral branches each year, until the tree has reached the full height of the wall. Prune the arms hcab L M ~~ Fig. 23 - Double-stemmed palmette pear tree. to around Om, 15 to Om, 18 in length, depending on their strength and position, but always on an eye placed so as to extend them as directly as possible. If one extension bud is much more vigorous than the other, it should be inclined more than the others when trellised, to restore the balance. Pear trees trained as double-stemmed palms (fig. 23) should be trained according to the same principles as single-stemmed palms. This form is now adopted by the greatest number of Pear growers, who prefer it to all others. M- - The. Stemmed pear trees should be planted 5 or 6 meters apart, and for the first few years, they should be pruned so that the branches that form the framework of the tree are equally spaced. Their development should be monitored to encourage the least vigorous ones, until such time as the trees can be left to their own devices, i.e. about two years later. When Pear trees are very old, or so exhausted that they no longer produce fruit, they can still be put to good use by cutting them down and grafting them into the crown (see article on Grafting, p. 67). More or fewer grafts are placed, depending on the tree's strength; then, when they are well established, the most vigorous are chosen to form the new framework. List of the best pear varieties approved by the Congrès Pomologique. ADÈLE DE SAINT-DENIS (Adèle de Saint-Céras, baronne de Mello). Fertile; average; good; October (1). BEAU PRÉSENT D'ARTOIS (Royal Present of Naples). Very fertile; large; fairly good; early September, (Pick from stock.) BERGAMOTE D'ANGLETERRE (Gansel's bergamot, Bezy de Caissoy by several nurserymen.) Fertile; medium; good; September, October, (Graft on franc.) BERGAMOTE ESPEREN. Very fertile; average; very good; March, May. BEURRÉ BEAUMONT (Beurré de Beaumont, Bezy Waët, Bezy de Saint-Waast, Belmont, Beymont). Fertile; medium; good; January. BEURRÉ CAPIAUMONT (Beurré aurore). Very fertile; average; good; October. (Graft from franç; very well cooked.) BEURRÉ CLAIRGEAU. Very fertile; large or very large; good; November, December. (1) The name in CAPITALS indicates the definitive name; the names in parentheses indicate synonyms that have been destroyed; the word fertile refers to the fertility of the tree; the word medium, to the size of the fruit; the word good, to the quality of the flesh; finally, the month of the year indicates the time of ripening. BEURRÉ D'AMANLIS, BEURRÉ D'AMANLIS PANACHÉ (Wilhelmine, Hubard, Duchesse de Brabant, Poire Delbert ou d'Albert, Poire kessoise). Very fertile; large; September. BEURRÉ D'AREMBERG (Orpheline d'Enghien, Colmar Deschamps, Beurré Deschamps, Beurré des orphelins, Délices des orphelins). Very fertile; average; very good; December, January, (Graft on franc.) BEURRÉ D'ANJOU (Ne plus Meuris, Nec plus Muris). Not very fertile; fairly large; very good; December. BEURRÉ DAVY (Beurré Spence, Beurré de Bourgogne, Beurré Saint-Amour, Belle de Fiandre ou des Flandres, Nouvelle gagnée à Heuze, Beurré des bois, Fondante des bois, Boss père, Poire des bois, Boss pear, Beurré d'Elberg, Beurré Davis, B. Foidart). Fertile; large or very large; good; October. BEURRÉ D'ARDENPONT (Beurré d'Arenberg by mistake, Glou morceau, Goulu morceau de Cambron, Beurré de Kent, Beurré Lombard, Beurré de Cambronne). Fertile; large; very good; January. BEURRÉ DIEL (Beurré magnifique, Beurré incomparable, Beurré royal, Beurré des trois tours, Dry Toren, Melon de Knops, Poire melon, Graciole d'hiver, Fourcroy, Dorothée). Fertile; large; very good; November, December. (Recommended.) BEURRÉ GIFFART. Fertile; medium; very good; late July. BEURRÉ PICQUERY (Urbaniste, Louis Dupont, Beurré Drapiez, Louise d'Orléans, Serrurier d'automne, Vergaline musquée). Not very fertile; average; very good; October, November. BEURRÉ QUETELET (Beurré Dumortier). Very fertile; average; very good; September, October. BEZY DE MONTIGNY (Not Doyenné musqué, commonly called Bezy de Montigny). Very fertile; average; good; September. BON CHRÉTIEN NAPOLÉON (Liard, Médaille, Mabille, Captif de Sainte-Hélène, Charles d'Autriche, Charles X. Beurré Napoléon, Bonaparte, Gloire de l'Empereur, Napoléon d'hiver). Very fertile; fairly large; very good; October, November. BON CHRÉTIEN WILLIAM (Bartlett de Boston, de Lavault). Very fertile; large or very large; very good; September. BONNE D'ÉZÉE (Belle or Bonne des Zées, Belle et Bonne des haies). Very fertile; large; good; September. CALEBASSE MONSTRE (Calebasse Carafon, Calebasse royale, Calebasse monstrueuse du Nord, Van Marum, Triomphe de Hasselt). Very fertile; very large; fairly good; October. (Graft on franc) COLMAR D'ARENBERG (Kartoffel). Very fertile; very large; fairly good; November. DÉLICES D'HARDENPONT D'ANGERS (Racqueingheim Pear-Apple). Very fertile; medium; very good; November, December. DOYENNÉ BOUSSOCH (Beurré de Mérode, Double Philippe, Nouvelle Boussoch). Fertile; large; good: September. DOYENNÉ D'IHVER (Bergamote de la Pentecôte, Seigneur d'hiver, Doyenné de ou du Printemps, Dorothée royale, Poire Fourcroy, Canning d'hiver, Merveille de la nature, Pastorale d'hiver, Poire du Pâtre, Beurré roupé). Very fertile; large; good; January, May. DUCHESSE D'ANGOULÊME (Poire de Pézénas, des Eparonnais, Duchesse). Very fertile; very large; good; October, November. DUCHESSE DE BERRI D'ÉTÉ. Fairly fertile; medium; very good; late August. ÉPINE DU MAS (Beautiful Épine Dumas, Colmar du Lot. Duc de Bordeaux, Épine de Rochechouart, C. de Limoges). Fertile; average; good; November. FIGUE (Figue d'Alençon, Figue d'hiver, Bonissime de la Sarthe). Fertile; fairly large; very good; November, December. FONDANTE DE CHARNEUX (Beurré or Fondante des Charneuses, Duc de Brabant (Van Mons), Miel de Waterloo. Fertile; fairly large; very good; October. (Graft on franc.) FONDANTE DE NOEL (Belle or Bonne de Noël, Belle or Bonne après Noël, Souvenir d'Esperen). Fertile; average: good; December. JALOUSIE DE FONTENAY (Jatousie de Fontenay-Vendée, Belle d'Esquermes). Very fertile; fairly large; very good; September. LOUISE BONNE D'AVRANCHES (Louise de Jersey, Bonne ou Beurré d'Avranches, Bergamote d'Avranches, Bonne de Longueval). Very fertile; fairly large; very good; September. MARIE-LOUISE DELCOURT (Marie-Louise Noya, Marie-Louise Nouvelle, Van Donkelaer, Vandonckelaër, Marie-Louise Van Mons). Very fertile; medium to large size; very good: October, November. NOUVEAU POITEAU (Tombe de l'amateur). Fertile; large; good; November. (Blettit before yellowing.) PASSE-COLMAR (Passe-Colmar gris, Passe-Colmar nouveau, PasseColmar ordinaire). Very fertile; medium; very good; December, February. ROUSSELET D'AOUT (Gros Rousselet d'aoüt, Van Mons). Very fertile; average; very good; August. SAINT-MICHEL-ARCHANGE. Fertile; fairly large; very good; October. SAINT-NICOLAS (Duchesse d'Orléans). Very fertile; medium; very good; September, October. SEIGNEUR (ESPEREN). (Seigneur d'Esperen, Bergamote Fièvée, Bergamote lucrative, Lucrate, Brésilière, Beurré lucratif, Fondante d'automne, Arbre superbe). Very fertile; medium; fairly large; very good; September, October. SOLDIER PLOUGHMAN. Fertile; fairly large; good; October, December. SUZETTE DE BAVAY. Very fertile; small; good; February, April. TRIOMPHE DE JODOIGNE. Fertile; large or very large; fairly good; December. VAN MONS (Van Mons de Léon Leclerc). Fertile; large; very good; walnut. (Graft on franc.) Pear trees especially for espaliers. BERGAMOTE CRASSANE (Cressane, Cressane d'automne, Beurré plat). Fertile; medium; very good; November. (Against a wall and in the sun.) BEURRÉ GRIS (Golden Beurré, Beurré d'Amboise, Red Beurré, Beurré d'Isambart, Beurré du Roi, Isambart le bon, Beurré de Terwerenne). -Fertile; medium and large; very good; September and October. (Against a wall, with eaves; sunrise, sunset; can grow into a tall stem). BEZY DE CHAUMONTEL (Beurré de Chaumontel, Chaumontel, Beurré d'hiver). Quite fertile; medium and large; fairly good; January. (Can also grow as a pyramid.) BON CHRÉTIEN DE RANS (Beurré de Rance, Beurré de Flandre, Beurré Noirchain, Beurré noire chair, Hardenpont de printemps, Beurré de Pentecôte). Fairly fertile; fairly large; fairly good; January, March. (Sur franc, contre un mur; bonne exposition.) DOYENNÉ BLANC (Beurré blanc, par erreur, Saint-Michet, Bonne ente, Doyenné picté, de Neige, du Seigneur, Citron de septembre, etc.). Very-fertile; average; very-good; October. (On franc, against a wall with eaves; north, east, west.) DOYENNÉ GRIS (Doyenné roux, Doyenné crotté, Doyenné galeux, Doyenné jaune, Saint-Michel gris, Neige grise). Very fertile; average; very good; October, November. (On freeboard, against a wall with eaves; light soil; sunrise, sunset, north). SAINT-GERMAIN D'HIVER (Unknown Lafare, Saint-Germain gris, Saint-Germain vert). Fertile; fairly large; very good; November, March. (Against a wall in the sun.) Varieties whose fruit can be cooked. BELLE ANGEVINE (Angora, Bolivar, Comtesse ou Beauté de Terweren, Royale d'Angleterre, Duchesse de Berri d'hiver, Abbé Mon13. gein, Très-grosse de Bruxelles). Fairly fertile; huge; good for late winter. (Pyramid, best espaliered, against a wall facing south.) BON CHRÉTIEN D'HIVER (Poire d'angoisse, Poire de Saint-Martin, Bon Chrétien de Tours). Quite fertile; large; good; March, May. Against a wall with good exposure. CATILLAC (Quenillat, Teton de Venus, Gros-Gillot, Bon Chrétien d'Amiens, Grand Monarque, Monstrueuse des Landes, Chartreuse, Abbé Mongein). Very fertile; very large; good; February, May. (Pyramid, best espaliered and high-stemmed.) AUTUMN'S CHERRY (Cuisse-Dame, by mistake). Very fertile; medium; very soft; October, November. (Better espaliered and high-stemmed.) CURÉ (Monsieur le Curé, de Monsieur, de Clio, Belle de Berri, Belle Andréanne or Adrienne, Bon Papa, Pater Noster, Vicar of Wakefield, Belle Héloïse, Beurré Comice de Toulon, Belle Andréine). Fertile; large; very good; November, January. (Pyramid, espalier, high stem.) LÉON LECLERC. Fertile; large; fairly good; March, May. (Pyramid; better, espaliered; on franc; good exposure.) MARTIN SEC (Rousselet d'hiver). Quite fertile; small; very good; December, January. (Best on high stems.) MESSIRE-JEAN (Mi-Sergent, Messire-Jean gris, Messire-Jean doré, Chaulis). Fairly fertile; average; good; November. (Better in stems.) Pear trees especially for high stems (Orchard trees). BERGAMOTE SYLVANGE (Sylvange pear). Fertile; medium; good; November. BEURRÉ D'ANGLETERRE (Bec d'Oie, Amande, Poire d'Amande, Poire anglaise, Saint-François, Poire des Finnois). Very fertile; average; fairly good; September. BEURRÉ GOUBAULT. Very fertile; average; good; September. (BLANQUET (Blanquet gros, Cramoisin, Cramoisine). Fertile; small; fairly good; July. (Pick from stock.) CITRON DES CARMES (Petite Madeleine, Saint-Jean). Very fertile; small; fairly good; July. (Pick from stock.) COLMAR NÉLIS (Nélis d'hiver, Bonne ou Fondante de Malines). Fertile; medium; good; November and December. DOYENNÉ DE JUILLET (King Jolimont). (Entre-cueillir.) ÉPARGNE (Beau-Présent, Cuisse-Madame, Grosse Madeleine; Saint-Samson, Chopine, Beurré de Paris, Cueillette, de la Table des Princes). Very fertile; medium to large size; good; July, August. (Succeeds in espaliers.) JOSÉPHINE DE MALINES. Not very fertile; medium and small; very good; January. (Successful in espaliers.) ROUSSELET DE REIMS (Petit Rousselet, Rousselet musqué). Fertile; small; good; September. (Very good candied.) SECKLE (Shakespeare, Seckle pear). Fertile; small; good; October. APPLE (Pyrus malus). - All soils, even those that are a little cool, are suitable for the Apple tree; all exposures, except south, are favorable. High-stemmed trees are grafted onto egrin, while dwarf trees are grafted onto doucin and paradis. What we have said about growing and pruning Pear trees can, in all circumstances, be applied equally to Apple trees. They can easily be made to take on any shape. High-stemmed trees are the most durable and the most productive. We recommend pruning during the first few years. If planted in rows, they should be spaced 8 or 10 meters apart, and sometimes more, depending on the nature of the soil. In gardens, we usually plant only dwarf trees, which take up very little space and, if well managed, produce a lot in a very short time. In light, warm soils, apple trees grafted on doucin are preferred, as their roots grow deeper than when grafted on paradis. In the latter case, they don't grow very high, but fruit a lot, and the fruit is generally very beautiful. They should be planted about Im, 65 apart. As almost all their roots are on the surface of the soil, they need only be hoeed. In the article on Pear trees, we advised you to place a dwarf apple tree between each cattail; the most advantageous shape to give them is that of a goblet (fig. 24). In the first year, select five or six buds, spaced as far apart as possible, to form the framework of the tree, and trellis them on a hoop. The following year, the mother branches are pruned according to their strength, and always on an eye placed so as to extend them in the same direction. E B Fig. 24 - Goblet apple tree. When disbudding, we pinch off any buds growing inwards, so as to hollow out the inside of the tree; then we also pinch off any buds growing outwards. A second hoop will be placed to support the extension of the branches, and branches will have to be established to fill the gaps left by the spacing of the mother branches. Trees that grow too vigorously generally need to be pruned longer and much later. The boxwood borders of the kitchen garden can be advantageously replaced by young Paradise Apple trees, which are planted about 2 meters apart, and directed horizontally on a single branch (fig. 25.) Before planting, mark the place of each tree with a stake designed to support the wire to which the Apple trees are attached. These stakes must be driven in so that the wire can be tensioned at Om, 40 or Om, 50 from the ground. Suce fe-agn-poay na ee "s h-c Fig. 25 - Cords of apple trees. After planting, the stem of each tree is carefully bent, held along the wire by means of a few wicker ligatures, then the longer or shorter end is cut off, depending on the tree's vigor. To obtain two branches on each apple tree, simply cut the stem below the wire after planting, and the following year direct one branch to the right and one to the left. In subsequent years, all lateral branches are pruned as close as possible to their insertion, to encourage the development of fruit buds; then the cords of Om, 40 to Om 50, are extended, depending on the vigour of the tree, until they have reached a length that allows them to be grafted onto each other, so as to form a single cord. We recommend forming apple hedges whenever you need to fence in areas where you don't have to worry about the devastation of the fruit; graft trees onto doucin, and plant them about 1 m apart. During the first few years, the inclination of the limbs will be maintained by attaching them to stilts placed far apart. Any main branches that cross will be grafted by approach, and the others will be interlaced. At the time of disbudding, the hedge should be pinched on both sides; then, by pruning and disbudding, we'll try to prevent it from thinning out at the bottom. Varieties. - Api, - Calville white. - Red C. - Fenouillet gris, - Pigeonnet. - Winter pigeon. - Gros Rambour. - Reinette de Hollande. - R. franche, - R. du Canada, - R. d'Angleterre, - R. dorée, - R. grise, - R. de Bretagne, - R. d'Espagne, - R. de Granville. PRUNIER (Prunus). - Plum trees, which have tracing roots, do not require very deep soil; they grow well almost everywhere, provided the soil is neither too dry nor too wet. They are grafted on the Prunier Saint-Jullien or on the Damas Noir; and, although they do well in all forms, they are not planted on any other tree.

Espalier trees are rarely used, except in regions where the fruit does not ripen well, when they need to be placed in a good position. It is much more advantageous to plant high-stemmed trees. If lines are to be formed, they should be placed 6 meters apart. Several species can also be planted to form interior hedges, or in places where you don't have to fear the devastation of fruit. Pruning is not absolutely necessary, except in the first few years, to form the framework of the tree. Forced plum cultivation. - Several varieties, such as Monsieur hâtif, Mirabelle and Reine-Claude, can easily be brought forward to maturity. To do this, in autumn, plant 30 young plum trees in Om pots, raised in the form of small cattails; choose them to be as branched as possible, and after potting, bury the pots in a well exposed spot. The following year, in January, place them in a glass greenhouse, where the temperature should not exceed 12° or 14°. Provide air when the sun is shining, and cover the greenhouse at night with straw mats. Other care consists in watering these trees as required, and syringing them from time to time, after they have defoliated; the fruit will be ripe in the first days of May. The same plum trees can be heated two or three years in a row. Varieties. - Early yellow. - Monsieur, - Royale de Tours. - Reine-Claude. - R.-C. Coëgolden drop. - R. C violet. - R.-C. monstrueuse de Bavay, - Mirabelle grosse et petite, - Impériale blanche. - Surpasse-Monsieur, - Jefferson, - Drap d'or d'Esperen. - Washington. - Gros Damas, - Perdrigon rouge. - de Sainte-Catherine, - de Saint-Mactin, - Pond's Seedling. VINE (Vitis vinifera). - Vines grow in almost any type of soil, and there are few places where they cannot produce fine, good grapes if planted in a favorable, well-governed location. However, the best soil is frank, soft and deep, amended from time to time with well-consumed fertilizers. Before planting a Vine espalier, it is necessary to decide on the form in which it will be trained, taking into account the location: for example, to line the overhangs of an orangery or any other building, the Vine can be trained as a palmette; but in all other circumstances, we recommend training it in the Thomery style (fig. 26), which - --- -Oe=-s U . 2- -C = 2 -- ~~~ - 2- -Con -=- -A = ☙E-I=A - Co- - ~ ---- - ☙ -- ~ . -- - 0 -~ A -dmanees -u - -====== ~~~~~ - ~ - - - ---===-- - 2 -=AT - -A -2 - 0 2- -o---A.=A ~ Eo . -7 - - -2 -----i - e === - DE ~ 0 - - - E o - - - R, - -Mo- - 2u - ommi ~ ~~ = ☙ gu - S - -=----- ~ -26 -mO - = - -P. - Aa ~ - - - "- == 2 6a . -6=- - 8 E I ~~ - Vigne à la Thomery. 4 96 6 mode de plantation offrant tous les avantages désirables. 1. Planting. - The distance to be observed between each Vine depends on the nature of the soil; in shallow or poor soil, Vines should be planted closer together than in good soil, in order to give less extension to each member; finally, in soil where satisfactory vegetation can be expected, plant as follows: every Om, 65, make a trench about Om, 33 wide and Om, 35 deep; start it Im, 33 or Im, 65 from the wall, depending on the length of the marcottes, then continue it up to Om, 65 from the wall. In autumn, we'll take rooted marcottes or crossettes (but then we'd need another year to reach the wall); we'll leave each marcotte a single throw, but with all its eyes, even on the part that has to lie in the ground. Place the marcotte in the trench, so that the end that is to emerge from the ground at Om, 65 from the wall is furnished with good eyes, and, to bring it out of the ground, bend it very carefully so as not to break it. The roots should be placed in loose soil, then covered with good earth, as should the part lying in the trench. A bed of good manure should be placed on top and the trench filled with soil. In February or March, we prune all marcottes to two or three eyes above the ground, taking care to cut only a few millimeters above the eye, and to ensure that the bevel of the cut is always opposite the terminal eye. Choose the most vigorous buds from among those that develop, and remove the others to encourage their growth. Tie each bud to it, taking care to remove false buds as they develop. 2. Pruning. - First year. - In the following autumn, the trenches are continued up to the wall and to the same depth as the previous year; then each vine is laid down and moved close to the wall to the place it is to occupy, which must have been marked in advance. When the time is right, all the vines are pruned to two or three eyes above the ground. The buds are trained on the wall as they develop, taking care to remove the false buds as soon as they reach Om, 12 or Om, 15 in length. If the year is favorable, it is likely that each bud will produce a few bunches, so if there are too many, remove some of them, to avoid putting too much strain on the young vines. Second year. - The top bud is cut back onto the one below it, unless it is too weak, as it is always necessary to prune on the most vigorous; then all the a stems are pruned on an eye placed a few centimetres below the first cordon, which is established at Om, 25 from the ground. If the b-stems, at the height of the second cordon, which should be at Om, 75 from the ground, are furnished with eyes which, by their size, promise vigorous buds, they will be pruned like the a-stems. Stems c, d and e are pruned according to their vigor, and in subsequent years, the cords of stems c are set at Im, 25 from the ground, those of stems d at Im, 75, and finally those of stems e at 2m, 25. In general, to cut back on good eyes, the current year's shoot should be cut back to half its length, unless the first or second eye above is at cordon height, on the part of the stem that will be extended each year until it has reached the height at which it should form a cordon. Three or four buds are left on each stem, chosen from among those with the most bunches; they are trellised as they develop, and, as in other years, the false buds are removed, then all the other buds are pinched off very short, and at the next pruning they are removed from the ground floor of the stem. Third year. - The following year, prune the vertical buds of stems which, in the previous year, had been cut back to the height of the cordon, from their insertion on the second eye, including the heel eye, giving rise to two buds, the two horizontal arms of which are formed; but they should only be brought gradually to the place they should occupy, and it would often be better to wait until autumn than risk breaking them. While they are growing, we tie them up as they develop, and remove the false buds, as well as all the buds in front and behind and those developing on the stems. Fourth year. - The two branches forming the cordon are pruned to about Om, 35 in length, depending on their vigour, but always on the eye most favourably placed to extend the cordon in the same direction. Then, to form the fruiting branches, we prune the buds placed on the upper part of the cordon, observing that they must have a distance between them of Om, 16 to Om, 20. As before, we remove all the false buds, as well as the badly placed buds, and we pinch off those closest to the end, in order to encourage the vegetation of the extension buds, which must be observed until the cordon has reached its full length. According to the spacing indicated for planting, each part of the cordon should be Ima, 60 long on each side. Fifth year. - The fruit-bearing branches are pruned back over two eyes, then each part of the cordon is extended by about Om, 35; and as, having reached this point, the care to be given to the Vine during vegetation is exactly the same as that previously indicated, we believe it unnecessary to deal with this subject at greater length. Sixth year. - For this pruning and those which follow, all fruit-bearing branches should be removed from the bud closest to the cordon, in order to rejuvenate them each year; then the spurs should be pruned on one or two eyes, as experience will indicate; for if, after pruning on one eye, buds are too vigorous, the following year they should be pruned on two eyes. Once each cordon has filled the space assigned to it, all that remains to be done is to maintain the balance of the sap, so as to ensure equal vegetation along the entire length of the cordon. To achieve this, you need to keep an eye on the buds at the end of the cordon (as they are always likely to attract a large quantity of sap), and, by pinching and trellising, force the sap to flow back towards the center. These notions, though succinct, are sufficient to illustrate the series of operations required to manage a trellis, and a careful study of the last prunings will help us to understand the others. 3. Palmette vine. - After bringing the vines to the place they are to occupy, they are all pruned three or four eyes above the ground; as soon as the buds have developed, the most vigorous are chosen, directed vertically, and, to encourage vegetation, the others are pinched off or removed. The following year, all the stems are cut back to about half their length, more or less, depending on their vigour; then, on each one, a bud is selected to extend the stem, then the buds placed on the right and left are pruned, taking care to incline them more or less, depending on whether you want to favour the development of one or restrict that of the other; and, as always, the buds placed in front and behind, as well as the false buds, are removed. In subsequent years, the buds on the right and left are pruned to form a two-eyed spur, then the vertical bud is cut back so as to obtain a few new buds each year, until the wall has been filled to its full height. 4. Vine in counter-spalier. - To form a counter-palier, we recommend following the same procedure as for the Thomery trellis, so as to represent the first two cords a, b (fig. 26). After planting, drive a stake in from a distance, and stretch a wire over it to guide each cordon, then another between the two to attach the buds of the first cordon, and finally a fourth at Om, 28 above the second cordon, to also attach the buds. You can heat part of it each year, as we indicated in Chapter II, concerning the layout of a garden; but you should only start after three or four years of planting, and then you can heat a quarter of the length each year, so that by the time you get to the first part, it will have had three years of renos. 5. Forced cultivation of the Vine. - Towards the end of December, in the course of January and even into February, depending on the maturity of the wood, the Vine is pruned; then, depending on its position, either panels are placed in front of it, if it is planted along a wall, or a small movable tarpaulin (1). If the vine is planted against a wall, a manure stove is placed around it and reworked if necessary, then the panels are put in place. However, much quicker results can be achieved by passing a stove pipe or, better still, a thermosiphon through the tarpaulin. This method of heating is very favorable to vegetation, and requires much less supervision to achieve good results. The temperature is regulated as follows: from the time you start heating until the vines begin to vegetate, you maintain a temperature of 15° to 18° in the cover; then you increase it by 4° to 5°, a temperature you maintain until the bunches are well formed, and during flowering you heat to 25° to 30°, but once the berries are well formed you gradually reduce the heat, so that you only have 18° to 20° until they are perfectly ripe. The temperature is all the easier to regulate, as the tarpaulin contains only a very small amount of air. During the night, we cover the panels with mats that we remove every day; and if, when the sun is shining, the thermometer rises higher than we've indicated, we provide a little air by lifting the panels from the top. To maintain the humidity necessary for (1) This tarpaulin consists of a box Om.80 wide by 1m.33 high at the back and Om.33 at the front. The spacing is maintained by bars dovetailed at the top and bottom, and positioned to support the panels. For grapevines, watering should be more or less frequent, depending on the temperature and the progress of vegetation. The water used for these waterings should be left under the tarpaulin for some time before use, so that it is, as far as possible, at the temperature of the atmosphere into which it is being poured. With the Vines treated in this way, the Grapes will be ripe after four or four and a half months, from the time when heating begins. To make use of the space left in front of the Vine, you can put in a few rows of potted Strawberry plants, which do very well at the same temperature. Varieties. - Madeleine noire, - M. blanche, - Chasselas de Fontainebleau, - Ch. de Bar-sur-Aube, - Ch. gros coulard. - Ch. musqué, - Ch. rose. - Muscat blanc, - M. violet, - M. d'Alexandrie, - Corinthe. - Panse commune, - Gromier du Cantal. - Frankental, - Gherkin, - Blackcurrant grape. CHAPTER XIV Tree Diseases. The diseases that attack trees and cause them to perish are due to two distinct causes: some, such as canker and gum, are the result of internal causes, while others are produced by external causes, and especially by the presence of parasitic plants such as Lichens, Mosses and Fungi. The former, which are often fatal, can be cured by amputating the diseased parts, if the tree is only partially attacked, or if the causes which produced them are temporary and have not destroyed any life seeds; but when the tree is invaded in its entirety and its vegetation is modified to the point where decay is a daily occurrence, the tree languishes and soon dies, without the gardener's help being able to save it. The same is not true of diseases caused by parasitic vegetation on the tree's epidermis; lotions with limewater and careful cleaning with a brush or blunt are usually enough to destroy lichens and mosses, and restore the tree's health. As for Fungi, a more energetic means is needed to destroy them, especially for the vine fungus known as Oïdium Tuckeri; lime water has been recognized as insufficient, and hydrosulfate of lime (1), applied in the proportion of 1 liter to 50 liters of water, is, up to now at least, the simplest and most effective means yet found. Flower of sulphur, applied after basking, is also known to destroy grapevine fungus, but whether flower of sulphur or hydrosulphate of lime is used, the key to success is to apply the treatment in good time, i.e. as soon as the first white traces of the disease are seen, as it spreads very rapidly. If, despite the care taken in the operation, the fungus is not destroyed by the first treatment, it should be repeated a few days later. Flower of sulphur and hydrosulphate of lime can also be used successfully to destroy the powdery mildew which is so damaging to peach trees. (1) To make hydrosulfate of lime, take 250 grams of powdered sulfur and about half a liter of freshly slaked lime; make a paste to which 3 liters of water are added. Place the mixture on the stove in a cast-iron or varnished earthenware pot, boil for about ten minutes and then bottle. Our science is limited to these inadequate notions, and the only means we have to prevent disease are attentive care, shelter in bad weather, and the choice of a good exposure. It is to be regretted that this important part of horticulture is so neglected, and that no one takes it seriously. CHAPTER XV The pleasure garden. For this part of the garden, which is subject to modifications depending on the location and shape of the land, as well as the owner's taste, we cannot go into the same details as for the vegetable garden, which has more fixed rules. Although walls are the best form of enclosure for all gardens, they are not essential for a pleasure garden, which can be enclosed by hedges. Although Hawthorn is considered the most suitable tree for a hedge, the following species can be used, depending on the nature of the terrain: White Acacia (Robinia), Judas tree, Acer campestre and Tataricum, Buplevrum fruticosum, Hornbeam, Cornus sanguinea, Clavalier (Xanthoxylum), Caragana arborea, Celtis occidentalis and australis; Cherry, Cypress, Spruce, Eleagnus angustifolia, Common Ash, Gleditschia Sinensis and triacanthos; Holly, Beech, 1f, Lilac, Lycium Barbarum; Maclura aurantiaca, Mulberry, Hazelnut, Elm, Prunus spinosa, incana, Mahaleb and insititia; Pear, Apple, Rhamnus 14 catharticus, Paliurus, hybridus, sempervirens and Alaternus; Elder, Common Privet, Thuja, Viburnum lantana. When a hedge is established, it should be protected from the outside by a dead hedge or a ditch wide and deep enough to protect it from the teeth of livestock. As fences, hedges are less unpleasant to look at than walls, and they allow you to take advantage of every view, an immense advantage in the composition of a pleasure garden. The study of the site's position should aim to provide everything that can contribute to a pleasing perspective, and to conceal the areas that were intended to be hidden. Nothing is more disgraceful in a pleasure garden than the disproportion between its different parts; paths, lawns, beds, ponds, everything must be in proportion to the extent of the land. The trees planted in the beds should not be scattered at random, but in order of their elevation; they should be spaced far enough apart so that vegetation is not hindered. They should be grouped in such a way as to harmonize foliage and flowers, producing a pleasing impression on the eye. We can't recommend enough the introduction into pleasure gardens, instead of useless trees, of high-stemmed fruit trees, such as cherry, apricot, plum, apple, pear, almond, coignass, etc., preferably placed at the top of the beds, so that they are not suffocated by the vegetation of neighbouring trees, and so that they enjoy the air and sunshine first. Many people have been deterred from planting fruit trees by the fear of seeing part of their harvest devoured by birds, and of having only mediocre-sized fruit. This consideration should not be a reason for exclusion: Moreover, fruit trees are not inferior to ornamental trees, both in the beauty of their foliage and in the brilliant color and abundance of their flowers, and they have, moreover, fruits that are as pleasing to the eye as the bunches of Sorbier, the fruit of Mespilus, of Sureaux, etc. Green trees and all the evergreens that provide a harsh, but reminiscent verdure in mid-winter, should also find a place in a pleasure garden. Cedar of Lebanon, Larch, Spruce Fir, Distichous Cypress, the great trees of our forests, such as Beech and Birch, can be planted in isolation and serve to break the monotony of straight lines. When establishing a pleasure garden, the driveway around it should not be too close to the fence, so as to conceal as much as possible the extent of the property. The main paths should be wider than the others, and regularity should be avoided when laying them out. Longer or shorter curves and sinuosities that conceal the path are essential to remove from a garden of this kind the monotonous symmetry of our old public gardens. Depending on the size of the garden, a few rustic buildings can be erected here and there, and green rooms created, where you can arrive unexpectedly in the course of your walk, and you mustn't neglect to place benches from distance to distance, and especially in places where you've created views. Whatever the size of the property, there should always be a section of lawn in front of the house. The lawn should have graceful contours and harmonize with the surrounding areas. The middle of the lawn should be hollowed out to produce a more natural effect, and the edges should be planted with small clumps, so as to contribute to the overall effect without obscuring the view. In France, English Rye-grass is most often used to establish a lawn, with a small amount of Dutch White Clover added; In England, however, Hye-grass has long since been abandoned in favor of Lawn's grass, a mixture of creeping bentgrass, meadow cretelle, meadow bromegrass, sheep's fescue, creeping fescue, sweet vernal grass, meadow grass, English Rye-grass, creeping bentgrass and white clover. Mixed in the right proportions, these plants produce just as good an effect as Rye-grass, and have the advantage of lasting much longer. Although these mixtures are suitable for almost all soils, in cooler soils, Ovine and Creeping Fescues should be replaced by Meadow Fescue, which rises a little higher, it's true, but is more suited than the other species to wet soils. In dry soils, instead of English Ryegrass, you can also sow Italian Ryegrass, which succeeds in the worst conditions. Under tall trees, it's best to sow Paturin des bois, alone or with a little Agrostis tracante, Fétuque ovine, Fétuque hétérophylle and Fétuque des prés, grasses that also do well in the shade. In large gardens, where lawns are often very extensive, you can, after consulting the nature of the terrain, replace the turf with a genuine natural meadow whose hay can be fed to livestock; but you must then choose plants that are suited to the nature of the soil for which they are intended. The best time to sow a lawn is September in light soils, or March in heavy or damp soils; but whatever the time, before sowing, the ground must be well prepared, which means breaking up the clods of earth and removing all roots and stones; then, depending on the nature of the soil, plough more or less deeply. If an old lawn is destroyed to sow a new one, it must be turned over with a spade, so that it is buried to a depth of at least Om, 35; after ploughing, the soil must be harrowed with a fork, then the stones and clods on the surface removed with a rake, so that the soil is perfectly even. If the poor quality of the soil makes it necessary to add fertilizers, they should only be used if they are well consumed. Sowing should only be done when the weather is fine, because of the operations that must follow. The seeds are broadcast, and immediately after sowing, lightly harrowed with a fork; then rolled or, failing that, trodden down with the feet, if the area is not too large; then covered with a very light layer of earth or very fine loam. To keep a lawn in good condition for a long time, it must be cut often. The first cut should be made at the beginning of May, and the last at the end of October or the beginning of November. It's impossible to say how many cuts will have to be made between these two periods, as this will depend on the state of humidity 14. in which they are kept. During the summer drought, watering should be very frequent, and should be done in the morning or evening, using apple watering cans. After each cut, rake the soil to remove anything that might cause rot, and then roll it. Every year, after the last cut, remove the moss with the rake, and spread a light layer of potting soil throughout. Since sowing grass on embankments or benches can only be done with great difficulty, it's best to use sods that have been lifted from meadows or roadsides; fit them next to each other, fix those in a vertical position with small wooden pins, then press them down lightly with a small bat. The best time to do this is usually in March. For small lawns, instead of sowing grasses, you can plant remontant Roses, whose branches are fixed to the ground after spreading them out in all directions. When the ground is completely covered, it's impossible to see anything more ravishing than a lawn of Roses, especially when the colors have been well varied in the planting. Shrubs that flower as long as possible should be massed on the edges of the lawn, and a few beautiful green trees, such as Cedar of Lebanon, Cedar Deodora, Abies Pinsapo, Cryptomeria Japonica, Pinus Sabiniana, Pinus Lambertiana, Taxodium sempervirens, etc., can be thrown in at random. Weeping Willow, Weeping Ash, Purple Beech, variegated Negundo, etc., and, among the lower plants, Tree Peonies, Gynerium argenteum, Bambusa edulis et aurea, Andropogon formosum, Saccharum Maddeni, Rheum, Gunnera scabra, Heracleum, Caladium and Wigandia, also produce a beautiful effect on lawns. The current widespread practice of establishing beds of one or more species of ornamental plants in the pleasure garden is in very good taste, in that it enables the full ornamental value of a host of plants to be appreciated, which only produce their full effect when they occur in groups. Amateurs unfamiliar with the resources offered by horticulture for this kind of decoration are often at a loss when it comes to choosing which plants of each season to use to form beds. In this respect, here are a few indications to help guide them: First decoration. Dutch crocuses, Dutch hyacinths, single-flowered tulips, double-flowered tulips, single-flowered anemones, auriculas, garden primroses, spring hepatica, large-flowered pansies, Aubrietia deltoidea, Cynoglosse omphalode, Corbeille d'or, Thlaspi vivace, Ellébore rose de Noël, Héliotrope d'hiver, Tussilago suaveo'ens, Saxifrage de Sibérie, Doronicum Caucasicum, Silene pendula, Nemophila, Phlox verna, Giroflées jaunes de diverses nuances, l'ieds-d'alouette; Spring Tourette, Myosotis alpestris, Double-flowered Poppies, Annual Lunaria, Dielytra spectabilis and Iris Germanica. This list includes plants of varying heights, from dwarf Dutch Crocus to larkspur and medium-sized poppies, so there's enough to form clumps of any size, depending on the size and location of the garden they're to form part of. To give just one example of what can be done with these plants, a bed of Spring Tourettes, Siberian Saxifrages and Doroniques produces a charming effect in spring. Second trim. N? 1: Mexican Ageratum with a double row of yellow Calceolaria and red Verbena. These three plants, arranged in concentric circles of amethyst-blue, bright yellow and deep red, produce a very nice effect; the other lists are calculated with the same aim of associating the shapes and colors that best match each other, and most pleasingly flatter the eye. 2. Yellow Calceolaria with a row of blue-flowered Lobelia Erinus. 3. Dwarf Nasturtiums with a row of blue Verbena. 4. White-flowered Chrysanthemums with a row of red Geranium or red Verbena. 5. Cuphea ignea with a row of Cerastium tomentosum. 6. Fuschia with a row of variegated Geranium or white Verbena. 7. Red Geranium with a double row of white Petunia and yellow Calceolaria. 8. Red Geranium with a double row of white Petunia and Ageratum Mexicanum. 9. Red or pink Geranium with a row of white Verbena. 10. Variegated Geranium with a row of blue or red Verbena. 11. Lantana Camara with a row of Lantana delicatissima. 12. variegated mint with a row of red Verbena. 13. Perilla Nankinensis with a row of variegated Geranium or white Verbena. 14. Petunia roses with a double row of white-flowered Chrysanthemums and red Geranium. 15. Salvia fulgens with a row of Ageratum Mexicanium. 16. Trianon Marigold with a double row of white Petunia and red Geranium. 17. Tagetes lucida or yellow Calceolaria with a double row of red Geranium and Nierembergia gracilis. 18. Red verbenas with a double row of Nierembergia gracilis and blue-flowered Lobelia Erinus. 19. White verbenas with one row of blue-flowered Lobelia Erinus. 20. Peruvian heliotrope. 21. Coleus Werschaffelti with one row of Cineraria maritima or Centaurea candidissima. 22. Canna discolor. 23. Caladium esculentum. 24. Wigandia Caracasana. 25. Various dahlias. In large gardens, you can also form groups of annuals and sow them immediately in place to avoid cultivation costs. By successively replacing the plants that make up the second group with Chinese Chrysanthemums, we can have, by adopting the rotation we propose, flowerbeds filled with flowers all year round. As long descriptions only serve to enlarge a book, we felt it necessary to follow a different plan in our book from that adopted in other treatises on cultivation: we preferred to group plants according to the place they should occupy in a garden, indicating briefly, for each of them, the time of sowing, that of flowering, the color of the flower and the height of the plant. However, we have devoted a special article to plants whose cultivation requires particular care. SECTION I. - Shrubs for borders. BOXWOOD-A BORDERS. -To establish a border, take clumps of Boxwood and divide them into as many splinters as possible. In autumn or spring, plant these splinters in a thin, regular line, taking care to leave only the tips of the branches above ground. The following year, in September or February, i.e. before or after sprouting, the box tree is pruned back with large scissors, an operation that must be carried out every year; otherwise, it will overgrow. CLIMBING IVY. - For planting under tall trees, where it's always so difficult to have greenery, there's nothing better than climbing ivy or one of its varieties. All can be grown as borders; but the variety known as Irish Ivy is more suitable than the others, because of the beauty of its foliage. To establish a border, in autumn or spring, plant young ivy grown in pots or, failing that, rooted marcottes, which are arranged to line the ground. To facilitate root development along the entire length of the branches, fix them to the ground using small wooden plugs similar to those used for marcotting Carnations. Once recovery is assured, all care consists in cutting off or fixing to the ground all young shoots, so as to always have regular borders. ROSES. - Pompoms and varieties known as Miss Lawrence Roses, with white, pink or crimson flowers, can be grown in borders. True miniatures, the latter grow to no more than Om, 12 to Om, 15. More vigorous, Pump Roses should be preferred; as they are more resistant to the disadvantages of all kinds that border plants have to put up with. 2. Clump-forming perennials. ALYSSE CORBEILLE-D'OR, THLASPI jaune (Alyssum saxatile) - Yellow flowers in April and May; propagation from spring flushes or from seed sown immediately after maturity. AUBRIÈTIE deltoïde (Aubrietia deltoidea), AlySSe deltoïde (Alyssum deltoideum). - Numerous light-blue flowers in spring and summer. Aubriéties form large, low clumps that are replanted every two or three years. ASPERULE odorante (Asperula odorata). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 30; fragrant white flowers, May; propagated by separation. ASTER Reversii. - In September and October, extremely abundant, meaty white flowers. This charming little plant can be propagated by separating clumps, like all other Asters. BERMUDIAN with pelite flowers (Sisyrinchium Bermudiana). - Height, Om, 18 to Om, 20; white flowers, in June and July; multiplication by seed or by the shattering of plants. BRUNELLE à grandes fleurs (Brunella grandiflora). - Blue, purple, pink or white flowers in July; propagates from seed, sown in March, or from splinters in autumn. CAMPANULA gazonnante (Campanula cespitosa). - All summer long, small but numerous blue or white flowers. Campanula Carrathica and Bocconi can also be grown in borders. All multiply by separating clumps. cottony cedar, ARGENTINA (Cerasttum tomentosum). - In May and June, white flowers; multiplication by seed or traces. SPRING CYNOGLOSS (Cynoglossum Omphalodes). Spring OMPHALODE (O. verna). - Charming little plant that can be placed in the shade. Blue flowers in March and April. Trace propagation. Caucasian DORONIC (Doronicum Caucasicum). - Yellow flowers from March to May; offshoot multiplication in autumn. GENTIANE acaule (Gentiana acaulis). - Very beautiful blue flowers in April and May; multiplication by the bursting of the stems. GRAMINES. - English Rye-gross is one of the most frequently used grasses for sowing borders. However, Agrostis tracante, Sheep's Fescue and Yellow Fescue are just as suitable for this purpose as English Rye-grass. JAPANESE HEMEROCALL (Hemerocallis Japonica, Funkia subcordata). - In August, white, very fragrant flowers. Varieties with blue flowers. Multiplication by separation. Spring hepatica (Anemone hopatica). - From February to March, white, pink or blue flowers, single or double, depending on variety; multiplication by splitting in autumn. Inis d'Allemagne (Iris Germanica). - See article on growing this plant. LIPPIA REPENS. A perennial suitable for lawns on slopes. Hardy, it produces numerous lilac flowers from June to October. Multiplies in any season. LYCHNIDE laciniée (Lychnis flos cuculi). - From June to September, red or white flowers, similar to small carnations. Double-flowered varieties. Multiplication by separating clumps in February. ŒILLET Mignardise (Dianthus moschatus, D. plumarius). - Red, white or pink flowers, single or double, in May and June; multiplication in August by marcottes, without incision. OPHIOPOGON du Japon, Turquoise grass. Grassy plant, suitable for edging dry soils. Multiplies in autumn or spring. Daisy (Bellis perennis). - Perennial; double, white, pink, red or variegated flowers; replant every year after flowering. 15 PHLOX subulata (Phlox subulata). - Pink flowers, marked with a purple star, from April to May; multiply by dividing clumps. PHLOX with narrow leaves (P. setacea). - Pink or purple flowers, spotted with red, in June or July. Varieties with white flowers; same propagation. BEARS EAR (Primula auricula). - Flowers in April and May; very numerous varieties obtained by sowing in February and March; seeds need little covering. Garden Primrose (P. veris). - In March; single or double flowers of all shades; multiplication from splinters, in autumn, or from seeds sown immediately after maturity. PYRETHRUM INODORUM. - In June and July, very attractive double white flowers; propagation by cuttings or splinters. Mountain SABLINE (Arenaria montana). - Height, Om, 20; in June, white flowers; propagation by traces. Sabline grandiflora (A. grandiflora). - Height, Om, 05 or Om, 06; white flowers; same propagation. SALVIA tricolor, a charming variety of Salvia officinalis, with red and yellow variegated leaves. Easy to propagate by cuttings. SAXIFRAGE ombreuse (Saxifraga umbrosa). - White flowers in April and May; all are propagated by separation in autumn or February. SAXIFRAGE mousseuse, Turkish grass (S. hypnoides). - White flowers in May. Geranioid SAXIFAGE (geranioides). - White flowers in May. SEDUM. - All Sedums can be grown in borders; they are hardy and look good, especially Pul. chellum. Sedum acre and cruciatum are also suitable for this purpose. Statice Armeria, common ARMERIA (Armeria vulgaris). - In May, June and July, red, white or lilac flowers. Cutting off the flowers as soon as they have faded gives a second bloom, often just as abundant as the first. Statice bellidifolia can also be grown in borders. Like Statice Armeria, it can be propagated by planting splinters in autumn or spring. THLASPI perennial (Iberis semperflorens.) White flowers in April and May; multiplication in summer by cuttings or marcottes. SPRING TURTLE (Turritis verna,) SPRING ARABETT (Arabis verna). - White flowers in March and April; trace propagation in autumn. fragrant violets (Viola odorata). - Dark blue, white or pink flowers, from February to April; multiplication by seed or, better still, from fragments of plants, in autumn. VITTADINIA triloba. - All summer long, single, white, pinkish flowers, exactly like small daisies; propagation by cuttings, taken in August and September, and overwintered in a greenhouse. 3. Bulbous plants for borders. Golden Am (Allium moly). - Attractive yellow flowers in June; white-flowered variety; clove propagation. AMARYLLIS jaune (Amaryllis lutea) - Yellow flowers in September. CROCUS, Spring saffron (Crocus vernus). - In February and March, yellow, blue or white flowers, or white with purple stripes, depending on the variety, which are very numerous; plant in autumn, to raise every three years. Common GLAILE (Gladiolus communis). - White or red flowers from May to June; plant in autumn. POET'S NARCISSUS (Narcissus poetieus). - In May, white flowers with purple crown; sweet fragrance: double-flowered varieties. Plant in October. Meadow Narcissus (N. Pseudo-Narcissus). - Yellow, double flowers in April; same propagation. OXALIDE de Deppe (Oxalis Deppei). - Red flowers, all summer; plant in spring, to be raised each year in autumn. 4. Annual plants that can be propagated from seed. CAMPANULE miroir-de-Vénus (Campanula speculum), SpECULAIRE miroir-de-Vénus (Specularia speculum) -Violet or white flowers in May, June and July; sow in place in September or spring. COLLINSIA de deux couleurs (Collinsia bicolor). - Lilac or white flowers all summer; sow outdoors in September or spring. Varieties. - Graudiflora, - Multicolor. COLLOMIA scarlet (Collomia coccinea). - Height, Om, 25; scarlet-red flowers all summer; sow outdoors in September or spring. CRÉPIS rose (Creris rubra) BARKHAUSIErouge (Barkhausia rubra). - Height, Om. 25. All summer, pink or white flowers; sow in place or in nurseries, for transplanting in autumn or spring. FLAX LEAF CYNOGLOSS (Cynoglossum linifolium). - Biennial; height, Om, 50, white flowers, June to August; sow in place, September or spring. KAULFUSSIE amelloïde, CHARIEIS à feuilles variées (Charieis heterophylla). - Height, Om, 20; blue flowers all summer; sow in place in spring. JULIENNE de Mahon, GIROFLÉE de Mahon (Cheirantus maritimus, Malcolmia maritima). - Flowers first red, then purple, in June and July; white-flowered variety; sow outdoors in autumn or spring. LEPTOSIPHON androsaceus (Leptosiphon androsaceus), GILIE androsacea (Gilia androsacea). - Height, Om, 25; blue or white flowers; all summer, sow in place in September or spring. Dense-flowered LEPTOSIPHON (L. densiflorus), Dense-flowered GIlie (Gilia densiflora). - Height, Om, 30 to Om, 35; all summer, light pink flowers fading to light blue; same propagation. LEPTOSIPHON AUREUS. - Round tuft, similar to Statice armeria. Attractive golden-yellow flowers all summer long; seed multiplication, sown in September in pots and overwintered under glass. ORCHIS-flowered LINAIRE (Linaria bipartita). - Height, Om, 45; bluish-purple flowers in summer; sow in September or spring. LOBELIE Erine (Lobelia Erinus). - Charming little plant with blue, white or pink flowers, forming large flower-covered clumps that follow one another throughout the summer. Lobelia are sown in March and April, in beds, or better still in September; the plant is then transplanted into pots and overwintered in a frame, Nemesia floribunda. - Height, Om, 40, lilac, yellow and white flowers all summer; sow in place in September or spring. Remarkable Nemophila (Nemophila insignis). - Height, Om, 33; beautiful blue flowers all summer; sow in place in September or spring. Spotted Nemophila (N. maculata). - White flowers, widely spotted with blue; same cultivation. Dwarf larkspur (Delphinium Ajacis). - Height, Om 35 to Om, 40. In May, June and July, double flowers in a wide range of colors; single-flowered plants should always be removed; sow in place in autumn or in February and March. REINE-MARGUERITE hâtive (Aster Sinensis, Callistephus hortensis). - Height, Om, 33; in bloom from July to September; sow from March to June in nurseries, then plant out. Creeping SANVITALIA (Sanvitalia procumbens). - Sow in beds in March. Once transplanted, this plant spreads naturally over the soil and produces an abundance of charming single or double yellow flowers with brown discs. SAPONAIRE de Calabre (Saponaria Calabrica). - All summer long, pink or white flowers, smaller than those of the Silenas, with which they are closely related. Propagate from seed, sown in September in a nursery, or in March and April. SCHIZANTE étalé (Shizanthus porrigens). - Height, Om, 30, lilac and yellow flowers, punctuated with brown, all summer; sow in spring, in the field or in a nursery, to be later transplanted. SILENE with pink flowers (Silene bipartita). - Height, Om 22 to Om 28; pink flowers, in June and July; sow in September, in nursery, or in spring, immediately in place. SECTION II. - Plants for beds and flowerbeds. Annuals and biennials. ABRONIA UMBELLATA, beautiful plant with lilac-pink flowers, somewhat related to valerian. Multiplication from seed, sown in March on a bed. ACROCLINIUM ROSEUM, a new species of immortelle, with satiny-pink flowers, larger than those of Rhodanthe Manglesii. Multiplication from seed, sown on a bed in February and March. ADONIDE d'été (Adonis œstivalis). - Om 30 stems; dark red flowers in June and July; sow in place in autumn or spring. AGERATUM MEXICANUM. - Biennial plant with blue flowers in a terminal corymb. Planted in May, Ageratum Mexicanum produces flowers for most of the year; propagate from seed or cuttings in August and September, and overwinter indoors. This charming plant is particularly suitable for bedding or as a wide border around Canna. AGERATUM CORULEUM. - Also an annual with blue flowers, it can be sown in beds in March, or in the ground in April; it has the same uses as Ageratum Mexicanum. ALYSSUM MARITIMUM (Koniga maritima). - Clump of Om, 20 to Om, 30, covered with small, fragrant white flowers in umbels, from May to November. Sow in March and April, immediately in place; suitable for forming clumps. AMARANTE tail-de-renard (Amarantus caudatus). - Stems from Om, 65 to I meter. Long clusters of red and yellow flowers all summer. Sow indoors in March or outdoors in April. AMARANTE mélancolique (A, melancholicus). - Angular stems from Om, 75 to l meters, blood-red glabrous leaves, rather insignificant light-green flowers; same cultivation. The variety cultivated under the name Amarantus melancholicus ruber is colored with a brighter hue, and is lower than the previous one. AMARANTUS BICOLOR and AMARANTUS TRICOLOR are two plants remarkable for the rich coloring of their leaves; they are considered varieties of Amarantus melancholicus and are grown in the same way. AMARANTE with red leaves (A. sanguineus). - Stem Om 90, washed or streaked with purple, blood-red leaves, purpurine flowers in elongated spikes; same cultivation as the preceding varieties. ANAGALLIS à grandes fleurs (Anagallis grandiftora). - Blue, pink or red flowers all summer and autumn. Anagallis are sown in spring, on a bed, or in September; they are then transplanted into pots and overwintered under a frame. Grown as a greenhouse plant, Anagallis can be kept for several years. Large-flowered ARGEMONE (Argemone grandiflora). - Height, Om, 60 to 1 m; white flowers all summer; sow in place in spring. Garden BALSAMINE (Balsamina hortensis), IMPATIENT BALSAMINE (Impatiens Balsamina). - Succulent stems, about Om, 50; from July to October, white, yellowish, red, pink, violet, flax-gray, single-colored or dotted flowers. We grow a large-flowered, very double race called Camellia, and another dwarf race with equally double and varied flowers: those called Balsamine à rameaug are much taller than the others. They can be sown in the garden in March, or in the open ground in April. Balsamines don't require any special care, but as they vegetate very vigorously in good soil, you need to pinch off the ends of the stems when you see that they exceed ordinary proportions, in order to obtain beautiful flowers. Glandular BALSAMINE (I. glanduligera). - Stems from 1 to 2 meters long; purplish-blue flowers in July; sow on a bed in spring, or better still, in the open ground, as soon as the seeds have ripened. GOLDEN BARTON (Bartonia aurea). - Twiggy stems, approx. Om, 60; beautiful yellow flowers all summer; sow in place in spring. BELLE-DE-JOUR, tricolor LISERON (Convolvulus tricolor). - Height, Om, 33; blue, white or variegated flowers from June to September; sow outdoors in April. BELLE-DE-NUIT FAUX JALAP (Mirabilis Jalappa, Nyctago hortensis). - Om.50 stems; red, white, yellow or variegated flowers from July to September. Propagates from seed, sown in April, or from roots, which are kept like Dahlias. BRACHYCOME à feuille d'ibéris (Brachycome iberidifolia). - Height, Om, 25; all summer, blue or white flowers; 15. sow in March and April, or better in September, in pots, which are wintered under frame. HIGH BROUAILE (Browallia elata). - Height, Om, 65; blue flowers from July to September; sow in spring. Drop-stemmed BROUAIL (B. demissa). - Twiggy stems from Om, 33; bluish-purple flowers, July to September; same cultivation CACALIE à feuilles hastées (Cacalia sagittata), EMILIE à feuilles hastées (Emilia sagittata). - Height, Om, 40; orange-red flowers from July to September; sow in March, on a bed, or in the field in April. Chilean chard (Beta cycla, Var, chiliensis) - Rightly considered an excellent vegetable plant, Chilean chard is nonetheless a beautiful ornamental that can be included in the variegated mix. In either case, however, make sure that each plant is spaced 1 m apart in all directions. CALANDRINE umbellate (Calandrinia umbellata). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 25; lovely pink-purple flowers, all summer; sow in spring. - Calandrinia Lindleyana and speciosa can be grown in the same way. CAMPANULE à grosses fleurs, VioleTre marine (Campanula medium). - Biennial; stem Om, 65; from June to August, blue, white, pink, single or double flowers; sow in June. CAmpaNUle pyramidale (C. pyramidalis). - Biennial; height, 1.30 to 1.60 m; blue or white flowers, July to September; sow immediately when ripe. CAPUCINA grande (Tropœolum majus). - Previously grown as a climber, the yellow-flowered and brown-flowered Nasturtium grande is ideal for bedding in large gardens. For this purpose, nasturtiums are sown in clumps in spring, and the stems are left to creep along the ground. Dwarf CAPUCIN (T. minus). - The varieties of this plant known as Tom-Pouce nasturtiums are much more suitable for bedding than the tall nasturtium. They are grown in exactly the same way. CENTRANTHUS MACROSIPHON. - An annual valerian with attractive red flowers, sown in September in the garden or in nurseries. It can also be sown in spring. Blooms in May and then again until July. COCK'S CROWN (Celosia cristata). - From June to September, red, violet or yellow flowers, depending on the variety; sow on a bed in spring; prick out in a nursery on a bed, and put back in the ground only in June and July. Celosia species. - Height from Om, 40 to Om, 50, from July to October; pink, red or yellow flowers in long spikes. Propagates from seed, sown in bed in February and March. Celosia is a truly remarkable plant for the abundance and freshness of its flowers. fragrant centaury, yellow beard (centaurea amberboi). - Stems from Om, 40 to Om, 50; large, yellow flowers from July to October; sow in spring. American CENTAURY (C. Americana). - Twiggy stems, 1 metre long; lilac-blue flowers, August and September; same cultivation as above, CENTAURÉE musquée, BARBeAu musqué (C. moschata). - Stems from Om, 40; purplish-white flowers, August and September; same cultivation. CENTAURÉE bluet, BARBEAU (C. cyanus). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 m; variety of all colors, except yellow; blooms in June and August; sow in place, in autumn or spring. Centaurea depressa is a more beautiful species, which can be grown in the same way. MANY-FLOORED CHENOSTOMA (Chenostoma polyanthum). - Pink, inconspicuous flowers all summer. Chenostoma are sown in beds in March and April, and transplanted in rows along the edges of flowerbeds. Ornamental leaf cabbage (Brassica oleracea var.). - Green curly cabbage, red curly cabbage, red variegated cabbage, lilac variegated cabbage, laciniate cabbage and palmetto can be considered true ornamental plants, thanks to the beauty of their leaves. They are sown in spring, like all other cabbages; and, as they are biennial, they can be sown only every two years. Garden CHRYSANTHEMUM (Chrysanthemum coronarium). - Stems from Om, 65; white or yellow flowers from July to September; sow in spring. CHRYSANTHÈME à carène (C. carinatum) Stems approx. Om, 40; yellow flowers with brown disc; sow in spring. Chrysanthemum Burridgeanum and Dunnetti are two fine varieties of Chrysanthemum carinatum, which are grown in exactly the same way. CLARKIA with cut petals (Clarkia pulchella). - Height, Om, 40. pink-red or white flowers all summer; sow in place in September or spring. Varieties. - Marginata, - Pulcherrima, - Elegans. CLÉOME piquante (Cleome pungens) - Height: 1 m; purplish flowers; sow in a bed in spring and prick out in the garden. COQUELICOT (Papaver rhœas). - Less tall than the poppy, in June and July the poppy produces very double, ponceau-colored flowers, single-colored or edged with red, white or pink. Sow in the field in autumn or spring. COQUELOURDE rose du ciel (Lychnis cœli rosa, Viscaria cœli rosa). - Height, Om, 33; lovely pink flowers in July; sow in place in spring. COQUELOURDE des jardins, LYcunIs des jardins (L. coronaria). - Biennial; stem Om, 50; red, purple or white flowers from June to September; sow in June. CORÉOPSIS élégant, C. des teinturiers (Corcopsis tinctoria); Calliopside des teinturiers (Calliopsis tinctoria). - Height, Om, 65; yellow flowers, with brown disk, from June to October; sow in autumn or spring, without almost covering the seeds; often produces varieties. CORÉOPSIS de Drummond, CALLIOpSIS de Drummond (C. Drummondi). - Lower height; larger flowers; sow in spring. CosMos bipinné (Cosmos bipinnatus). - Stems from Om, 50 to I mêtre; purplish-red flowers in autumn; sow in beds in spring. Cosmos atrosanquineus, recently introduced under the name Bidens atrosanguinea, can be grown in the same way. CUPHEA silenoides. - All summer and autumn, tubular, purple flowers, shaded brown. SILVER CYNOGLOSS (Cynoglossum cheirifolium). -Biennial; stem Om, 50; red flowers in June and July; sow in place in autumn. DATURA FASTUOSA (Stramonium fastuosum). - 1.30 m stem; white or violet flowers all summer and autumn; sow in bed in April. DATURA TUBERIANA. - Variety of the preceding one, remarkable for the widely developed proportions of its semi-double lilac-white flowers. Same cultivation. DIGITALE purpurea. - Biennial; 1-meter stem; purple or white flowers in July and August; sow in June. Moldavian DRACOCEPHALE (Dracocephatum Moldavicum). -Stems from Om, 65; purplish or white flowers in July; sow in place in spring. Fragrant ENOTHERA (ŒEnothera suaveolens). - Stems 1 m tall; very long-tubed, yellow flowers in July and August. LONGFLOWER (OE. longiflora). - Height, I mêtre; very long-tubed, yellow flowers in July and August. DANDELION LEAF (Œ, taraxacifolia). - Height, Om, 40; carne-white flowers, all summer. Lindley's NURSERIES (ŒE. Lindleyana). - Height, Om, 40 to Om, 50; soft pink flowers, with a broad purple spot on each petal, July to October. ENOTHÈRE agréable (ŒF. amœna). - Height, Om, 40 to Om, 50; lovely pink flowers in July and August. PURPLE ENOTHERY (Œ), purpurea). - Height, Om, 50; purple flowers in July. - All Enotheres multiply from seed sown in the field in spring. Petrowski's ERYSIMUM (Erysimum Petrowskianum). - Height, Om, 40 to Om, 50. All summer, saffron-yellow flowers, slightly fragrant; sow in autumn or spring. Elegant EUCHARIDIUM (Eucharidium elegans). - All summer, dark red flowers, cut like those of Clarkia; sow in spring or September; then transplant into pots and overwinter indoors. California ESCHOLTZIA (Escholtzia Californica). - Biennial; height, Om, 40 to Om, 50; saffron-yellow or white flowers, all summer; sow in spring. EUTOCA viscida. - Stems from Om, 80; blue flowers, all summer; sow in spring. ICE FICOID (Mesembryanthemum cristallinum). - This plant is loaded with so many small, transparent vesicles full of water that, especially in sunlight, it appears to be covered in frost. Sow in a bed in April and prick out before planting in the ground. The Tricolor Ficoid (M. tricolor) and the Yellow-flowered Ficoid (M. pomeridianum) are two charming plants that can be grown in the same way. GAURA biennis. - Biennial; stems of Im, 60, in July, and successively until November, pink flowers fading to white; multiplication by cuttings or, better still, seeds, sown in June or March, on a bed. Lindheimer's Gaura is a new species, grown in the same way. GILIE à fleurs en tête (Gilia capitata). - Height, Om, 65; all summer, blue or white flowers, Sow in place, in spring. Gilia tricolor and its white- and pink-flowered varieties are grown in the same way. YELLOW GIROFLY (Cheiranthus Cheiri). - Biennial; fragrant, yellow flowers in spring; sow from March to June; double-flowered varieties that can be propagated from cuttings as soon as the flowers have faded. GIROFLÉE des jardins ou GROSSE ESPÈCE (C. incanus). - Biennial; red, white, pink or violet flowers, from May to October; sow in May and June; prick out in the nursery, and in September lift into pots, which are then placed in the greenhouse during the frosts. Greek wallflower, KIRIs (C. grecus). - Greek wallflowers and their varieties can be grown in the same way as quarantine wallflowers. quarantine wallflower (C. annuus). - The main varieties are: red, white, pink and violet. Sow indoors in February and March, outdoors in May and June, and in August in pots, which are then overwintered in frames. AMARANTOID GOMPHRENE (Gomphrena globosa). - Stems from Om, 35; red or white flowers all summer. Sow indoors in spring; grows with crested Amaranthus. GYPSOPHILE élégante (Gypsophila elegans). - Height, Om, 40; white flowers all summer; sow in spring. HIBISCUS TRIONUM (Ketmie vesiculeuse) Height, Om, 50, June to September; numerous, sulfur-yellow flowers with brown tabs. Sow outdoors in spring. HIBISCUS APRICANUS (African Ketmia). - Flowers of same color, but much larger. Same culture: HELIANTHUS ARGOPHYLLUS. - Annual sun variety covered with a thick wool that gives it a silvery appearance; in July and August, yellow flowers with a brown disk. Multiplication from seed, sown in place in April. HUMEA élégant (Humea elegans, Calomeria amarantoïdes). - Biennial; height, 1 m; from June to September, very attractive copper-red flowers in panicles. Sow in June and July, in pots and overwinter indoors. HUGÊLIE bleue (Hugelia cœrulea, Didiscus cœruleus, Trachymene cœrulea). - Height, Om,65; blue flowers in August and September. Sow in a bed in spring, or in the open ground in September; then transplant into pots and overwinter in a frame. IMMORTELLE annuelle (Yeranthemum annum). - Stems of Om, 65; from July to October, violet, white or purple flowers, similar to small single daisies. Sow in place in autumn or spring. IMMORTELLE à bractées (Helichrysum bracteatum). - Height, 1 meter; blooms all summer and part of autumn, with yellow or white flowers; sow in a bed, in spring or September; then plant out under a frame to overwinter. Large-flowered IMMORTELLE (Helichrysum macranthum). - Scarlet-red or pink flowers. Mềme cultivation. IPOMOPSIS élégant, Gilie ponctuée (Ipomopsis elegans, Cantua coronopifolia, Gilia coronopifelia). - Height, 1 to 1.30 meters; scarlet or yellow flowers all summer. Ipomopsis is sown in June and autumn; the plant is transplanted into pots and overwintered in a greenhouse. LARGE-FLOWERED LAVATER (Lavatera trimestris). - Height, Om, 65; pink or white flowers from July to September; sow in place in spring. LARGE-FLOWERED LINSEED (Linum grandiflorum). - Beautiful, amaranth-red flowers all summer long. Linum grandiflorum is sown immediately in April and May. Grown in good vegetable garden soil, Linum grandiflorum vegetates much more vigorously than in heather soil, which we thought would be more suitable. RED LOTIER (Tetragonolobus purpureus). - Stems from Om, 33; dark red flowers in June or July; sow in beds in February and March, or in open ground in April. LUNAIRE annuelle (Lunaria annua). - 1-meter stem; red, purplish, white or variegated flowers in clusters in April and May; sow in June and July. Annual LUPIN (Lupinns annuus). - Blue, white, pink or yellow flowers, depending on variety; sow outdoors in April. MADIA élégant (Madia elegans), Mapaire élégante (Madaria elegans). - Height, 1 m; yellow flowers all summer; sow in spring. Japanese ribboned corn (Zea Japonica variegata), beautiful grass with green and pinkish-white ribboned leaves, propagated from seed like all other corn. Since its introduction, this beautiful plant has produced several generations, all of which have retained the characteristics of the primitive type. large-flowered MALOPE (Malope grandiflora). - Height, Om, 50 to Om, 60; all summer, red or white flowers. Malopes are sown in September in pots and overwintered under a frame, or in the field in March and April. MAUVE de Crée (Malva Creena, Sphgralcea Creeana). - Biennial; height, Om, 40 to Om, 50; pink or cinnabar-red flowers; sow in autumn or spring. CAMPANULA (Malva campanulata). - All summer long, soft lilac flowers with a vanilla scent. Sow in late August, in the ground, or in spring, on a bed. MARTYNIA FRAGRANS (Craniolaria fragrans). - Purple-purple, vanilla-scented flowers all autumn. Martynia fragrans is sown on a bed in April, then transplanted, also on a bed, before planting out. Martynia lutea has yellow flowers and is grown in the same way. BLUE MELILOT (Melilotus cœrulea). - Stems from Om, 65; fragrant blue flowers in August; sow in place in April. Garden MUFLIER (Antirrhinum majus). - Biennial; height; Om, 65; red or white flowers from May to August; seed multiplication, sown in autumn or spring; often produces charming varieties. NIGELLE de Damas (Nigella Damascena). - Stems from Om, 50; blue or white flowers, from June to September; sow outdoors in April. Spanish Nigella (N. Hispanica). - Larger flowers; same cultivation. Many-flowered NEMESIA (Nemesia floribunda). - In June and July, white flowers, similar to those of the Linaria. Somer in place, April and May. NYCTERINIA SELAGINOIDES. - Low clump, covered all summer with small, fragrant pink flowers. This charming little plant is also suitable for forming beds. It can be propagated from seed sown on a bed in March and April. Chinese carnation (Dianthus Sinensis). - Biennial; height, Om, 33; violet, red or purple flowers, variegated or dotted with white, from July to September; sow in September or spring. Varieties. - Heddewigii. - Laciniatus. OXALIS with pink flowers (Oxalis rosea). - Oxalis rosea is sown in April on a bed, or in May and June, immediately in place, in rows or in small clumps on the edges of beds. - With the above seedlings, you can have Oxalis in bloom throughout summer and autumn. PAVOT (Papaver somniferum). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 meter; very numerous varieties; flowers all summer; sow in place, in autumn or spring. PENTAPETES purple (Pentapetes phœnicea). - Stems from Om,65 to I mêtre; scarlet flowers in August; sow in beds in spring. PERSICAIRE Indigotier (Polygonum tinctorium). - Height, 1m, 30; red flowers all autumn; sow in spring. Large-flowered POURPIER (Portulaca grandiflora). - All summer and autumn, purple-purple, scarlet-red, carmine-striped white or red-spotted yellow flowers. Sow indoors in March and April, then plant outdoors. Cultivated in mixes and groups, large-flowered Purslane forms a veritable lawn of brightest colors when the sun comes out. PHACELIA bipennata (Phacelia congesta). - Height, Om 30 to Om, 33; small, blue flowers all summer, arranged like those of Heliotrope; sow in place, in autumn or spring. Tansy-leaved PHACELIA (P. tanacetifolia). - Height, Om, 30 to Om, 40; in May, unilateral, light-blue flowers in terminal spikes. Same culture. Drummond's PHLOX (Phlox Drummondi). - All summer and autumn, white, pink or purple flowers of extremely varied shades. Phlox Drummond is sown in spring, on a bed, or better still in autumn, as soon as the seeds have ripened; when the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted into small pots, which are then overwintered in a greenhouse. In May, when there are no more frosts to worry about, plant out. Grown in rows or groups, there's really no plant more graceful than these charming little Phloxes. LARGE ALOUETTE (Delphinium Ajacis). - Height, Om, 70. In May, June and July, flowers of various colors, like those of the dwarf race; sow in place, in autumn, or in February and March. WHEAT'S FOOT (Delphinium consolida). - Height, 1 mt to Im, 30. All summer long, flowers equally varied, single or double, depending on variety; sow in September, in the field or in a nursery, or in February and March, immediately in the field. PODOLEPIS with meaty flowers (Podolepis gracilis). - Hau. teur, Om, 50 to Om, 60, flowers of various shades, from pink to pure white, all summer; sow in spring. REINE-MARGUERITE (Aster Sinensis Callistephus hortensis). - We have a considerable number of varieties of all shades, the most remarkable of which are all related to the pyramidal race known as ReineMarguerite Truffaut, a true perfection in terms of shape, flower size and plant habit. Some have flat flowers, like the old race, but larger and very soft; others have petals slightly curved towards the center, giving the flowers a globular shape, and earning them the name Peony Queen Daisies. Reines-Marguerites are sown from March 15 to April 20, in beds or in the ground, and each plant is transplanted separately. Although they can grow in almost any soil, to produce beautiful Daisy-Reins, you need to grow them in soil well supplied with fertilizer. During the first few months of their growth, DaisyReins don't need much water, but a fortnight before flowering, they need to be watered more frequently and more abundantly. RESEDA odorata. - Sow in the spring and throughout the summer. RHODANTHE de Mangles (Rhodanthe Manglesii). - Height, Om 35; pink flowers all summer; sow in beds in February and March; plant in a shady spot. BLOOD RICE (Ricinus sanguineus). - Height, 1m, 30; in July and August, purple-red flowers in clusters. Multiplication by seed, sown in April on a bed, or in May immediately in place. This beautiful plant is very effective, especially when grown on its own. CHINESE ROSE (Alcga rosea Sinensis). - Biennial; stems from l mêtre to Im, 30; from July to October, purple flowers, variegated with white; red-flowered variety; sow in beds in spring. SPANISH FLOWER (Hedysarum coronarium). - Biennial; stems from Om, 65 to I meter; beautiful red flowers in July; sow in August. SALPIGLOSSIS à feuilles sinuées (Salpiglossis sinuata). - Several varieties are related to this species, and all are now cultivated under the same name. They are sown in April, on a bed, or in May, immediately in place. They flower in July, and continue to flower until September. Cultivated in beds, Salpiglossis produce more effect than separately; by adding to the sowing a few seeds of the yellow-flowered species called aurea, you'll have all the colors this beautiful genus has to offer. SALVIA HORMINUM. - To enjoy the full beauty of this plant, so remarkable for its flowers with red, pink or violet bracts, instead of growing it in small clumps, it should be planted in long clumps. Sow in March and April, in the field or in a nursery. ROSE BLOSSOM (Scabiosa atropvrpurea). - Biennial; stem Om, 65; velvety dark purple flowers in July and September; sow in autumn. Varieties. - Pink-flowered dwarf. - Dwarf with purple flowers. SCHIZANTHE émoussé (Schizanthus retusus). - Height, Om 50 to Om, 60. All summer, pink, purple, lilac or white flowers, widely marked with yellow in the center. Schizanthus is sown in the first fortnight of September, and the plants are transplanted into pots and overwintered in frames. Alternatively, and much more simply, they can be sown in April, immediately in place; but plants sown at this time will never be as beautiful as those sown in autumn. SCHIZANTHUS GRAHAMI. - Schizanthus Grahami is an equally beautiful species, which can be grown in the same way. Senecio elegans. - Twiggy stem, from Om, 30 to Om, 40; from June to August, single or double purple, violet or white flowers; sow in a bed, in March, or in the open ground, in April. Hanging SILENNA (Silene pendula). - A charming little plant with pink flowers, which for some years now has been used in the Tuileries and Luxembourg gardens to create baskets that are admired by all visitors in spring. For beautiful Silenes, sow in July in a nursery, or in spring, immediately in the field. BUNCH SILENNA (Silene compacta). - Height, Om, 50. Pink flowers all summer; sow in June and July. SILENNA flycatcher (Silene armerio). - Height, Om, 40. Pink or white flowers all summer. Same cultivation as Silene compacte. Souci de Trianon, Souci anémone (Calendula officinalis. var.). - From July to October, very soft yellow flowers. Sow outdoors in April and May. Rainfed marigold (C. pluvialis, Dimorphotheca pluvialis) - In June and August, white flowers inside, purple outside; same cultivation. SPHIENOGYNE elegante (Sphenogyne speciosa). - Height, Om, 30; from July to September, pale yellow flowers with brownish-purple petals at the base; sow in February or March, on a bed, or in April, in the open ground, in the field or in a nursery. Spreading TAGET, Indian EYE (Tagetes patula). - Twiggy stems, Om, 40; orange flowers, yellow-striped, in July and October; sow from April to June. Dwarf spotted tagetes (Tagetes signeta pumila). - A less tall variety than the previous one, just as stalky, literally covered with bright-yellow flowers; same cultivation. HIGH TAGET, INDIAN ROSE (T. erecta). - Height, Om, 65; yellow flowers; same cultivation. THLASPI, umbellate IBERIS (Iberis umbellata). - Stems, Om 33; white or violet flowers, May, June or July; sow in autumn or spring. BLUE TRACHELIA (Trachelium cœrruleum). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 40; bluish-purple flowers, all summer; propagate from seed or cuttings. VALÉRIANE Corne-d'abondance (Valeriana Cornucopice), - Height, Om 25; red flowers, May to August; sow in place in spring. Miquelon VERBENA (Verbena Aubletia). - Bisan16 nuelle; height, Om, 33; violet-purple flowers, July to November; sow in spring. VIOLETTE tricolore, PENSÉE à grandes fleurs (Viola tricolor hortensis). - Numerous varieties, flowering from April to September; sow in August, transplant in autumn, and plant out only in spring. VISCARIA with purple heart (Viscaria oculata). - Height, Om, 40. In June and July, white or pink flowers, with dark purple centers; sow in September in pots, overwintering indoors, or in April, immediately in the field. WHITLAVIA GRANDIFLORA. - Height, Om, 40. In June, July and August, beautiful purple flowers in spikes. Multiplication from seed, sown in place in April; suitable for bedding. ZINNIA multiflore (Zinnia multiflora). - Height, Om, 50; red flowers, with yellow disk, from July to October; sow in a bed, in March, or in the ground, in April and May. Elegant ZINNIA (Z. elegans). - Higher than the previous species. Zinnia elegans has produced a large number of varieties, which can be grown as a mixture or in separate colors; sow in March on a bed, like Ainnia multiflora, or in April and May in the open ground, then transplant in rows or groups. Double-flowered varieties in the same colors as single-flowered varieties. SECTION III. - Outdoor perennials and bulbs. GOLDEN ACHILLA (Achillea auréa). - Height, Om, 50; golden-yellow flowers, from July to September; for all this genus, seed multiplication, sown as soon as mature or by bursting the stems. A. millefolium. - Height, Om, 65; purple flowers all summer; pink-flowered varieties. Pink ACHILLA (A. rosea). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; purple-pink flowers all summer. Sternutatory ACHILLÉE, Silver bud (A. ptarmica). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; white flowers, July to September. AcoNIT Tue-loup (Aconitum Iycoctonum). - Height, 1 m to 1.30 m; pale yellow flowers, June and August. ACONIT Napel (A. Napellus). - Height, 1 m; dark blue flowers in May and June; white-flowered varieties. All Aconite species are poisonous; they multiply from seeds sown immediately after maturity, or by splintering. Species: - Anthora, - Eminens, - Rubicundum, - Speciosum. Alpine ACTEA (Actea spicata). Height, 1m, 30; white flowers in July and August; seed multiplication by sowing immediately after maturity, or by separating the plants. ADONIDE printanière (Adonis vernalis). - Height, Om 25 to Om, 30; yellow flowers, in March and April; seed multiplication sown immediately after maturity, or by splitting; winter cover. ALSTRŒMÈRE à fleurs tachées, Lis des Incas (Alstromeria pelegrina). - Stems from Om, 35, needing stakes; from June to October, white flowers marked with purpurine spots and several dark purple dots. ALSTREMER from Chile. - Chilean Alstrœmère has been sown for several years, producing a large number of varieties. They can all be grown in light soil; during winter, they need only be covered with leaves, which are removed towards the end of March or in early April. Alstrœmères can be propagated from seeds sown as soon as they reach maturity, either in the field or in pots, and overwintered under a frame. As these plants vegetate very early in autumn, they should be planted in September or October, otherwise they will not flower the following year. AMARYLLIS. - A large number of Amaryllis, considered as greenhouse plants, can, in the Paris climate, be grown in the open air. M. Aimé, from Versailles, who specially cultivates this beautiful genus, has, since 1845, had several beds of Amaryllis in the open ground, which vegetate and flower admirably. To grow Amaryllis in the ground, prepare a trench Om.25 deep, the length and width of which are proportionate to the number of onions you wish to plant. Put a good layer of leaves at the bottom and, after treading them well, fill the trench with soil if it's not too compact, heather soil or, failing that, plant sand and potting soil made from well-consumed leaves mixed in equal parts. When grown in the ground, Amaryllis should be planted deeper than in pots, and watered only when they are in full bloom. After flowering, they should not be watered, and as frost approaches, they should be covered with a layer of leaves, the amount of which should be increased according to the intensity of the cold. All varieties of Amaryllis pulverulenta and Amaryliis cinnamomea can be grown as described above. AMARYILIS with pink flowers (A. Belladora). - From July to October, pink flowers mixed with white; multiplication by cloves, which are removed in September or October, immediately after flowering, and replanted immediately; winter cover. AMARYLLIS à longues feuilles (A. longifolia). - White flowers in June and July; pink-flowered variety; plant in autumn; winter cover. AMARYLLIS, St. James lily (A. formosissima). - Bulbous plants with deep purple-red flowers in July and August; plant outdoors in spring, or in pots in autumn; clove propagation. ANCOLIA commune (Aquilegia vulgaris). - Height, 1 meter; in May and June, red, blue, purplish, white or pink flowers, single or double, depending on variety; multiplication by seed, sown as soon as mature, or by bursting the stems. ANCOLIE du Canada (A. Canadensis). - Height, Om, 40; saffron-red flowers. Siberian ANCOLIA (A. Sibirica). - Height, Om, 40; beautiful blue flowers. Florist's ANEMONE (Anemone coronaria). - Height, 16. Om. 20 to Om, 25; in May and June, single, semi-double or double flowers in a variety of colors. It likes light, substantial soil. It is propagated by seed and tuber. Seeds are sown in September, either in pots or in the ground, in a well-prepared bed; they are lightly covered with fine compost as frost approaches. The young plant should be secured with straw mats, which are laid out on gaulettes so that they are a few centimetres above the ground. Uncover whenever the weather permits; then, in spring, weed and water as necessary; when the leaves have dried out, we pull out the tubers to treat them as mature plants, which means planting in March and April, about Om, 05 deep and Om, 10 or Omi, 15 apart, depending on the strength of each. When you have a large enough number of Anemones of flowering strength, it is a good idea to plant only half of them, so that each tuber only flowers every two years, as the flowers are then more beautiful. ANEMONE Peacock's eye (A. pavonina). - Height, Om, 20 to Om 25; in April and May, red flowers, bluish in the center; multiplication by root separation, as for the following. ANEMONE with blue flowers (A. Apennina). - Blue flowers in March. ANEMONE with umbel (A. narcissiflora). - Height, Om, 33; white flowers, May. Japanese anemone (A. Japonica). - Height Om,50; from August to October, semi-double pink, purple or white flowers. This charming plant grows vigorously in the open ground; it adapts well to all types of soil and can be multiplied by dividing clumps in spring. ANEMONE pulsatilla (A. pulsatilla). - Height, Om, 25 to Om 30; dark purple flowers in April and May. DYING ANTHEMS (Anthemis tinctoria). - Height, Om, 65; yellow flowers, June and November; propagates from seed or by splinters. APOCYN Flycatcher (Apocynum androsœmifolium). - Twiggy stem, Om, 50; pink flowers, July and September; seed or trace propagation, March. ARUM Attrape-mouche (Arum crinitum). - Height, Om, 40 to Om, 50; in March, spathe Om, 33 long, purplish inside and green-spotted outside. Its foul odor attracts flies. Seed or bulb propagation; winter cover. ARUM Serpentaria (A. dracunculus). - Height Om, 65 to I meter; in June and July, spathe dark purple inside, green outside; same propagation. Asclepias Cornuti. - Height, 1m, 30 to Im, 60; white flowers washed with red, in July and August; seed multiplication, sown immediately after maturity, from splinters or traces; other species multiply in the same way. ASCLÉPIADE tubéreuse (A. tuberosa). - Bristly stems, Om, 50; flowers in umbels, orange-red, in July, August and September. ASCLEPIADE incarnata (A. incarnata) - Height, 1 m to Im, 30; in July and August, purple-red flowers. Asclepias are propagated from seed or splinters. Asphodelus luteus. - Height, 1 meter; from May to July, beautiful yellow flowers; multiplication by seed, sown in spring, by suckers or by root separation. ASPHODELUS ramosus. - Height, 1 meter; white flowers marked with russet lines. ASTER (Aster). - Stems from Om, 35 to Im,60; from July to the end of October, more or less dark blue, white-purple or pink flowers, depending on the species, which are very numerous. They withstand our winters very well. They can be propagated from seed, sown as soon as they reach maturity, or, better still, by bursting clumps, in autumn or spring, an operation which must be carried out at least every three years, in order to renew the plants. Species. - Alpinus, - Amelloïdes, - Bicolor, - Corymbosus, - Ericoldes, - Floribundus, - Gracilis, - Grandiflorus. - Pendulus, - Versicolor. ASTRAGALE varius (Astragalus varius). -Height, Om, 65; purple-purple flowers with yellow markings, in June and July. Broad-leaved ASTRANCE (Astrantia major). - Height, Omi, 65; all summer, reddish-white flowers, multiplication of seeds or flakes in autumn. Hairy BEET (Betonica hirsuta). - Height, Om, 33; bright, dark-red flowers in July; multiplication by seed, sown in March, or by root burst in autumn. Large-flowered BETOIN (B. grandiflora). - Height, Om, 33; red flowers. HEART LEAF BOCCONIA (Bocconia cordata). - Height, Im, 30 to Im, 60; white flowers in July; seed and splinter propagation; winter cover. Aster-leaved BOLTONIA (Boltonia asteroides). - Height, 1 m to Im, 60; white flowers, with yellow disk, from August to October; seed multiplication, sown in place, or by splintering. Broad-leaved BUGLOSSE (Anchusa sempervirens). - Height, 1 meter; in May, June and July, blue flowers; seed multiplication, sown in June and July, or by bursting the vines, in February or March. BUGLOSSE d'Italie (A. Italica). - Taller than the previous variety; flowers also a beautiful blue; same cultivation. HIGH BUGRANE (Ononis altissima). - Height, 1 meter; purplish flowers in July; multiplication by seed or splinters. Round-leaved BUGRANE (O. rotundifolia). - Height, Om 35; pink flowers, May and July; same propagation; winter cover. PEACH LEAF CAMPANULA (Campanula persicœfolia). - Height, Om, 65; blue or white flowers, single or double, from July to September. Nettle-leaved CAMPANULA (C. urticœfolia). - Height, Om, 65; blue, white or tricolored flowers, June and July. Broad-leaved CAMpanula (C. latifolia). - Height, I meter; blue flowers, white-flowered variety, in June and July. CAMPANULA with head-shaped flowers (C. glomerata). - Height, Om 33; blue, white or tricolored flowers in summer. CAMPANULE à grandes fleurs (C. grandiflora) Height, Om 50; blue flowers in July. CAMPANULE noble (C. nobilis). - Height, approx. 1 m; beautiful purple-purple flowers edged with white, in June and July. All Campanula species can be propagated from seed, sown as soon as they are mature, without covering them, or by bursting the stems, in autumn or March. DOUBLE-FLOWERED MEADOW CARDAMINE (Cardamine pratensis). - Height, Om, 35 to Om, 40; purplish-white flowers, April and May. JACEAN CENTAURY (Centaurea Jacea). - Height, Om, 65 to I meter; purplish flowers, June and July; seed multiplication, sown in spring, or by separating clumps. MOUNTAIN CENTAURY (C, montana). - Height, Om, 50 blue, white or pink flowers, from June to August; same propagation. Black CENTAURY (C. nigra). - Height, Om, 50; purplish flowers, from May to July; multiplication by seeds and splinters. CHRYSANTHÈME des Indes (Chrysanthemum Indicum, Pyrethrum Indicum). - Stems from Om, 65 to Im, 30; from October to January, flowers of all shades of purple, white and yellow, depending on the variety, which are very numerous; propagated by cuttings or splinters, in April; planted in the ground or in pots. They are watered from time to time to encourage growth, but once well rooted, watering should be sparing. In June, pinch off the tips of each stem, so as to keep the clumps full and low. As soon as the frosts approach, the potted plants must be brought into the greenhouses, if you want to enjoy the full beauty of their bloom, which is so late that it is rare for it not to be surprised by the frosts. The many varieties of this plant are divided into two races. One is cultivated under the name Chrysanthemum pompon. Flax-leaved Chrysanthemum (Chrysocoma linosyris). - Height, Om, 65; yellow flowers, August to October; propagated from seed or splinters. AUTUMN COLCHICUM (Colchicum autumnale). - In September, pale purplish-red flowers, similar to those of the Crocus; double-flowered varieties, white, red, pink and variegated; propagated by cloves, replanted in July. COMMELINA tuberosa. - Height, Om 33; beautiful blue flowers, from June to September; propagated from seed, sown on a bed in spring, or by separating plants; covered in winter. Rough-leaved CONSOUD (Symphytum asperrimum). - Height, 1 m to 1.30 m; azure flowers in May and June; seed and splinter propagation in autumn or spring. CONSOUDE with purple flowers (S. purpureum). - Height, Om, 40 to Om, 50; purple-purple flowers, April to September; same propagation. CORÉOPSIS auriculé (Coreopsis auriculata). - Height, 1 m to 1m, 30; beautiful yellow flowers, from August to September; multiplication by seed and declassification, in autumn or spring. Three-winged CORÉOPSIS (C. tripteris). - Height, 1 m to 1.30 m, yellow flowers with brown disc, from August to September; same propagation. Bulbous CORYDAL (Corydalis formosa). - Height, Om, 15 to Om, 18; in April, white, purple or flax-gray flowers, depending on variety; multiplication by root separation. Blue CUPIDONE (Catananche cœrulea). - Height, Om, 35, sky-blue flowers from July to October; white-flowered variety; multiplication by seed or splinters; winter cover. EUROPEAN CYCLAMEN (Cyclamen Europœum). - Very low plant; white or purple flowers in April; seed multiplication, sown in pots or by dividing tubers, taking care that there is an eye on each separate part; winter cover. CYCLAMEN with ivy leaves (C. hedergfolium). - In April, fragrant white, pink or red flowers; same cultivation. DAHLIA. - Stems from Om.50 to 2 meters; from June to frost, white, yellow, pink, purple flowers, changing from these colors to their most delicate and darkest shades. They thrive in any soil, but bloom better in light soil than in compact or smoky soil. Multiplication by sowing, separating, taking cuttings and grafting onto tubers. 1. Sowing. - Sow in warm soil in March and April; in May, prick out the seedling in the open ground, at a distance of about 1 meter; then treat it with the other Dahlias. 2. Separation. - Dahlias are placed on beds in March or April, and when they come into vegetation, the clumps are divided, ensuring that each detached tuber has a reproductive germ. 3. Cuttings. - You can start taking cuttings soon after the Dahlias start to grow, and continue until June; but whatever the time, only young buds should be taken, and removed as soon as they have reached Om,06 or Om,08 in length; after removing the lower leaves, they are transplanted separately into small pots which are placed on a warm layer. Water them lightly, then cover them with a cloche, which should be shaded when the sun is shining. This care should be continued until you are sure that the cuttings will recover, at which point you lift the bell gradually, removing it when they can stand the air without wilting. 4 - Grafting. - Transplants, like cuttings, must be made in sufficient time to form tubers that can survive the winter. For the manual operation, follow the instructions given in the article on Herbaceous grafting, page 74. Planting. - Dahlias should only be planted towards the end of May: if planted earlier, they often run out of flowers by September, which is the most favorable time for their beauty. They should be placed in a well-ventilated position, about 1m 65 apart. They are planted in the middle of a basin Om, 40 to Om, 50 in diameter, after which a good mulch of half-censored manure is spread around each plant, to conserve water for watering, which should be moderate in the early stages, then more frequent as the drought increases. When the Dahlias are around Om, 30 to Om, 40 in height17 , if there are several stems on each plant, choose the most vigorous and remove the others. Immediately secure it with a stake. When it has reached Om, 60 to 0.70, remove the branches that are too close to the ground, or those that cross over each other, so as to leave only six or eight branches arranged around the main stem. If, at the height indicated, the stem is without branches, the tip must be pinched off, which delays flowering a little, but this delay is less unpleasant than the inconvenience of having very tall Dahlias on a single stem. In July or August, when the Dahlias have reached their maximum development, we start disbudding them, an operation which consists in detaching the secondary buds that grow between the leaves; the result is that, freed of a multitude of useless buds, each clump will produce a beautiful and abundant bloom. Towards the end of October or the beginning of November, as soon as the first frosts appear, Dahlias should be uprooted. If the weather is favorable, let them dry out a little, then place them either in the orangery, under the tier of the geranium greenhouse, or in a dry cellar, to spend the winter. DATURA METELOIDES. - Height, Om, 80; from July to November, white flowers edged with lilac-blue, Om, 20 long, fragrant. The roots are fleshy and can be stored in winter, like those of Dahlia. DELPHINIUM ELATUM (Perennial larkspur). - Height, Im,30; in June and July, single or double blue flowers. Multiplication from seed sown in June and July, or from cuttings in spring. DELPHINIUM AZUREUM. - Height, 1 meter; in June and July, single or double flowers of a beautiful azure blue; multiplication from splinters, in spring. DELPHINIUM BARLOWI. - Height, 1m, 30; in June and July, blue, semi-double flowers, wider than those of the above species; same cultivation. DELPHINIUM HYBRIDUM. - Height, 1m, 30; in June and July, blue flowers, paler than those of D. Barlowi, semi-double; same cultivation. Delphinium Hendersoni and the species named Formosum, one of the most beautiful of the genus, are equally easy to grow. DIELYTRA SPECTABILIS. - This charming plant has leaves cut out exactly like those of the Peony tree. In May and June, it produces a large number of long clusters of beautiful pink flowers. It can be propagated from cuttings, which, once well rooted, can be grown in the open ground, like most of our perennials. Virginia Dodecatheon (Dodecatheon Meadia). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 25; purple-pink flowers in spring; white-flowered variety. Multiplication by seed, sown immediately after maturity, or by root division. Heart-leaved DORONIC (Doronicum pardalianches). - Height, Om,65; yellow flowers in May and June; offspring multiplication. DRACOCEPHALE de Virginie (Dracocephalum Virginianum). - Height, Om, 65 to l meters; pink flowers, July to September. All Dracocephalums multiply by seed or by the separation of suckers. ECHINOPS azure pellet (Echinops ritro). - Height, Om, 65; pretty blue flowers; white-flowered variety. Propagates from seed, sown in spring. ENOTHÈRE frutiqueuse (Œ'nothera fruticosa). - Height, 1 meter; attractive yellow flowers in July and August; propagates from seed, sown in the soil, from clump fragments or cuttings. ENOTHÈRE superbe (O. speciosa). - Height, 1m, 30; fragrant white flowers in July and August; same propagation. EPERVIÈRE orangée (Hieracium aurantiacum). - Height, Om,50; orange-yellow flowers, from June to September; multiplication by seed, sown in spring, or by offshoots. Virginia EPHENER (Tradescantia Virginica). - Height, Om, 40; purplish-blue or white flowers, from May to October; multiplication by separating plants in autumn. Pink EPHEMER (T. rosea). - Height, Om, 20; pink flowers, all summer; same propagation. EPILOBE à épi, Laurier Saint-Antoine (Epilobium spicatum). - Height, 1m, 30 to Im,60; purplish-red flowers, from July to September; white-flowered variety; seed and offspring multiplication. ALPINE EPIMEDIA (Epimedium Alpinum). - Height, Om, 35; yellow and reddish flowers, April and May; multiplication by bursting clumps in autumn. ERIGERON des Alpes (Erigeron Alpinum). - Height, Om, 20; blue flowers with yellow discs in July; flowering variety.

double; seed multiplication, sown immediately after maturity, or by dividing plants. All Erigéron species multiply in the same way. ERIGERON almost naked (E. glabellum). - Height, Om, 50; lilac flowers, with yellow disk, all summer. ERIGERON with large flowers (E. speciosum). - Same height; dark lilac flowers with yellow discs in August and September. ERINE des Alpes (Erinus Alpinus). - Height, Om, 16; purplish or white flowers, from March to June; multiplication from seed or by splinters, in autumn. ERODIUM des Alpes (Erodium Alpinum). - Height, Om, 35; blue flowers, all summer; multiplication by seed and splinters. Rome Erodium (E. Romanum). - Purpurine flowers, all summer; same multiplication. EUPATOIRE ageratoïde (Eupatorium ageratoïdes) - Height, Om, 65; white flowers, September. Purple EUPATOIRE (E, purpureum). - Height, Om, 65; purplish flowers from September to October. All Eupatoria can be propagated from seed, sown immediately after maturity, or by separating plants in autumn. The white-flowered Eupatorium (E. glechonophyllum) and the blue-flowered Eupatorium (E. coelestinum) are two charming orangery plants that can be grown in the garden throughout the summer. Both can be propagated from cuttings and overwintered in a greenhouse. FARFUGIUM GRANDE. - This plant, remarkable for its broad, yellow-spotted leaves, needs to be grown in groups on lawns to be effective. It can be propagated from root cuttings. EUROPEAN FRAXINELLE (Dictamnus albus). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; reddish-brown flowers in June and July; white-flowered variety; propagated from seed, sown immediately after maturity; if sown later, it does not emerge until the second year; can also be propagated by splinters. FRITILLAIRE checkerboard (Fritillaria Meleagris). - Height, Om,33; in March and April, purple flowers marked with small squares of different colors; clove multiplication, in August; replant immediately, along with the main bulbs; winter cover. FRITILLAIRE couronne impériale (F. imperialis). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; in March and April, red, single or double, yellow, single or double, orange flowers with yellow or white variegated leaves; propagated by cloves in August; replant immediately, Om, 15 deep, along with the main bulbs. Bulbous FUMITORY (Fumaria bulbosa). - Height, Om, 18 to Om, 20; from February to April, white, purple or flax-gray flowers, depending on variety; they are all propagated from seed or by separating clumps in autumn. white and yellow, from April to November; winter cover. Fragrant fumitory (F. nobilis). - Height, Om, 50; pale yellow flowers, purple at the top, in April. PAINTED GAILLARD (Gaillardia picta). - Height, Om, 35 to Om, 40; in spring and autumn, orange-yellow flowers, purple at the base, brown disk; all propagated from seed, splinters or cuttings. Varieties. - Nana. - Grandiflora, - Alba marginata. GALANE glabre (Chelone glabra). - Height, 1 meter; white or purple flowers in August and September; all multiply from seed or splinters. Species. - Barbata. WINTER GALANTHE or PERCE-NeiGe (Galanthus nivalis). - Height, Om, 15 to Om, 18; white flowers spotted with green, in February; double-flowered variety; multiplication by cloves replanted in autumn. GALÉGA officinale (Galega officinalis). - Height, 1 to 1.30 meters; blue or white flowers in June and July; seed multiplication. GALÉGA oriental (G. orientalis). - Same height; blue flowers in June; same propagation. GENTIANE croisette (G. cruciata). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 25; blue flowers, in June and July; same propagation. GENTIANE pourpre (G. purpurea). - Height, Om, 65; yellow flowers punctuated with purple, in July; same propagation. GENTIANE jaune (G. lutea). - Height, 1 meter to Im, 30; yellow flowers, in July; same propagation. Bloody geranium (Geranium sanguineum). Height, Om, 35; violet-red flowers in June and July. Blackish GERANIUM (G. phœum). - Height, Om, 65; purple-black flowers, April to June. Meadow GERANIUM (G. pratense). - Height, Om, 65; white flowers, striped with purple, in May and June; double-flowered variety. Large-rooted GERANIUM (G. macrorhizum). - Height, Om, 40; red flowers, May to July. Striated GERANIUM (G. striatum). - Height, Om, 33; white flowers veined with purple, May and September; winter cover. Large-flowered GERANIUM (G. Ibericum). Height, Om, 50; flowers arranged in bunches, changing from violet to the purest azure blue. Geraniums need loose soil; all multiply from seed or splinters in spring. GEUM COCCINEUM. - Height, Om, 50; scarlet flowers, all summer; multiplication from seed sown in place, or by separating clumps; other species multiply in the same way. Species. - Rivale, - Montanum. GLADIOLUS (Gladiolus). - Gladiolus are grown in light soil mixed with leaf compost. They are planted in the open ground in March and April; they flower in July and August, and are lifted in October. They can also be planted in pots in autumn, but in this case they must be placed under a frame to overwinter, and they flower as early as May. They can be propagated from seed or cloves. GLADIOLUS CARDINALIS. - Spike of Om, 50; in July and August, scarlet flowers, marked with a white spot. As the bulbs of this Gladiolus are continually in vegetation, they should never be left out of the ground. GLADIOLUS BLANDUS or FLORIBUNDUS. - Om spike, 30; in August, pure white or pinkish-white flowers, marked with a purplish-purple longitudinal stripe. GLADIOLUS RAMOSUS. - Om spike, 70 to I meter; in July and August, pink flowers, marked by a white spot surrounded by azure. This admirable plant has produced a large number of beautiful varieties. GLADIOLUS GANDAVENSIS. - There are now so many varieties of this plant that it is physically impossible to list them all. All can be grown in the open ground, like the standard species. GUNNERA SCABRA. - This plant, so remarkable for the beauty of its foliage, closely resembles Rhubarb. It must be grown in isolation to achieve its full effect. Although hardy, it must be covered in winter. GYNERIUM ARGENTEUM. - Ornamental grass, with linear leaves inclined in all directions; in September, silky, silvery flowers in panicles of great effect. Multiplication by offshoots, separated in spring. Varieties. - Pink-flowered. - Purple-flowered. GYPSOPHILE paniculée (Gypsophila paniculata). - Height, Om, 65; white flowers in June and July; propagation from seed sown in spring. Gypsophila acutifolia, altissifolia, altissima, pubescens, Gmelini, perfoliata, fastigiata and dichotoma are also grown. Autumn Helenium (Helenium autumnale). - Height, 1m, 60 to 2 meters; beautiful yellow flowers, August to November; propagated by roots. BLACK HELLORA, Christmas Rose (Helleborus niger). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 25; pinkish-white flowers, from December to February; 17. propagation by seed, sown immediately after maturity or by splinters. Winter helleborine (H. hyemalis). - Height, Om, 10 to Om, 15; yellow flowers; multiplication by separating plants in autumn. Yellow hemerocallis or yellow lily (Hemerocallis flava). - Height, 1 m; fragrant yellow flowers in June; propagated by separating plants in autumn. Fawn HEMEROCALLIS (H. fulva). - Higher than the preceding one; tawny-red flowers in July. HERACLEUM WILLEMSH.-Much superior, in the beauty of its leaves, to the type known as Heracleum sphondylium, Common Hogweed, German Acanthus, Wild Angelica. This plant is very effective on lawns. It can be propagated from seed or by separating plants. HIBISCUS ROSEUS. - Height, 1m, 38; in August and September, pink flowers, similar to those of simple hollyhocks. This beautiful plant requires warm exposure and plenty of water in summer; it is propagated by cuttings and seed. Varieties. - Palustris, - Moschatus, - Sanguineus. Japanese HOTEIA (Hoteia Japonica). - Height, Om, 50 to Om, 60; white flowers, in June and July; multiplication from cuttings, in spring. WHITE IMMORTAL (Gnaphalium margaritaceum). - Height, Om, 50; yellow flowers, with white involucre, from July to September; trace propagation. Imis d'Allemagne or FLAMBE (Iris Germanica). - The many varieties of this plant deserve to occupy a distinguished place in gardens; either in borders or in beds, they produce a charming effect at the time of their flowering, which takes place in May and June, especially if the colors have been suitably blended, and their hardiness is an added bonus for enthusiasts. We propagate them from seed or by separating the plants in September; we already have over a hundred beautiful varieties. Bulbous IRIs, XIFHIUM, or Angleterré. - A large number of varieties of all colors are grown; the flowers are remarkable for the narrowness of all their divisions; they bloom in June; they are propagated from cloves, which are planted in autumn; winter cover. Xiphioid or Spanish IRIS. - Like the previous one, this species offers a large number of varieties; same cultivation. JACINTHE (Hyacinthus orientalis). - In April, single or double flowers of all colors, depending on the variety, which are very numerous; propagation by seed or clove. Hyacinths like soft, substantial soil, and the colder and wetter the climate, the lighter the soil. To obtain good vegetation, they should be planted in well-smoked soil, but the manure must be buried deep enough for the roots alone to reach it, otherwise the onions almost always rot shortly after being pulled out. The best time for planting is late September or early October; however, it would be better to delay planting by a fortnight than to plant in wet weather. Planting is carried out as follows. After preparing the soil well, hoe a furrow Om, 10 deep; place the onions about Om, 15 apart on the line, and press them in so that they are covered with Om, 10 of soil; then open the other furrows successively, and Om, 15 apart. After planting, a good mulch is spread over the whole, and other care consists in pulling out weeds. If the cold becomes so intense that we fear the soil will freeze to the roots, we'll cover them with leaves or dry litter, which we'll remove in February; if the weather is bad, we'll cover them more lightly. Once they have deflowered, and as soon as the leaves begin to yellow, cut off the leaves and stems on the ground, and towards the end of June carefully pull them up, which should only be done when the weather is fine. As soon as they are uprooted, place them in a dry, well-ventilated spot, without exposing them to the sun; after a few days, detach the cloves and roots, then, before placing them on the shelves, clean them with a soft brush to remove anything that might cause rot. To fill in the soil until the onions are ready to be lifted, sow a small amount of Larkspur, Nemophila or Silene seed in the spring. When sown light, this will succeed Hyacinths without affecting the maturity of the onions. Planting in pots - Hyacinths whose flowering is to be brought forward should be planted in pots at the same time as in the ground. The soil used for potting should be light and substantial, and the pots in proportion to the size of the onions. After planting, the pots should be placed side by side, so that they are covered with Om, 03 soil. You can place some of them to the south, and others to the north, so that they don't all flower at the same time. If there is a severe frost, they should be covered with leaves or litter, so that the soil in the pots doesn't freeze; and in the course of January you can start putting some of them under a frame or in a heated greenhouse, but always as close as possible to the windows. They'll be in bloom about a month after you start heating them; you should only force them in successively, so as to prolong flowering as long as possible. As soon as they have deflowered, the pots should be placed in the ground to allow the onions to ripen, so that they can be planted the following year. JULIENNE des jardins (Hesperis matronalis). - Height, Om, 65 to I meter; double, fragrant, white or violet flowers, from May to July; propagation by cuttings or splinters in April. Perennial variety with double, white or violet flowers. Substantial free soil; otherwise the plant perishes. LAMIER orvale (Lamium orvala). - Height, Om, 65; white flowers washed and spotted with dark pink, from April to June; propagates from seed or by bursting plants in autumn. PERENNIAL LINSEED (Linum perenne). Height, Om, 65; pretty blue flowers, June to August; propagates from seed, sown in autumn or spring, or from splinters, in autumn. White-flowered variety. Viscous LINSEED (L. viscosum). - A pink-flowered species that can also be grown in the ground, provided it is covered over winter. Yellow-flowered linseed (Linum flavum) can be grown outdoors in summer. LARGE-FLOWERED LINER (Linaria triornithophora). - Height, Om, 65; purple flowers, all summer; seed multiplication, sown in spring; winter cover. White LIs (Lilium candidum). - Height, 1 meter; white flowers, June and July; double-flowered, red variegated and variegated-leaved varieties. All lilies propagate from seed or by their cloves, which are removed immediately after flowering and must be replanted immediately, along with the main bulbs, if they are to flower the following year. Long-flowered white LIs (L. longiflorum). - Height, 1 m to Im, 30, white flowers, much larger than those of the White Lily. Spearhead LIs (L. lancifolium, L. speciosum). - Height, 1 meter; in September, white flowers, punctuated with purple, or pale red, also punctuated. They are planted in spring, in pure heather soil or in a mixture of heather soil, manure loam and well-consumed leaves, mixed in equal parts; in autumn, they are lifted into pots, placed under a frame or on a shelf in the temperate greenhouse or orangery, and lily with golden stripes (Lilium auratum).- Height, Om, 50 to Om, 60; very fragrant flowers, long from Om, 18 to Om, 20, white mottled with purple, with broad bands of a beautiful yellow. This plant, remarkable for the size, color and fragrance of its flowers, requires no more care than its predecessor. LIs bulbifère (L. bulbiferum). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 m; large, saffron-red flowers in June; double-flowered varieties with variegated leaves. .Pomponne lily (L. Pomponium). - Height, Om, 65; yellow flowers punctuated with reddish-brown, in May; variety with beautiful pumice-red flowers. LIs orangé (L. croceum). - Height, 1 m to Im, 30; saffron-red flowers punctuated with black in June. Catesby lily (L. Catesbœi). - Height, 0m, 35; orange-red flowers, mid-petals yellow punctuated with brown, in July and August. Tiger lily (L. tigrinum). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 m; beautiful orange-red flowers, punctuated with black purple,. in July. LIs Martagon (L. Martagon). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 meter; in July, red, saffron, yellow, white, purple flowers, speckled with white or purple, depending on the variety, which are very numerous; same cultivation as the White Lily; winter cover. Superb lily (L. superbum). - Height, 1 m to Im, 33; in June and July, orange-red flowers, punctuated with purple; heather soil; winter cover. LOBELIA cardinale (Lobelia cardinalis). - Height, Om, 70 to I meter. In July and successively until frost, scarlet-red spikes of flowers. Propagate from seed, sown in pots, in spring, on a bed, or in June and July also in pots, but cold, or from cuttings, in spring; cover in winter. LOBELIA Queen Victoria. - Height, 1m, 30. In August, September and October, flowers in long, bright-red spikes. Multiplies from stems; covers in winter. LOBELIA DOUGLASH. - Height, 1a, 30. In August, September and October, red flowers, larger than those of the above species. Same culture. LOBELIA CŒLESTIS. - Stems higher than those of other species; flowers also in spikes, of a beautiful celestial blue. Same culture. polyphyllous lupin (Lupinus polyphyllus). - Height, 1 meter; blue flowers in May; white-flowered variety; seed multiplication, sown immediately after maturity; light, siliceous or heather soil. LYCHNIDE de Chalcédoine, CRoIX de Jérusalem (Lychnis Chalcedonica). - Height, Om, 65; in June and July, bright scarlet, single or double flowers; white-flowered variety; propagation from seed, cuttings, taken in June, or splinters, in autumn or February. The double-flowered variety needs to be protected from the cold. LYCHNIDE visqueuse (L. viscaria). - Height, Om, 35; purplish flowers, from May to July; double-flowered variety; multiplication by separating clumps, in February. LYCHNIDE dioïque, Jacée (L. dioica). - Height, Om, 50; from May to July, red or white flowers, single or double; same propagation. Bunge's LYCHNIDE (L. Bungeana). - Height, Om, 50; in June and July, bright red flowers; propagation by cuttings or splinters. LYCHNIDE with large flowers (L. grandiflora). - Height, Om, 65 to l m; scarlet flowers, June and July; propagates from seed or splinters. LYCHNIDE éclatante (L. fulgens). - Height, Om, 35; bright red flowers; same propagation; half-sun exposure. MATRICAIRE Mandiane (Matricaria parthenioides). - Height, Om, 50; very soft white flowers, all summer and autumn; propagation by cuttings or splinters, in February and March. A few plants should be placed in pots and brought into the orangery to overwinter, so that cuttings can be taken in spring. PEPPERMINT (Mentha piperita). - Height, Om, 50; reddish flowers, in August; cultivated particularly for the scent of its leaves, the essence of which is used to perfume pastilles: variegated-leaf variety. Sucker propagation. Merendera bulbocodium. - Height, Om, 06 to Om, 08; flowers white, then purpurine, in March; propagated by cloves, replanted in July and August. Purpurine MOLEN (Verbascum phœniceum). - Height, Om, 50 to Om, 60; purple flowers, from May to July; varieties with more or less bright pink flowers; seed propagation, sown immediately after maturity. MONARD with red flowers, Oswégo tea (Monarda didyma). - Height, 0e, 50; dark scarlet flowers from June to August. Propagated by suckers in autumn; covered in winter. Several other varieties are grown, differing only in flower color. MoriNe à longues feuilles (Morina longifolia). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; pinkish-white flowers in June and July; seed and splinter propagation. MORÉE de la Chine, Inis tigré (Morœa Sinensis). -Height, Om, 50; saffron flowers, dotted with red, in June and July; propagates from seed or by separating plants. May lily (Convallaria maialis). - White flowers, single or double, in May; pink-flowered variety; propagates offspring in autumn. MUSCARI monstruueux, Earth Lilac (Muscari monstruosum). - Bulbous plant; purplish-blue flowers in June; clove propagation; replant in autumn, along with bulbs. MUSCARI odorant (M. moschatum). - Reddish, fragrant flowers in May; same propagation. MYoSoTIS ALpESTRIS. - Sown in July, Myosotis Alpestris produces charming blue or white flowers in April and May, depending on the variety. Transplanted in separate colors, this plant can be used to create delightful beds until greenhouse plants are ready to be planted in the ground. NARCISSUS à bouquet (Narcissus Tazetta). - Fragrant yellow flowers in May; cloves multiply and are planted in October. This species has produced a large number of varieties, the most remarkable of which are : Constantinop'e, Soleil d'or, Multiflore and Grand Monarque; but as they cannot withstand our winters and succumb to 4 degrees of cold, they should be planted in pots or placed on carafes filled with water, with a few grains of salt; they flower in January and February. NARCISSUS daffodil (N. Jonquilla). - Yellow, fragrant, single or double flowers in April. Requires soft, substantial soil; in any other condition, it not only fails to flower, but quickly perishes. Daffodils are planted in September, at Om, 05 or Om, 06 depth, then lifted when the leaves are dry. Multiplication of Daffodils, planted at this time. Florist's carnation (Dianthus caryophyllus). - This species has produced a considerable number of varieties, all of which can be traced back to two main races: I° Flemish, whose characteristics are: perfectly rounded petals, without serrations and with wide bands of various colors on a white background; 2° Fancy; they are classified in the following order: 1st Series. Ardoisés. They are single-colored, striped or ribboned. 2° Series. Avranchains. Yellow background, more often nankin, with more or less intense flames. 3rd Series. English. Pure white petals, neither laciniated nor crenellated, but embroidered with a border. 4th Series. White background. Petals with streaked white background, sometimes also edged at the same time. 5th Series. Saxon. Petals with striated yellow background, sometimes edged at the same time. 6th Series. Bichons. The colors are only apparent on the surface of the petals. They are propagated from marcottes or seeds, which can be sown immediately after maturity; but as they do not all flower the following year, Carnations are not usually sown until April, either in the open ground or in terracottas, and during June; finally, when the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted in a nursery and spaced Om, 12 or Om, 15 apart. A few waterings help the plants to take root; then, towards the end of August, they are planted, either in flowerbeds or in beds, about Om 40 apart. Immediately after planting, the soil is mulched with half-used manure, and further care is limited to hoeing and watering as needed. Young Carnations are usually very hardy, and able to withstand heavy frosts without suffering; however, it is wiser to cover them in winter, to protect them from snow and frost, which are very harmful to them. The following spring, and as soon as necessary, they should be staked; then, in order to obtain perfect flowers, when the buds appear, their number should be reduced before they are too far advanced. At the end of June or the beginning of July, the flowering period, we select those worth keeping, and during July we lay them, taking care to observe everything we have indicated in the Marcottes chapter. However, as there are sometimes branches so high up on the stems that it is not possible to marcott them in this way, they must be removed and cut into cuttings, which are treated in the following way: after cutting them cleanly below a node, make a small incision and work upwards to divide the cutting in two; then transplant them into light soil, in a shady spot, and cover them with cloches, which are removed when the cuttings begin to grow. When the cuttings have sufficient roots, they are potted up and treated like rooted marcottes, as described below. At the beginning of October, we wean the marcottes, i.e. separate them from the old plants, to plant them in pots of about Om, 08 to Om, 10; the soil used for potting must be healthy and made up of two-thirds good free soil and one-third well-consumed leaf compost, all well mixed and passed through a rack. Immediately after potting, place the pots under the shelter of a wall, and give them a few light sprinklings from time to time. As soon as frost approaches, they should be put inside, to protect the carnations from cold and damp. If there's not enough room under the frames, make a trench about Om.20 deep and I metre wide; then lay out the gaulettes in such a way as to support doormats, which are placed as needed, and removed whenever the weather permits; and if the cold is more severe, it's always enough to spread leaves or litter over the doormats. Finally, around April, when sleet is no longer to be feared, carnations can be planted in the open ground, or repotted more generously if they are to be kept in pots. (EILLET remontant. - Variety of the florist's carnation, far superior to the type for the long duration of its flowers; same cultivation. Poet's carnation, bearded carnation (Dianthus barbatus). - Stems from Om, 30 to Om, 40; in June and July, red, pink, white or variegated, single or double flowers; propagation by cuttings, marcottes, or seeds sown in August. ŒILLET Flon. - Whatever the conditions in which it is grown, this carnation fully justifies the name Dianthus semperflorens given to it in France, and Dianthus hybridus multiflorus in England, by the abundance and long duration of its flowers. Its flowers are pink, red, white or white with pink variegation, semi-double and fragrant, requiring nothing more than other carnations, and it blooms from June to November. Potted plants returned to the greenhouse continue to flower throughout the winter. Propagate with cuttings in August and September. ORNITHOGALE pyramidale, Eri de la Vierge (Ornithogalum pyramidale). - Bulbous plant; height, Om, 50; white flowers, late June; multiply by cloves, planted in October. Spring OROBE (Orobus vernus). - Height, Om, 33; purplish flowers, in April; azure-flowered varieties, multiplication by seed, sown immediately after maturity, or by splinters in autumn. PAVOT de Tournefort (Papaver Orientale). - Height, Om, 60 to Om, 80; orange-red flowers in June; propagates from seed, sown immediately after maturity, or from offshoots in February. PAVOT with bracts (P. bracteatum). - Flowers larger and brighter in color; same propagation. PENTSTEMON with gentian leaves (P. gentianoides). - Height, Om, 50. All summer, purple, pink or white flowers in long, one-sided clusters. Multiplication by seed sown in June. Varieties. - Argutus, - Ovatus, - Digitalis. PHALANGER, LIS Saint-Bruno (Phalangium liliastrum). - Height, Om, 35; white flowers in June; multiplication by separating the roots in autumn, taking care not to break them, as they are very fragile. Tuberous PHLOMIS (Phlomis tuberosa). - Height, 1m, 30; purplish flowers, from July to September; multiplication by separating tubers, every three years, or from seeds sown in pots. PHLOX ligneux. - Stems from Om, 30 to Im, 20; in July, August and September, pink, purple, lilac, flax-gray, pure white or white lamé flowers in various colors, depending on the variety, which are very numerous. They are propagated from seed, sown immediately after harvesting from cuttings or by separating clumps. Varieties. - Hébé, - La Candeur, - Le Vésuve, - Le Lion, - Liervalii, - Mme La Croix, - Mme de Wendel, - Mme Lierval, - Mars, - Parmentier, - Raphaël, - Victor Hugo. PIGAMON with columbine leaves (Thalictrum aguilegifolium). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; in May, green flowers with white stamens; varieties with lilac and bright pink stamens; multiplication by seed, sown in spring, or by separating plants in autumn. PIVOINE officinale (Pœonia officinalis). - Height, Om, 65; in May, single or double red flowers; varieties with pink or meaty flowers first, then white; all propagate from seed, sown in August, or by separating the tubers with eyes; they are planted in September, and in such a way that they are only covered with about Om, 02 or Om, 03 of soil. These varieties decorate flowerbeds and flower beds, where they produce a very beautiful effect. Chinese peony (Pœonia Sinensis). - Height, Om, 65; very double, white flowers in June. Varieties. - Alba sulfurea, - Anemonœflora, - Striata, - Clarisse, - Comte de Cussy, - Faust, - Festiva, - Hericartiana, - Lutea variegata, - Magnifica, - Pulcherrima, - Reine des Français, - Victoire Modeste. PLUMBAGO LARPENTÆ. - A trailing plant that can be grown in the shade. Placed in favorable conditions, it forms large clumps and produces a large number of beautiful blue flowers throughout the autumn. It can be propagated by cuttings and splinters. Blue Polemonium, Greek Valerian (Polemonium cœruleum). - Height, Om,65; blue flowers, from May to July; white-flowered variety; multiplication by seed, which sows itself, or by separating clumps. Any soil. POTENTILLA. - A large number of Potentilla species are grown. Their foliage resembles that of the strawberry. The pink, red, purple, yellow or white flowers of these plants follow one another throughout the summer. Multiplication by seed and splinters. Varieties. - Atrosanguinea, - Aurantiaca, - Mac-Nabbiana, - Nepalensis, - Obwoodiana, - Alba, - Purpurea, - Smoutii, - Versicolor. Virginia PULMONARY (Pulmonaria Virginica). - Height, Om, 65; from March to May; blue flowers, sometimes red or white: multiplication by separating clumps in autumn. PYRETHRUM ROSEUM, RED CAMOMILE. - Height, Om, 30 to Om, 40; in June and July, single bright pink flowers; multiplication by seed or by separating clumps. The flowers of this plant are used to make the insecticide powder known as pyrethrum powder. Double-flowered varieties. - Red. - Pink or meaty. Garden Ranunculus (Ranunculus Asiaticus). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 25; very numerous varieties, single, semi-double or double, of almost any color. They are planted at O m. 05 depth, towards the end of December, in light soils, then in February and March, in all other circumstances; they are in flower from the end of April to the beginning of June. For cultivation and propagation, follow the same guidelines as for Anemones. ROSE trémière (Alcœa rosea). - Height, 2 m to 2.65 m; from July to September, single, semi-double or double flowers, offering almost every shade; propagation from seed sown in June; plants are transplanted in the nursery in July and planted in autumn; they can also be propagated by suckering. Planted in rows, hollyhocks produce a charming effect. To prevent them from being broken by the wind, they should be staked or tied to trellis slats fixed to stakes which are driven in from a distance. For those planted in isolation, a stake should be placed on each one; and when the clumps are strong, a hoop is placed in the middle of the stems, then they are fixed to it. This arrangement produces a very good effect. To grow hollyhocks to a lower height, simply pinch off the ends of the stems when they have reached the height you want the plants to reach. RUDBECKIA purpurea. - Height, 1 m; pinkish-purple flowers, blackish-purple disk, from July to September; multiplication by separating plants, in autumn or March. Varieties. - Hirta. - Laciniata, - Drummondi. - Speciosa. Caucasian Hawthorn (Hedysarum Caucasicum). - Height, Om 50; from May to July, pendant flowers of a beautiful purple-purple. Multiplication by seed and splinters. SAPONAIRE officinale (Saponaria officinalis) - Height, Om, 30; pink, fragrant flowers in July; double-flowered variety; multiplication by traces. SAXIFRAGE cotyledon (Saxifraga cotyledon), S. pyramidale (S. pyramidalis). - Height, Om, 50 to Om, 60; pure white flowers, from May to July; multiplication by seed, or by separating rosettes, which are transplanted in autumn or February. Siberian Saxifrage (S. crassifolia, Megasea crassifolia). 18 - Height, Om, 33; beautiful pink flowers in March and April; propagated by suckers. Caucasian SCABIUS (Scabiosa Caucasica). - Height, Om, 50; tender blue flowers, June-August; seed and bud multiplication. Pleasant SCILLS (Scilla amœna). - Bulbous plant; height, Om, 25; pretty blue flowers, April. SCILLE d'Italie, Gardeners' JACINTHE-Lily (S. Italica). - Height, Om, 16; in April and May, fragrant, pretty blue flowers. SCILLE campanulée (S. campanulata) - Height, Om, 30; pretty purple flowers in June; white-flowered variety. SCILLE du Pérou (S. Peruviana). - Height, Om, 33; attractive blue flowers in May; white-flowered variety. Less hardy than the other species, the Peruvian Scilla needs to be covered in winter. They are all propagated from cloves, which are planted in October, along with the bulbs. SCUTELLAIRE à grandes fleurs (Scutellaria macrantha) - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 25; beautiful blue flowers, from June to October; multiplication by seed or splinters. SEDUM TELEPHIUM RUBRUM. - A grassy plant with fleshy leaves, whose flowers, arranged in large pink umbels, produce a very ornamental effect. Essentially an outdoor plant, it requires no special care, but it does fear humidity, especially when at rest. Adonis-leaved SENECON (Senecio adonidifolium). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; yellow flowers in July and August; propagated from seed or splinters. SILENGE Virginia (Silene Virginica). - Height, Om, 25 to Om, 30; scarlet flowers in July; propagated from seed in autumn; winter cover. Multiflora SUN (Helianthus multiflorus). - Height, I meter to Im,30; yellow flowers, from August to September; all multiply by separating plants, in autumn. Varieties. - Mollis, - Orgyalis. SPIRÉE reine des prés (Spirœa Ulmaria). - Height, Om 65 to I mêtre; single or double white flowers in June and July; variegated-leaved variety; frequent watering in summer; multiplication by splintering. Goat's beard spirea (S. Aruncus). - Height, 1 m to Im 30; white flowers, June and July; same cultivation. Semi-sunny. Filipendula SPIRÉE (S. Fili pendula). - Height, Om, 50; single or double white flowers in June and July; same cultivation. Lobed-leaf Spirea (S. lobata). - Height, 1 meter; pink, fragrant flowers in July; variegated variety; same cultivation. STENACTIS pleasant (Stenactis speciosa). - Height, Om, 65; purplish-purple flowers with yellow disk, all summer; propagates from seed or by dividing the plant. STEVIA purple (Stevia purpurea). - Height, Om, 50; pink flowers, arranged in corymbs, in July and August: multiplication from seeds sown in spring or from splinters; winter cover. Saw-leaved STEVIA (S. serrata). - Same height; white, fragrant flowers in July and August; same cultivation. TANAISIE commune (Tanacetum vulgare). - Height, Im, 30; beautiful yellow flowers in August; suckering. Large-flowered TIGRIDIA (Tigridia pavonia). - Bulbous plant; height, Om, 40 to Om, 50; yellow or scarlet flowers, punctuated with dark purple; they follow one another from July to August, but each lasts only eight or ten hours; propagation by cloves, which are separated in March and April, and then replanted, along with the bulbs, to a depth of Om, 05. LYING TOWER (Tournefortia heliotropioides). - Height, Om, 35; bluish flowers all summer, overwinter under frame; multiplication by seed and cuttings. GARDEN TUBER (Polianthes tuberosa). - Bulbous plant; height, 1 mt to 1m 30; from July to September, white flowers with a very sweet odor, single or double; multiplication of cloves, which are separated only in spring, for planting on beds. Flowering bulbs should be planted in March, in pots placed on a bed under a frame. As long as the onion is not growing, it should be given little water; but as soon as it has a few leaves, it should be watered frequently. Gessner or Florist's TULIP (Tulipa Gessneriana). - This species has produced a considerable number of brightly colored varieties from seed. They like soft, substantial soil, made light by much-used fertilizers. They are propagated from seed, sown in the ground from September to November, or from cloves, which are replanted by September at the latest. Flowering onions should be planted in late October or early November. Once the soil has been well prepared, it is usually divided into rows about 1 m wide, with one row in the middle, then two on each side, arranged so that they are equally spaced, and the first two at Om, 12 or Om, 15 from the edge, and, as with Hyacinths, a furrow is opened with the hoe, starting the planting with the middle row, for which the tallest plants are chosen. until we have a collection classified by name and color, it must at least be arranged by height. The Tulips are placed about Om, 15 apart on the line, and lightly pressed down so that they are covered with about Om, 08 of soil; then the soil is brought closer together, so that there are no gaps. The same procedure is followed for each row, taking care to place the onions in a chessboard pattern. After planting, a good mulch of half-used manure is spread over the whole area, and until flowering, all care consists in hoeing the soil, pulling out weeds and, in spring, watering the soil if the temperature so requires. Flowering is usually at its most beautiful around the first days of May. If you want to prolong the life of the flowers and enjoy their full brilliance, towards the end of April you need to erect a small framework over which you spread a canvas when the sun is shining. As soon as the tulips have deflowered, remove the heads of those whose seeds you don't want to keep, so that the sap remains concentrated in the onion, increasing its vigor for next year's flowering. Onions are left in the ground until they are fully ripe, which is usually towards the end of June. To pull them out, however, you need to choose good weather, and as you remove them from the ground, you detach the cloves and old roots, then rub lightly with your thumb to remove the old scales. Above all, avoid leaving the onions exposed to the sun, 18. GARDENING MANUAL. as most of them will be lost. Each row is placed immediately in a square with a sequential number, then all the onions are placed in a well-ventilated place, but where they cannot be affected by frost. As with Hyacinths, a little Larkspur seed can be sown in Tulip beds in spring, to fill in the ground until the time comes to remove the onions. TUSSILAGE odorant, HÉLIOTROpE d'hiver (Tussilago fragrans). - Height, Om, 30; from November to January, purplish-white, Heliotrope-scented flowers; sucker propagation. VAĹRIANE rouge (Valeriana rubra) - Height, Om, 65 to I mêtre; red or white flowers, June to October; all multiply from seed, sown in place in autumn or spring, or by separating their plants. VARAIRE blanc, HELLEBore blanc (Veratrum album). - Height, 1 meter; white flowers in June and August; seed and bulb propagation. Black VARAIRE (V. nigrum). - Taller than above; brownish flowers, June-August; same propagation. VELAR de Barbarie, HerBe de Sainte-Barbe (Erysimum Barbarea). - Height, Om, 65; in May, single or double yellow flowers; multiplication in autumn. Canadian gold VERGE (Solidago Canadensis). - Height, Om, 65; brilliant yellow flowers from July to September. Propagates from seed, sown immediately after maturity, or by separating plants in autumn. VERNONIA (Vernonia prœalta). - Height, 2 meters, in October and November, purplish-purple flowers in a terminal corymb. Multiplication by splintering. SHOULDERED VERONICA (Veronica spicata) Height, Om, 50; blue, white or pink flowers, from June to August. Propagates from seed, sown in June, or by separating plants in autumn. California ZAUSCHNÈRIA (Zauschneria Californica). - A charming little plant with scarlet-red flowers, propagated from cuttings or seeds sown in July in a nursery. The young plant is overwintered in a greenhouse, and in spring planted out in groups like Verbena and Petunia. SECTION IV - Greenhouse plants that can be grown in the open ground during the summer. For general care of summer-grown greenhouse plants, see page 91. ALTERNANTHERA SPATULATA - Herbaceous, bushy plant; height Om, 10 to Om, 15, spatula-shaped leaves, light green irregularly variegated with pink, salmon and yellow. Treated like Coleus, this charming plant can be used for exactly the same purposes. BEGONIA. - Grown outdoors in summer, Begonias produce a charming effect, with their beautiful leaves and abundant, long-lasting flowers. They can be planted in the second half of May, in heather soil, in rows or in beds. They can be propagated by taking cuttings and overwintering them in a warm greenhouse. Varieties - Fuchsioides, - Ingrami, - Lucida, - Prestoniensis. CALADIUM ESCULENTUM. - Although this is a hot-greenhouse plant, it can be grown outdoors during the summer. In fact, judging by the way Caladium esculentum develops when grown in the ground, this is the most suitable growing method. Like all vigorous plants, Caladium esculentum require good fertilization and copious watering during hot spells. They can be planted in the second half of May, singly or in clumps, then lifted as frost approaches to overwinter in a warm greenhouse. woody calceolaria. - Much hardier than herbaceous Calceolaria, woody Calceolaria can be grown in the open ground throughout the summer. The beautiful yellow flowers of these plants produce a charming effect in the center of a bed of red Geranium or blue-flowered Lobelia erinus. Woody Calceolaria can be propagated from cuttings taken under cloches in August and September, and overwintered in a greenhouse. These cuttings are good for planting out in May (1). CANNA INDICA. - This plant, most remarkable for its .(1) Herbaceous calceolaria. - Herbaceous Calceolaria are sown in August and September in light soil, made up of heather soil, loam and potting compost, under a frame in a shady spot. When the plant has three or four leaves, it is transplanted into small pots, which are then placed under a frame to overwinter. In February or March, Calceolaria seedlings are given larger pots, after which they can be placed in the temperate greenhouse to enjoy the beauty of their flowers. Calceolaria, with its leaves as well as its flowers, can be grown in the open ground during the summer. With warmth, water and fertilizer, Canna's vigor surpasses anything our climate allows us to hope for. To obtain Canna similar to those seen every year in the squares of Paris, they need to be bedded out in the second half of March. When the suckers are about Om, 10 in length, we detach them with a portion of tuber, then plant them in pots which we keep on bedding until May, when we can put the Canna in the ground. After enjoying the beauty of this plant throughout the summer, it is lifted as frost approaches, to be stored in a dry cellar, or on the tier of a temperate greenhouse, just like the Dahlias. Varieties that don't produce tubers should be pulled out and placed in pots to overwinter in a warm greenhouse. Canna can be propagated from suckers, as described above, or from seed, which is sown on a bed in spring. Varieties. - Annei, - Discolor, Edulis, - Gigantea, - Indica, - Indica superba, - Leptophylla, - Liliiflora, - Lutea, - Peruviana, - Zebrina, - Warscewezii. CASSIA - Cassia are beautiful shrubs with yellow flowers in corymbs, which can be placed on lawns in summer. When young, they produce little effect, but as they vegetate vigorously when grown in the ground, medium-sized specimens can be planted if strong specimens are lacking. They are planted in May, then lifted as frost approaches, to be stored in the orangery until the following spring. Varieties. - Floribunda, - Corymbosa, - Tomentosa. CHAMÆROPS HUMILIS (Dwarf Palm). - Despite this plant's well-known hardiness, in the Paris climate it must be grown in pots. Arranged in groups on lawns, Chamærops humilis produce an entirely new effect in summer, with leaves so different from those of other plants. Chamærops humilis is easy to keep in the orangery in winter. CHEIRANTHUS DELILIANUS - A charming little wallflower with purplish-red, long-lasting flowers that can be grown in the open ground in summer. It can be propagated from cuttings and overwintered in a greenhouse. CHEIRANTHUS MARSHALLI. - Equally recommendable, this plant differs from Cheiranthus Delilianus in the color of its flowers, which are a beautiful yellow; it can be grown in exactly the same way. CHRYSANTHÈME frutescent (Chrysanthemum with white flowers). - This plant, whose flowers bear a slight resemblance to meadow daisies, is particularly well-suited to bedding because of its hardiness and long-lasting blooms. It is propagated from cuttings taken under glass in August and September. Overwintered under glass, frutescent Chrysanthemums can be delivered to the garden in May (1). COLEUS VERSCHAFFELTI. - All Coleus are remar(1) Hybrid Cineraria. - To grow beautiful Cineraria, you need a richly colored leaf, but they are delicate. Only the species named Verschaffelti can be grown in the open ground during the summer, like Lantana, Heliotrope and Salvia. Nothing can give an idea of the beauty of this plant, when it has been properly cared for. Coleus Verschaffelti are propagated by taking cuttings and overwintering them in a warm greenhouse. CUPREA. - Cuphea should, in keeping with their small size, be placed at the edge of beds. Grown in the open ground during the summer, these charming little plants produce flowers until the frosts; they can be propagated from seed or cuttings and overwintered in a greenhouse. Varieties. - Platycentra, - Ignea, - Strigulosa. ERYTHRINA. - Like all plants that vegetate vigorously, Erythrina needs a lot of food to produce beautiful flowers. So, unless the soil is cold and damp, it's better to grow them in the open ground during the summer than to keep them in pots. This shrub is worthy of a place in any garden, thanks to the beauty of its large red flowers. It can be planted singly or in clumps. During winter, it is stored in the orangery, where it remains until spring. Varieties. - Crista galli, - Bellengerii, - Floribunda, - Madame Bellengé. - Marie Bellengé, - Ruberrima. give them a light soil, made up of heather soil, loam and potting soil. Sow in August and September, in a shady frame. Transplanted and repotted at the appropriate time, Cineraria seedlings can be used to decorate greenhouses and apartments in spring. EUCALYPTUS GLOBULUS. - Eucalyptus globulus is a large, beautiful Australian tree that can be grown in the open ground during the summer. Endowed with uncommon vigor, it can reach 5 meters in height in a single year; its leaves, covered with a whitish dust when young, are essentially different from those of our garden trees. Multiplication by seed, sown towards the end of summer, to produce plants suitable for planting the following year. DATURA ARBOREA. - Datura arborea is, if not the first greenhouse plant to be cultivated in the open ground during the summer, at least one of the first; its flowers, often as long as Om, 32, are pendulous, white and very fragrant. In large gardens, beds of Datura arborea can be formed; but everywhere else, it is preferable to grow this beautiful plant on its own. Datura arborea is propagated from cuttings, which are overwintered in the orangery, like the old plants. FUCHSIA. - Grown in the open ground during the summer, Fuchsias produce flowers until the frosts, requiring no care other than watering in proportion to the temperature. They can be propagated from seed or from cuttings, which are grown in greenhouses or under frames. Varieties. - Flowers more or less dark red, or white with red corolla. HELIOTROPES. - For beautiful Heliotropes, grow them in the open ground during the summer. They can be propagated by sowing or, better still, by taking cuttings in layers in January and February. Planted in May, Heliotrope cuttings grow rapidly and produce flowers until the frosts. A few Heliotrope plants overwintered in the greenhouse are enough each year to produce as many cuttings as are needed to fill a garden. Varieties. - From Peru. - Triomphe de Liége, - Gloire des massifs. - Anna Thurell. LANTANA. - Lantana are charming little plants with corymb flowers, first yellow, then red or lilac, which can be used to create delightful beds. Lantana can be propagated from seed or from cuttings taken from the bed in January and February. By giving these cuttings the warmth they need, they can be delivered to the field in the second half of May. Lantana needs light soil, with plenty of fertilizer. Varieties. - Aurantiaca, - Delicatissima. - Mutabilis. LOBELIA RAMOSA. - A border plant with beautiful blue flowers. Grown in the garden in summer, Lobelia ramosa produces flowers until the frosts. It can be propagated from seed or cuttings in August and September. Overwintered in a greenhouse, Lobelia ramosa cuttings can be delivered to the garden in May. MMULUS - The difficulty of preserving Mimulus over winter means that we have to make do with growing them as annuals. Sown in beds in February and March, Mimulus can be delivered to the garden in the second half of May. Grown in light soil mixed with potting mix, 19 Mimulus form large clumps when the ends of the stems are suitably pinched. Varieties. - Variegatus, - Cardinalis. Musk Mimulus is a creeping species with small yellow flowers, which can be grown in the shade, in heathland. NICOTIANA WIGANDIOIDES. - A perennial orangery plant that can be grown in the open ground during the summer, just like Datura. Placed in favorable conditions, Nicotiana wigandioides makes a beautiful ornamental leafy plant that can be propagated from seed or cuttings, NIEREMBERGIA GRACILIS. - Nierembergia gracilis is particularly suitable for making borders, by laying the branches on the ground. Grown in the ground in summer, it produces flowers until the frosts. It can be propagated by sowing or, better still, by taking cuttings and overwintering them in a greenhouse. Much more vigorous, Nierembergia frutescent deserves preference in every respect. PELARGONIUM ZONALE. - Much better known under the name of Geranium than Pelargonium, this plant is now one of the most beautiful additions to our gardens. Just as commendable for its hardiness as for the brilliance, abundance and long life of its flowers, Geranium zonale is particularly suitable for vases and beds. It can be propagated from seed or, better still, from cuttings taken under cloches in August and September. Geranium zonale are winter-harvested in greenhouses or under frames, and can be delivered to the garden in May. As they develop rapidly, it is much simpler to plant young Geraniums each year than to keep the old plants. Varieties. - Red, pink or white flowers, or red with white variegated leaves. The species known as Ivy-leaved Geranium can be grown as a summer border plant. PETUNIA. - Having long since recognized that it is much simpler to grow Petunia as annuals than to keep the old plants, they are now sown in March on beds, then transplanted as soon as the planting is sufficiently advanced, or sown in April, immediately in place. For double-flowered varieties that you want to keep, take cuttings in August and September, and overwinter them under glass. Grown in the open ground during the summer, Petunias produce flowers right up to the frosts. Of all the plants used to decorate gardens, none are better suited than Petunias for lining vases and beds, or making borders by laying branches on the ground (1), SALVIA SPLENDENS. - Although the flowers of this beautiful plant appear a little late, its cultivation should not be neglected, for when delivered to the open ground in June, it produces long spikes throughout the autumn (1) PRIMULA Sinensis. - Primula Sinensis is one of the most suitable plants for decorating greenhouses and apartments during the winter. Sow in March and April in a greenhouse, then transplant into pots. It requires heather soil mixed with a quarter of potting compost. red flowers, of such brilliance that it is impossible to fix them for long. Salvia splendens can be propagated by sowing or, better still, by taking cuttings on a bed in March and April. A few plants of Salvia splendens, overwintered in a warm greenhouse, are enough each year to produce as many cuttings as are needed to fill a garden. SOLANUM. - From an ornamental point of view, Solanum plants are of immense interest. Grown in the open ground during the summer, certain species produce a remarkable effect with their beautiful leaves. They can be used to form clumps; however, it is preferable to place them singly on lawns. Solanum can be propagated from seed or cuttings, and overwintered in a warm greenhouse. Varieties. - Atropurpureum, - Betaceum, - Callicarqum, - Marginatum, - Purpureum, - Pyracanthum, - Robustum. SENECIO CINÉRARIA (Cineraria maritima). - Rough plant with pinnate leaves covered, like the stems, with a tamentous down. Arranged in rows around beds of Coleus or any other brightly-colored plant, Cineraria maritima produces a charming effect; it can overwinter outdoors if necessary, but it's best to take cuttings every year to replace old plants that grow too large. Centaurea candidissima can be used in the same circumstances; it is even whiter than Cineraria maritime, only less hardy. STATICE LATIFOLIA. - This perennial, with radical leaves and branching stems, forms a paniculate corymb; blue flowers from July to September. Propagates from seed in June and July. Although hardy, Statice latifolia should be grown in pots and overwintered in a greenhouse. TAGETES LUCIDA. - The flowers of this plant are a beautiful yellow. They are small, but very numerous and long-lasting. If required, Tagetes lucida can replace woody Calceolaria in the composition of beds where yellow flowers are desired. It can be propagated from seed or cuttings and overwintered in a greenhouse. TRADESCANTIA zebrina. - Creeping plant, suitable for lining the surface of beds dedicated to the cultivation of greenhouse plants during the summer. The exceptional conditions in which Tradescantia zebrina thrives add to the interest of this charming plant, already remarkable for the beauty of its leaves. Tradescantia zebrina is propagated from cuttings and overwintered in a warm greenhouse. hybrid Verbena. - The seeds from these charming little plants produce a considerable number of varieties of all shades every year. Sown in February and March, hybrid Verbena plants can be transplanted into pots, or planted out immediately, like all annuals sown in spring. Despite the simplicity of this method of cultivation, Verbena cuttings are most often propagated in August and September; overwintered in frames, Verbena cuttings are good for putting in the ground in April and May. The brilliance, freshness and long life of Verbena flowers make these plants particularly recommended for making up beds or borders by laying the branches on the ground. woody veronicas. - Woody Veronica is not to be confused with perennial Veronica, whose stems die back each year. Arranged in long clusters of red, pink or lilac, the flowers of woody Veronica turn successively white. They can be propagated from seed or from cuttings taken under cloches in August and September. Overwintered under glass, woody Veronica cuttings can be delivered to the garden in May. Varieties. - Andersoni, - Lindleyana, - Splendida. WIGANDIA Caracasana. - Of all the greenhouse plants cultivated for the beauty of their leaves, none is more ornamental than Wigandia Caracasana. It is propagated from seed or root cuttings in September and October; overwintered in the greenhouse or under glass, Wigandia Caracasana cuttings can be delivered to the field towards the end of May. To obtain the full effect that this beautiful plant can produce, reserve a place for it on lawns and give it a light soil amply supplied with consumed fertilizers. SECTION II. - Plants for water ornament. 1. Plants with floating leaves. Floating ALISMA (Alisma natans). - White flowers. Spiny-fruited CORNIFLOWER (Ceratophyllum demersum). - Herbaceous flowers in June and July; smooth-fruited variety. WATERFLOWER (Sagittaria sagittifolia). - White flowers in June; seed multiplication. WATER CHESTNUT (Trapa natans). - White flowers in June; seed multiplication. MÉNYANTHE Water clover (Menyanthes trifoliata). - White flowers in July. FROG MORREN (Hydrocharis morsus rance). - White flowers in June. WHITE NENUPHAR, Pond lily (Nymphœa alba). - White or yellow flowers in June, July and August. NÉNUPHAR odorant (N. odorata). - White, double, fragrant flowers in July. Amphibious RENQUÉE (Polygonum amphibium). - Red flowers in July. water lily (Villarsia nymphoides). - Yellow flowers in July. 2. Plants rising above the surface of the water. Fragrant Acorn (Acorus calamus). - Height, 1 m to Im 50; fragrant flowers, in catkins, in July. Swamp IRIS, Swamp GlaieuL (Iris Pseudo-Acorus). - Height, 1m, 33; beautiful yellow flowers in June. Broad-leaved MASSETTA (Typha latifolià). - Stems 1.65 to 2 meters long, ending in a spike of brown flowers in July. Narrow-leaved MASSETTA (T. angustifolia). - Less tall than its predecessor. NAIADE with lanceolate leaves (Naias monosperma). - Height, Om, 15; herbaceous flowers, August and September; seed multiplication, self-seeding. WATERWORTH (Rumex hydrolapathum). - Height, 1.50 to 2 meters; greenish flowers, July. HEART LEAF PONTEDERIA (Pontederia cordata). - Blue flowers in May. This beautiful plant can also be grown on the water's edge. WATERFOOT (Hippuris vulgaris). - Height, Om, 15 to Om, 20; dirty-white flowers in May. long-leaved pondweed (Ranunculus lingua). - Stems 1 m high; yellow flowers in June, continuing until October. SALICAIRE (Lythrum virgatum). - Height, 1 mt to Im, 33; purple-pink flowers in July and August. All Salicaria can also be grown on the water's edge. Leaning Saururus (Saururus cernuus). - Height, Om, 40; white flowers, arranged in a long cluster curved at the top. POND SCIRP (Scirpus lacustris). - Very tall plant, producing terminal spikes of flowers in July. SPARGANIUM flotant, RUBAN d'eau (Sparganium natans). - Height, Om, 33; flowers in catkins in July. All these plants can be grown in large pots or tubs immersed in water. 3. Plants suitable for waterside decoration. ALISMA water plantain (Alisma plantago). - Height, Om, 65; white or reddish flowers in July. ARUNDO DONAX. - This plant, remarkable for the power of its vegetation, must, like all reeds, be cultivated in isolation; each year, the stems of Arundo donax are cut back from the ground, then covered with leaves during harsh winters. Varieties. - White variegated leaves. - Yellow variegated leaves. The variety with white variegated leaves should be stored in winter. The yellow variegated variety can remain in place. BAMBUSA AUREA. Native to northern China, this beautiful plant can withstand the harshest cold without suffering. Like all bamboos, it produces numerous woody stems with a truly picturesque effect. Multiplication by root cuttings. BUTOMUS umbellatus, Joxc fleuri (Butomus umbellatus). - Height, 1 meter; pink flowers in July; variegated variety. LINAIGRETTE à gaînes (Friophorum vaginatum). - Height, Om, 33; in March and April, spikes covered with long white silks. WILLOW LEAF LYSIMACHY (Lysimachia ephemerum). - Height, 1 m; white flowers, July-September; seed multiplication, sown on beds, frequently watered, one of the brightest plants. LYSIMACHIE thyrsiflore, NAUMBURGIA thyrsiflore (L.thyrsiflora).-Height, Om, 33; yellow flowers, June and July; seed and splinter propagation. LYSIMACHIE ponctuée (L. punctata). - Height, Om, 65; yellow flowers in July. MARSH PARNASSIA (Parnassia palustris). - Height, Om, 25 to Om, 30; white flowers spotted with yellow, in June and July. PHALARIS ribboned, Ribbon reed (Phalaris arundinacea 19. picta). - Height, 1 m; leaves ribboned with yellow; flowers in a spiciform panicle, whitish on the shady side, purple on the sunny side; multiplication by traces. Swamp POPULAR, Swamp Soucr (Caltha palustris). -Height, Om, 33; in April and May, single or double yellow flowers. FLAMMOND (Ranunculus flammula) Height, Om, 40; yellow flowers in June and July. SCORPIONE (Myosotis palustris). - Stems from Om, 20 to Om, 26; celestial-blue flowers, April to August; propagates from seed, sown in spring, from cuttings or by bursting the stems. SPIRITS (Spirœa). - Almost all herbaceous species thrive at the water's edge, producing a pleasing effect. 4. Trees and shrubs. Veined WORTH (Vaccinium uliginosum). - Creeping stems; white or meaty flowers in May and June. Caneberry (V. Oxycoccos). - Stems like above; red flowers in May; red berries with purple spots. AUNE (Alnus). - All like damp, marshy or even submerged soil. (V. Amenity trees.) CÉPHALANTHE d'Amérique, Bois-BOUTON (Cephalantus occidentalis) Height: 1.30 to 1.65 m; white flowers in August and September. CHIONANTHE de Virginie, ARBRE de neige (Chionantus Virginica) - Height 2.65 to 4 meters; white flowers in June. Louisiana bald CYPRESS (Cupressus disticha, Schubertia disticha). (V. Amenity trees.) DIRCA des marais, Bois-CuiR (Dirca palustris). - Height, 1m, 33 to 2 meters; yellowish-white flowers in March and April. GALE, Royal pepper (Myrica Gale). - Height, 1 meter to Im, 33; flowers in catkins, in May. Pensylvanian GALE (M. Pennsylvanica). - Height, Im 65 to 2 meters; flowers as above. Virginia HAMAMELIS (Homamelis Virginica). - Height, 1.33 to 1.65 meters; yellowish-white flowers in autumn. PEPPER TREES (Populus). - They thrive in damp soils and are ideal for decorating ponds and rivers. (V. Amenity trees.) WILLS (Salix). - All willows are suitable for aquatic sites in landscape gardens, and can be advantageously placed at the water's edge, where they produce a very picturesque effect. (See Trees for pleasure.) TAMARIX de Narbonne (Tamarix Gallica). - Height, 2m, 65 to 3m, 33; purplish-white flowers, from May to October. TAMARIX d'Allemagne (T. Germanica) - Height: 2.33 to 2.65 meters; pale purple or pink flowers, June to September. Hairy TUPELO (Nyssa villosa). - Large, beautiful tree with greenish flowers in June; blue fruit. Varieties. - Aquatic, - forest. VIORNE obier, SUREaU aquatique (Viburnum opulus). - Height, 1 m to Im, 65; white flowers, May and June; red berries. SECTION VI. - Plants for rock gardens. AUBRIETIA DELTOIDEA.-Small, clump-forming plant with light-blue flowers throughout spring. ARABIS VERNA. - Small clump-forming plant with white flowers in March. CAMPANULAS. - Campanula cespitosa and Campanula carpathica, already recommended as border plants, are also well-suited to lining rocks. CRUCIANELLA RUBRA. - Spreading stems, from Om, 25 to Om, 30 long; pink flowers, all summer long. EPINEDIUM ALPINUM. -Stems from Om, 35; red and yellow flowers, in April and May. ERINUS ALPINUS - Small plant in clumps; purplish or white flowers; March and April. FOUGÈRES. - Athyrium fœmina, Adianthum pedatum, Aspidium lobatum, astrœa, recurva, Blechnum spicans, Osmunda regalis. Onoclea sensibilis, Pteris aquilina, Scolopendrium officinarum, Struthiopteris Germanica, can be placed between the stones of rocks, especially those in a cool, sheltered spot. IRIS GERMANICA. - No plant is hardier or more suitable than Iris Germanica for lining rocks. LINARIA CYMBALARIA. - Creeping stems; blue flowers all summer long. ŒETHIONEMA CORDIFOLIA. - Spreading stems, Om 15 to Om 20 long; lovely pink flowers in April and May. POTENTILLA REPTANS. -Creeping stems; yellow flowers all summer. PRIMULA - All varieties of Primula veris can be used to line rocks. SAPONARIA OCIIOIDES - Spreading stems, from Om, 15 to Om, 20 long; purplish flowers in June and July. SAXIFRAGA. - Saxifraga granulata, hypnoides and sarmentosa are particularly suitable for lining rocks. SEDUM - All Sedums are suitable for lining rocks, especially Sedum acre, elegans, hirsutum, populifolium, Siebolduï and Telephium rubrum. SEMPERVIVUM TECTORUM - Height Om, 33; purplish flowers from July to September. TUSSILAGO FARFARA, foliïs variegatis. - Remarkable for the beauty of its broad, yellow variegated leaves; yellow flowers in February and March. VINCA MAJOR (Periwinkle). - Stems about Om, 65, some upright, others recumbent; blue flowers all summer; variegated variety. VINCA MINOR (Small Periwinkle). - Blue flowers, single or double; white-flowered variety. Trees and shrubs. AIRELLE anguleuse (Vaccinium myrtillus). - Height, Om, 65; pinkish-white flowers in May; blackish-blue berries. ASTRAGALE adragant (Astragalus tragacantha). - Height, Om, 33; white flowers in June and July. CAPRIER (Capparis spinosa). - Height, 1 meter to Im, 33; white flowers, June and July; winter cover. Kermes oak (Quercus cocci fera). - Height, 1 meter; oval acorns, ripening only the second year. COTONEASTER BUXIFOLIA. - Low shrub with sloping branches; white flowers in April and May. Red fruit in autumn. Cotoneaster microphylla comptus and marginatus are also suitable for covering rocks and slopes. FONTANESIA with Filaria leaves (Fontaniesa phyllireoides). - Height, 2m, 65; flowers white, then reddish, in May. BARLEY, sterile (Ribes sterile). - Yellow flowers in April. Yellow JASMIN (Jasminum fruticans). - Height, 1 m to 1 m, 33; yellow flowers, May to September; blackish berries. Chinese LYCIET (Lycium Sinense). - Height, 2m, 65. to 3m,33; purplish-purple flowers, all summer; red berries. Narrow-leaved LYCIET, Jasminompe (L. barbarum). - It differs from the preceding plant in having slightly broader leaves and crimson-white flowers. LYCIET d'Europe (L. Europeum). - Height, 2 meters to 9.65 meters; whitish flowers. MILLEPERTUIS with large flowers (Hypericum calycinum). - Height, Om, 34; beautiful yellow flowers, from June to September. RONCE commune (Rabus fruticosus). - Several varieties are grown, the most remarkable of which are: RONCE with double white flowers -Flowers similar to small roses, from June to November. Cut-leaf RONCE. - Pink flowers from July to September. RONCE with pink flowers. - Very double pink flowers. SECTION VII. - Climbing plants for walls, cradles and arbors. 1. Annuals and perennials. CALYSTEGIA PUBESCENS. - All summer long, double flowers of soft pink, shaded with brighter pink. CALYSTEGIA SEPIUM (var. incarnatum). - Single, soft-pink flowers. Calysegia are particularly suitable for lining cradles, rocks and the stems of large trees; they are propagated by root trunks. CAPUCINA grande (Tropœolum majus). - Orange-yellow flowers all summer long; brown-flowered variety; sow outdoors in April. CANARY CAPUCINA. (Tropœolum peregrinum) - Serin yellow flowers all summer; same cultivation. COBEA climber (Cobea scandens). Violet flowers all summer long; sow in a bed in March. As soon as the plants have a few leaves, transplant them into small pots, which are left on the bed until late April or early May, when they are planted out. PERENNIAL CUCUMBER (Cucurbita perennis). - This squash is extremely remarkable for its hardiness, the beauty of its velvety leaves and the pleasant scent of its flowers. The stems of the perennial squash die during the winter, but grow back in the spring with great vigor; it is propagated from seeds, marcottes and offshoots, which are replanted in the spring. The squash, known as Tladiantha dubia, produces tubers for reproduction. annual gourds. - All annual squashes can be grown as climbing plants. They can be sown in March, on a bed, or in May, immediately in place; to this end, a good hole is prepared, filled with manure, the soil from the excavation is placed on the manure, then a basin is made, in the center of which the squash seeds are sown. Pelerine, powder pear, flat Corsican, club, siphon, metuliferous, dipsaceus, myriocarpus (gooseberry), melanosperma and all coloquintes can be processed as described above. Sweet pea (Lathyrus odoratus). - Fragrant violet, pink, red or white flowers; sow outdoors in autumn or spring. GESSE de Tanger (L. Tingitanus). - Deep purple-red flowers from July to October; sow outdoors in spring. GESSE à larges feuilles, Pois vivace (L. Latifolius). - Perennial; purple-pink flowers from July to September; sow in place in autumn or spring. Spanish beetle (Phasœlus coccineus). - Scarlet-red flowers all summer; white-flowered and bicolored varieties; sow outdoors in April. IPOMÉE, purple, VOLUBILIS (Convoloulus purpureus, Ipomœ purpurea) - White, red, pink, blue or variegated flowers all summer. All varieties can be planted in April and May. IPOMÉE Nil ou de Michaux (I. Nil, C. Nil.) - Azure-blue flowers all summer long. scarlet IPOMY, scarlet QUAMOCLIT (I. coccinea). - Scarlet flowers, all summer. 7 THUNBERGIA à pétioles ailés (Thunbergia alata) - Yellow flowers with purple centers, all summer; white-flowered variety; sow on a bed in spring and plant out in the garden. 2. Climbing plants for temperate greenhouses that can be planted out in the garden all summer. BOUSSINGAULTIA BASELLOIDES. - Large, sarmentose plant with small, very fragrant white flowers. Multiplication by cuttings, which root easily and through tubers; winter cover. tuberous capuchin. - We grow several species of tuberous-rooted nasturtiums, but they require a greenhouse. More hardy than the others, the species known as Tropœolum pentaphyllum can be planted in the open ground in April or May. As cold weather approaches, the tubers are lifted and stored in dry soil until replanting. DIOCLEA glycinoides. - Very bright red flowers in autumn; propagation by cuttings. ECCREMOCARPUS rude (Eccremocarpus scaber). - Scarlet flowers in July and August; sow immediately after maturity. IPOMÉE de Léar (Ipomga Leariï). - Large, beautiful blue flowers all summer and autumn; propagate by cuttings. LOASA with red flowers (Laosa lateritia). - Brick-red flowers, all summer; propagates from seed or cuttings. LOASA with orange flowers (L. aurantiaca). - Orange-yellow flowers, all summer; same propagation. LOPHOSPERM with pink flowers (Lophospermum erubescens). - Pink flowers, all summer; multiplication by seed and cuttings. LOPHOSPERMum volubile (L. rhodochiton). - Less tall than the preceding; pink flowers all summer; same propagation. MAURANDIE toujours fleurie (Maurandia semperflorens). - Purple-pink flowers all summer long. Propagates from seed, sown in the spring, and from cuttings. MURANDY with snapdragon flowers (M. antirrhiniflora). - Lilac flowers all summer. Barclay's MAURANDY (M. Barclayana). - Attractive blue flowers, all summer. 3. Shrubs (1). ARISTOLOCHE siphon (Aristolochia sipho). - May and June, dark purple, pipe-shaped flowers. Varieties. - Tomentose. - Sempervirens. ALPINE ATRAGEN (Atragene Alpina). - Light blue flowers in June and July. Siberian Atragon (A. Sibirica). - White flowers. Indian ragwort (A. Indica). - Flowers first green, then white, from April to November; winter cover. ATRAGEN with tendrils (A. cirrhosa). - Greenish-white flowers in autumn. BIGNONE, Virginia JASMIN (Bignonia radicans). - Large, scarlet-red flowers in July and August. BIGNONE with large flowers (B. grandiflora). - Saffron flowers. BIGNONE à vrilles (B. capreolata). - In June, orange-yellow flowers at the top, purple at the base. CELASTRE grimpant, BOURREAU des arbres (Celastrus scandens). - Greenish flowers in May and June; red fruit. Gardeners' CHESTNUT (Lonicera Caprifolium). - May and June, sweet-smelling flowers, pink inside, more or less red outside. Variety with white flowers and variegated leaves. Varieties. - Flava. - Japonica. - Sempervirens. - Sinensis. CLEMATITE odorante (Clematis flammula). - In July and August, white flowers in clusters, very fragrant. Varieties. - Azurea. - Bicolor. - Florida. - Hendersoni. - Montana, - Sophia, - Viticella, - Viticella venosa. DECUMAIRE sarmenteux (Decumaria barbata). - White, sweet-smelling flowers in August and September. CHINA GLYCINE (Glycine Sinensis). - Large, pale-blue or white, sweet-smelling flowers in April. Like all vigorous shrubs, Chinese Glycines can be pruned. However, contrary to common practice, they must be pruned in June, otherwise they will not produce flowers the following year. GLYCINE frutescente (G. frutescens). - Purple flowers from June to September. Varieties. - Backousiana, - Floribunda. GRENADILLE bleue, FLEUR de la Passion (Passiflora cœrulea). - White, blue and purplish flowers from July to October; covered in winter. GRENADILLE incarnate (P. incarnata). - White, purplish, purple and black flowers in July and August; winter cover. Cultivated HOPS (Humulus lupulus). - Yellow, scaly cone-shaped flowers from June to August. WHITE JASMINE (Jasminum officinale). - White, sweet-smelling flowers all summer long. JASMIN triomphant (J. revolutum). - Very bright yellow, very fragrant flowers; winter cover. Climbing ivy (Hedera helix). - Small, greenish flowers in September and October; black berries; variegated or spotted with white or yellow leaves. Irish ivy (H. Hibernica). - Larger leaves; more effect. Canada MENISPERM (Menispermum Canadense). - Small, greenish flowers from June to July. Varieties. - Carolina, - Virginia. Climbing MORELLE, Judean VINE (Solanum dulcamara). - Purple flowers in June and July; red berries. Varieties. - With variegated leaves, - With jasmine leaves. Greek PERIPLOCA (Periploca Grœca). - Blackish purple flowers in June and July. 4. Roses. From the Alps. - Boursault, pink, semi-double flowers, - Calypso, white, pearly flowers, - Reversa, purple flowers, - Inermis, pale pink flowers. Banks. - With white flowers, - With yellow flowers. With bracts. - Ayrschyres, double, meaty, tea-scented flowers, - Macartney, white flowers, - Maria-Leonida, white flowers, - Triomphe de Machetteau, pink flowers, streaked with white. Field. - Pink flowers, - Large white flowers. Multiflora. - Pink flowers, double, - Red flowers, double, - Gaulhie, white flowers, - Laure Davoust, bright carmine flowers. Muscat. - Single white, - Double white, - Countess Plater, yellowish-white flowers, - Princesse de Nassau, white flowers, - Dupont, single white flowers, - Eponine, double white flowers. Hazelnut. - Dark yellow Chromatella. - Euphrosine, pink and yellowish, fragrant, - Noisette ordinaire, flesh-colored flowers. - Desprez, pinkish-yellow flowers, - Lamarque, white flowers. - Labiche, white flowers, pink heart. - Solfatare, sulfur yellow. Always green. - Scandens, white flowers, - Adélaïde d'Orléans, white flowers, - Princesse Marie, soft pink flowers, - Félicité-Perpétue, blano carné flowers. Climbing roses that are to be pruned should be pruned immediately after flowering, otherwise they will not produce flowers the following year. SCHIZANDRA coccinea (Schizandra coccinea). - Coccinate flowers in July; winter cover. Virginia creeper (Cissus quinquefolia). - Recommended shrub for its vigor and hardiness; greenish flowers in autumn. Varieties. - Oriental, - Heterophyllous. SECTION VIII - Deciduous shrubs (1). Whenever the cultivation of shrubs and trees offers nothing special, we will not go into detail on the subject. All can be propagated by seed, grafting, cuttings or marcottes; but we have not deemed it necessary to indicate the method of reproduction for each, as it is only in nurseries that their education can be carried out with advantage. As for the time of planting, the nature of the soil should always be taken into account, and all that is indicated for fruit trees should be observed. Dwarf AMANDIER (Amygdalus nana). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; beautiful pink flowers in April; double-flowered variety. Varieties. - From Georgia, - from Persia. - With variegated leaves. Cratœgus Canadensis. - Height, 3.33 to 4 meters; white flowers in April; almost black fruit. BUNCH HORN (C. racemosa). - Height 2.65 to 3.33 m; white flowers in April and May; black fruit. ALEMANCHIER à épis (C. spicata). - Height, 2 meters to 2.65 meters; white flowers in May; red fruit. AMORPHA frutescent, Faux-INpIGo (Amorpha fruticosa). - Height, 2 m to 2 m, 65; purplish-blue flowers in June and July. Varieties. - Lewesii, - Glabra, - Crispa. (1) When planting species marked with an asterisk, the roots should be covered with heather soil to encourage their recovery. Rhamnoid arbutus (Hippophae rhamnoides). - Height, 2 meters to 2m, 33; spiny branches; whitish leaves, spotted with russet; greenish flowers, in April; orange berries. ASSIMINIA virginiana, Anone with three lobes (Assiminia virginiana). - Height, 3m, 33 to 4 meters; very brownish-purple flowers in May and June. Varieties. - Large-flowered, - Small-flowered. AZÉDARACH bipenné, ARBRe saint (Melia Azedarach). - Height, 3m, 33 to 4 meters; in July, soft lilac flowers, sweet-smelling; winter cover. BAGUENAUDIER (Colutea arborescens). - Height, 3 to 4 mềtres; yellow flowers, all summer; blistering fruit. BAGUENAUDIER du Levant (C. orientalis). - Height, 2 meters; saffron-red flowers, in June and July. BAGUENAUDIER d'Alep (C. Alepica). - Height, 1m, 33 to Im 65; yellow flowers, all summer. BURGUNDY (Rhamnus frangula). - Height, 2m, 65 to 4 meters; greenish flowers, April and May; black berries, Varieties. - Alpine, - Broad-leaved. BUGRANE frutescente (Ononis fruticosa). - Height, 1 meter; pink flowers in May and June; white-flowered variety. Carolina CALYCANTH, PoMPADOURA, Anemone TREE (Calycanthus floridus). - Height, 2 mêtres to 2m, 65; from May to August, reddish-brown flowers, exhaling a very pleasant fragrance. Varieties. - Fragrans, - Occidentatis. CARAGANA arborescent (Caragana arborescens, Roblinia Caragana). - Height, 2 mêtres to 3m,33; yellow flowers, in May. CARAGANA frutescent (C. frutescens). - Height, 1 metre; yellow flowers in May. SILVER CARAGANA (C. argentéa). - Height, 1m, 33 to Im, 65; pale pink flowers, April and May. Varieties. - Altagana, - Chamlagu, - Grandiflora, - Pygmæa. CERISIER odorant, Bois de Sainte-Lucie (Cerasus Mahaleb, Prunus Mahaleb). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; fragrant white flowers in May; black fruit. CESTREAU with black berries (Cestrum Parqui). - Height, 1.65 m; yellow flowers all summer, giving off a pleasant scent at night. Tartarian CHAMERA (Chamœcerasus (Lonicera) Tatarica). - Height, 2m,65; pink flowers outside, white inside; red berries. Varieties. - Des Pyrénées, - Ledebour. - Standish. "CLETHRA à feuilles d'Aune (Clethra alnifolia). - Height, 1m, 65 to 2 meters; small, white, fragrant flowers in August. Varieties. - Cottony, - Acuminate. - Paniculate. COIGNASSIER de la Chine (Cydonia Sinensis). - Height, 1 meter; beautiful red flowers, sweet fragrance, in April and May. Fern-leaved COMPTONIA (Comptonia aspleniifolia). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 m; flowers in catkins, from March to May. Japanese CORET (Kerria Japonica, Spirœa Japonica). - Height, 1m, 65 to two meters; very double, yellow flowers, all summer and autumn. GARDEN CORONIL (Coronilla Emerus). - Height, Im, 33; beautiful yellow flowers, spotted with red, from April to June. BLOOD CUCUMBER (Cornus sanguinea). - Height, 2m, 65 to 4 meters; beautiful red twigs; white flowers, in June, black berries. Varieties. - From Florida, - With alternate leaves. TRIFOLIUM (Cytisus sessilifolius). - Height, 1.65 to 2 meters; yellow flowers, March and June. CYTISE with spikes (C. nigricans). - Height, 1 m to Im 33; fragrant yellow flowers in June and July. Headed CYTISE (C. capitatus). - Height, 0r65; aurora-yellow flowers in June and July. Varieties. - Adami, - White-flowered, - Purple-flowered, - Biflora. DAPHNE Bois-Joli (Daphne Mezereum). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; from December to February, bright pink or white, fragrant flowers. Alpine DAPHNE (D. alpina). - Height, Om, 65; fragrant white flowers in May and June. DEUTZIE crénelée (Deutzia scabra). - Height, 1 meter; white flowers, all summer. DEUTZIE with tapering stems (D. gracilis). - Taller than the previous one; in May and June, flowers in small clusters of beautiful white. Varieties. - Canescens, - Corymbosa. DIERVILLE jaune (Diervilla lutea). - Height, Om, 65 to I meters; yellow flowers, from June to November. VINE PINE (Berberus vulgaris). - Height, 2 mêtres 20 to 2m, 65; yellow flowers, in May; red fruits in maturity. Varieties. - With purple leaves, - With variegated leaves. - From Canada. - From Nepal. FORSYTHIA SUSPENSA. - Japanese shrub with sarmentose branches. Numerous yellow flowers in February and March. Common FUSAIN, Priest BoNNEr (Evonymus Europœus). - Height, 3.33 to 4 meters; whitish flowers in May; attractive red fruits. Varieties. - Atropurpureus, - Latifolius, - Verrucosus. COMMON GARDEN (Vitex agnus castus). - Height, 2m, 65 to 4 meters; purple or white flowers in summer. Varieties. - Hybrid, - With incised leaves. SPANISH GENET (Genista juncea). - Height, 2 meters; sweet-smelling yellow flowers in July and August; odorless double-flowered varieties. Varieties. - White-flowered. - From Siberia. - Dyers. GORDONIA with hairless leaves (Gordonia lasianthus). - Height, 4 meters; white flowers, in September and October. GORDANIA pubescent (G. pubescens). - Less tall than above; white flowers in August and September. GOLDEN GARDEN (Ribes aureum). - Height, 2 to 3 meters; fragrant yellow flowers in April. Red-flowered GROOSEILLIER (R. sanguineum). - Height, 1 to 2 meters; bright pink flowers in April. Varieties. - Malvaceum, - Gordonianum, - Sanguineum; - Sanguineum flore pleno; - Flore albo, - Speciosum. FOUR-WINGED HALESIA (Halesia tetraptera). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; numerous white flowers in May. Two-winged HALESIA (H. diptera). - This species differs from the previous one only in its slightly broader leaves and seeds. HYDRANGEA JAPONICA. - Hydrangea habit; in August. pinkish-white flowers tinged with blue; varieties with white variegated leaves; suitable for forming charming beds. Virginia Hydrangea (Hydrangea arborescens). - Height, 1 m to 1 m, 33; white flowers in July. IDIGOFERA DOSUA. - This shrub, worthy in every respect of a place at the forefront of ornamental garden beds, produces in May, and successively until the frosts, charming crimson-pink flowers in long clusters, similar to those of the White Acacia. The Indigofera decora species is also recommended for its abundant flowering. Virginia Itea (Itea Virginica). - Height, 1 m to Im 33; white flowers in June. ITEA à grappes (I, racemiflora). - Height, 5 to 6 meters; white flowers in June. Garden KETMIA, ALTHÆA FRUTTEX, (Hibiscus Syriacus). - Height, 2 meters to 2.33 meters; in August and September, purple-red, violet or white flowers, with bright red tabs, depending on variety. Varieties. - With double flowers. - With variegated leaves. LEYCESTERIA elegante (Leycesteria formosa). - Height, Im, 65 to 2 meters; pinkish-white flowers all summer; covered during hard frosts. COMMON LILAC (Syringa vulgaris). - Height, 3 to 4 meters; in April and May, violet, red, purple or white flowers, depending on the variety, of which there are now many as a result of annual sowing. Persian lilac (S. Persica). - Red, purple or white flowers, smaller than those of the common Lilac. Josika LILAC (S. Josikœa). - Purplish flowers, later than other species. MAGNOLIA discolor (Magnolia discolor). - Height, 1 to 4 meters; flowers purple on the outside, white on the inside, from April to June. MAGNOLIA glauque (M. glauca). - Height, 5 meters; white flowers, very sweet-smelling, from July to September. MERISIER à grappes (Cerasus Padus). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; white flowers in May; black fruit. MILLEPERTUIS fetide (Hypericum hircinum). - Height, 1 meter; yellow flowers all summer. Varieties. - High, - Prolific, - With oblong leaves, - With Kalmia leaves. - Rosemary leaves. MURIER multicaule (Morus multicolis). - Large, embossed leaves with a beautiful effect. Fears frosts, but can be cut back every year and covered in winter. American walnut (Corylus Americana). - Height, I mêtre to 1m, 65; flowers in March and April; fruits small and of little value. Varieties. - With purple leaves. - With laciniate leaves. HAT PALIURA (Paliurus aculeatus) Height, 2.65 m; very spiny branches; very small, yellow flowers in June and July; unusually shaped fruit. tree peonies. - All tree peonies withstand our winters very well with a little shelter; but as they come into vegetation very early, care must be taken to protect them from spring frosts. Varieties. - Athlète, - Blanche de Noisette. - Comte de Flandres, - Comte de Rambuteau, - Empress Josephine. - Moutan, - Mme de Vatry, - Triomphe de Malines. POINCILLADE de Gillies (Poinciana Gilliesii). - Height, 1 to 2 meters; large, yellow flowers in clusters, stamens a beautiful purplish purple; winter cover. POTENTILLE frutescente (Potentilla fruticosa). - Height, 1 meter; beautiful yellow flowers all summer. SPINY PLUM (Prunus spinosa) - Height, 2.65 m; spiny branches: white flowers in March and April; small, very acerbic fruit. This shrub is ideal for making impenetrable hedges. Varieties. - With double flowers, - With variegated flowers. PTÉLÉA trifolié, ORMe à trois feuilles (Ptelea trifoliata). - Height, 3 to 4 mềtres; greenish flowers, in June. ROSE TREES. - This beautiful genus is very numerous in species, and thanks to remontant varieties, we can now enjoy the beauty of its charming flowers for a good part of the year. Roses like a clean, slightly cool soil, amended from time to time with fertilizer; they can be propagated by seed, offspring, marcots, cuttings and grafts. 1. Sowing. - This method of propagation is only used when new varieties are desired. Seeds are sown as soon as they reach maturity, either in terrines, which are brought in during the winter, or in a bed at sunrise, taking care to cover the seedlings during the frosts. 20. 2 Cuttings. - We remove them in autumn, and put them in gauge to replant them in February or March; they are easy to take up; they don't even need to have many roots; a good heel is often enough. 3. Marcottes. - Softwood species are pruned by incision, in May and June, either in the ground or in pruning pots, and woody species are pruned by vine. (See Marcottes article.) 4. Cuttings. - Almost all species can be propagated with cuttings, but on a bed and smothered. Only the Bengals and the Bourbon Islands can do without this care. Species that are to be raised on stems are propagated mainly by scape grafting, using the long-fruited Rose Hip as the subject, followed by the Four Seasons Rose or the ordinary Bengal for species that have some affinity with the latter, and in cases where only low stems are required. Roses are grafted in July and August, taking care, as indicated in the article on Grafting, to take advantage of the time when the plants are most healthy. As for the choice of species, each person must choose according to his or her taste, and the only recommendation we have to make to people who have roses to graft is that they should always prefer species that can withstand the rigors of our winters without suffering. In addition to grafted Roses, we also grow a large number of free-standing varieties, with which we create charming beds. But as many of them suffer from our winters, to preserve them, you need to butter them as the cold approaches, then cover them with leaves or litter if there are heavy frosts. Finally, in February, when frosts are no longer to be feared, the roses are uncovered and the mounds destroyed. In this way, all the varieties that are usually grown in pots can be brought out into the open. You can easily bring forward the flowering of species such as Quatre-Saisons, du Roi, Bengale ordinaire and some of its varieties. To do this, you need to have roses planted in pots from the previous year; you prune them in autumn, and as early as January you can start to force some of them, either by placing them in a heated greenhouse, always as close as possible to the stained-glass windows, or under a frame; but then you need to dig a good trench around the trunk; then you raise a stove of new manure, 'which you reshuffle more or less often, depending on the season. Cover the frames at night, and give them some air when the sun comes out. All roses grown in the open ground flower in June; later on, those of remontant species flower a second time, but there is necessarily an interruption between the first and second flowerings. To remedy this, simply remove the flower buds from a number of remontant Roses. Stopped for a moment in their development, these Roses soon produce new branches, whose flowers succeed the first Roses. Then comes the second natural flowering, so that by this means you have Roses all through the summer. There's nothing special about growing Roses; all you have to do is prune them in March, more or less short, depending on their vigor, and while they're growing, pinch off the ends of any branches that are growing too vigorously; then carefully remove all the branches that grow from the base or from the stem. White and violet Petunias, or Gladiolus, which also produce a beautiful effect, can be planted at the base of slightly high grafted Roses to garnish the stem. For the same purpose, sow a little dwarf larkspur seed in spring between those grown in beds. Varieties. tea or india roses. - Adam, pl. light pink, - Bougère, soft pink, - Comte de Paris, very light pink. - Devoniensis, white

yellowish, - Duc de Magenta, copper pink. - Louise de Savoie, sulfur yellow, - Madame Bravy, slightly pinkish white, - Id. Mélanie Willermoz, white, yellowish center. - Narcisse, yellowish. - Pactole white, yellow heart, - Safrano, yellow to yellowish bl. - Sombreuil, slightly pinkish white. - Souvenir d'un Ami, or Queen Victoria, beautiful pink, - Vicomtesse de Cazes, coppery yellow fading to pale yellow. BENGAL ROSES. - Archduke Charles, pink fading to crimson. - White Camellia. - Cels, multiflora, carne, - Cramoisi supérieur, bright crimson, - Madame Bréon, beautiful pink, - Prince Charles, bright cherry. HAZELNUT ROSES. - Aimé Vibert, pure white. - Chromatella, yellow to light yellow, - Desprez, pink and yellowish, - Lamarque, yellowish white, - Madame Deslonchamps, slightly yellowish carnelian white. - Ophirie, copper aurora. - Solfatare, very pronounced sulfur yellow, - Triomphe de Rennes, canary yellow. ROSES ILE BOURBON. - Acidalie, medium or light white, - Apolline, strongly shaded soft pink. - Comice de Tarn-et-Garonne, bright carmine, - Comtesse de Barbantane, carmine white, - Docteur Leprestre, bright velvety red, - Gloire de Dijon, carmine white with yellowish center, - Guillaume le Conquérant, light pink, - Hermosa, soft pink, - Louise Odier, bright pink, - Marquis de Moyria, bright pink, - Mistriss Bosanquet, soft carmine, tr. florifère, - "Monsieur Gourdau, dark purple, - Paxton, bright pink with tan undertones, - Reine des fles Bourbon, yellowish carné. - Souvenir de la Malmaison, lightly carinated white. - Id, de l'Arquebuse, gr. pl. bright red, bright cherry, - Victor-Emmanuel, variable purple-red. HYBRID REMONTANT ROSES. - Alexandrine Bachmeteff, bright red. - Alphonse Karr (Cherpin), bright pink, - Anna de Diesbach, beautiful carmine pink, - Auguste Mie, bright pink. - Baroness Hallez de Claparède, bright red, - Baroness Prévost, beautiful pink, - Caroline de Sansal, light carmine, pink center. - Cardinal Patrizzi, dazzling red with purple undertones, - Comte de Nanteuil, bright pink, - Comtesse Cécile de Chabrillant, glazed bright pink, - Cornet, soft pink. - Deuil de la reine des Belges, dark red, - Duchesse de Cambacérès, bright pink, - Id. d'Orléans, hydrangea pink, - Id. Sutherland, carné, - Emperor of Morocco, nuanced velvety purple, - François Arago, nuanced velvety amaranth, - François Ier, cherry red nuanced with dark red. - François Lacharme, bright carmine fading to red, - Giant of battles, bright red, - General Jacqueminot, bright carmine, - Id. Washington, bright red. - Jules Margottin, light crimson, - Lion of battles, dark red shaded with fire. - Lord Raglan, bright purple center, purple at circumference, - Louis Bonaparte, bright pink, - Louis XIV, bright velvety crimson. - Louise Odier, beautiful bright pink, - Madame Boll, beautiful bright pink, - Id. Charles Crapelet, icy cherry pink, - Id. Ducher, soft pink, almost white, - Id. Furtado, carmine pink. - Id. St. Hilaire, pink, back of petals white, - Id. Knorr, bright pink with light pink edges, - Id. Laffay, light pink, - Id. Vidot, carne white shaded with bright pink, - Mère de saint Louis, white fading to soft pink, - Pœonia, crimson red, - Pie IX, crimson, - Id. Léon Kotschoubey, bright red, - Rose de la Reine, lilac satin pink. - Sénateur Vaïsse, bright red, - Souvenir de la reine d'Angleterre, beautiful bright pink, - Id. de Leweson, Gower, dark red fading to light red, - Sidonie, pink. - Triomphe de l'Exposition, bright red, - Vicomte Vigier, purplish red, - Victor Verdier, pink shaded with bright carmine." HYBRID HAZELNUT ROSES. - Impératrice Eugénie, slightly pinkish white fading to pure white. - Virginale, pure white. NASTURTIUM ROSE. - Persian yellow. HUNDRED-LEAF ROSES. - Des peintres, - Unique panachée, - Mousseuse rose. - White foamy. SERINGA odorant (Philadelphus coronarius). - Height, 2 mêtres to 2m, 60; very fragrant white flowers in June; variegated variety. Varieties. - Inodorus, - Latifolius, - Mexicanus, - Grandiflorus, - Speciosus, - Gordonianus. SPIRÆA. - Spirwa are charming shrubs with white or pink flowers, in umbrellas, corymbs or panicles, which should be included in the composition of all beds; they require light, cool soil to thrive. Varieties. - Arigfolia. - Bella, - Billardi. - Callosa. - Douglasi, - Eximia, - Lanceolata, - Lindleyana, - Pruuifolia, - Pubescens, - Reevesi, - Salicifolia, - Fortuneii. STAPHYLÉ à feuilles ailées, Faux PISTAcHer (Staphylea pinnata). - Height 4 to 5 meters; white flowers in April and June. Ternate-leaved STAPHYLIST (S. trifoliata). - Less tall than above; larger, purer white flowers in May and June. SUMAC fustet (Rhus cotinus). - Height, Om, 33 to 2 meters; small, whitish flowers; very long peduncles, forming a very picturesque plume. SUREAU à grappes (Sambucus racemosa). - Height, 2 meters to 2.65 meters; white flowers in April and May; red berries. Canada currant (S. canadensis). - Height, 2 m to 2 m, 65; white flowers in July; black berries. Varieties. - Common, - with silver leaves, - with laciniate leaves, - with round leaves, - heterophyllous. SYMPHORINE with small flowers (Symphoricarpos parviflora). - Height, 1m, 33 to Im, 65; in August, small, pink, inconspicuous flowers; red fruits. SYMPHORINE (S. racemosa). - Height, 1 metre to Im, 65; flowers similar to the preceding one, in August; fruits produce a charming effect. SYMPHORINE of Mexico (S. Mexicana) - Height, 1 meter at Im,33; pink flowers, all summer; white fruits, tinted with purple. COMMON TROEN (Ligustrum vulgare). - Height 2 m, 65 to 4 m; white flowers in June and July; black berries. Variety with variegated leaves. Used to form borders and hedges that can be trimmed. VIORNA (Viburnum lantana). - Height, 2.65 m; white flowers in July; red berries, then black. VIORNE obier (V. opulus) - Same height as above; white flowers in May; black berries. VIORNE sterile, Boule De NEIGE (V. sterile). - Variety of the preceding one; height, 2 m to 2.65 m; white flowers in May. WEIGELIA ROSEA. - Charming shrub from northern China, quite similar to Seringa. In May, pink flowers, numerous and very elegant. Ordinary light soil. Parsley-leaved XANTHORHIZE (Xanthorhiza apiifolia). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 meter; brownish-purple flowers in March and April. SECTION IX. - Ornamental evergreen shrubs. Nepalese gorse (Ulex Nepalensis). - Height, 1 meter; yellow flowers in April and May. ALATERNE (Rhamnus alaternus). - Height, 3 to 4 meters; fragrant, yellowish flowers in April; narrow-leaved variety. Varieties. - With white variegated leaves; - With yellow variegated leaves. SHINY ALISER (Cratœgus glabra). - Height, 2m to 3m, 33; small, white flowers, washed with pink. Varieties. - Glaucous, - from China: Japanese AUCUBA (Aucuba Japonica). - Height, 1 m to Im 33; glossy green leaves, mottled with yellow; brown flowers, small in April, numerous in May and June. Since the introduction of the male-flowered Aucuba, the only female-flowered Aucuba we once had has produced numerous scarlet fruits, adding enormously to the ornamental value of this charming shrub. Experience has shown that a single male-flowered Aucuba is sufficient to fertilize all the female-flowered Aucubas in a plantation; as we can see, nothing is easier than to have fruits on all the Aucubas in our gardens. BUDDLEIA LINDLEYANA. - Hardy shrub, suitable for bedding. Purplish-purple flowers in spikes all spring. Boxwood (Buxus sempervirens). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; inconspicuous white flowers in April; variety with white or yellow variegated leaves. BUIs de Mahon (B. Balearica) - Height, 3m, 33; yellow flowers in April. BUISson ardent (Mespilus pyracantha). - Height, 1m, 65 to 2 meters; very numerous white flowers in May and June; scarlet fruit. BUPLEVRE HARE'S EAR (Buplevrum fruticosum). - Height, 1m, 33 to Im,65; small, yellow flowers in July and August. Silique CARUBEAN (Ceratonia siliqua). - Medium-sized tree, dark purple flowers in August; silique Om 33 long, containing a reddish pulp that is good for eating; southern exposure. GREEN OAK (Quercus ilex). - These oaks are less tall than common oaks, have smaller, firm, leathery leaves, with more or less prickly teeth; they are sensitive to severe cold, and should be covered in winter while young. Varieties. - Carolina, - Carolina with variegated leaves. - Cocciferous, - Heterophyllous, - Cork. - Yeuse. FILARIA à larges feuilles (Phillyrea latifolia) - Height, 4 meters; greenish-white, inconspicuous flowers in March; black berries; narrow-leaved variety. JAPANESE HORSETAIL (Evonymus Japonicus). - This shrub produces two broad-leaved varieties, one white, the other yellow, which can be used to create attractive beds. Common holly (Ilex aquifolium). - Height, 6 to 8 meters; small, white flowers in May and June; red, yellow or white berries, depending on variety. Varieties. - Altaclarense, - Balearica, - Canadensis, - Cuninghamii, - Ferox. - Flammea. - Laurifolia, - Longifolia, - Marginata, - Serratifolia. Cherry or almond LAUREL (Cerasus laurocerasus). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; small, white flowers in May. Varieties. - Narrow-leaved, - variegated, - Colchis. LAUREL (Laurus nobilis). - Height, 5 to 6 meters; yellowish flowers in May; black berries; variegated-leaf variety; winter cover. PORTUGUESE LAUREL, Azaréro (Cerasus Lusitanica). - Height, 5 meters; small, white flowers in May; black berries. TIN LAUREL (Viburnum tinus). - Height, 2 mêtres to 2m, 65; white flowers in March and April; winter cover. Varieties. - Broad-leaved, - variegated. Tree ivy (Hedera arborescens). - A non-21 climbing species that can be used to good advantage in the composition of ornamental garden beds. MAGNOLIA with large flowers (Magnolia grandiflora). - A tall, handsome tree with fragrant white flowers, Magnolia is not choosy about where it grows, but it does not like dampness. We plant it in April and May; otherwise it loses its leaves and recovers with difficulty. The species cultivated under the name of Magnolia Oxoniensis flowers younger, but is more delicate, and is often lost in the Paris climate. HOLLY LEAF MAHONIA (Mahonia aquifolium). - Height, 1 to 2 meters; yellow flowers in April and May. Varieties. Fascicularis, - Intermedia, - Nervosa. - Nepalensis, - Trifoliata, - Pallida, - Darwinii, - Bealii, - Fortunei,- Japonica. Japanese medlar (Mespilus Japonica). - Height, 2 m to 2.65 m; fragrant white flowers in autumn and sometimes in May; must be protected from the cold during harsh winters. PHLOMIS frutescent (Phlomis fruticosa). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 m; bright yellow flowers from July to September. SENECON tree (Coniza halimifolia). - Height, 2 mềtres to 3m, 33; white flowers, in October and November. JAPANESE TROLEY (Ligustrum Japonicum). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; white flowers, June and July. Varieties. - variegated leaves, - Nepaul. Dwarf YUCCA (Yucca gloriosa). - Height, Om, 65 to 1 meter; in August and September, rather large and numerous white flowers. Varieties. - Aloefolia, - Glauca, - Glaucescens, - Pendula, - Filamentosa, - Flaccida. SECTION X. - Heath shrub. ANDROMEDA (Andromeda). - Fairly hardy shrub; height, Om, 65 to 1m, 65; white or red flowers, June to August; fresh heather soil, northern or eastern exposure. Varieties. - Axillaris, - Lucida, - Hendersonii, - Poliifolia, - Racemosa, - Cassinefolia, - Rollisonii, - Arborea. Common arbutus (Arbutus unedo). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; white flowers, from September to December; red, fleshy, strawberry-like fruit. andrachnate arbutus (A. andrachne). - More delicate than the preceding; white flowers in March and April; red fruit. AZALEA (Azalea deciduous). - Veryrustic shrub; height, Om.65 to 2 meters; charming flowers all spring and summer, white, red, pink or yellow, depending on variety. Three main species are grown in the open ground, each of which has produced a large number of varieties. We will only mention the most remarkable. As with the Andromeda, they require shady exposure. AZALEA NUDIFLORA. - Height, 1 meter; white or red flowers in May and June. Varieties. - Alba. - Alba plena. - Bicolor. - Blanda. - Carnea, - Coccinea, - Crispa, - Incana, - Incarnata, - Mirabilis, - Partita, - Purpurea, - Rosea, - Rubicunda, - Rubra, - Rutilans, - Versicolor. AZALEA VISCOSA. - Height, 1m, 33 to Im, 65; fragrant white flowers in April and May. Varieties. - Dealbata, - Fissa, - Glauca, - Odorata, - Rubescens. - Serotina, - Variegata, - Vittata. AZALEA PONTICA. - Height, 1.65 to 2 meters; yellow flowers, May and June. Varieties. - Albiflora. - Aurantiaca. - Calendulacea. - Crocea, - Cuprea, - Flammea, - Grandiflora. - Ignescens. - Pallida, - Speciosa, - Splendens, - Sinensis lutea, - Tricolor, - Triumphans. DAPHNE CNEORUM, Alpine THYME. - Creeping stems; pleasant-smelling, deep-pink flowers in April and May. Varieties. - With white flowers, - With variegated leaves. DAPHNE COLLINA. - Height, Om, 65; soft pink, sweet-smelling flowers, April to June. DAPHNE PONTICA. - Height, Om, 65 to I meter; yellow, fragrant flowers, March and April. DAPHNE dauphin. - Height, Om, 65; purple-pink flowers, November to April. ERICA ARBOREA. - Height, 1m, 33 to 2 meters; small, white flowers, February and March. ERICA MEDITERRANEA. - Height, 1 meter to Im, 33; pink flowers, in March and April. ERICA MULTIFLORA. - Height, Om, 65; light purple flowers from August to October. FOTHERGILLE à feuilles d'Aune (Fothergilla alnifolia). - Height, Om, 65; small, spiky, white flowers, pleasantly fragrant, April. CANADA GAULTHERIA (Gaultheria procumbens). - Height, Om, 20 to Om, 25; bright red flowers at different times; red berries. HORTENSIA à feuilles d'obier (Hydrangea opulifolia). - Height, 1 meter to Im, 33; June to November; purplish-red flowers, blue in some areas; winter cover. KALMIA (Kalmia). - Superb shrub; height, Om, 50 to 2 meters; from May to July, red, pink, white or carmine flowers, depending on the variety; fresh heather soil, with northern or eastern exposure. Varieties. - Latifolia, - Augustifolia, - Glauca. - Oleifolia. MENZIEZIA with Polium leaves (Menziezia polüfolia) - low, creeping stems, purple flowers in summer: white-flowered varieties. PRINOS verticillatus, ApALANCHE vert (Prinos verticillatus). - Height 1m, 65 to 2 meters; white flowers in July and August; red fruit. PRINOS glabre (P. glaber). - Height, Om, 65; white flowers in August. RHODODENDRUM PONTICUM. - Height, 2 m to 2 m, 65; large, more or less dark purplish-purple flowers in May. It has produced a large number of varieties: the most remarkable are : Varieties. - Album, - Bullatum. - Elegantissimum. - Guttatum, - Heterophyllum. - Hyacinthæflorum. - Monstrosum. - Nivaticum, - Nazarethii, - Roseum superbum. - Rubrum. - Vervaenneanum. RHODODENDRUM MAXIMUM. - Height, 1m, 65 to 2 meters; more or less bright pink flowers, in May and June; varieties. Varieties. - Album, - Roseum. RHODODENDRUM CATAWBIENSE. - Height, 1 meter; large, soft-pink flowers in May and June. Varieties. - Bicolor, - Purpureum, - Pardolaton, - Speciosum. RHODODENDRUM ARBOREUM. - Rhododendrum arboreum, so remarkable for the beauty of its flowers, has produced several varieties that can be grown in full soil. Like all heathland shrubs, Rhododendrum arboreum should preferably be placed in a northerly position, flowering some time after those grown in greenhouses, so that flowers can be produced for several months. The following varieties have already withstood several winters in the open ground without suffering. Varieties. - Altaclanense, - Charles Truffaut, - Curninghami, - Elegantissima. - Lady Warander, - Louis-Philippe, - Madame Bertin, - Nobilianum, - Russelianum, - Smithi elegans, - Superbissima. - Triumphans. SECTION XI. - Deciduous ornamental trees. AILANTUS glandulosa, Japanese Wormwood (Ailantus glandulosa). - A tall tree with a fine habit and vigorous growth; greenish flowers in August. ALIZIER à feuilles larges ou de Fontainebleau (Cratœgus latifolia). - Height, 8m, 33; whitish leaves underneath; white flowers in May and June; scarlet saffron fruits. Varieties. - White, - From Lapland. SPINY ARALY (Aralia spinosa). - Height, 2m, 65 to 3m 33; spiny stem; fragrant white flowers, March to September. Common alder (Alnus communis). - Very tall tree, stemmed or bushy, vigorous vegetation in damp soils; catkin-shaped flowers in July. Varieties. - With laciniate leaves, - Silver. Bonpuc, Cmicor du Canada (Gymnocladus Canadensis). - Attractive tree; white flowers in June. Common birch (Betula alba). - Very tall, hardy tree with flexible branches; very light foliage; catkin-shaped flowers in July. Varieties: - With laciniate leaves. - Black. - Paper, - Fragrant. BROUSSONETIA, PAPER WALL (Broussonctia papyrifera). - Height, 5m to 6m, 65; leaves of various shapes; flowers in grayish catkins, from March to September. Varieties. - With variegated leaves, - With hooded leaves. CATALPA (Bignonia Catalpa). - Height, 10 meters; large, green leaves; white flowers with purple dots in August. This beautiful tree deserves to be placed in isolation, so that you can enjoy the pleasure of its view. DOUBLE-FLOWERED CHERRY (Cerasus flore pleno). - Variety of the common cherry; beautiful white flowers in April. Varieties. - Virginia, - Peach-leaved. CHALEF à feuilles étroites, OliVIer de Bohême (Elœagnus angustifolia). - Height, 5m to 6m, 65; branches covered with white down; whitish, cottony leaves; small, yellowish, very fragrant flowers in June and July. CHARME commun (Carpinus betulus). - Very tall, hardy tree; catkin-shaped flowers from March to May. Planted young, it can be used to form palisades known as "charmilles"; if mowed regularly, it can easily take on any shape desired. The following varieties are also used in landscape gardens: Varieties. - Variegated, - Oak-leaved, - American, - Virginia. CHATAIGNIER d'Amérique, CHINCAPIN (Castanea Americana). - Large tree with lanceolate leaves edged with sharp teeth; catkin-shaped flowers in July and August. Varieties. - variegated leaves, - heterophyllous. common oak (quercus pedunculata). - This is undoubtedly the most beautiful tree in our forests; it is to be regretted that its gigantic proportions do not always allow it to be placed in gardens. Among the European and American species, there are several that deserve to be used in landscape gardens. Here are some of the most remarkable. 1. european oaks. - variegated leaves. - Fern-leaved. - Pyramidal, - Hairy. - Hairy with variegated leaves. 2. American oaks. - White, - Very large fruit, - Bicolored, - Red, - Mountain, - Marsh, - Quercitron, - Coccine, - Willow-leaved. Ash-leaved CLAVALIER (Yanthoxylum fraxineum). - Height, 4 meters; thorny branches, inconspicuous flowers in March and April; beautiful red capsules. CHINESE CINNUT (Cydonia Sinensis). - Medium-sized tree; smooth leaves; fragrant pink flowers in April and May. Male CUCUMBER (Cornus mas). - Height, 4 to 5 meters; small, yellow flowers in February; red or yellow berries, depending on variety. Large-flowered CUCUMBER (C. florida). - Height, 10 meters; small, yellow flowers in May; red berries. ALPINE CYTIZER (Cytisus laburnum). - Height, 5 meters, stemmed or bushy; long, pendulous branches; numerous yellow flowers in May and June. Varieties. - Odorant, - Pleureur, - A feuilles de Chêne, - D'Adam. WHITE PINE (Mespilus oxyacantha). - Height, 6 m to 6 m, 65; thorny branches; white, very fragrant flowers in May; red or yellow fruit. Raised as a bush, it forms very solid hedges. Varieties. - With double white flowers, - With single pink flowers, - With variegated leaves, - Parasol. SPANISH PINE, AzEROLIER (M. Azarolus). - Higher than the preceding variety; white flowers in June; apple-shaped fruit, red or yellow, or pear-shaped, depending on the variety. PINE ergot de coq (M. crus galli). - Height, 6m, 65; twigs lined with spines similar to rooster spurs; white flowers, in May and June; beautiful red fruit. Sycamore maple (Acer pseudo-platanus). - Very tall tree; palmate leaves; yellowish flowers in April and May. negundo maple (A. negundo). - Large tree with 21. stiff, brittle limbs; smooth green bark; small, green flowers in April. Variety with white variegated leaves. Nothing can give an exact idea of the effect produced by a Negundo bed with white variegated leaves and a few red-leaved annuals. Jasper maple (A. Pensylvanicum). - Medium-sized tree; broad, rounded leaves; glaucous-green bark streaked with white lines; greenish flowers in May. Red maple (A, rubrum). -Large, beautiful tree; toothed leaves, white underneath; red flowers in April and May; red fruit. Japanese Maples ornatum, Friederici Guillelmi and sanguineum are charming ornamental trees worthy of a place in any pleasure garden. American Beech, Acacia triacanthos (Gleditschia triacanthos). - Height, 10 to 12 meters; numerous, often very long thorns; inconspicuous, dirty-white flowers in May and June; very long pods. Varieties. - Thornless, - Weeping. Chinese beech (G. Sinensis, G. horrida). - Height, 10 to 12 meters; numerous, spindle-shaped thorns; greenish flowers in June and July. Caspian beech (G. Caspica). - Tall tree with very long, curved thorns. Common ash (Fraxinus excelsior). - Very tall tree, light foliage; yellowish flowers in April and May. Several varieties are grown, all suitable for landscaped gardens. Flowering ash (F. ornus) - 10 meters high; dark green leaves; white flowers in May and June. Varieties. - Argentea, - Aurea, - Pendula, - Scolopendrifolia, - Jaspidœa, - Americana, - Juglandifolia, - Sambucifolia, - Latifolia, - Variegata. GINRGO BILOBA, FORTY-ECUS TREE (Salisburia adiantifolia). - Very tall, pyramidal tree, remarkable for the shape of its leaves; yellowish, catkin-shaped flowers; plum-like fruit; almonds good for eating. COMMON BEECH (Fagus sylvatica). - Large, beautiful and very rustic tree; catkin-shaped flowers in April and May; hazelnut-flavored fruit, from which a highly prized oil is extracted. Varieties. - Weeping, - Purple-leaved, - Copper-leaved. - With variegated leaves, - With fern-like leaves. - With crisp leaves. KŒLREUTERIA paniculata, SAVONIER (Kœlreuteria paniculata). - Medium-sized tree; pleasant habit; beautiful yellow flowers from June to August. LIQUIDAMBAR copal (Liquidambar styraciflua). - Height, 10 to 12 meters; palmate leaves; fragrant, greenish flowers in spring. LIQUIDAMBAR imberbe (L. imberbe). - Same height as above, but hardier. SPINY MACLURA (Maclura aurantiana). - Beautiful tree with thorny branches; greenish, catkin-shaped flowers in June and July; green, spherical fruits with rough bark. MAGNOLIA acuminata (Magnolia acuminata). - Very tall, hardy tree; very large leaves; greenish-yellow flowers, Om, 10 wide, in May and June. MAGNOLIA with heart-shaped leaves (M. cordata). - This species is closely related to the previous one. MAGNOLIA auriculé (M. auriculata). - Height, 10 meters; large, white, fragrant flowers in April and May. MAGNOLIA glauque (M. glauca). - Height, 5 mềtres; very-rustic; leaves glaucous green beneath; white, fragrant flowers, July to September. Thompson's MAGNOLIA (M. Thompsoniana) - Pyramidal stem; white, large flowers from Om, 15. Large-leaved MAGNOLIA (M. macrophylla). - Height, 6m, 65 to 10 meters; leaves Om, 65 long; white flowers, Om,15 wide. MAGNOLIA Yulan (M. conspicua). - Height, 10 to 12. meters; leaves Om, 20 long; white, fragrant flowers in April. MAGNOLIA parasol (M. umbella). - Height, 6m, 65 to 10 meters; Om leaves, 50 long; large, white flowers, in May and June. MAGNOLIA de Soulange (M. Soulangeana). - Height, 3 to 4 meters; fragrant flowers, white inside, purple above, in April. Horse chestnut (Æsculus hippocastanum). - A handsome, very tall, hardy tree; white flowers, variegated with red, in May. CHESTNUT rubicunda (A). - Less tall than the preceding tree; greener foliage; attractive red flowers in May and June. MARRONIER Pavier jaune (Pavia lutea, Æsculus flava). - Less tall than the Horse Chestnut; pale yellow flowers in May. Red chestnut (P. rubra). - Height, 5 m to 6 m, 65; deep red flowers in May. Ohio HORSEMARY (P. Ohiotensis) Height, 6.65 to 8.33 m; white flowers in May. long-spiked chestnut (P. macrostachya). - Fragrant white flowers in July and August; small, edible fruit. Two-colored chestnut (P. discolor). - Low tree; red and yellow flowers in May. Provence MICOCOULIER (Celtis australis). - Attractive tree; small, greenish flowers in May; black fruit. Varieties. - De Tournefort, - Heart-leaved, - Virginia, - Mississippi. WHITE WALL (Morus alba). - Attractive tree, worthy of inclusion in landscape gardens; catkin-shaped flowers in June; whitish berries. Varieties. - Canadian red, - Moretti. Umbrella NABLER (Mespilus linearis). - This shrub extends its branches laterally and, grafted at the head onto the White Thorn, is very suitable for forming beautiful covered alleys; white flowers in May and June. NOISETier du Levant (Corylus colurna). - Very tall tree; pyramidal habit; catkin-shaped flowers in March and April; small, flattened fruit. NOISETIER de Byzance (C. Byzantina). - Similar to the above, but a little lower. American black walnut (Juglans nigra). - Very tall, vigorous tree; catkin-shaped flowers in April and May; small, round, very hard-shelled fruit. Varieties. - Ashy. - White. - Ash-leaved. - Heterophyllous. Common elm (Ulmus campestris). - Very tall tree, remarkable for its hardiness; whitish flowers, in scaly clusters, in April. Narrow-leaved elm (U. stricta). - A variety of the preceding; it is used to form very rustic palisades. Varieties. - Broad-leaved, - Variegated, - Weeping, - Pyramidal. American elm (U. Americana). - Taller than the common elm; reddish branches, curving towards the tip. PAULOWNIA IMPERIALIS. - Japanese tree, introduced in 1834; Catalpa-like habit; remarkable vegetation; very large leaves, especially on young specimens; blue flowers in April. To enjoy the full beauty of its foliage, it should be cut back every year, so as to have young branches on which the leaves are always much wider. DOUBLE-FLOWERED PEACH (Amygdalus Persica flore pleno). - An admirable tree during its flowering period, which takes place in March and April; it is grown as a stem or bush. Varieties. - Alba plena, - Rubra plena. - Versicolor, - Flore pleno, - Camelliæflora, - Dianthiflora. POPLAR (Populus). - All Poplars are tall, fast-growing trees; they thrive in damp soils and are suitable for landscaped gardens; the most remarkable are: Varieties. - Nivea. - Angulata, - Balsamifera, - Canadensis, - Pyramidalis, - Grandidentata, - Heterophylla, - Ontariensis,- Tremula, - Molinifera. PLANERA CRENATA, Siberian elm. - Just as hardy as the common elm, with which it is closely related, the Planera crenata has the advantage of never being attacked by insects. LOTUS or Italian PLAQUEMIN (Diospyros lotus). - Height, 8m, 33 to 10 meters; lanceolate, green leaves; greenish, inconspicuous flowers in June and July; yellowish, edible fruit. PLAQUEMINIER de Virginie (D. Virginiana). - Higher than the preceding; good eating fruit. Oriental PLATAN (Platanus orientalis). - Very tall tree with a beautiful habit; palmate leaves; flowers in globular catkins in April and May. PLATANE d'Occident (P. occidentalis). - Same habit as above, only with broader leaves. Varieties. - Maple-leaved. - With laciniate leaves. - Wavy, - Starry. DOUBLE-FLOWERED PEAR (Pyrus communis flore pleno). - Variety of the common pear tree; height, 4 meters; double white flowers in April. Cottony PEAR (P. Polveria). - Height, 5 meters; leaves and twigs covered with white down; white flowers in May. DOUBLE-FLOWERED APPLE (Malus communis flore pleno). - Variety of the common apple tree; 4 meters high, pinkish-white flowers in May. Bacciferous or Siberian APPLE (M. Baccata). - Height, 2.65 m; large, pinkish-white flowers in April; red, berry-shaped fruit. Chinese apple (M. spectabilis). - Height, 4 meters; beautiful carmine flowers before blossoming, then white washed with pink, in May; very small fruit. Evergreen APPLE (Malus sempervirens). - Leaves are almost evergreen; flowers are pink before blooming, then almost white in May. fragrant apple (M. coronaria). - Large, fragrant white flowers in May. DOUBLE BLOSSOM PLUM (Prunus flore pleno). - Variety of the common plum, cultivated for the beauty of its flowers. Varieties. - Sinensis alba plena, - Sinensis rosea plena, - Trilobata, - Blanc. Mirobolan plum (P, mirobolana). - Two varieties are grown, one with red fruit, the other with yellow. ROBINIER blanc, White Acacia (Robinia pseudo-acacia). - Tall tree with elegant foliage; thorny branches; very fragrant white flowers in May and June. Varieties: - Pyramidalis, - Pendula, - Flore luteo, - Amœna, Decaisneana. - The thornless varieties grown under the names Spectabilis, Inermis, Crispa are also derived from white Robinia. ROBINIER visqueux (R. viscosa). - White Acacia habit; thorny when young; slimy branches; pale pink flowers in June and July. ROBINIER rose (R. hispida). - Height, 4 meters; very broken branches, covered with reddish hairs; beautiful pink flowers from June to August. Grafted on the ground, it forms a charming shrub. weeping sapling (Salix Babylonica). - Very picturesque tree; long, flexible branches, hanging to the ground; lanceolate leaves; catkin-shaped flowers in April and May. Varieties. - Laurel-leaved, - Rosemary-leaved, - Silvery, - Ring-shaped. All willows can be used to advantage in landscaped gardens: they are particularly suited to damp soils. Japanese SOPHORA (Sophora Japonica). - Large, beautiful tree; dark green leaves; slightly pendulous branches; whitish flowers in July. Variety with hanging branches. BIRDSORB (Sorbus aucuparia). - Height, 5 to 6 meters; long, often pendulous branches; white flowers in May; attractive red fruit. Domestic sorb (S. domestica). - Much taller than the preceding; white flowers in May; pyriform, reddish fruit. Varieties. - Hybrid, - American, - Elder-leaved. European lime (Tilia Europgea). - A tall, hardy tree with a pyramidal habit. This tree is covered with leaves from the first days of spring, but loses them much earlier than all the others. It is used to form avenues. It is easy to manage and can be mowed regularly. Fragrant, whitish flowers from March to June. Varieties. - Coral, - Weeping, - With laciniate leaves. - variegated leaves. SILVER LINDEN (T. argentea). - European lime habit, only slightly lower; leaves dark green above, white and cottony below. American lime (T. Americana). - Very tall tree; very large, toothed leaves. TULIPIER de Virginie (Liriodendron tulipifera). - An attractive tree, remarkable for the shape of its leaves and for its flowers, of a greenish-yellow mingled with red, similar to a Tulip in shape and size; flowers in June and July. Tulip trees should only be planted in spring, and cutting off any branches should be avoided as far as possible, as amputations are very harmful to them, especially when young. Varieties. - With whole leaves, - With yellow flowers. VIRGILIER à bois jaune (Virgilia lutea). - Height, about 10 meters; very beautiful white flowers in June. SECTION XII. - Resinous trees. Resinous trees, commonly called green trees, should be planted young, preferably in April and May, when they begin to vegetate. If you are forced to plant in autumn, you should do so from the end of September, otherwise you risk losing a large number of trees. Yews, Thuias and Sequoia sempervirens can be pruned; as for the others, they should not be cut; and if ever it becomes necessary to remove a few branches, they should be cut a few centimetres from the stem, to avoid a loss of sap, which is always detrimental. Green trees are propagated from seed, sown in April, or by herbaceous grafting, using the most common varieties as subjects. ARAUCARIA IMBRICATA. - Pyramidal tree, very graceful; branches covered with lanceolate leaves, prickly at the top. Cedar of Lebanon (Cedrus Libhani). - Very tall, pyramidal tree; horizontal branches; oblong, oval cones, without asperities. It should always be planted singly, to enjoy its majestic effect. DEODORA CEDAR (Cedrus deodora). - This tree, so remarkable for its pendulous branches and the beautiful glaucous green of its leaves, is fast-growing and capable of great elevation. CRYPTOMERIA JAPONICA. - This tree differs essentially from other green trees in its leaves and the arrangement of its branches. To enjoy the full beauty of Cryptomeria, they should be planted in isolation. CYPRESS (Cupressus). - These shade-green trees are all suitable for the pleasure garden; they can be planted in rows or singly, depending on their shape. Cupressus disticha alone requires cool soil to thrive. Varieties. - Sempervirens (pyramidal), - Funebris, - Lawso niana, - Lambertiana, - Disticha (bald). common juniper (Juniperus communis). - Shrub 4 to 5 meters high; diffuse branches, prickly leaves; spherical, blackish-blue berries. Varieties. - Virginia, - Oriental. Common Ir. (Taxus baccata). - Hardy, very common tree; red berries. Can be made to take different shapes by annual mowing. Varieties. - With variegated leaves, - Pyramidal. EUROPEAN LARCH (Larix Europœa). - Very tall, pyramidal tree; horizontal branches; deciduous leaves; very small cones. Varieties. - With hanging branches, - American black. PINES (Pinus). - Very tall, hardy, evergreen trees, invaluable for landscaped gardens; placed singly or in groups, their dark shade contrasts pleasantly with the foliage of other trees. Varieties. - Sylvestris (from Scotland), - Laricio (from Corsica). - Austriaca. - Benthamiana. - Lambertiana. - Pinaster, - Ponderosa, - Pyrenaica, - Strobus, - Sabiniana. FIR TREES (Abies). - Firs are generally tall trees; they differ from pines in their pyramidal shape. All can be grown in large gardens. Varieties. - Alba (White Fir). - Excelsa (Spruce). - Canadensis (Hemlock), - Cephalonica, - Cilicica, - Balsamea (Balsam). - Douglasii, - Morinda. - Nobilis, - Nordmanniana, Pectinata (S. argenté), - Pinsapo. SEQUOIA SEMPERVIRENS (Taxodium sempervirens). - A large, beautiful, fast-growing, hardy California tree. Sequoia can be left to grow naturally, or pruned like Yew trees, essential qualities that should make it eagerly sought after. SEQUOIA GIGANTEA (Wellingtonia gigantea). - Also native to California, this tree can grow to gigantic proportions. To produce its full effect, it must be grown in isolation. CANADA THUIA (Thuia orientalis). - Height, 8m, 33; pyramidal crown; vertical branches; flat, imbricate, green leaves. THUIA de la Chine (T. occidentalis) -Higher than the preceding; flexible branches; russet-green foliage. Varieties. - Aurca, - Pendula. - Gigantea, - Lobbii CHAPTER XVI Destruction of pests. The vegetable garden, orchard and pleasure garden are, all too frequently for the horticulturist, exposed to the ravages of birds, small mammals and insects, which, at every stage of their lives, from the moment they emerge from the egg to their metamorphosis, live at the expense of the plants we raise for our use or enjoyment. Traps and poisoned pellets are used to destroy small rodents, such as mice, rats, dormice and ferrets. Traps, scarecrows and a few rifle shots keep birds away; but the grower must know how to distinguish between his friends and his enemies, and exclude from this proscription warblers and other fine beaks, swallows and insectivorous birds, which at all times of the year live on insects, and in winter on seeds or a few small berries left on bushes. Sparrows and other granivores destroy a prodigious quantity of insects when their young are being raised, and should be spared during this season; it's around July that you should start to hunt them mercilessly. As for insects, which are so numerous, and which by their multiplicity and smallness escape our means of destruction, their numbers are well reduced, it's true, by the active hunting that birds do for them; but their multiplication is so rapid, that they brave these bad odds and seem only to become more inconvenient. A large number of means have been proposed to eradicate them, but few of them are successful; and of all those that have been employed, careful and persevering research is without doubt the most time-consuming, but the most certain. Hedgehogs, tortoiseshells and small night birds, such as the owl, are bred in gardens. They devour a large number of insects, and are the most destructive of all; their usefulness is all the greater as they only hunt at night, and it is at this time of day that many insects wreak their havoc. We therefore advise horticulturalists to keep one of these animals in their garden, as they cost nothing and provide great service. You should also be careful not to destroy bats, which feed only on moths and butterflies. Some insects, such as ladybugs, hoverflies, calosomes, ichneumons and sphexes, destroy large numbers of insects and caterpillars; ladybugs and hoverflies eat aphids, and can be left to multiply without fear; but it often happens that certain carnivorous insects become pests in their turn when they have nothing left to eat. Ichneumons, sphexes and hoverflies should be excluded: they are always useful and never harmful. Spiders (garden spiders) can also be counted among the animals that render great service. BEES, GUESTS - Ripe fruit is often attacked by these insects, which cause considerable damage to espaliers. They are destroyed by hanging small vials filled with honey water from the branches, in which they drown; wasp nests are sought out, and their inhabitants asphyxiated with sulfur smoke or boiling water. ACARUS, commonly known as the gray one. - One of the most dangerous causes of the destruction of trees in our orchards are the stings of the acarus, which attacks peach trees and kills them. It attaches itself under the leaves, sucking the parenchyma, and, despite its small size, is so numerous that it kills the most vigorous tree. Powdered sulfur, applied after basking, is the most effective remedy that can be used to destroy peach blight. Melons, cucumbers, beans and cabbages attacked by this arachnid can also be treated by the same method. SPIDERS. - If the large spider is harmless, the same cannot be said of the small ones, which run quickly over the soil: they attack young seedlings, particularly carrots, prick the stem, suck the sap and kill them. They are kept at bay by sprinkling powdered soot on the soil, and, when the weather permits, they are bathed in water. COURTILIÈRES. - These insects, which are very large and therefore easy to detect, wreak great havoc on vegetable plants, and particularly on diapers. The various means of destroying them are to sprinkle the soil with water laden with black soap or oil, and to plant pots half-full of water in the direction of the cricket's galleries, in order to drown them. Gardeners simply crush them as they find them by turning over the beds, and deliver small piles of manure in which they come to nest. caterpillars and larvae. - In orchards, careful weeding is one of the most foolproof methods, as it destroys both the eggs and the following generations; and if a few nests escape, it is necessary, as advised by Mr. Samuel Curtis, a skilled English amateur, to sprinkle the trees with quicklime just as the leaves begin to develop, and before the flowers bloom. M. le docteur Bailly also says that caterpillars can easily be destroyed when they are gathered together, by sprinkling them with water mixed with black soap, using a broom: it seems that as soon as they are touched, they are instantly struck dead; he even says that prussic acid does not act with greater promptitude. The larvae of insects of the Tenthrède genus are a source of despair for Rose lovers: together with the other enemies of this shrub, they attack the young shoots, causing the flowers to abort. The best time to destroy them is in spring, in April. The best time of day is in the morning, before they have begun to disperse; look for them in the tips of twigs, which are swollen by their presence, and crush them by pressure, or even split the branch with the tip of a penknife and extract the larva. When the disease is too far advanced, cut off the diseased branches. Hylotoma rosce larvae gnaw on the leaves of roses, and can easily be destroyed by crushing them. As for the caterpillars that devour vegetable plants and hide under plant leaves or in the soil, after other natural means of destruction, try decoctions of soot and walnut stain to kill them, but rely even more on research. Careful horticulturists should destroy all butterflies without mercy, as they are the propagators of the enemies of their crops. FORMS. - The inconvenience of these small insects is well known: they harm roots by lifting the soil in which they make their homes; they attack leaves and fruit, and escape many means of destruction because of their smallness and agility. To keep them from climbing trees, wrap a cord of well-carded wool around their feet; keep them away from pots and crates by surrounding them with water, either by a support or by small vases that are kept constantly full. Bottles of honeyed water hung from trees attract ants, which die in considerable numbers. Finally, you can destroy them, like mites, with water mixed with black soap or oil. KERMES, MEALYBUGS, GALLINSECTS. - Kermes insects cause considerable damage to peach trees and fruit trees in general. In spring, they cling so tightly to the branches that a rough brush is needed to remove them. The best time to look for them is in April, before they have laid their eggs, and before they have left the branches where they have spent the winter, to disperse on the leaves of the trees. There are several species of kermes, all generally applied to branches like small warts. LIMAÇONS (Garden propellers). - To get rid of them22 , the best thing to do is to pick them up as you come across them, especially in the morning or after rain; you should also carefully destroy them whenever you come across eggs. LILACES (or Buhottes). - They are very damaging to plants, which they devour with incredible voracity. The best way to destroy them is undoubtedly to use powdered hydrated lime. To spread it, stand downwind and throw it by hand, shaving the ground as hard and evenly as possible. EARTHWORMS. - Earthworms do no harm to plants other than lifting the soil to dig their galleries, and it is only in beds where young seedlings have been planted that they should be destroyed. They are brought out by beating the soil, or by poking a stick into it and shaking it in all directions: they then emerge from the earth; they are placed in a pot and drowned, crushed or, better still, fed to poultry. EAR DRILLS or FORFICLES - Like all insects that come out particularly at night, earwigs attack plant leaves, flowers and fruit, piercing them to make their homes. Carnations, dahlias and hollyhocks are all prey to their voracity. To destroy them, the simplest method is to place small upside-down flower pots on sticks, with a bit of moss at the bottom; the traps are visited every morning, and any earwigs that have taken refuge in them are destroyed by immersing them in a tub full of water. APHIDS. - Aphids, of which there are a large number of species, attack all plants in general. Whether they are grey, like woolly aphids, or green, like rose aphids, they cause the same devastation and cause plants to perish through the repeated sucking they exert on their leaves; the ants they attract add to the damage they cause. They can be destroyed by cleaning branches or leaves one by one, removing those that have been too deeply altered, or by smoking them with slightly damp tobacco, using the device known as a fumigator, or by washing the plants with a little black soap water; pyrethrum powder, recommended for destroying aphids, can be advantageously replaced by powdered tobacco. TAUPES. - This small insectivorous quadruped is still actively hunted, although it causes little harm except through its galleries, as it lives only on insects and worms; but it stirs up all the soil, upsetting it and cutting roots in the direction of its corridors. The mole works three times a day: in the morning, at midday, and in the evening at sunset; you must take advantage of this time to remove it with a spade, while it re-establishes its gallery, which you first pushed in with your foot. A trap baited with walnuts boiled in lye, which the mole is very fond of, is also placed in the gallery, which is then unblocked. Earthworms cut into pieces and sprinkled with walnuts are also placed in the water. TICKS (BLUE FLEA BEETLE). - These small, extremely agile insects, which leap away from any hand that tries to grab them, wreak considerable havoc on cabbage, radish and turnip seedlings. There are few ways of destroying them, but they can be kept at bay by spraying the plants with a decoction of tobacco or pungent plants. WHITE WOLVES - These insects, harmful to fruit trees, vines, ornamental shrubs and vegetable plants, are difficult to destroy, not because of their agility, since in their larval stage they crawl slowly under the soil, but because they wreak their havoc hidden in the bosom of the earth, and their presence is only noticed when the damage is irreparable. As soon as you see the leaves of a plant wilting, you have to dig at the base, and you're sure to find one or two white grubs. If you want to protect valuable plants, such as fruit trees or young plantations, from grubs, plant strawberries, lettuces, etc. near them, as grubs are very fond of them. Another precaution to take is to pursue chafer beetles with the greatest care, and destroy them as soon as they appear. This must be done in the morning: the beetles, numbed by the cool of the night, are then weakly attached to the branches and easily fall to the ground. M. Duval, who seems to have studied the habits of the cockchafer with great care, claims that simple hoeing is enough to destroy the larvae of this insect. However, hoeing must be carried out at the right time. According to him, it's after egg-laying that the land usually ravaged by the white grub should be hoeed, in order to bring the eggs in the soil to the surface. At this time, the action of light is sufficient, according to his observations, to destroy all the eggs that can be reached. CHAPTER XVII Vocabulary of the main gardening terms. Accor. Manure raised around layers to prevent the cold from penetrating. Apos. Sloping ground facing the sun. Ados are used for sowing and transplanting young plants. AMEND. To improve a soil by fertilizing. ANNUAL. This name is given to plants that germinate, flower, bear seeds and die during the year. AUGUST. Said of young branches that have reached the necessary consistency to withstand winter. ARROSER. Synonymous with wet. BASSINER. To water lightly with a watering can, so that the water falls as rain. BIFURQUÉ. To divide into two branches. BINER. To divide the surface of the soil with the hoe, so that it does not harden. BISANNUAL. Plants that last two years. BOURGEONS. Leaves and stems that are beginning to develop. BUTTERFLY. Eyes placed in the axils of leaves and at the tips of twigs. ADVENTIONAL BUTTERFLIES: those born elsewhere than in the leaf axils and at the ends of twigs. 22. BRINDLE. Thin, short, fringed branch. BULB. Onion plant. BUTTER. To raise the soil around the base of plants to protect them from frost, to whiten them or to promote tuber development. CADUQUES (leaves). Falling every year. CAÏEU. A bud that forms on the side of large onions. CHARGE UNE COUCHE. Placing on it the soil or potting compost required by the plants to be grown. COLLET. A kind of knot placed between the root and the stem. COUNTER-ESPALIER. Trees planted parallel to the espalier and whose branches are attached to a low trellis. COUNTER-PLANTING. This operation consists of planting between the rows of a bed lined with plants that are half or three-quarters grown, the plants that will follow them. CÔTIÈRE. A more or less wide bed, sheltered by a wall or windbreak, where vegetables are grown that come earlier than in the garden. COTYLEDON. Seminal lobes or leaves. COURSON. Branches cut short. DRAGEONS. Young shoots growing from roots. ÉCLAIRCIR. To pull up a plant when it has been sown too thickly, so that the remaining plant will benefit more. ECLATER. To separate the roots of a plant that grows several stems. ESPALIER. A tree whose branches are spread out against a wall. SPLIT. To cut with the nails the main stem of a plant, so as to facilitate the development of the lower branches. FORCE. To force a plant or tree to produce earlier than it would naturally. FRAPPÉ. Said of a melon that, having reached its full size, begins to change color and hue. GERM. Part of the seed from which a plant is formed. GOBTER. To cover mushroom wheels with light earth. HALE. Dry, drying wind. HERBACEOUS. Green, soft, succulent stems. HERSER. This operation consists in breaking up clods of earth with a fork after plowing. GAUGE. The ditch formed by the earth that must be removed before ploughing. LARDER. To introduce the white into mushroom wheels. LINEAR. From the nature of wood. FURNITURE. Said of land well divided by ploughing. WET. Synonymous with watering. EYE. A small point which appears in the axils of leaves and at the end of twigs. In the following spring, this small point becomes a woody or fruit bud. EYE. Offshoots produced by certain plants and used to propagate the species. OMBRACE. To spread canvas or mulch over the frames, to attenuate the intensity of the sun's rays. PAILLER. To spread short manure on the ground, to prevent the rapid evaporation of water from watering. PALISSER. This operation consists in fixing only the branches and buds of espaliered trees. PERSISTENT. Leaves that remain on the tree for several years are called evergreen. PINCH. To cut the tips of young branches with the nails, to encourage the development of lower branches. RAMEAU. A small branch that is a division of the larger ones. RATISSER. To cut the grass between two plots of land with a rake, in alleys and plantations. RECHAUD. New manure raised around layers to warm or maintain heat. REMONTANTS. Roses and other plants that bloom twice in the same year. REPIQUERING. Transplanting consists in planting young plants from seedlings with a planter. RUSTIC. Easy to grow, winter hardy plant. SARCLER. To pull out weeds that grow in cultivated beds. SENTIER. A narrow path left between each bed. TERREAUTER. Spreading a layer of compost over a seedling. TRACER. To make lines along the length of the boards, for sowing or planting. TUBERCULES. Fleshy, rounded parts from which small fibrous roots usually sprout. TURION. Eye or bud arising immediately on roots. VIVACE. Perennials are all plants that survive for more than three years, whether or not they lose their leaves or stems each year. 2 4 S 63 6 55 N 5 1E I 4 61 S E 7 60 60 2 27 28 ? General layout of a vegetable garden..................... CHAPTER II Calendar................................................. - August............................................. September................ .... ................. Octobre.......................................... 1 - 5 O 11 Novembre............ 14 Décembre........................................ 17 Janvier...................... 19 Février....................... 22 Mars............................................ 25 Avril............................................. 29 Mai.............................................. 31 Juin............................................. 34 Juillet........................... 37 CHAPTER III Gardening instruments................................... 39 § 1. Tools for plowing and planting........ 39 2. Tools for transport........................... 41 3. Tools for watering................. 42 4. Tools for pruning and trimming trees 43 CHAPTER IV Raking and ploughing.................................... 44 CHAPTER V Manure and fertilizers..................... CHAPTER VI .... 47 Watering............................................ 49 CHAPTER VII Layers................................................ 51 CHAPTER VIII Plant propagation................................... 56 § 1. Sowing.............................................. 56 I. Sowing in beds................................. 57 II. Sowing in the open ground............................. 57 1. Broadcast sowing....... . 57 2. Sowing in rows or rays.................. 58 3. Sowing in bags............................. 58 §2. Transplanting.......................................... 59 3. Onions............................................. 59 4. Cloves............................................ 60 5. Bulbils........................................... 60 6 Tubers.......................................... 60 7. Claws or pates.................................... 61 8. Eyelets........................................... 61 9. Root separations.............................. 61 10. Stolons or runners............................ 61 11. Marcottes................... 62 1. Marcottes simples................................ 62 2. Marcottes par strangulation.............. 62 3. Marcottes par incision............................ 62 4. Marcottes par cépée.............................. 63 5. Marcottes de racines......... 63 12. Cuttings........................... 64 1. Cuttings in the open air.............................. 64 2. Cuttings under cloches and under frames............ 64 3. Cuttings by root sections.................. 66 CHAPTER IX Grafting............................................. 67 1. Grafting in escutcheon.................................. 08 2. Grafting in ring................................... 70 3. Grafting in slit..................................... 4. Grafting in slit on tuber....................... 71 72 5. Grafting in veneer.................................. 73 6. Vine grafting............................. 73 6 bis. Herbaceous grafting.................................. 74 6 ter. Crown grafting (Pliny)....... 76 7. Ordinary approach grafting....................... 77 8. Grafting by complicated approach...................... 18 CHAPTER X° Plant preservation. - Cloches. - Frames. - Doormats. - Orangery................................ 78 § 1. De la rentrée des plantes d'orangerie et de leur traitement en hiver.................................... 2. De la sortie des plantes d'orangerie et de leur traitement pendant l'été............................... 3. Composition de la terre qu'il faut donner aux plantes ci-après désignées................................ 4. De la rentrée des plantes de serre tempérée et de leur traitement en hiver. ............................. 5. De la sortie des plantes de serre tempérée et de leur traitement en été................................. 6. Repotting......................................... 7. Composition of the soil to be given to plants ci82 83 85 87 90 92. after designated................................... 94 CHAPTER XI Vegetable garden............................................ 95 CHAPTER XII Diseases of vegetable plants............................. 180 CHAPTER XIII Fruit garden............................................. 181 S 1. Planting......................................... 182 2. Pruning.............................................. 184 1. Stone fruit trees......................... 186 2. Pome fruit trees.......................... 188 3. Disbudding..................................... 189 4. Trellising.......................................... 189 5. Fruit trees............................................ 19 6. Cultivation of the best fruit species.............. 191 Forced cultivation of the Cherry tree................................. 193 - Fig tree.................................. 196 - Gooseberry tree............................... 198 - Peach tree........................... 212 - Pruniér.................................. 230 - - Vine................................. 238 CHAPTER XIV Tree diseases........................................ 239 23 CHAPTER XV Pleasure garden......................................... 241 SECTION Ire. Plants for borders..................... ... 250 1. shrubs.......................................... 250 2. clump-forming perennials................. 251 3. Bulbous plants......... 255 4. Annual plants propagated from seed...... 256 SECTION II. Plants for beds and flowerbeds. Annuals and biennials.............. 259 SECTION III. Outdoor perennials and bulbs.... 279 SECTION IV. Temperate greenhouse plants that can be grown in the open ground in summer................................. 319 SECTION V. Plants for water ornament............... 330 1. plants with floating leaves.................... ... 330 2. plants rising above the surface of the water... 331 3. Plants for waterside decoration.... 332 4. Trees and shrubs................................ 334 SECTION Vl. Plants for rock gardens......................... 336 Trees and shrubs................................ 337 SECTION VII. Climbing plants for walls, cradles and arbors..................................... 339 1. Annuals and perennials....................... 339 2. Climbing plants for temperate greenhouses that can be placed in the ground all summer.................... 341 3. Shrubs....................................... 342 SECTION VIII. Deciduous shrubs and bushes... 346 SECTION IX. Evergreen ornamental shrubs and bushes......................................... 359 SECTION X. Heath shrubs.................. 363 SECTION XI. Deciduous ornamental trees........366 SECTION XII. Coniferous trees..............................378 CHAPTER XVI Destruction of vermin........................ 381 CHAPTER XVII Vocabulary of key gardening terms............. 389 Table of contents.............. ... .. ... .... . ..... ... 394 Alphabetical table........................................ 399 Table of figures......................................... 410 END OF TABLE OF CONTENTS. Apricot trees, 191. Abronia umbellata, 259. White acacia, see Robinia. Acer, see Maple. Achillea, 279. Aconite, 279. Aconitum, see Wolfsbane. Acorus, 331. Acroclinium roseum, 259. Actæa spicata, 279. Adonides, 259, 279. Adonis, see Adonides. Æsculus, see Chestnut tree. Æthionema coridifolium, 336. Ageratum, 259. Garlic, 95. Golden garlic, 255. Ailantus, 366. Airelle, 334, 337. Gorse, 359. Alaterne, 359. Alcea, see Rose Trémière. Alizier, 359, 366. Alisma, 330. Alnus, see Aune. Alstrœmeria, 280. Althæa, see Hibiscus. Alternanthera spatula, 319. Alyssum, 251, 259. Almond tree, 192, 346. Pigweed, 260. Amaranth, see Celosia. Amaranthoid, 268. Amarantus, see Amaranth. Amaryllis, 255, 280. Amelanchier, 346. Amorpha, 346. Amygdalus, see Almond tree. Anagallis grandiflora, 260. Pineapple, 96. Anchusa, see Bugloss. Columbine, 281. Andromeda, 363. Anemone, 281. Anona, see Asimina. Anthemis des teinturiers, 283. Antirrhinum majus, see Snapdragon. Apalanche vert, see Prinos ver. ticillata. Apocyn, 283. Apocynum, see Apocyn. Aquilegia, see Ancolia. Arabis verna, see Spring Tourrette. Aralia, 367. Arbutus, 363. Arbre aux quarante écus, see Gingko biloba. Anemone tree, see Calycanthus. Snow tree, see Chionanth. Holy tree, see Azedarach. Strawberry tree, see Arbutus unedo. Arbutus, see Arbutus. Araucaria, 379. Arenaria, see Sabline. Argemone grandiflora, 260. Betonica, 284. Beet, 109. Argentine, see Cerastium tomen-1 Betula, see Birch. tosum. Sea buckthorn, 347. Aristoloche, 342. Arroche des jardins, 101, Artichoke, 101. Arum, 283. Arundo donax, 332. Asclepias, 283. Asimina virginica, 347. Asparagus, 103. Asperula odorata, 251. Asphodelus, 284. Asphodelus, see Asphodel. Aster, 251, 284. Aster Sinensis, see Daisy Queen. Astragale, 284, 337. Astrantia, 284. Atragene, 342. Hawthorn, see White thorn. Eggplant, 108 Aubrietia deltoida, 251, 336. Aucuba, 360. Auricle, see Auricle primrose. Aune, 334, 367. Azalea, 363. Bidens atrosanguinea, see Cosmos Bignonia, 343. Turkey wheat, see Corn. Cornflower, see Centaurea. Bocconia, 284. Bois-bouton, see Cephalanthus. Bois-cuir, see Dirca. Bois de Sainte-Lucie, see Cerisier odorant. Bois-jóli, see Daphne mezereum. Boltonia, 285. Bonduc, 367. Bonne-Dame, see Arroche. Bonnet de Prêtre, see Common charcoal. Birch, 367. Boulette azurée, see Echinops ritro Boule de neige, see Viorne stérile. Burgundy, 347. Borage, 110. Tree borer, see Celastrus scandens. Boussingaultia baselloides, 341. Azarero, see Cerasus Lusitanica. [Silver button, see Achillea Azédarach, 347. Azerolier, see Spanish thorn. Baguenaudier, 347. Balisier, see Canna Indica. Balsamine, 261. Bambusa, 383. Capuchin beard, see Wild chicory. Barbeau, see Centaury. Barkhausia rubra, see Crepis rubra. Bartonia aurea, 261. Baselle, 109. Basil, 109. Begonia, 319. Belle-Dame, see Arroche. Belle-de-jour, 261. Belle-de-nuit, 261. Bellis perennis, see Daisy. Berberis, see Barberry. Bermudian, 252. ptarmica. Brachycome, 261. Brassica, see Cabbage. Broualle, 262. Broussonetia, 367. Browallia, see Broualle. Brunella grandiflora, 252. Buddleia Lindleyana, 360. Buglose, 285. Bugrane, 285, 317. Boxwood, 250, 360. Burning bush, 360. Buplevrum, 360. Butomus umbellatus, 333. Buxus, see Boxwood. Cacalia sagittata, 262. Caladium, 320. Calandrinia umbellata, 262. Calceolaria, 320. Calendula, see Calendula. Calliopsis, see Coreopsis. Callistephus hortensis, see Queen-] Charieis heterophylla, see Kaulmarguerite. Calomeria, see Humea. fussia amelloïdes. Hornbeam, 368. Caltha palustris, see Populage! Water chestnut, see Marsh mace. Calycanthus, 347. Calystegia, 339. Red chamomile, see Pyrethrum roseum. Campanula, 252, 256, 262, 285, 336. Canna Indica, 320. Cantua coronopifolia, see Ipomopsis elegans. Caper, 337. Nasturtiums, 110, 262, 339. Tuberous nasturtium, 341. Caragana, 347. Cardamine pratensis, 286. Cardamom, see Cardamom. Cardoon, 110. Carrot, 111. Carob tree, 360. Carpinus, see Hornbeam. Cassia, 320. Blackcurrant, see Black currant. Castanea, see Chestnut. Catalpa, 367. Catananche caerulea, see Cupid blue. Cedar, 379. Celastrus scandens, 343. Celery, 112. Celosia, 268. Celtis, see Hackberry. Centaurea, 263, 286. Centranthus macrosiphon, 263. Cephalanthus, 334. Ceriste, 252. Cerastium, see Cerassus. Cerasus, see Cherry tree. Ceratonia, see Carob tree, Ceratophyllum, see Corniflower. Chervil, 114. Bulbous chervil, 114. Cherry trees, 193. Sweet cherry, 348. Double-flowered cherry, 367. Cestrum, 348. Chænostoma polyanthum, 264. Chalef, 368. Chamacerasus, 348. Chamærops, 322. Edible mushroom, 115. Chestnut, 368. Cheiranthus, 268, 322. Cheiranthus maritimus, see Julienne de Mahon. Chelone, see Galane. Oak, 338, 360, 368. Chenillette, 118. Chervis, 118. Honeysuckle, 343. Chicory, 118. Chicot du Canada, see Bonduc. Chincapin, see Castanea Americana. Chionanthus, 334. Chirouis, see Chervis. Cabbage, 121. Kohlrabi, 124. Kohlrabi, 124. Broccoli, 126. Sea cabbage, 127. Ornamental leaf cabbage, 264. Cauliflower, 124. Chrysanthemum, 264, 286, 322. Chrysocoma, 287. Chives, 128. Chives, 129. Hybrid cineraries, 322. Cissus quinquefolia, see Virginia creeper. Civet, see Chives. Clavalier, 368. Clarkia, 264. Clematis, 343. Cleome, 265. Clethra, 348. t Cobæa scandens, 339. Cœlestina cœrulea, see Ageratum cœruleum. Coignassier, 194, 348. Coignassier de la Chine, 369. Colchicum, see Colchicum. Colchicum, 287. Coleus, 322. Collinsia, 256. Collomia, 256. Colutea, see Baguenaudier. Commelina tuberosa, 287. Comptonia aspleniifolia, 348. 1Cucumber, 129. Coniza, see Seneçon tree. Dahlia, 288, 364. Potato preservation, 166. Cauliflower preservation, 126. Cabbage preservation, 122. Comfrey, 287. Daphne, 349. Datura, 266, 290, 324. Decumaria barbata, 343. Delphinium, see Larkspur. Dent-de-lion, see Dandelion. Convallaria maialis, see Lily of the Valley! Deutzia, 349. of May. Convolvulus, see Ipomæa. Couvolvulus tricolor, see Bellede-jour. Poppy, 265. Poppy, 265. Corbeille d'or, see Alyssum. Corbeille d'argent, see Thlaspi vivace and Tourette printanière. Coreopsis, 265, 287. Japanese cortea, 348. Gherkin, see Cucumber. Gherkin, 330. Dogwood, 349, 369. Cornus, see Dogwood. Coronilla emerus, 349. Corydalis formosa, 288. Corylus, see Hazelnut. Cosmos bipinnatus, 265. Cotoneaster, 338. Gourds, 130, 339. Imperial crown, see Fritillaria imperialis. Dianthus, see Carnation. Dictamnus albus, see Fraxinelle. Didiscus caeruleus, see Hugelia carulea. Dielytra spectabilis, 290. Diervilla lutea, 349. Digitale pourpre, 266. Dimorphotheca pluvialis, see Calendula pluvialis. Dioclea glycinoides, 341. Dioscorea batatas, see Chinese yam. Diospyros, see Plaqueminier, Dirca palustris, 335. Dodecatheon meadia, 291. Doronic, 252, 291. Dracocephalum, 266, 291. Eccremocarpus scaber, 341. Echalote, 133. Echinops ritro, 292. Elœagnus, see Chalef. Crambe maritima, see Cabbage ma-Emilia sagittata, see Cacalia sarin. Craniolaria fragrans, see Martynia fragrans. Cranson, see Horseradish. Cratœgus, see Alizier, Crepis rose, 256. Cress, 131. Crocus vernus, 256. Jerusalem cross, see Lychnis. Crucianella, 336. Cryptomeria, 379. Cucurbita, see Squash. Cuphea, 266. Cupidone blue, 288. Cupressus, see Cypress. Cyclamen, 288. Cydonia, see Coignassier. Cynoglossum, see Cynoglossus. Cynoglosse, 252, 257, 266. Cypress, 379. Bald cypress, 335. Cytise, 349, 369. gittata. Enothères, 266, 292. Hawkweed, 292. Ephemera, see Tradescantia. Epi de la Vierge, see Ornithogalum pyramidale. Epilobium, 292. Epimedium, 292, 336. Spinach, 133. Epinard d'été, see Tétragone étalée. Thorn, 369. Barberry, 194, 349. Maple, 369. Erica, 364. Erigeron, 292. Erinus, 293, 336. Eriophorum, see Cottongrass. Erodaum, 293. Erysimum, 267. Erysimum barbarea, see Velar. Erythrina, 322. Escholtzia Californica, 267. Tarragon, 134. Eucalyptus globulus, 324. Eucharidium elegans, 267. Eupatorium, 293. Eupatorium, see Eupatorium. Eutoca viscida, 267. Evonymus, see Fusain. Fagus, see Beech. Farfugium, 293. Faux Ebénier, see Cytise. False Indigo, see Amorpha. False Jalap, see Belle-de-nuit. False Pistachier, see Staphylea. Fennel, 134. Fennel, see Perce-pierre. Fava bean, 134. Bean, 370. Ficoid, 267. Fig tree, 195. Filaria, 361. Fléchière, 330. Passion flower, see Passiflora. Fontanesia, 338. Forsythia suspensa, 350. Fothergilla, 364. Ferns, 336. Strawberry bushes, 135. Raspberry bushes, 196. European Fraxinella, 293. Fraxinus, voïr Frène. Ash, 370. Fritillaria, 293. Fumaria, see Fumitory. Fumitory, 293. Funkia subcordata, see Hemerocallis Japonica. Fusain, 350, 361. Fuchsia, 324. Gaillardia, 295. Galane, 295. Galanthus nivalis, 295. Galé, 335. Galega officinalis, 295. Chaste tree, 350. Gaultheria, 365. Gaura biennis, 267. Turkish grass, see Saxifrage. Broom, 350. juniper, 379. Genista, see Broom. Gentiana, 252, 295. Geranium, 295. Red geranium, see Pelargonium zonale. Gesse, 340. Geum coccineum, 296. Gilia, 268. Gilia androsacea, see Leptosiphon androsaceus. Gilia coronopifolia, see Ipomopsis elegans. Gilia densiflora, see Leptosiphon densiflorus. Ginkgo bibola, 371. Wallflower, 268. Giroflée de Mahon, see Julienne de Mahon. Gladiolus, 256, 236. Gladiolus, see Gladiolus. Gleditschia, see Févier. Glycine, 343. Gnaphalium margaritaceum, see Immortelle. Gomphrena globesa, see Amaranthoid. Gordonia, 350. border grasses, 252. Great fluke, see Ranunculus. Grenadilla, 344. currant bush, 197, 338, 350. Gunnera scabra, 297. Gymnocladus, see Bonduc. Gynerium argenteum, 297. Gypsophila, 268, 296. Helesia, 350. Hamamelis, 335. Flaricot, 139. Runner bean, 340. Hedera, see Ivy. Hedysarum, see Sainfoin. Helenium autumnale, 297. Helianthus, see Sun. Helianthus argophyllus, 269. Helichrysium, see Immortelle. Heliotrope d'hiver, see Tussilago fragrans. GARDENING MANUAL. Heliotropium, see Heliotrope. Hellebore, 297. Hellebore white, see Varaire. Hemerocallis, 253, 298. Hemerocallis, see Hemerocallis. Spring liverwort, 253. Heraclum, 298. Turquoise herb, see Japanese Ophiopogon. Herbe de Ste-Barbe, see Velar. Hesperis matronalis, see Julienne des jardins. Beech, 371. Hibiscus, 268, 298, 351. Hieracium aurantiacum, see Hawkweed. Hippophæ rhamnoides, see Sea buckthorn, Hippuris vulgaris, see Water pess. Hydrangea, 365. Hoteia Japonica, 298. Hop, 344. Holly, 361. Hugelia caerulea, 269. Humea elegans, 269. Humulus lupulus, see Hops. Hyacinthus orientalis, see Hyacinth. Hydrangea, 351. Hydrocharis, see Morrene. Hypericum, see St. John's wort. Iberis, see Thlaspi. Yew, 380. Chinese yam, 142. Ilex, see Holly. Immortelle, 269, 298. Impatiens balsamina, see Balsamine. Indigofera, 351. Ipomœa, 340. Ipomopsis elegans, 270. Iris, 253, 278, 331, 336. Itea, 351. Virginia jasmine, see Bignonia radicans. Flowering rush, see Butomus umbellatus. Daffodil, see Narcissus Jonquilla. Juglans, see Walnut. Julienne de Mahon, 257. Julienne des jardins, 301. Juniperus, see Juniper. Kalmia, 365. Kaulfussia amelloïdes, 257. Kerria Japonica, see Japanese cortea. Ketmie, see Hibiscus. Kœlreuteria, 371. Koniga, see Alyssum maritima. Lettuces, 144. Lamium orvala, 301. Lantana, 325. Larix, see Larch. Lathyrus, see Chickweed. Laurier, 361. Laurier Saint-Antoine, see Epilobium spicatum. Laurus, see Laurel. Large-flowered Lavatera, 270. Lawn's-grass, 244. Lentils, 147. Leptosiphon, 257. Leycesteria, 351. Ivy, 250,-344, 361. Ligustrum, see Troëne. Lilac, 351. Earth lilac, see Muscari monstrosum. Lilium, see Lily. Snail, 118. Large-flowered flax, 270. Perennial flax, 301. Cottongrass, 333. Toadflax, 257, 302, 336. Linum perenne, see Perennial flax. Lippia repens, 253. Liquidambar, 371. Liriodendron, see Tulip tree. Lily, 362. Inca lily, see Alstrœmeria pelegrina. Jacée, see Lychnis dioica. Hyacinth, 299. Jasmine, 338, 344. Lis Saint-Bruno, see Phalangium ! Mentha piperita, see Menthe poililiastrum. vrée. Liseron tricolore, see Belle-de- Menthe poivrée, 305. jour. Loasa, 342. Lobelia, 257, 303, 325. Lonicera, see Honeysuckle. Lophospermum, 342. Lothier rouge, 270. Lunaria, 270. Lunaria annua, see Annual Lunaria. Lupin, 270, 304. Lupinus, see Lupin. Lychnid, 253, 304. Lychnis, Poppy, see Lychnide. Lycium, 338. Lysimachi, 333. Lythrum virgatum, see Purple loosestrife. Lamb's lettuce, 147. Maclura, 371. Macre, 331. Menyanthes, 331. Menziezia, 865. Merendera bulbocodium, 305. Merisier, 352. Mesembryanthenum, see Ficoldes. Mespilus Germanica, see Medlar. Micocoulier, 372. Mignardise, see Carnation. St. John's wort, 338, 352. Mimulus, 325. Mirabilis Jalapa, see Belle-denuit. Molène purpurine, 305. Monarda didyma, 305. Moræa Sinensis, 305. Climbing nightshade, 344. Morina longiflora, 305. Morrene, 331. Morus, see Mulberry. Garden mulberry, 271. May lily of the valley, 305. Madaria elegans, see Madia ele-Mûrier, 198, 352, 373. gans. Madia elegans, 270. Magnolia, 352, 362, 371. Mahonia, 362. Corn, 147, 270. Malcolmia maritima, see Julienne de Mahon. Malope grandiflora, 271. Malus, see Apple tree. Malva, see Mallow. Chestnut tree, 372. Martynia, 271. Sledgehammer, 331. Matricaria mandiana, 304.e Maurandia, 342. Mallow, 271. Megasea crassifolia, see Saxifraga crassifolia. Larch, 380. Melia, see Azedarach. Melilot, 271. Melilotus, see Melilot. Melongene, see Aubergine. Melons, 148, Watermelon, 158. Paper mulberry, see Broussonetia Muscari, 306. Myosotis, 306, 334. Myrica, see Galé. Naiad, 331. Narcissus, 256, 306. Narcissus, see Narcissus. Naumburgia, see Lysimachia. Turnip, 159. Néflier, 199, 362, 373. Negundo, see Negundo maple. Nemesia floribunda, 258, 272. Nemophila, 258. Water lily, 331. Nierembergia, 326. Nicotiana wigandioïdes, 326. Nigella, 272. Hazel, 200, 352, 373. Walnut, 260. American walnut, 374. Nyctago hortensis, see Mirabilis Jalapa. Menispermum Canadense, 344. Nycterinia selaginoïdes, 272. ALPHABETICAL TABLE. Nympæa, see Water lily. Nyssa, see Tupelo. Carnation, 306. Carnation, 253. Chinese carnation, 272. Poet's carnation, 309. OEillet flon, 309. OEillet d'Inde, see Tagetes. OEnothera, see Enothère. Onion, 159. Olivier de Bohême, see Chalef. Spring Omphalodes, see Cynoglossum omphalodes. Onomis, see Brugrane. Japanese Ophiopogon, 253. Bear's ear, see Auricle primrose. Hare's ear, see Buplevrum. Elm, 374. Three-leaf elm, see Ptelea trifoliata. Ornithogalum pyramidale, 309. Orobe printanier, 310. Orobus vernus, see Spring orb. Sorrel, 162. Spinach sorrel, 162. Oxalis, 163, 256, 272. Pæonia, see Peony. Paliurus, 352. Parsnip, 163. Papaver, see Poppy. Daisy, 253. Parnasia palustris, 333. Passiflora, see Grenadilla. Watermelon, see Watermelon. Sweet potato, 164. Patience des Jardins, 162. Patience aquatique, 332. Paulownia, 374. Pavia, see Horse chestnut. Poppy, 272, 310. Peach trees, 201. Double-flowered peaches, 374. Pelargonium zonale, 326. Large-flowered pansy, 278. Pentapetes phœnicea, 272. Pentstemon, 309. Perce-neige, see Galanthus nivalis. Perce-pierre, 166. Periploca, 344. Persicaria, 272. Parsley, 167. Periwinkle, 337. Water pess, 332. Little Daisy, see Bellis perennis. Petuni a, 327. Poplar, 335, 374. Phacelia, 273. Phalangere, 310. Phalangium, see Phalangere. Phalaris, 333. Phascolus, see Bean. Philadelphus, see Seringat. Phlomis, 310, 362. Phlox, 254, 273, 310. Phlox Drummundii, 273. Larkspur, 258. Larkspur, 273. Larkspur, 274. Perennial larkspur, 290. Pigamon, 311. Piment, 167. Pimprenelle, 167... Pines, 380. Pinsapo, see Firs. Pinus, see Pines. Dandelion, 167. Herbaceous peony, 311. Peony tree, 352. Planera 375. Water plantain, see Alisma. Plaqueminier, 375. Plane tree, 375. Platanus, see Plane tree. Plumbago Larpentæ, 311. Podolepis gracilis, 274. Poinciäna Gilliesii, 353. Leek, 168. Poirée blonde, 168. Poirée à cardes, 169, 262. Pear trees, 213, 375. Double-flowered pear trees, 375. Peas, 169. Sweet pea, see Fragrant chaste. Perennial pea, see Broad-leaved pea. Loug pepper, see Chili pepper. Pelemonium cæruleum, see Polemonia. Polianthes, see Tuberose. Polygonum, see Loosestrife. Pomme-d'amour, see Tomato. Potatoes, 172. Apple trees, 227, 375. Double-flowered apple trees, 375. Pompadoura, see Calycanthus. Pontederia cordata, 332. Marsh marigold, 334. Populus, see Poplar. Porte-Chapeau, see Paliurus. Portulaca, see Purslane. Potentilla, 311, 353. Pumpkin, see Squash. Purslane, 174. Purslane, 273. Primrose, 254, 327. Primrose, 254. Primula, see Primrose. Prinos, 365. Blackthorn, see Thorny plum. Plum trees, 230, 376. Thorny plums, 353. Double-flowered plums, 376. Prunus, see Plums. Prunus mahaleb, see Cerasus mahaleb. Lungwort, 312. Pulmonaria, see Lungwort. Pyrethrum, 254, 312. Fyrethrum Indicum, see Chrysanthemum. Pyrus, see Pear tree. Quercus, see Oak. Radish, 174. Horseradish, 175. Rapunzel, 175. Ranunculus, see Ranunculus. Raves, 175. Régence, see Italian Lamb's lettuce. Reine-Marguerite, 258, 274. Ranunculus, 312, 332, 334. Knotweed, 331. Reseda, 274. 407 Rhamnus, see Bourgène, Ala. terne. Rhodanthe Manglesii, 275. Rhododendron, 365. Rhubarb, 176. Rhus, see Sumac. Ribes, see Gooseberry. Ricin, 275. Ricinus, see Ricin. Robinier, 376. Romaines, see Lettuces. Bramble, 338. Hollyhock, 275, 312. Christmas rose, see Helleborus niger. Rose d'Inde, see Tagetes erecta. Rose du ciel, see CoquelourdeRose-du-Ciel. Roses, 251, 345, 353. Water ribbon, see Sparganium natans. Cattail reed, see Arundo donax. Rubau reed, see Phalaris arundinacea. Rubus, see Bramble. Rudbeckia, 313. Rumex, see Sorrel. Ray grass, English, 244. Sabline, 254. Spring saffron, see Crocus vernus. Sagittaria, see Arrowweed. Sainfoin, Spanish, 275. Caucasian sainfoin, 313. Purple loosestrife, 322 Salisburia, see Gingko biloba. Salix, vorr Willows. Salpiglossis sinuata, 275. White salsify, 176. Black salsify, see Scorsonère. Salvia, 254, 215, 327. Sambucus, see Elderberry. Sanvitalia, 258. Firs, 380. Saponaria, 258, 313, 337. Sariette, 177. Sage, see Salvia. Willows, 335, 377. Saururus cernuus, 332. Savonnier, see Kœlreuteria. Scabieuse, 276, 314. Scabiosa, see Scabieuse. Scarolea, see Chicory. Schizandra coccinea, 345. Schizanthus, 258, 276. Schubertia desticha, see Bald cypress. Scille, 314. Scirpus lacustris, 332. Scorsonera, 177. Scutellaria macrantha, 314. Sedum pyramidale, see Saxifraga pyramidalis. Sedum, 255, 314, 337. Sempervivum, 337. Senecio, see Groundsel. Groundsel, 276, 314, 328. Tree ragwort, 362. Sequoia, 380. Seringat, 357. Silene, 258, 276, 315. Sisyrinchium, see Bermudienne. Solanum, 328. Sun, 315. Solidago, see Goldenrod. Sophora, 377. Sorbier, 377. Sorbus, see Sorb. Marsh marigold, see Marsh marigold. Marigold, 217. Remember me, see Myosotis palustris. Sparganium natans, 332. Specularia speculum, see Campanula speculum. Sphenogyne speciosa, 277. Spiræa Japonica, see Kerria Japonica. Staphylea, 358. Statice, 255, 328. Stenactis speciosa, 315. Stevia, 315. Stramonium fastuosum, see Datura fastuosa. Sumac, 358. Elderberry, 358. Sureau aquatique, see Viorne obier. Symphorine, 358. Sycamore, see Sycamore maple. Symphoricarpos, see Symphorine. Symphytum, see Comfrey. Sisyrinchium, see Bermudagrass. Syrnga, see Lilac. Tagetes, 277, 329. Tagetes patula, see Carnation. Tagetes erecta, see Indian Rose. Tamarix, 325. Tanacetum, see Tansy. Tansy, 315. Taxodium, see Sequoia. Taxus, see Yew. Tetragonia, 177. Tetragonolobus purpureus, see Red trefoil. Thalictrum, see Pigamon. Oswego tea, see Monarda didyma. Thlaspi, 277. Yellow thlaspi, see Alyssum saxatile. Thlaspi perennial, 255. Thrachymene caerulea, see Hugelia caerulea. Thuia, 381. Thunbergia, 341. Alpine thyme, see Daphne Cneorum. Tigridia, 316. Linden, 377. Tilia, see Linden. Tomato, 178. Tournefortia, 316. Tourrette, 255, 336. Trachelium caeruleum, 277. Tradescantia, 292, 329. Trapa natans, see Macre. Water clover, see Menyanthes trifoliata. Triacanthos, see American beech. Trifolium, see Cytisus sessilifolius. Privet, 359, 362. Tropœolum, see Nasturtiums. Tuberose, 316. Tulip, 316. Tulip tree, 378. Tupelo, 335. Turritis verna, see Spring tourrette. 1Tussilage, 318, 337. GARDENING MANUAL. Tussilago, see Coltsfoot. Typha, see Massette. Ulex, see Gorse. Ulmus, see Elm. Vaccinium, see Lingonberry. Valerian, 277. Greek valerian, see Polemony. Varaire, 318. Velar de Barbarie, 318. Veratrum, see Varaire. Verbascum phœniceum; see Purpurine mullein. Verbena, see Verbena. Goldenrod, 318. Vinca, see Periwinkle. Viola tricolor, see Pansy. Sea violet, see Large-flowered bellflower. Viorne, 335, 359. Violette odorante, 255. Viola odorata, see Scented violet. Virgilia, 378. Viscaria, 278. Vitex, see Chaste tree. Vitadinia, 255. Volubilis, see Ipomæa purpurea. Wellingtonia, see Sequoia. Witlavia grandiflora, 278. Weigelia rosea, 359. Japanese varnish, see Ailantus Wigandia, 330. glandulosa. Veroniques, 319, 330. Vernonia, 319. Worms, 118. Verbena, 277, 329. Viburnum, see Viorne. Xanthorhiza, 859. Xanthoxylum, see Clavalier. Xeranthemum, annuum, see Immortelle. Judas vine, see Morelle Yucca, 362. climbing. Virginia creeper, 345. Vine, 231. Villarsia, 331. zauschneria, 319. Zea, corn, see Corn. lZinnia, 278. END OF ALPHABETICAL TABLE. Fig. 1. vegetable garden map............................ - 2. Thermosiphon........ 53 - 3. Escutcheon graft................................. 69 4. - ring graft................................... 5. - slot graft..................................... 6. - veneer graft....................... . 8. in crown.............................. - by approach................................ 9. frame................................ 70 2 3 7 76 2 78 - 10. Pineapple greenhouse.................................. 96 - 11. Melon, 1st bay................ 150 12. 13. - 2nd pruning................................... 151 3rd pruning............. ................... 152 - 14. Peach, 2nd year....... ........................... 204 15. ★16. 17. - 18. - - - 3rd year.................................. 206 4th year...........................208 5th year.................................. 210 in V.,.................................... 211 19. Forcing greenhouse..................................... 212 - 20. Cattail pear trees.............................. 214 21. 22. - 23. - - - fan-shaped................................. 218 palmette.................. 220 double-stemmed palmette................... 221 - 24. Goblet apple tree.............................. 228 - 25. - in cordons............. 229 - 26. Thomery vine................................ 233 END OF TABLE OF FIGURES. BIBLIOTHÈQUE DES PROFESSIONS INDUSTRIELLES ET AGRICOLES FOUNDED BY E. LACROIX X Ex-Officier de marine, Ingénieur eivil Membre de la Société industrielle de Mulhouse, de l'Institut royal des Ingénieurs hollandais de la Société des Ingénieurs de Hongrie, etc, AVEC LA COLLABORATION de MM. les Rédacteurs des Annales du Génte civil ET CELLE d'Ingénieurs, de Professeurs et de Savants français et étrangers Avertissement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Table in alphabetical order of authors' names... Pages, Alphabetical catalog of subjects... 17 Catalogue in methodical order of subjects or series. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 General catalog of works published by the Lacroix bookshop, other than those forming part of the library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 OAO PROFESSIONS INDUSTRIELLES ET AGRICOLES Publiée par Eugène LACROIX 2 AVERTISSEMENT Since 1816, i.e. in the sixty years since our company was founded (1), our predecessors have published, and we continue to publish, works on the sciences applied to industry, arts and crafts, and agriculture. Taken together, these publications form a very varied collection: we had therefore created a Bibliothèque des professions industrielles et agricoles. But the scope of some of these works, the more or less scientific or more particularly practical teaching they contain, the typographical form, different for most, and finally the high price (1) Merger (in 1856) of the former houses Malher et Ce (founded in 1816), Aug. Mathias (founded in 1827), Comptoir des Imprimeursunis (founded in 1842), G. Comon (founded in 1848). Some of them could not be understood serially in an encyclopedia accessible, by form, content and price, to people who most often need practical indications on the profession they are learning, or in which they want to become more intelligently skilled. For these people, of whom there are many, there is a need for accurate practical guides, in a convenient format, at a moderate price, written with clarity and method, in the same way that direct teaching from teacher to pupil or master to apprentice is clear and methodical. Such was our thinking when we began, in 1863, the publication of the Bibliothèque des professions industrielles et agricoles. We are confident that we will achieve the goal we have set ourselves, thanks to the sustained sales of the series already published, to the number and merit, both as scholars and as practitioners, of the contributors to the work, and to the subscriptions we receive from all sides and in all forms. Our publication is aimed at the engineer, the industrialist, the mechanic in each of the special professions, the craftsman in all trades, the schoolteacher, the farmer; some series are suitable for the man of the world who wishes to satisfy his curiosity, or who wishes to augment the notions already acquired, with specific knowledge of the professions which provide society as a whole with the elements of material well-being, the indispensable basis of moral progress. It is therefore to a very large number of readers, or rather workers, that we offer effective assistance in the study and application of questions of private or public utility. We appeal directly to them, reminding them that the only way to lower the selling price of a book is to print it in a very large number of copies, in anticipation of a large number of buyers: indeed, the initial expenses, i.e. engraving the wood and plates, typographical composition of the text and the author's work, are the same for one copy as for a thousand, ten thousand, etc. We hope that the number of copies will increase in the future. In the hope that the number of subscribers to our work will not cease to increase, - that editors and subscribers will lend us their increasingly effective support, - we shall continue to publish the volumes announced, as quickly as possible. The selling price of each volume will be determined by the cost of producing it. This Library is composed of nine Series, subdivided as follows: SERIES A. - Exact sciences... ... ... . 9 vols. B. - Observational sciences... . 24 " C. - Civil engineering... ... ... ... ... ... ... D. - Mining and metallurgy . . . . . " E. - Power machinery... " F. - Military and maritime professions. G. - Industrial occupations... ..." H. - Agriculture, gardening, etc. ..." I. - Home economics, accounting29 57 lity, legislation, mixtures... 29 1 X 1 Total. ... 250 vols. The volumes in this series are published in the large in-18 format, most of them illustrated with engravings to enhance understanding of the text; atlases contain drawings that need to be represented on a larger scale and in greater detail. DES VOLUMES PUBLIES DE LA BIBLIOTHÈQUE LACROIX - 66o- October 1871 Pagez. SÈRIE G, n° 26. Barbot. Jewelry. 1 vol. with 101 figs. 10 fr. - H - 9. Basset. Agricultural chemistry. 1 vol. 4 fr - G - 1 - Culture et alcoolisation de la betterave, 1 vol. with fig. 4 fr - C - 2. Birot. Guide pratique du Conducteur des Ponts et Chaussées et de l'Agent-Voyer. 1 vol. and 1 atlas, 10 fr. Subdivided into 4 parts, sold separately for 3 fr. 1° Plans et nivellements; 2° Routes et chemins; 3° Ponts et aqueducs; 4° Constructions en général et devis. 50 57 45 31 SERIE H, n° 45. Rona. Pleasure gardens. 1 vol. 3 fr. 50c. 63 - H - 57. - Rural buildings. 1 vol. 5 fr. 66 - 6 - 1 - Fabric preparation and weaving. 1 vol. and atlas, 10 fr. Part 1. New drapery. 1 vol. and atlas sold separately, 6 fr. - F - 2. Rousquet. Architecture navale, 1 vol. with fig. 3 fr. - C - 20. Bouniceau. Constructions at sea. 1 vol. with fig. and 1 atlas, 18 fr. - H - 50. Bourgoin d'orli. Culture de la canne à sucre du caféier et du cacaoyer, suivi de la fabrication du chocolat. 5 fr. Sold separately: - H - 46. - Cultivation of coffee and cocoa trees. 3 fr. - II - 50. - Cultivation of sugar cane. 3 fr. - B - 12. Brun. Wine fraud and disease. 1 vol., 3 fr. - 6 - 60. Cailletet. Oils, testing and dosage. 1 vol. 4 fr. 45 43 33 64 63 29 53 - H - 20. Carbonnier. Fish farming. 1 vol, 3 fr. 59 - C - 3 - Carnet de l'Ingénieur, 1 vol, 4fr - G. - 9. chateau. Corps gras industriels. 1 vol. 5 fr. 31 48 SÈRIE C, n° 16. Chauvac de la Place. Railroads (connecting curves. 1 vol. 6fr. 32 - B - 5. Chevalier. Photography. 1 vol. with figs, 4 fr. - B - 2. Clausius. Mechanical theory of heat. 2 vols. with figs, 15 fr. - C - 4. Cornet. Album des chemins de fer, course de l'École centrale, 10 fr. - H - 41. Courtois-Gérard. Gardening. 1 vol. with figs, 5 fr. - H - 28. - Market gardening. 1 vol. with figs, 5 fr. - C - 10. Demanet. Masonry. 1 vol. with 20 double plates, 6 fr. - D - 1. Demanet (son). Coal mining. 1 vol. with figs, 6 fr. - D - 5. Dessoye. Steel. 1 vol. 4 fr. - E - 6. Dinée. Gears. 1 vol. with 17 double plates, 5 fr. - 1 - 16. D'Omalius d'Halloy. Ethnographie. Studies on human races. 1 vol. with one color plate, 4 fr. 28 27 34 62 60 32 37 4 69 - F - 1. Doneaud. Maritime law. 1 vol. 3 fr. 43 D - 15. Drapiez. Mineralogy. 1 vol., 3 fr. 39 - G - 5. Dromart. Maritime pine. 1 vol. with 3 double plates, 4 fr. - G - 50. Dulief. Traité de la fabrication des liqueurs, 5 fr. 46 82 Pages. SERIES I, No. 4. Dubief. Liquoriste des dames. 1V., 3 fr. - 1 - 1. - Vins factibes. 1 vol. 2 fr. - G - 48 bis. - Le Féculier et l'Amidonnier. 1 vol. 5 fr. 1 - 21. - L'Immense trésor des Vignerons et des marchands de vin. 1 vol., 5 fr. - H - 14 Dubos. Choosing dairy cows. 1 vol. with figs, 3 fr. - 1 - 6. Dufrené. Inventors' rights, patents. 1 vol. 3 fr. - C - 21. Emion. Traité de l'exploitation des chemins de fer. 1 vol. 8 fr. Two parts sold separately. 1° Voyageurs et bagages. 1 vol. 3 fr. 50. 2° Marchandises. 1 vol. 3 fr. 50. 1 - 12 - Expropriations, 1 vol. 1 fr. 1 - 7 - Freight brokerage. 1 vol. 2 fr. - D - 4. Fairbairn, Iron metallurgy. 1 vol. with figs, 6 fr. - G - 12. Flamm. Appareils économiques de chauffage, 1 vol. with 4 plates, 4 fr. - H - 40. Fleury-Lacoste. Vigneron. 1 vol. 3 fr. 68 67 52 70 57 68 33 68 37 48 61 Pages. SERIES G, no. 14. - Fol Nouveau manuel complet du Teinturier, préparation et application des mauères tinctoriales. 4 vol. with numerous figures, in press. For subscribers, 8 fr. 50 - H - 2. Forney. Taille du rosier, sa culture, etc. 1 vol. 3 fr. - H - 52. Fraiche. Oyster farming. 1 vol. with figs, 4 fr. - C - 8. Francon. Wood cubing. 1 vol. 4 fr. - B - 10. Frésénius. Potasses, sodas, ashes, acids, etc., 1 vol. with figs, 3 fr. - B - 17. Garnault. Electricity. 1 vol. with figs, 3 fr. - H - Gaudry. Rural steam engines. 1 vol. 107 p. New edition in press. - H - 4. Gayot. Traité pratique de construcH- 4 tion des habitations des animaux, pour le bon aménagement et l'hygiène. 1 large vol. with numerous illustrations, 7 fr. Two parts sold separately. 55 64 31 28 30 55 1° Ecuries et étables. 1 vol. 3 fr. 56 H - 4 2° Bergeries, porcheries, etc., 1 vol. 3 fr. - H - 49. Gobin (H.). Entomology and destruction of harmful insects. 1 vol. with figs, 4 fr. 55 64 Pages. SÈRIE H, n° 32. Gobin (A.). Traité de la culture des plantes fourragères. 1 very large vol. with figs, 8 fr. Two parts sold separately. H - 32. 1° Prairies naturelles. 3 fr. H - 33. 2° Prairies artificielles, 3 fr. 50 60 61 - H - 1. - Agriculture générale. 1 vol. with figs, 4 fr. - H - 11. Gossin. Agricultural lectures. 1 vol. 1 fr. - D - 12. Guettier. Metal alloys. 1 vol. 4 fr - C - 1. Guy. Surveyor. 1 vol. 183 figs, 4 fr - H - 25. Hamet. Apiculture or beekeeping. 1 vol. with figs, 5 fr. - G - 7. Jaunez. Driver's manual, 1 vol. with figs, 3 fr. - G - 3. Kaeppelin. Impression des tissus avec échantillons et planches, 1 vol. 10 fr. - H - 8. Kielmann. Drainage. 1 vol. with figs, fr - H - 42. Koltz. Willow cultivation, 1 vol. with figs, 3 fr - H - 3. Laffineur. Guide de l'Ingénieur agricole, hydraulique, desséchement, irrigations, lois, décrets, etc. et un traité d'hydraulique urbaine et agricole. 1 vol. with 5 oblong plates, 6 fr. Two parts sold separately: 55 57 38 31 59 47 46 56 62 55 - H - 31. 2° Hydraulique urbaine. 1 vol. - E - 1. Hydraulic wheels. 1 vol. with plates, 3 fr. 50. - G - 4. Laterrière (de). Bedding. 1 vol. with fig. 2 fr. 13 Pages. SERIE H, n° 3. - Laffineur. 1° Hydraulics, drying. 1 vol. 4 fr. 3 fr. - H - 56. Lérolle (Léon). Botany applied to plant cultivation. 1 vol. with figs, 6 fr. - 1 - 9. Lesoure. Géographie à l'usage des écoles d'architecture, des arts et 41 46 65 métiers, des artistes, etc. 1 v., 3 fr. 68 - B - 11. Liebig. Introduction to the study of chemistry. 1 vol. 2 fr. 50. - 1 - 25. Lincol. Accounting for

industrial and commercial enterprises. 1 vol. 5 fr. - G - 44. Lunel. Grocery. 3 fr. - 2 - Home economics, 2 fr. G - 43. - Perfumery, 5 fr. H - 48. - Acclimatization, 3 fr. I 55 60 - 14. - Hygiene and common medicine. 2 fr. - D - 18. Malo. Asphalts, bitumens. 1 vol. with 7 plates, 5 fr. - D - 17. Marcel de Serres. Traité des roches. 1 vol. 5 fr - II - 18. Mariot-Didieux. Basse-cour: Education lucrative des poules des oies et 29 54 67 63 69 39 canards, etc. 1 vol. avec fig., 6 fr. 58 Two parts sold separately. Pages. SÈRIE H, n° 18 bis. - Mariot-Didieux. Les Poules. 1 vol. 4 fr. - H - 19 - Geese and ducks. 1 vol. 2 fr. - H - 17. - Lucrative rabbit education. 1 vol. 2 fr. 50. - H - 21. - Treatment of dog diseases. 1 vol. 3 fr. - G - 13. Merly. Carpenter's guide. 1 vol. with 130 plates, 6 fr. - B. - 4. Miége. Electric telegraphy. 1 vol. with figs, 3 fr. - G - 48. Monier. Analysis of sugars. 1 vol. with figs, 2 fr. - G - 23. Moreau. Jeweler. 1 vol. with col. figs, 2 fr. - G - 10. Mulder. Brewer's guide. 1 strong vol. 6fr. - B - 14. Noguès. Applied mineralogy. 2 vols. with figs, 12 fr. - G - 6. Ortolan. L'ouvrier mécanicien ou la mécanique de l'atelier. 1 vol. and 58 59 49 27 52 50 48 29 atlas of 52 double plates, 12 fr. 47 - A - 6 - Mesta. Linear drawing applied to industrial and vocational schools. 1 vol. and atlas of 41 double plates, 6 fr. - C - 27. Perdonnet. Chemins de fer (Notions générales.) 1 vol. with figs, 15 fr. - C - 26. Pernot et Tronquoy. Constructor's dictionary. 1 vol. 6 fr. 25 34 34 SERIE C, n° 17. Peronne. Tracé des courbes sur le terrain, 1 vol. 3 fr. - H - 6 et 7. Pouriau. Traité des sciences phyH - 6. siques appliquées à l'agriculture, 2 fort vol. 14 fr. Two parts sold separately. 1° Chimie inorganique. 7 fr. - 7. 2° Chimie organique. 7 fr. - H - 55. - Chimiste agriculteur, 1 vol. with figs, 7 fr. - G - 35. Prouteaux Paper and cardboard manufacture. 1 vol. with 7 oblong plates, 5 fr. - I - 5. Rambosson. Popular science. 4 vols. with numerous fig. in text, 14 fr. - H - 38. Reynaud. Olive tree cultivation. 1 vol. 4 fr. - G - 11. Roux (L.). Weapons and hunting powders. 1 vol., 3 fr. - A - 3. Rozan. Elementary geometry lessons for vocational schools. 1 vol. and atlas of 31 double plates, 6 fr. - B - 1 et 1 bis. Sacc. Élément de Chimie. 2 vel. together, 6 fr. Sold separately: 1° Chimie minérale ou synthétique. 1 vol. 3 fr. 2° Chimie organique ou asynthétique, 1 vol. 3 fr. - 1 - 3. Sébillot. Industrial and commercial movement. 1 vol. 2 fr. 15 32 56 " 65 51 68 61 48 25 27 67 Pages. SERIE A, n° 1. Sella. Theory and use of the slide rule. 1 vol. with plates, 4 fr. - H - 43. Sicard. Cultivation and preparation of cotton. 1 vol. with figs, 3 fr. - D - 19. Soulié. Gisement, exploitation, em25 63 ploi du pétrole, 1 vol. with fig., 3 fr. 40 - F - 4. Steerk. Manufacture of powders and saltpeter; - fireworks. 1 vol. with figs, 6 fr. - H - 22. Tarade (E. DE). Traité de l'élevage 43 et de l'éducation du chien. 1v.,4 fr. 59 - D - 11. Tissier (Ch. and A.). Aluminum, properties, processes, extraction. 1 vol. with plates, 5 fr. I. - 8. Tondeur. Stenography, 1 fr. - H - 52 bis. Touchet. Agricultural drainage, 1 vol. with illustrations, 2 fr. - C - 25. Vanalphen. Metal weights. 1 vol. with tables and 2 plates, 5 fr. - 6 - 8. Violette. Varnish manufacture. 1 vol. with figs, 6 fr. - F - 6. Vincent. Guide du commandant de navires à vapeur. 1 vol. and 2 plates, 5 fr. - B - 9. will. Qualitative analysis. 1 vol. 3 fr. - H - 53. Wolff. Farmyard manures and fertilizers in general. 1 vol. 3 fr. 38 2 65 34 47 43 28 68 POUR LES VOLUMES PUBLIÉS Acclimatation des animaux domestiques, par le Dr B. LUNEL. 1 vol. 185 p. 3 fr. Steel (its use and properties), by G.-B.-J. DÉSSOYE, with introduction and notes, by E. GRATEAU. 1 vol. 309 pp. 4 fr. Agent-voyer (Guide de l'), by BiRor. 1 vol. and atlas. 10 fr. Agriculture. Guide pratique d'agriculture générale, by A. GOPIN. 1 vol. 1,448p. with fig. Alcoholization. V. Beet. 4 fr. Alloys métalliques, by A. GUETTIER, foundry manager. 1 vol. 343 p. 4 fr. Aluminum and alkali metals (Research, extraction and manufacture), by C.-H. and A. TISSIER. TISSIER, 1 vol. 228 p. with 1 plate and numerous figures in the text. 5 fr. Amidon (fabrication de l'), by Dubier, 1 vol. Analysis of wines. V. Wines. Sugar analysis. V. Sucres. 5fr. Analyse qualitative, by H.WILL, translated by W. BICHON. 1 vol. 259 p. with tables in text. Domestic animals. V. Housing. 3 fr. Pests: their destruction, by H. Gobin. 3 fr. Apiculture (beekeeping), by H. HAMET. 1 vol. 336 p. with figures. 5 fr. Economical heating appliances for solid and gaseous fuels, by P. FLAMM. 1 v., 157 p., 4 pl. 4 fr. Architecture navale. (Practical guide), by G. BOUSQUET. 1 vol., vi-102 p. with fig. Rural architecture, by T. BoNA. 1 vol. Weapons and hunting powders, 1 vol, 138 p. Artifice (Fireworks) V. Powders and saltpeter. 3 fr. 4 fr. 50. 3 fr. Asphalts, bitumens, by Malo. 1 v., 111-319 p., 7 pl, 5 fr. Basse-cour, éaucation lucrative des poules, oies et canards, etc. par MARIOT-DIDIeux. 1 large vol. with figs. 6 fr. Beetroot (Cultivation and Alcoholization), by Basser. 1 vol. 284 p. 4fr. Rijoutier. Application de l'harmonie des couleurs, by L. MOREAU. f vol. 108 p., 2 pl. col. 2 fr. Bois. Tariff for the cubage of wood, by A. FRANCON. 1 vol. 402 p. 4 fr. Botanique appliquée à la culture des plantes, by LEON LEROLLE, 1 vol. 464 p., with numerous fig. in text Brasseur (Guide du), by MuLper. 1 vol. 6 fr. 6 fr. Rrevets. Inventors' rights, by H. DUFRENÉ. 3 fr. Carton (Fabrication du), by PROUTEAUX. 1 vol. with plates. 5 fr. Caféier, cacaoyer et de la canne à sucre (Culture et exploitation du), by Bourcoin D'ORLi. 1 vol., 260 p. 5 fr. Canards, by MARIOT-DIDIEUX. 1 vol. 1 fr. 50 Carnet de l'ingénieur. Aide manuel de l'ingénieur, etc. 1 vol. 290 p. with fig. and table. 4 fr. Chaleur (Mechanical theory of heat), by CLausius, translated by FOLIE. 2 vols. together 748 p. with fig. 15 fr. Charpentier (Livre de poche du). Collection de 150 épures, with accompanying explanatory text, by J.-F. MeRLy. 1V., 287 p. 6 fr. Chasseur médecin (Traité complet sur les maladies du chien), by F. CLATER, translated by MARtoT-DIDieux. 1 vol. 195 o. chauffage (Appareils de), by FLAMM. 1 vol. 3 fr. 4 fr. chauffeur (Manuel du), by Jaunez. 1 vol. with fig. 3 fr. Chemins de fer. Traité d'Exploitation by Victor EMION, with preface by Jules FAVRE. 1 large vol. 787 pages. 8 fr. Chemins de fer (Notions générales), by A. PERDONNET. - Atbum des chemins de fer, Ecole centrale course. 1 vol. text and 74 pl. 1 vol. 458 p. - Curves in the field, by PERONNE. 10 fr. 15 fr. 3 fr. - Courbes de raccordement, by CHAUVAC DE LA PLACE. 1 vol. chien (Education du), by E. de TARADE, 1 vol. 6 fr. 4 fr. chimie. Eléments de chimie, by Dr SAcc. 2 vols. 6 fr. Chimie agricole, by N. BASSET. 1 vol. 389 p. 4 fr. Chimie (introduction à l'étude de la), by M. J. LIEBIG. 1 vol. 248 p. - Qualitative analysis, by WILL. 2 fr. 50. 3 fr. Inorganic chemistry, by POURIAU. 1 v., 520 p., with figOrganic chemistry, by the same, 1 v., 546 p., with fig. Tfr. 19 Chemist farmer, by the same, 1 vol., 460 p., 148 fig. fr. Commandant de navires (Guide du), by VINCeNT, 1V. 5 fr. Conducteur des Ponts et Chaussées (Guide du), by BiRoT 1 vol. and atlas. 10 fr. Agricultural lectures, by GoSSIN. 1 vol. 124 p. 1 fr. Constructeur (Guide du). Dictionnaire des mots techniques employés dans la construction, by PERNOT, revised and completely recast, by C. TRONQUOY. 1 vol. 532 p. 6 fr. - Masonry, by DEMANET. 1 vol. 252 p. with tables and 20 double plates. 6 fr. Constructions et travaux à la mer, by M. BOUNICEAU. 1 vol. viti-420 p. and atlas of 44 double plates. 18 fr. Constructions rurales, by BonA. 1 vol. 296 p. with fig. 5 fr. Corps gras industriels, Savons, Bougies, Chandelles, etc. (Connaissance et exploitation), by Th. CHATEAU 1 vol. 435 p. 5 fr. Coton (Culture du), by Dr. A. SICARD. 1 vol., 148 p. with figures in text. 3 fr. Connection curves. Chemins de fer, routes et chemins (Nouvelles tables pour le tracé des), by CHAUVAC DE LA PLACE. 1 vol. 121 p., 1 pl. 6 fr. Courbes sur le terrain (Guide pratique pour le tracé des), by Eug. PERONNE. 66 p. or tables, with figures interspersed in the text. 3 fr. Courtage. La liberté et le courtage des marchandises, by V. EMION. 1 vol. 142 p. 2 fr. Culture maraîchère, by COURTOIS-GÉRARD, 1 vol., 399 p., with numerous fig. in text. 5fc. Linear drawing, by A. ORTOLAN AND J. MESTA. 1 vol. 281 p. with an atias of 42 plates. 6 fr. Dictionnaire du Constructeur, by TRONQUOY, 1 vol. 6 fr. Drainage. Results of observations and practical experiments, by KIELMANN. 1 vol. 104 p., fig. in text. 1 fr. Droit maritime international et commercial (Notions pratiques de), by Alp. DONEAUD. 1 vol. 155 pp. 3 fr. Economie domestique, contenant des notions d'une application journanère, by doct. B. LUNEL. LUNEL. 1 vol. 227 p. 2 fr. Electricity. Principes généraux, applications, by SNOWHARRIS, translated by E. Garnaulr. 1 vol. 264 p., with 72 figures in text. 3 fr. Fertilizers. La vidange agricole, by TOUCHET. 1 v. with fig. 2 fr. Engrenages (Traité pratique du tracé et de la construction des), by F.-G. DINÉE 1 vol. 80 p. et 17 pl. 5fr. Entomologie agricole. Destruction of harmful insects, by H. Gobin, 1 vol. 285 p., with figs. and tables. 4 fr. Entreprises industrielles et commerciales, by LinCOL, 1 vol. 343 pp. 5 fr. Epicerie, ou Dictionnaire des denrées indigènes et oxotiques, by doct. B. LuNEL. 1 vol. 262 p. 3 fr. Ethnographie (Descriptions des races humaines), by d'OMALIUS D HALLOY. 1 vol. with one colored plate, 130 p. 4 fr: Expropriations. Manuel des expropriés, by Victor EMION. 1 vol. 125 p. 1 fr Fécules et amidons, by DuBIEr, 1 vol. 267 p. 5 fr. Fer (le), by FAIRBAIRN, 1 vol. with fig. 6 fr. Fumiers de ferme et engrais en général, by Dr Emile WOLFF, 1 vol. 204 p. Fireworks. V. Powders and saltpeter. 3 fr. Géographie Physique, Ethnographique et Historique à l'usage des aruistes, des écoles d'architecture et dez gens du monde, by O. LESCURE, 1 vol. 351 pages. 3 fr. Géomètre arpenteur (Arpentages, nivellements, levé des plans, partage des propriétés agricoles), by M. P. Guy. 1 vol. 272 p., with 183 figs. 4 fr. Géométrie élémentaire (Leçons de), by Ch. ROZAN. 1 vol. 270 p., with an atlas of 31 plates 6 fr. Animal housing (Bon aménagement des). Ecuries et étables, bergeries, porcheries, etc., by GAYOT, 558 pages and numerous figs. 7fr. Houille. Gisement, extraction et exploitation des Mines de Houille, by DeManer, 1 vol. 404 p. and 4 tables. Paperback. 6 fr. Huiles (Essai et dosages des) employées dans le commerce ou servant à l'alimentation des savons et de la farine de blé, by CAiLlerer. 1 vol. 107 p. fr. Kydrauliques (Wheels), by J. LAFFINEUR. 1 vol., 142 p. and 8 plates. Hydraulique, Dessèchement. 1 vol. Urban Hydraulics. 1 vol. 3 fr. 50 4 fr. 3 fr. Hygiène et médecine usuelle, par le doct. B. LUNEL. 1 vol. 212 p. 2 fr. Agricultural engineer (Hydraulics, drainage, irrigation, etc.), by LAFFINEUR. 1 vol. 398 p., 5 pl. 6 fr. Two parts sold separately. Insectes nuisibles (Destruetion des). V. Entomotogie. Inventors' rights. Legislation, by H. DUrRENÉ, 1 vol. 168 pages. 3 fr. Jardinage (Manière de cultiver son jardin), by COURTOISGERARD. 1 vol. 403 p., with 1 plate and figures in text. (New edition.) 5 fr. Jardins d'agrément (Tracé et ornementation), by T. BONA. 1 vol. 304 p., 4th ed. 3 fr. 50. Joaillier. Traité complet des pierres précieuses, by CH. BARBOT, 1 vol. 567 p. and 178 engraved figures. Hardcover. 10 fr. Lapins (Éducation lucrative des), by MaRIoT-DIDIEUX. 1 vol. 163 p. 2 fr. 50 Liqueurs (Fabrication des), sans distillation, by DUBIEF. 1 vol. 288 p. with figures and 1 pl. 5 fr. - Le liquoriste des Dames, by Dubier. 1 vol. 120 p. 3 fr. Literie, by JEAN DE LATERRIÈRE. 1 vol. 180 p., avee 13. 2 fr. Machines agricoles en général et machines à vapeur rurales (construction, emploi et conduite), by GAUDRY 1 vol. 107 p., avee 13. 2 fr. Masonry (Builder), by A. DEMANET. 1 vol. text, 252 p. and atlas, 20 pl. 6 fr. Marine. Guide pratique du commandant de navires à vapeur, by A. VINCENT. 1 vol. 285 p., 2 pl. - Le droit maritime. 1 vol. - Naval architecture. 1 vol. with fig. 5 fr. fr. Resinous materials (Provenance and working), by E. DROMART. 1 vol. 101 p. with 3 plates 4 fr. Mécanique pratique, (Guide de l'ouvrier mécanicien), by ORTOLAN, 1 vol. and atlas. 12 fr. Manuel du Chauffeur, by A. JaunEz, 1 vol. 212 p., 37 fig. and 1 plate. édecine usuelle. V. Hygiene. 4 fr. Métallurgie (le Fer, son histoire, ses propriétés), by William FAIRBAIRN; translated by G.. MAURICE. 1 vol. 351 pages, with 5 plates - L'acier, by DESSOVE. 1 vol. 6 fr. 4 fr. étaux. Manuel calculateur du poids des métaux, by VANALPHEN. 1 vol. X-86 p. and 2 pl. 5 fr. Minéralogie appliquée, by A.-F. NOGUèS, 2V. with fig. 12 fr. Minéralogie usuelle (Exposition succincte et méthodiqne des minéraux), by M. DRAPIEZ, 1 vol. 507 p. - Extraction of aluminum. 1 vol. Mines de Houille, by DEMANET, 1 vol. with fig. 3 fr. 5 fr. 6fr. Mouvement industriel et commercial, by A. SÉBILLCT, 1 vol. 232 p. 2 fr. Oies et canards (Educat. Iucrative des), by MaRIoTDIPIEUX. 1 vol. 187 p., with numerous fig. in text. 2 fr. olivier (sa culture, son fruit et son huile), by J. REYNAUD. 1 vol. 330 p. 4 fr. Ostreiculture. Elevage et multiplication des races marines comestibles, by FRAICHE, 1 vol. 178 p., with fig, 4 fr. Ouvrier Mécanicien (Guide pratique de l'), by ORTOLAN. 1 vol. with atlas. 12 fr. Papiers et cartons (Fabrication), by A. PROUTEAUX. 1 vol. 277 p., with atlas, 7 pl. 5 fr. Perfumer. Dictionary of cosmetics and perfumes, by dorteur B. LUNEL. 1 vol. 215 p. 5 fr. Pétrole (Gisements, explottation et traitement industriel), by E. SOtLIÉ and H. HAUDOUIN. 1 vol. 236 p. 3 fr. Physics. Physical sciences applied to agriculture, by M. POURIAU. 2 vols. 14 fr. Photography (l'Etudiant photographe), by A. CHEVALIÉR. 1 vol. with numerous figs. 4 fr. Pin maritime (Exploitation du), by DROMART. 1 vol. 4fr. Pisciculteur, by. P. CARBONNIER. 1 vol. 208 p. 3 fr. Fodder plants, by M. A. GoBiN. Two parts sold separately. 1st part. Natural meadows, irrigation, pastures. 1 vol. 3 fr. 2nd part. Artificial meadows, plants, roots. 1 very strong vol. of 680 p. with figs. Both parts in 1 vol. 3 fr. 50. 8 fr. Ponts et chaussées et agent voyer (Conducteur des), 1 vol. 558 p. with atlas of 144 tig. 10 fr. Ponts et chaussées. Tracé des conrbes sur le terrain, by PERTNNE. 3 fr. Poudres et salpêtres, by Major STEERK, with appendix on fireworks, 1 vol. 360 p. Hunting powders, 1 vol. 6 fr. 3 fr. Poules (Education lucrative des), ou Traité raisonné de gallinoculture, by MARIOT-DiDIEUX, 1 vol. 456 p. 4 fr. Potasses et soudes. Guide pratique pour reconnaître et déterminer le titre véritable et la valeur commerciale des potasses, des soudes, des cendres, des acides et des manganèses, avec 9 tables de déterminations, par le Dr R. FRÉSÉNIUS, le Dr H. WILL, traduit de l'allemand, par le Dr G-W. BICHON. 1 vol. V1-229 p. 3 fr. Natural and artificial meadows. V. Fodder plants. Industrial processes. V. Economy, hygiene, etc. Slide rule (Theory and practice of the slide rule), by Q. SELLA. 1 vol. 133 p., 39 tables. 4 fr. Roches simples et composées (Classification et caractères minéralogiques), by Marcel DE SERRES. 1 vol. 291 p. 5 fr. Ro ser (Taille du), by FORNEY, 1 vol. Water wheels, by LAFFINEUR. Saltpetre, by STEERCK. 1 vol. Soaps. V. Fats. 3 fr. 3 fr. 50. 6 fr. Saule et osier (Culture du), by M.-J. KoLrz, 144 p. and 30 fig. in text. 3 fr. Science populaire (la), by J. RAMBOSSON. 4 vols. with numerous figures in text. Soudes. V. Potasses. Sténographie, by TONDEUR. 1 fr. 14 fr. Sucres. Essai et analyse des sucres, by E. MoNiER, with fig. and tables. 2 fr. - La canne à sucre, by BOURGOIN D'ORLI. 1 vol. 156 p. 3 fr. Tariff of weights and metals, by VANALPHEN. Dyer's Guide, by FoL. 1 vol. with fig. 5 fr. 8 fr. Electric Telegraphy, by B. MIÉGE. 1 vol. 158 p. with numerous figures in text. 3 fr. Weaving and fabric preparation, by T. BONA. Text 2 parts in 1 vol. set, 364 p. ; plus 2 atlases in 1 set, 116 pl. 10 fr. The third part alone: Preparation of fabrics, sold separately, 1 vol. and atlas, 6 fr. Printed fabrics (their manufacture). Impression des étoffes de soie, by D. KAEPPELIN, 1 vol. 151 p., with 4 plates and numerous samples. 10 fr. Cows. Choosing dairy cows, by E. Dunos. 1 vol. 132 p. with pl. 3 fr. Vernis (Fabrication des), by Henri VIOLETTE, 1 vol. with figures in text. 6 fr. Agricultural drainage. Human fertilizer, by J.-H. TOUCHET. 1 vol. 88 p. - 2 fr. Vigneron, by FLEURY-LACOSTE. 1 vol. 144 p., with fig. 3 fr. Vignes et vinification. The immense treasure of winegrowers and wine merchants. 1 vol. 5 fr. Vins (falsifications et maladies des), by J. BaUN. 1 vol. with numerous tables, 2nd ed. 1 vol. 191 p. 3 fr. Vins factices et boissons vinuses, by DUBIEF, 1 vol. p 2 fr. PAR ORDRE MÉTHODIQUE DE MATIÈRES OU DE SÉRES. TABLE OF CONTENTS SERIES A. EXACT SCIENCES. 1 Theory and practice of the slide rule, by Q. SELLA Minister of Finance of the Kingdom of Italy, translated from the Italian by G. Montefiore Levi. 1 vol. 133 pages, 39 tables. 4 fr. 3 Leçons de Géométrie élémentaire, by M. Ch. ROZAN, professor of mathematics. 1 vol. 262 pages and an atlas of 31 engraved double plates, 5 fr. bound, 6 fr. These lessons are based on a completely new plan. M. Rozan's main concern is to show the connection between the essential principles of elementary geometry, and the way in which they flow from one another through a continuous chain of deductions and consequences. The division into lessons gradually leads the student to acquire, even without a teacher, knowledge of the most advanced theorems of geometry. The atlas is composed of carefully engraved plates. 6. Guide pratique pour l'étude du Dessin linéaire et de son application aux professions industrielles, by MM. A. ORTOLAN and J. MESTA. 1 vol. LXXVI-204 pages and an atlas of 41 double plates, engraved by EHRARD. 5 fr. hardback. 6 fr. 1 This table is far from complete in terms of subjects to be published. As the collection is intended to form a complete technology of arts and crafts, manufactures, mines, agriculture, etc., many other volumes, dealing with subjects not mentioned here, will in due course enlarge the scope: but we intend, for the time being, to deal only with the works indicated, because we believe that these are the ones whose publication is most promptly desiredc. An excellent elementary manual, preceded by an introduction in which the authors explain, in dictionary form, all the technical terms and describe the various special instruments. This practical guide is a natural introduction to the work we have entitled Guide de l'ouvrier mécanicien. In preparation': Arithmetic. - Algebra. - Trigonometry. - Descriptive geometry. - Perspective. - Knowledge and practice of Logarithms? "Several works indicated as being in preparationoa will go to press in the course of 1872. 2 We feel we must especially recommend a work on logarithms which appeared some time ago, entitled: Tables des togarithmes à sept décimales, by Jean Luvini: these tables are very complete, and this volume includes several other usual tables. Price: 4 francs (Librairie scientifique-industrielle E. Lacroix) SERIES B. ORSERVATION SCIENCES, CHEMISTRY, PHYSICS, ELECTRICITY, ETC. 1 Eléments de Chimie, by Dr. Sacc, professor at the Neufchatel Academy, etc. 2 vols. Br. 5 fr. Hardback 7 fr. Sold separately. 1° Chimie minérale ou synthétique. 1 vol. 3 fr. 50. 2° Chimie organique ou asynthétique. 1vol. 3 fr. 50. 2. Mechanical theory of heat, by R. CLAUSIUS, professor at the University of Würzburg, translated from German by F. FOLIE, professor at the Ecole industrielle and tutor at the Ecole des mines de Liège, Part I, 1 vol. xxIV-441 pages - Part II Memoranda on the application of the mechanical theory of heat to electrical phenomena and on the molecular movements accepted for the explanation of heat. 1 vol. vi-307 p. Price of 2 volumes. 15 fr." Since heat has been used as a motive force by means of steam engines, and we have thus been practically led to regard a certain quantity of work as equivalent to the heat necessary to produce it, it has been natural to seek theoretically for a definite relationship between a quantity of heat and the work it is possible to make it produce, and to use this relationship to deduce conclusions about the essence and laws of heat itself." So says Mr. Clausius at the beginning of his first Memoir. These lines suffice to illustrate the importance of a question whose study is essential today for scientists and practical men who want to derive from the steam engine all the useful effect it can give. 4. Télégraphie électrique, ou Vade mecum pratique a l'usage des employés des lignes télégraphiques, suivi du programme des connaissances exigées pour être admis au surnumérariat dans l'administration des lignes télégraphiques, by M. B. MIECE, telegraph line station manager. 1 vol. x1-148 pages, with 45 figures in text. Br. 2 fr. Hardcover. 3 fr. M. Miége's intention was not just to produce a useful book, but an indispensable guide. Preliminary notions on magnetism, the different sources of electricity and the properties of currents are followed by descriptions of all the devices in use, with indications of the signals generally adopted. Extremely simple formulas are used to determine the intensity of currents, and to identify the cause of malfunctions. M. Miége's work will also be of undeniable use to anyone wishing to acquire knowledge of the laws of electricity as applied to telegraphy. 5. L'Etudiant photographe, by A. CHEVALIER, with processes by Messrs. Civiale, Bacot, Cavelier, Robert, 1 vol. da 216 pages, with 68 figures. 3 fr. Hardcover. 4 fr. No theoretical considerations, but lots of information and details on the instruments used and how to operate them. In addition, the author is keen to bring the reader up to date with the latest procedures. 9. Analyse qualitative, instruction pratique à l'usage des laboratoires de chimie, by M. le Docteur H. WILL, professeur agrégé de l'université de Giessen; translated from the German by M. le Dr. G.-W. BICHON, translator of M. Justas Liebig's Lettres sur la chimie, and author of several works on this science. 1 vol. 248 pages. 3 fr. Special treatises on analytical chemistry are either too voluminous or incomplete, in the sense that the latter lack the indications essential for the student to be able to guide himself. Dr. Will has avoided both these shortcomings: his guide teaches, in a simple, substantial and methodical way, everything you need to know to be able to discover and separate the constituent parts of compound bodies. 10. Guide pratique pour réconnaître et pour déterminer le titre véritable et la valeur commerciale des Potasses. des Soudes, des Cendres, des Acides et des Manganèses, avec neuf tables de déterminations, par le docteur R. FRÉSÉNIUS and Dr. WILL, assistants and preparators at the Giessen laboratory, translated from the German by Dr. G.-W. BICHON, former student of M. Justus Liébig, with additional notes, tables and documents taken from the Annales du Génie civil. 1 vol. vi-229 pages 3 fr. 11. Introduction to the study of Chemistry, containing the general principles of this science, chemical proportions, atomic theory, the relationship of atomic weights to the volume of bodies, isomorphism, the uses of atomic weights and chemical formulas, isomeric combinations of catalytic bodies, etc..., accompagnée de considérations détaillées sur les acides, les bases et les sels, par M. J. LIEBIG, translated from the German by Ch. GHÉRARD, augmentée d'une table alphabétique des matières prèsant les définitions techniques et les relations des corps. 1 v., 248, pages. 2 fr. 50 The favorable reception this translation has met with in France is reminiscent of the success achieved in Germany by the original edition of the illustrious scholar, rightly considered one of the princes of modern chemistry. 12. Guide pratique pour reconnaître et corriger les Fraudes et maladies du vin, suivi d'un traité d'ANALYSE CHIMIQUE de tous les vins, by M. JACQUES BRUN, vice-présisent de la Société suisse des pharmaciens, 2 ed. 1 vol. 191 p., with numerous tables. Br. 2 fr. 50. 3 fr. The art of wine adulteration has made rapid progress in recent years. Chemistry must not be outdone by fraud: it must stand up to it and always be able to point to the added substance. This task, says Brun, falls mainly to pharmacists. His book is a summary of the different treatments he has found really useful, and which, in his long practice, have been the most successful for the chemical examination of suspect wines. 14. Guide pratique de Minéralogie appliquée (histoire naturelle inorganique) ou connaissance des combustibles minéraux, des pierres précieuses, des matériaux de construction, des argiles céramiques, des minerais manufacturiers et des laboratoires, des minerais de fer, de cuivre, de zinc, de plomb, d'étain, de mercure, d'argent, d'antimoine, d'or, de platine, etc., par M. A.-F. NOGUES. professeur de sciences physiques et naturelles. 2 vols, together 919 p. and 248 fig. Br. 10 fr. Hardcover. 12 fr. As the author states in his preface, this guide has been written primarily for people wishing to acquire accurate, practical and customary knowledge of metalliferous ores and minerals used in the arts and industry, students taking courses at Faculties, students at special and industrial schools, engineers, students at mining schools, miners, farmers, mine managers, mine wardens, amateurs and people from all walks of life who wish to acquire a practical knowledge of mineralogy, will consult it with fruitfulness. This guide has been conceived in an essentially practical and industrial spirit. 17. Leçons élémentaires d'Électricité ou exposition concise des principes généraux de l'ÉLECTRICTIÉ ET DE ses APPLICATIONS, by SNOW-HARRIS, of the Royal Society of London, etc., annotated and translated by E. GARNAULT, former student of the Ecole normale, professor of physics at the Imperial Naval School. 1 vol. 264 pages, with 72 figures in the text. 3 fr. Mr. Snow-Harris' lessons have been a great success in England. The author has concentrated on giving sound, practical and theoretical ideas on the general principles of electricity and the simplest facts, which he demonstrates with easily repeated experiments. His elegant translator, Mr. Garnault, has added notes to the English work, in which he gives, above all, insights into the main applications of electricity in industry. In preparation: Physics, Electroplating, Astronomy, Industrial Chemistry, Geology, Vinegar and Mustard Making, Meteorology, Anatomy, Zoology. - Anatomy - Zoology SERIES C. ENGINEERING, BRIDGES AND ROADWAYS, CIVIL CONSTRUCTION. 1. surveyor's practical guide, including surveying, levelling, surveying plans, dividing up agricultural properties, by Mr. P.-G. Guy, former student of the Ecole polytechnique, artillery officer. New edition. 1 vol. of 272 pages with 5 plates. 4fr. The first two editions of this guide were sold out. The one we are announcing has been completely revised, with a number of important additions. The re-engraved plates are very clear. 2. Guide pratique du Conducteur des ponts et chaussées et de l'Agent voyer. Principes de l'art de l'ingénieur, by M. F. BIROT, civil engineer, former "conducteur des ponts et chaussées", 3rd edition, revised and enlarged. 1 vol. 545 pages, with an atlas of 19 double plates, containing 144 figures. Br. 8 fr. Hardback Four parts sold separately. 10 fr. 1° Plans et nivellements, 1 vol., vin-124 pages, and 6 plates. 3 fr. 2° Roads and paths. 1 vol., 155 pages, 5 plates. 3 fr. 3° Bridges and aqueducts. 1 vol. 124 pages, s plates. 3 fr. 4° Travaux de construction en général, 1 vol. de 145 pages et pl. 3 fr. 3. Carnet de l'Ingénieur, collection of tables, formulas and practical information. 4 fr. 4. Album des chemins de fer, graphic summary of the course taught at the Ecole Centrale des Arts et Manufactures. 4th edition, by G. CORNET, engineer, 1 vol. text and 74 steel-engraved plates. 10 fr. s. Tarif de Cubage des bois équarris et ronds évalués en stères et fractions décimales du stère, by J.-A. FRANCON, cubeur juré de la ville de Lyon. 1 vol. 402 pages. 4 fr. 10. Practical Builder's Guide. - MAÇONNERIE, by A. DEMAXET, lieutenant-coloael honoraire du génie, member of the Académie royale de Belgique, etc. 1 vol. 252 pages, with tables and 1 atlas in-18 of ?0 double plates, engraved on steel by CHAUMONT. Br. 5 fr. Bound 6 fr. This guide, written by M. Demanet, who taught a construction course at the Brussels Military School, borrows great authority from the author's experience and position. The 20 atlas plates accompanying this guide comprise 137 figures, engraved by Chaumont with the accuracy and elegance for which he is renowned. We would remind you that Lieutenant-Colonel Demanet is the author of a Cours de Construction (Construction Course), which was rapidly published in two editions and covers the knowledge of materials and their use, the theory of construction, the establishment of foundations, the economy of works, their maintenance, etc., etc., etc. This work, published by Librairie Demanet (Paris), is the first of its kind in France. This work, published by Librairie Scientifique, Industrielle et Agricole, costs 70 fr. with the atlas, and could therefore not be included in the Bibliothèque des Professions Industrielles et Agricoles. Le Guide pratique du constructeur (maconncrie) is an extract from Mr. Demanet's highly esteemed work, but nevertheless forms a complete whole. 16. Nouvelles tables pour le tracé des Courbes de raccordement (chemins de fer, routes et chemins), calculées par M. CHAUVAC DE LA PLACE, chef de section au chemin de fer de l'Est. 1 vol. 120 pages, 1 plate. New edition, supplemented. 6 fr. These tables, calculated for 82 of the most frequently used radii, and taking as their base a small arc expressed as a round number and successively adding to itself, offer great facility. Their merit has been quickly appreciated by all those who have had occasion to use them. 17. Guide pratique pour le tracé des Courbes sur le terrain, by Eug. PERONNE, 66 pages or tables, with figures in the text. 3 fr. Special works designed to facilitate engineers' operations in the field are generally voluminous or incomplete. Mr. Peronne has avoided this twofold pitfall, and has brought together in a convenient format tables concerning tangents, circles, arrows, conversions of graduation and the raising of plans. Each table is preceded by an explanation and a geometric figure, and the author has also carefully indicated how to use the various tables, 20. Eindes et notions sur les Constructions à la mer, by M. BOTNICEAU, ingénieur en cheft des ponts et chaussées. 1 vol. viII-421 p. and atlas of 44 pl. in 4°, including several duplicates, engraved by Ehrard. Br. 15 fr. Hardback, 18 fr. This work is the summary of long and conscientious studies by one of the most distinguished chief engineers of the national corps des ponts et chaussées. Mr. Bouniceau has attached his name to works of great importance. His work should be meditated upon by all those interested in the new developments in constructions designed to improve seaports and the works needed to preserve coastlines. The atlas which accompanies these Studies is remarkable for the choice of plates and their execution. 21. Traité de l'Exploitation des chemins de fer, by M. V. EMION. 1 tort. vol. preceded by a preface by M. Jules FAVRE. 787 pages. Two parts sold separately. 8 fr. First part: VOYAGEURS ET BAGAGES, 1 vol. XVI-305 pages. 3 fr. 50 Part Two: GOODS. 1 vol. vui-459 p. 3 fr. 50 Today, everyone travels. M. V. Emion's handbook is a must-have guide for everyone. It informs everyone of their rights and duties with regard to the Companies: it picks up the traveler at his home, takes him to the station, follows him at his departure, during his journey, at his arrival and brings him back to his home: it foresees all the difficulties, all the disputes and gives the solution based on law, regulations, jurisprudence and equity. In the second part, Mr. Emion deals in great detail with the organization of the goods service, the tariffs, the formalities required for handing over goods at the station, shipping, delivery, and finally everything concerning the actions to be brought against the Companies, either for damage, or for delay, loss, negligence, etc. 25. Manuel caleulateur du Poids des métaux employés dans les constructions, containing : 1° tables of the new classification of various plain irons, strips and sheet metal; 2° 36 weight tables of 1,100 various samples of plain irons; 3° 5 weight tables of 25 thicknesses of sheet metal; 4° 14 weight tables of all cast irons used daily in buildings, with various very useful information to consult; 5° 9 weight tables of lead, zine and red copper, by VANALPHEN, metreur vérifi cateur spécial de serrurerie, with an appendix containing: 1° weight per square meter of sheet metal of various metals; 2° weight per linear meter of iron (flat and square irons, round and square irons); 3° weight of thin laminated zinc. 1 vol. x-86 pages, 2 ft. 5 fr. 26* Guide pratique du Constructeur. Dictionnaire des mots techniques employés dans la construction à l'usage des architectes, propriétaires, entrepreneurs de maçonnerie, charpentes, serrurerie, couvertures, etc., renfernant tes termes d'architecture civile, l'analyse des lois de voirie, des bâtiments et des desséchements, par M. L.-P. PERNOT, officier de la Légion d'honneur, architecte-vérificateur des travaux publics. New edition, enlarged and entirely revised, by Camille TRonouoy, civil engineer. 1 vol. of 532 p. 5 fr. Hardcover. 6 fr. The first editions of this Dictionary of Construction were completely sold out. In response to the many requests he received, the director of the Bibliothèque des professions industrielles et agricoles not only had the original work reprinted, but also wanted to ensure that none of the progress made over the last fifteen years was omitted from the new edition. Mr. C. Tronquoy, one of our most distinguished civil engineers and at the same time one of our most erudite technologists, was kind enough to take on the thankless task of completely revising the work. The Dictionary we are announcing is the result of this conscientious work. 27. Notions générales sur les chemins de fer, statistiques, histoire, exploitation, accidents, organisation des compagnies, adminis tration, tarifs, service médical, institutions de prévoyance, construction de la voie, voitures, machines fixes, locomotives, nouveaux systèmes sui" vies des Biographies de Cugnot, Seguin et George Stephenson, d'un mémoire sur les avantages respectifs des différentes voies de communication, d'un mémoire sur les chemins de fer considérés comme moyens de défense d'un pays, et d'une Bibliographie raisoonée; par M. Auguste PERDONNET, former student of the Ecole polytechnique, former chief engineer of several railroads, etc. 1 vol, 452 p., with numerous figures in the text. 15 fr. After having published two technical works on railroads, aimed directly at special men, Mr. A. Perdonnet wanted, in his Notions générales, to make himself intelligible to everyone. In addition to technical and economic questions, he dealt in these Notions with questions of company organization and operations, which he did not have to discuss in his two major works. We would like to emphasize the importance of the historical and statistical information with which Mr. Perdonnet has enriched our publication. In preparation: Quantity surveyor. - Brick manufacture. - Architect. - Stonemason. - Staircase construction. - Smoke-making. - Plasterer, cement and mortar. - Marble worker. - House painter. - Iron constructions. - Religious architecture. - Heating and ventilation. - Cubage tables for materials of all kinds. - Tables for weights of materials of all kinds. - Earthworker. - The fitter. SERIES D. MINING AND METALLURGY, MINERALOGY, GEOLOGY, NATURAL HISTORY. 1 Gisement, extraction et exploitation des Mines de houille, traité pratique à l'usage des ingénieurs, des contre-maîtres, ouvriers mineurs, etc., by M. DEMANET, engineer. 1 vol. 404 pages, numerous figures in text and 4 tables. Br. 5 fr. Hardcover. 6fr. 4. practical guide for metallurgists. Le fer, son histoire, ses propriéiés et ses différents procédés de fabrication, par M. William FAIRBAIRN, ingénieur civil, membre de la Sociét- royale de Londres, correspondant de l'Institut de France, etc., translated from English, with the author's approval, and enlarged with notes and appendices, by M. Gustave MAURICE, ingénieur civil des mines, secrétaire de la rédaction Cu Bulletin de la Société d'encouragement. 1 vol. 331 p. and 68 fig. in text, Hardcover. 6 fr. Mr. Fairbairn has long been a leading authority on the iron industry. After tracing the history of progress in ironmaking, the author gives analyses of ores and fuels in relation to the results of the various manufacturing processes: he takes this opportunity to describe the furnaces, machines, etc., used in iron metallurgy. Mr. Maurice, the elegant translator of Mr. Fairbairn's book, has supplemented, with notes and appendices, all that the original text may have been too laconic or too exclusively written with English metallurgy in mind. Among these appendices are those concerning Bessemer processes and the resistance of tubes to crushing. 5. Emploi de l'acier, ses propriétés, par J.-B.-J. DESSOVE, ancien manufacturier, avec une introduction et des notes. par Ed. GRATEAU, ingénieur civil des mines. 1 vol. 303 pages. 4 fr. This book is a veritable monograph on steel. M. Dessoye takes the art of steelmaking at its origin and shows us its progress. He points out the nature and native properties of steel, indicates the different ways in which it is made, and ends his guide with a study on the use of steel in the manipulations it undergoes. As Mr. Grateau points out in his skilful introduction, this book is aimed at all those who are called upon to buy and consume steel of any quality, in any form, and should be consulted by all practitioners. This work is to some extent complemented by a volume by M. Landrin fils, entitled Traité de l'acier. Although we have published this work outside the Library, we must cite it here. It forms 1 volume, Library format, of 315 pages with figures in the text. 5 fr. 11. Guide pratique de la recherche, de l'extraction et de la fabrication de l'Aluminium et des Métaux alcalins. Recherches techniques sur leurs proprietés, leurs procédés d'extraction et leurs usages, by Messrs. Charles and Alexandre TISSIER, chemists-manufacturers. 1 vol. 226 pages, 1 plate and figures in text. 5 fr. Notions on aluminum were scattered throughout numerous collections published in France and abroad. The authors of this guide have had the happy idea of turning these scattered notions into a homogeneous whole in which, after tracing the history of alkali metal preparation, they outline the history of aluminum preparation. Special chapters are devoted to industrial manufacturing and to the physical and chemical properties of the new metal, which has rapidly gained a major place in industry. 12. Guide pratique de l'Alliage des métaux, by M. A. GUETTIER. 1 vol. vii-342 pages. Br. 3 fr. Hardback. 4 fr. After giving a few preliminary explanations on the physical and chemical properties of metals and alloys, the author examines, from the point of view of their alloying with each other, metals that are specially industrial, i.e. of very widespread common use (copper, tin, zinc, lead, iron, cast iron, steel). He then gives some general indications on metals belonging to other industries, but occupying only a secondary place (bismuth, antimony, nickel, arsenic, mercury), and on rich metals belonging to the arts or luxury industries (gold, silver, aluminum, platinum); finally, he considers metals of restricted industrial use, from the possible point of view of their association with alloys of some interest in the industrial arts. 39 15. Mineralogie usuelle. Exposition succincte et méthodique des minéraux, de leurs caractères, de leur composition chimique, de leurs gisements, de leur application aux arts et à l'économie, by M. DRAPIEZ, 1 vol. 504 p. Hardcover. 3 fr. To the lucidity of its definitions and the simplicity of its method of exposition, this guide adds a merit that will not escape the notice of practical men; it contains descriptions of 1,500 mineral species, analyzing their distinctive characteristics, regular and irregular forms, particular properties, chemical compositions and synonyms, deposits, applications in the arts, industry and so on. 17 Traité des Roches simples et composées or de la classification géognostique des Roches d'après leurs caractères minéralogiques et l'époque de leur apparition, by M. Marcel. DE SERRES, Professor at the Montpellier Faculty of Science, Honorary Counselor at the Montpellier Court, Officer of the Legion of Honor. 1 vol. 288 pages. 5 fr. An analysis of the table of contents of this treatise will be the best recommendation we can make: De la composition du globe; - de la classification minéralogique des roches composées : - plutonic rocks or crystalline rocks; - plutonic rocks composed of two elements, granites (six subfamilies); - plutonic rocks composed of three elements, one of which is amphibole: - idem, one of which is talc, steatic or chlorate; - idem, one of which is pyroxene; - some simple rocks; - the various degrees of antiquity of composed rocks. - The work is completed by various tables and ideal cross-sections of the gneiss terrains of Scotland. 18. Guide pratique pour la fabrication et l'application de l'Asphalte et des bitumes, by M. Léon MaLo, civil engineer, former student of the Ecole centrale. 1 vol. II-319 pages, 7 plates. Br. 4 fr. Hardback 5 fr. As the use of asphalt and bitumen became more widespread, there was no practical treatise on the manufacture and use of these substances. Mr. Malo's book fills this gap. It abounds in information of interest not only to engineers, but also to municipal authorities. It also contains data of great interest from a historical point of view, i.e. on the origins of asphalt. This practical guide is accompanied by seven plates, some of them very large. 19. Pétrole (le), ses gisements, son exploitation, son traitement industriel, ses produits dérivés, ses applications à l'éclairage et au chauffage, by Messrs. Emile SOULIÉ and Hipp. HAUDOUIN, former students of the Ecole des Mines, 1 vol. 232 pages, with figures in text. 3 fr. Petroleum is taking on an increasingly important role in industry. Every day sees the testing of new applications for this once-despised substance. To the chemical study of natural petroleum, the authors have added an industrial study, the aim of which is to indicate the means of applying scientific data. Manufacturers will find in this book truly practical information, not only on the chemical treatment itself, but also on the equipment used to carry it out. In preparation: Research and exploitation of metal mines. - Sounder. - Zinc. - Lead. - Lead - Tin - Silver. - Gold. - Tester. - Peat extraction. SERIES E. POWER MACHINES. 4. Traité de la construction des Roues hydrauliques, containing all the wheel systems in use, practical information on the dimensions to be adopted for turning shafts, journals, hydraulic wheel arms, etc. 1 vol. of 142 pages, with numerous tables and 8 plates, by M. Jules LAFFINEUR, civil engineer, member of several learned societies. Br. 2 fr. 50. Hardback 3 fr. 50 In his preface, the author demonstrates that the improvement of factory engines is both a necessity and in the public and private interest. In his book, he researches and defines the main conditions to be met in this respect, and then gives all the details relating to the construction of waterwheels in the best possible conditions. True to his own method, Mr. Laffineur has endeavored to make himself understood through the simplicity of the terms he uses and the many examples he gives. The plates are extremely clear. 6. Traité pratique du tracé et de la construction des Engrenages, de la vis sans fin et des cames, by Mr. F.-G. DINEE, naval mechanic, former student at the École des arts et métiers de Châlons-sur-Marne, 1 vol. 80 p. et 17 pl. 3 fr. 50. Bound 5 fr. This book fills a need that has long been missing from any industrial library; it is a truly practical work of mechanics. It is divided into three chapters: 1° Des courbes en usage dans la censtruction des engrenages; 2° dimensions des détaits et de l'ensemble des engrenages; 3° tracé des engrenages, des vis sans worms, des cames. In preparation: Driving, heating and maintenance of stationary and locomotive machines. - Construction of locomotive engines. - Construction of windmills. (See series G, n° 6, Guide de l'ouvrier mécanicien.) n° 7, Guide du chanffeur. SERIES F. MILITARY AND MARITIME PROFESSIONS. 1. Aide-mémoire de l'officier de marine (marine militaire et marine marchande). Notions pratiques de Droit maritime international et commercial, by Alp. DONEAUD, professor at the École navale. 1 vol. 155 pages. 3 fr. The latest trade treaties have considerably increased international relations. This work by M. Doneaud is therefore of great practical use. We would add that this book is the first in a series of volumes which together will form, in our library, l'Aide-mémoire de l'officier de marine. 2. Guide pratique d'architecture navale à l'usage des capitaines de la marine du commerce appelés à surveiller les constructions et réparations de leurs navires, by Gustave Bousouer, capitaine au long cours, ingénieur. 1 vol. VI-102 pages, numerous figures in text. Br. 2 fr. 3 fr. 4. Guide pratique de la fabrication des Poudres et salpêtres, by M. le major STEERR, with an appendix on fireworks. 1 vol. 360 pages, with numerous figures in the text. 5 fr. Hardback. 6 fr. From the very first lines of this book, it is clear that the author is an expert in his field, and that Major Steerk has combined laboratory study with large-scale manufacturing experience. Everything in his data is rigorously accurate, and we can accept the author as our guide without fear of making a mistake. The appendix on fireworks summarizes, in a few pages, the notions necessary for the making of these fireworks. 6. Guide pratique du Commandant de navires à vapeur, résumé des principales connaissances théoriques et pratiques nécessaires pour bien diriger ces sortes de navires et en tirer tout le parti possible, by A. VINCERT; work enriched with two chapters borrowed, with the author's permission, from the work entitled Manuel du gréement et de la manœuvre, by E. BRÉART, capitaine de frégate, 1 vol, 285 pages and 2 plates. 5 fr. In preparation: Topographie militaire. - Pontoon boat. - Long-distance captain. - Master of coastal navigation. -Tepog raphie marine, the survey of a coast or bay. - Nautical instruments and calculations. SERIES G. ARTS. - INDUSTRIAL PROFESSIONS. 1. Traité pratique de la Culture et de l'Alcoolisation de la Betterave, Complete summary of the best work done to date on beet and its alcoholization, containing all the notions necessary for the grower and distiller, as well as a critical examination of the pulping, maceration, fermentation and distillation methods used today, by M. N. BASSET. 3rd edition, corrected and considerably enlarged, with numerous engravings in the text. 1 vol. of 284 pages. 2 fr. Hardcover. 4 fr. Before publishing this new edition, the author had made a thorough study of the main issues relating to beet, in order to contribute his quota to the great question of agricultural transformation, through the data that experience had provided him with. He sought, and succeeded, in putting before the eyes of farmers and distillers, the technical, scientific or practical facts, in the greatest simplicity of expression, and to warn them well against all exaggerations. (For cane sugar, see Series H, no. 50 below.) 2". Traité de Tissage. Manuel complet de la fabrication, de la compositon des tissus, et spécialement de la draperie-nouveautés, by T. Bona, director of the Ecole de tissage et de dessin industriel de Verviers, member of the Société industrielle, etc., in Verviers. This work consists of two parts and two atas. The first part, 192 pages of text with an atlas of 137 plates, deals with the preparatory operations of weaving and fabrics; it is a summary of everything the author has found useful for the intelligent practice of weaving. The second part, 171 pages with an atlas of 56 plates, deals with the classification of fabrics. It is no longer enough," says the author, "to produce well and economically; one must also know how to create, and for this special studies are indispensable." It was with the aim of facilitating and popularizing these studies that Mr. BoNA undertook to write the supplement to the Manual. * In error, the title bears no. 1. The two parts bound together, with the two atlases also bound together, sell for 10 fr. The first part, which is sold separately, is priced at 6 fr. 3. Manufacture of printed fabrics, printing of SILK STOFFS. Accompanied by plates and enriched with numerous samples, by M. D. KAEPPELIN, chemist, fabric printing factory manager. Second edition with appendix. 1 vol. 142 p., 1 pl. and numerous samples. 10 fr. M. Kaeppelin, with the authority that comes with long experience, describes in succession all the operations involved in printing proper, starting with those that precede them (bleaching and mordanting); then comes printing by hand, with perrotine, with roller, with lithographic stones. Special chapters are devoted to fixing, washing, priming, scarf making, different types of derivatives, etc. 4. Manuel de la Literie, by M. Jean De LATERRIÈRE, manufacturer. 1 vol. 180 pages, with 14 plates. 2 fr. This manual contains: 1° the analytical description, type of manufacture and method of treatment of furniture and furnishings used in bedding; 2° a series of practical observations on the composition and installation of hospital beds. However dry Mr. de Laterrière's subject may seem, apart from its undeniable usefulness, the author has sprinkled it with humorous reflections that make Le Manuet de la literie an attractive read. 5. Traité théorique et pratique de la recherche, du travail et de l'exploitation commerciale des Matières résineuses provenant du pin maritime, by Mr. E. DROMART, civil engineer in Bordeaux. 1 vol. vn-96 pages, 3 plates. 4 fr. After a few words on pine in general, Mr. Dromart gives the chemical characteristics of the gem derived from it, as well as those of the turpentine and rosin essences derived from it. He compares the two gemmage systems used in the Landes region and describes all the equipment needed to manufacture resinous products, with the improvements that have been made. The book concludes with an overview of the use of essences and rosins in the main industries. 6. Guide pratique de l'Ouvrier Mécanicien, by A. ORToLAN, chief mechanic of the fleet, with the collaboration of MM. Bonnefoy, Cochez, Dinée, Gibert, Guipont, Juhel, naval mechanics. 1 vol. x-627pages, numerous figures in the text and atlas of 52 plates. Paperback, 10 fr. Bound. 12 fr. 7. Manuel du Chauffeur - Guide pratique à l'usage des mécaniciens, des chauffeurs et des propriétaires de machines à vapeur, exposé des connaissances nécessaires, suivi de conseils afin d'éviter les explosions des chaudières à vaneur, by Jaunez, civil engineer. 1 vol. 212. p., 37 fig. in text and plates. 2 fr. Bound. 3 fr. This book is specially designed for drivers, as its title indicates. Good drivers for private industry are in short supply, and therefore in demand. People who have steam engines are all too often obliged to employ as drivers men who lack, not only the knowledge for such a job, but sometimes even any practical experience. In such circumstances, there is obviously danger, and this is why we have published this work, so that it can be put into the hands of all workmen who, without knowing the first word of the theory of heat or mechanics, are put in a position to operate a steam engine. This work should be in their hands like a catechism teaching them their trade. 8. Guide pratique de la Fabrication des vernis, by M. Henry VIOLETTE, former student at the Ecole polvtechnique, commissaire des poudres et salpêtres, member of several learned societies. 1 vol. 401 p., with numerous figures in the text, 5 fr. hardback. 6 fr.-We have sought to make known, says Bi. Violette, the causes and effects of reactions, the conditions for success; we have endeavored to bring the art of the varnisher out of the obscurity of empiricism, and into the realm of science, To make known the necessary and sufficient conditions to be fulfilled, discarding superfluous and useless facts, simphïjer the recipes, facilitate and assure the operations, such is the goal we have sought to attain." This broadly conceived plan was punctually carried out, and Mr. Violette successively reviewed ether, alcohol, gasoline and fatty varnishes. .Connaissance et Exploitation des Corps gras industriels, containing the history of provenuances, extraction methods, physical and chemical properties, the trade in fatty substances, the alterations and adulterations to which they are subjected, and old and new ways of recognizing these sophistications, by M. Théodore CHATEAU, chemist, ex-preparator at the Muséum d'histoire natrelle; a work for chemists, pharmacists, perfumers, oil manufacturers, etc., purifiers, foundries, etc., and for the use of the general public, purifiers, tallow founders, soap, candle, candle, machine oil and grease manufacturers, oilseed and fat warehousemen, etc., 2nd edition, revised and enlarged. 1 vol. 386 pages or tabl-aux, 2nd edition followed by a new appendix. Br. 4 fr. Hardback. 5 fr. M. Chateau's aim in publishing the first edition of this work was to give chemists and manufacturers as complete a history as possible of the industrial fats used both in France and abroad, from the point of view of their origin, extraction, composition, physical and chemical properties, trade and spontaneous or fraudulent alterations. In the new edition published in our Library, Mr. Chateau has added an appendix to his monograph on fats, containing a number of essential corrections and important additions. 10. Guide du Brasseur, by MuLpeR. 1 vol. 6 fr. 11. Armes et poudres de chasse, by M. Louis Roux, ingenieur des poudres. 1 vol. 138 p., 2 fr. Hardback. 3 fr. This book contains invaluable information for any hunter wishing to assess the qualities of his gunpowder and the weapon he uses. By virtue of his position, Mr. Roux was able to draw his information from official sources, and let's not forget that since gunpowder manufacture is a government monopoly, it was necessary for a man in such a position to know the details of all the comparative experiments he reports. What's more, the book's author is an avid hunter, and it is his own observations that he passes on to the reader. 12. Three sources of fuel savings. Guide pratique du Constructeur d'appareils économiques de chauffage pour les combustibles solides et gazeux, dealing with fixed and locomobite gas generators, the application of concentrated heat and lost caloric to steam candles and furnaces of all kinds, for the use of engineers, architects, smokers, glassmakers, brickmakers, forges, zinc, porcelain, earthenware, steel and chemical factories; sugar and set refineries; metallurgical and other industries using heat; by M. Pierre FLAMM, manufacturer, author of a work entitled : Le Verrier au dix-neuvième siècle, 157 pages and 4 pl. 4 fr. Mr. Flamm has taken as the epigraph to his book: Non multa, Sed muitum. Never has this motto been more faithfully observed. In this treatise, everything is substantial, nothing is useless. Builders will find practical data in it, and major industrialists will be able, after reading it, to realize the qualities that the equipment they have installed in their factories or plants must possess. In the same farmat, the same author has published an excellent little booklet entitled: Un chapitre sur la verrerie, ou transformation complète de la fabrication actuelle du verre donnant les méthodes du chauffage aux gaz combustibles, les modes nouveaux de couler les glaces, le cristat, le flint et le cromn-olass; de travailler le verre à vitres, la gobeletterie ct les bouteilles, de supprimer les creusets et le cueillage du verre sur les pots. 1 vol. 44 pages and 1 plate. 1 fr. 50. 13. Le Livre de poche du Charpentier, aprlication pratique a 1 usage des CHANTIERS, des ELÈVES DES ÉCOLES PROFESSIONNELLES, etc. Collection of 140 DRAWINGS, with explanatory tax, by Mr. J.-F. MERLY, carpenter, public works contractor, member of the Société industrielle d'Angers and the Académie nationale de Paris, author of the album du Trait théorique et pratique, etc. 1 vol. 287 p., 5 fr. bound. 6 fr. Regarding the Livre de poche du Charpentier, we repeat what was said about another book by M. Merly. Both works deserve the same praise. Mr. Merly is not a scholar who must strive to forget the technology of the School in order to speak the ordinary language of most of his listeners; Mr. Merly is, on the contrary, a worker, a practical man, who has sought to make himself understood by the fellow workers to whom he addressed himself, and who has arrived at demonstrations so clear, at explanations so natural, that theorists themselves have soon had to draw inspiration from his work. Nothing is sharper than his drawings, nothing simpler than his precepts: in a way, it is by playing with himself that he arrives at the most complicated designs. L'Album du Trait théorique et pratique will remain as proof of the results that intelligence, perseverance and love of work can produce. 14. Guide du Teinturier, by FOL, 1 large vol. with numerous figs. In press. For subscribers. 8 fr. 23. Guide pratique du Bijoutier. Application de l'harmonie des couleurs dans la juxta-position des pierres précieuses, des émaux et de l'or de couleur, by M. L. MOREAU, jeweler and designer, 1 vol. 108 pages with 2 plates. 2 fr. This little book is a bold protest against the spirit of routine. The author has gathered together the data provided by sejence on color harmony and contrast, and comparing these data with observations made in the practice of the trade, he has formed a theory applicable to jewelry. 26. Guide pratique du Joaillier, ou Traité complet des pierres précieuses, leur étude chim,que et minéralogique, les moyens de reconnaître sûrement, leur valeur approximative et raisonnée, leur emploi, la description des plus extraordina res et des chefs-d'œuvreanciens et modernes auxquels elles ont concouru, by M. Ch. BARBOT, former jeweler, inventor of the rough diamond bleaching process, member of several learned societies. 1 vol. 567 pages, 3 plates containing 178 figures representing the most famous diamonds of India, Brazil and Europe, rough and cut, and the exact dimensions of prillants and roses in relation to their weight, from one carat to one hundred carats (rare). Hardback. 10 fr. Written for both practitioners and people of the world, this guide gives, in alphabetical order, a description of all gemstones, indicating their appearance, color, hardness, luster, specific gravity, chemical composition, geometric form, deposit, abundance and rarity, use and price. - A special article is devoted to diamonds, the stone of choice today. 35. Manufacture du Papier et du Carton, by Mr. A. PROUTEAUX, civil engineer, former student of the Ecole Centrale des Arts et Manufactures, director of the paper mill at Thiers (Puy-de-Dôme). 1 vol. 273 pages and atlas of 7 double steel-engraved plates with accompanying captions. 4 fr. Hardback. 5 fr. After methodically listing and classifying the various raw materials, the author introduces us to the details of manufacture and describes the many transformations that rag undergoes before leaving the vat or machine in the form of paper. He teaches us to know and distinguish the different types of paper, their formats, weights and dimensions, and describes the various machines that make up the equipment of a paper mill. - An American publisher has been quick to translate Mr. Prouteaux's work into English. 43. Guide pratique du Parfumeur. Dictionnaire raisonné des Cosmétiques et Parfums, containing a description of the substances used in perfumery, the alterations or adulterations that can alter them, etc., formulas for more than 500 cosmetic preparations, perfumed oils, diluting toothpastes, various waters, extracts, distilled waters, essences, tinctures, infusions, aromatic spirits, vinegars and toilet soaps, pastilles, creams, etc. Entirely new work, presenting hygienic considerations on cosmetic preparations that may be dangerous in use, by M. le docteur Adolphe-Benestor LUNEL, chemist, member of the Academies of Sciences of Caen, Chambéry, etc., former professor of chemistry and natural history. 1 vol. XXVII-340 pages. Hardback. 5 fr. 44. Guide pratique de l'Épicerie, ou Dictionnaire des denrées indigènes et exouques en usage dans l'économie domestique, comprenant: l'étude, la description des objets consommables: les moyens de constater leurs quafités, leur nature, leur valeur réelle; les procédés de préparation, d'amélioration et de conservation des denrées, etc., containing, moreover, the manufacture of liqueurs, the fining of wines, etc., and finally the manufacturing processes of a host of products that can be added to the grocery trade, by Dr. Benestor LUneL, member of several learned societies, 1 v. of 256 pp. 3 fr. We have nothing to add to the titles of these two works, which indicate their usefulness. We need only note that Dr. Lunel has conscientiously fulfilled the framework he set himself. 48. Guide pour l'essai et l'analyse des Sucres indigènes et exouques, à l'usage des fabricants de sucre. Résultats de 200 analvses de sucre classés d'après leur nuance, by M. Emile MONIgR, ingénieur chimiste, ancien élève de l'École centrale des aris et manufactures, membre de la Société de chimie de Paris, 1 vol. 96 p., with figures in the text and tables. 2 fr. The author, after recalling the general properties of sacchariferous substances, gives the simplest methods for accurately assaying these same substances. A few notes on the alteration and yield of sugars subjected to refining complete Mr. Monier's work, which was commended by Mr. Payen before the Académie des Sciences. (For the cultivation of sugar cane, see series H, no. 50. (For the cultivation and alcoholization of sugar beet, see series G, no. 1.) 48 bis. Guide pratique du Féculier et de l'Amidonnier, suivi de la conversion de la fécule et de l'amidon en uextrine sèche et liquide, en sirop de glucose, sirop de wheat, sircp impondérable; en sucre de raisin, sucre massé, sucre granulé et cassonade, en vin, bière, cidre, alcool et vinaigre, amsi que leur application dans beaucoup d'antres industries, par M. L.-F. DuptEr, chimiste. 1 vel. of 267 pages. 5 fr. 50. Traité de la fabrication des Liqueurs françaises et étrangères sans distillation, 3rd edition, augmented by more extensive developments. new recipes for the manufacture of liqueurs, kirsch, rum, bitter, the preparation and improvement of eaux-de-vie and the imitation of Cognac relles, of different origins, the manufacture of syrups, etc., etc., by M.-L.-F. DuBIEF, oenological chemist. 1 vol. 288 pages. 5 fr. This treatise is formulated in clear and familiar terms; the person least experienced in the art of distillation who carefully reads its precepts will be able, without any guide, to become a good manufacturer after a few trials. 57. Mapuel des constructions rurales, by T. BONA, author of Tracé et ornementation des jardins. 3rd edition. 5fr. 60. Essai et dosage des huiles employées dans le commerce ou servant à l'alimentation des savons et de la farine de blé: manuel pratique à l'usage-des commerçants et des mannfacturiers, by Cyrille CAILLETET, pharmacist first class, rtc. 1 vol. 104 pages. 4 fr. This guide clearly describes new and practical procedures for discovering the sophistication of oils, for the prompt analysis of soaps and for the commercial testing of wheat flour. Mr. Cailletet's processes have in turn been tested; the Société Industrielle de Mulbouse awarded prizes in 1857 and 1859 for the assay of mixed oils and soaps, while the Société des Arts, Sciences et Belles-Lettres de Paris awarded a prize in 1855 for the testing of wheat flour. In preparation: Making colors. - The blacksmith and the blacksmith worker. - Mennisier modleur. - Cabinetmaker. - Wood turner. - Sculptor. - Upholsterer, furniture, etc. - Locksmith. - Metal fitter and turner. - Melter and moulder. - Tinsmith. - Marker. - Boilermaker. - Watchmaker-mechanic. - Engraver. - Luthier. - Embroiderer, bookbinder and cardboard maker. - Vitrification and manufacture of mirrors. - Porcelain manufacture. - Faience maker. - Glass and porcelain painting. - Letterpress printer. - Lithography and intaglio printing. - Coalmining, coke, peat. - Gas manufacturing. - Oils. - Candles. - Soap manufacturing. - Milling and baking. - Tannery. - Cooks. - Sommelier. - Pastry cook. - Distillers. - Pharmacist. - Sugar manufacture. - Raffinave. - Chocolatier, confectioner, etc. - Pharmacist-drugst. - Precision instruments. - Hemp and flax preparation and spinning. - Bleaching. - Bianchissage and laundry. - Naturalist. - Herbalist. - Pea preservation. SERIES H. AGRICULTURE, GARDENING, HORTICULTURE. - WATER AND FORESTRY. - INDUSTRIAL CROPS, DOMESTIC ANIMALS. - BEEKEEPING, FISH FARMING, ETC. 1. practical guide to general agriculture, by A. GOBIN, professor of zootechnics, former assistant director of farm schools, etc. 1 vol. x-448 pages with figures in text. Paperback 8 fr. Hardback. 4 fr. 2. Rose pruning, cultivation, etc. by FORNEY. 1 vol. 3 fr. 3. Ingénieur agricole (L'), hydraulique, desséchement drainage, irrigations, etc.; suivi d'un appendice contenant les tois, décrets, règlements et instructions ministérielles qui régissent ces matières et de l'hydraulique urbaine, by M. Jules LAFFINEUR, civil engineer and agronomist, member of several learned societies, etc. 1 vol. 398 pages and 5 plates Two parts sold separately. 6 fr. Le Guide pratigue d'hydraulique (série H, no. 31) by the same author, is aimed more particularly at city dwellers, large landowners and those whose mission is to study or establish water pipes. L'Ingénieur agricole deals more specifically with work in the countryside. In it, farmers will find precise information on the work they need to have carried out, and exact details of their rights and duties. 4 Guide pratique pour la construction et le bon aménagement des Habitations des animaux, by M. Eug. GAYOT, member of the Société centrale d'agriculture de France, 1 fort vot. with numerous fig. Two parts sold separately. 7 fr. Les Bergeries, les Porcheries, les Habitations des animaux de la basse-cour, Clapiers, Oiseleries et Colombiers. 1 volume with 355 pages and 31 figures in the text. 3 fr. Les Ecuries et les Etables, by the same author. 1 volume, 208 pages and 65 figures in text. 3 fr. No animal can be developed in its native faculties, in its own aptitudes, and produce actively in the direction of the latter, if it is not placed in the best conditions of feeding, housing and multiplication. Mr. Gayot, with the authority of long experience, has brought together in these two volumes the general conditions of establishment and the particular provisions for the various species of animals. 6 and 7. Eléments des Sciences physiques appliquées à l'agriculture, by M. A.- F. POURIAU, docteur ès-sciences, ancien élève de l'École centrale, etc., in two volumes, namely: 6. 1° Chimie inorganique, suivie de l'étude des marnes, des eaux et d'une mathode genérale pour reconnaître la nature d'un des composés minéraux intéressant l'agricutture ou la médecine vetérinaire. 1 vol. 912 p., 153 figu res in text and tables. Br. 6 fr. 7 fr. 7. 2° Chimie organique, comprising a study of the constituent elements of plants and animals, notions of plant and animal physiology, cattle feeding, manure production, etc., by the same author. 1 vol. 541 p., 66 figures in text and tables. Br. 6 fr. Retié. 7fr. Mr. Pouriau's books are no longer praised. M. Pouriau is professor and deputy director at the Ecole d'agriculture de Grignon; election has made him general secretary of the Société d'agriculture de Lyop; these are just some of the man's titles; as for his works, they have rapidly become classics, and are at the same time consulted with fruit by people of the world. (See also n° 55 below). 8. Drainage, résultats d'observations et d'expériences pratiques laites par M. C.- E. KIELMANN, directeur de l'Ecole agricole de Haasenfeld (Prusse), et publiées à l'usage des agriculteurs trançais, by C. HoMBOURG. 1 vol. 104 pages with figures in text. 1 fr. Most published works on drainage are the result of theoretical studies that experience has not yet sanctioned. Mr. Kielmann has taken a different approach: he has resorted to theory only when necessary to explain certain phenomena. As he says in his preface, his aim was to offer those just starting out in the field of drainage, and even the simple farmer, a manual such that the reader could say, after reading it: It's easy to understand, now I'll be able to work. - The success of the Guide pratique du drainage proves that this goal has been largely achieved. 9. Agricultural chemistry. Leçons familières sur les notions de chimie élémentaire utiles au cultivaleur et sur les opérations chimiques les plus nécessaires à la pratique agricole, par M. N. BASSET, auteur de plusieurs ouvrages d'agriculture et de chimie apoliquée. 1 vol. 336 p. with figures in text. Paperback. 3 fr. 4 fr. Leaving aside the big words and scientific formulas, the author has sought, above all, to make himself intelligible to all. In a series of familiar lessons, after proving the necessity of chemistry for agriculture, he deals successively with soil anatyse, soil amendments, plant composition, animal composition, some agricultural industries, and so on. Brief observations and interesting notions on various subjects complete this Chimie agricole. (See also same series, no. 55). 11. Guide pratique des Conférences Agricoles, by M. Louis Gossin, farmer, professor of agriculture in Oise, etc. 1 vol. xII-112 pages. 1 fr. (Officially recommended for teacher training colleges, etc.). 14. Guide pratique pour le choix de la Vache laitière, by M. Ernest Duros, veterinarian for the Beauvais district, professor of zontechnics at the agricultural institute of the same town. In-18, 132 p. et pl. Br. 2 fr. Rel. 3 fr. The various methods for choosing dairy cows are summarized in this book. Farmers and breeders will find in it the signs that can guide them in keeping and acquiring the animals best suited to their farms. - The figures representing the various breeds of dairy cows are remarkable. . 17. Éducation lucrative des lapins, ou Traité de la race cuniculine, suivi de l'Art de mégisser leurs pèaux et d'en confectionner des fourrures, by M. MARIOT-DIDIEUX, veterinarian first attached to the remounts of the army, member of several learned societies. 1 vol. 156 p. 2 fr. 50 The rabbit breeding industry has been created and is moving forward. It is with the aim of seeing it spread in the countryside as one of the industries perhaps most likely to dry up the sources of pauperism and misery that the author has published this new edition of his Practical Guide, enriching it with a large number of new data. In short, the author demonstrates that no meat can be produced as cheaply as rabbit meat. 18. Basse-cour, Education lucrative des poules, des oies, des canards, etc., etc. 1 fort vol. avec pl. 6 fr. Deux parties se ve dent séparément. 18bis, 10 Education lucrative des poules, ou Traité raisonné de gallinoculture, by the same author. 1 vol. 444 p. 4 fr. The education, multiplication and improvement of farmyard animals have made considerable progress in the last fifteen years. Responding to a need in the domestic economy, the author of this practical guide has set out to produce a complete treatise on gallinoculture in which, after historical, anatomical and physiological considerations on hens, he describes the physical and moral characteristics of forty-two breeds, teaches how to choose among these diverse breeds and indicates the means for conserving and multiplying individuals. Special chapters are devoted to diseases, gallinaceous pharmacy, statistics on hens and eggs in France, etc. 19. 2° Éducation lucrative des Oies et des Canards, by the same author, i vol. 180 p. with numerous figures in the text. 2 fr. Both monographs are useful, instructive and entertaining. The author describes the particular habits of each species, and indicates the type of food that is favorable to their multiplication and profitable for breeders. All these notions, interspersed with historical data, anecdotes and philosophical reflections, make for very attractive reading. 20. Guide pratique du Pisoiculteur, by M. Pierre CaRBONNIER, fish farmer, manufacturer of hatching devices, member of the fish section of the Société d'acclimatation and of several learned societies, etc. 1 vol. 200 pages, with numerous figures in the text. Br. 2 fr. Hardback. 3 fr. It is not as a theorist or systematic scholar that M. Carbonnier presents himself to his readers: it is the practical results he has obtained in the fish farm he built and operated in Champigny, which gives him the right to indicate the methods and systems that have worked best for him, i.e. that have given him the most profitable results. The treatise on fish farming is followed by a note on the freshwater fish that live in our climates, their forms and habits, and the particularities relating to the artificial cultivation of each of them. An appendix is devoted to home aquariums. (For Oyster farming, see same series, n° 52.) 21. Guide pratique du Chasseur médeoin, ou traité complet sur les maladies du chien, by Mr. Francis CLATER, English veterinary surgeon; translated from English on the 27th edition. 3rd French edition, corrected and enlarged, by M. MARIOT-DIDIEUX, veterinary surgeon first attached to the remounts of the army, etc. 1 vol. 189 pages. 3 fr. The fact that this book has had twenty-seven editions in England dispenses with further comment. The guide we have placed in our Library is the third French edition. M. Mariot-Didieux, the learned veterinary surgeon, accepted the revision of this edition, deleting from the original text formulas that were too complicated, simplifying others and adding new ones. Thus entirely recast, the work is truly a complete treatise on dog diseases, complemented by a chapter on the art of shining hides to make carpets. 22. Traité de l'Elevage et de l'éducation du Chien, by E. de TARADE. 1 vol. 360 p. 4fr. 25. Guide pratique d'apiculture (culture des abeilles), cours professé au jardin du Luxembourg, by H. HAMET, apiphile. 1 vol. 336 pages, figures in text. 5 fr. 28. Mannel pratique de Culture maraîchère, by M. CoUR. TOIS-GÉRARD, marchand graimer, horticulteur, 5e édiuon, angmentée d'un grand nombre de figures et de plusieurs articles nouveaux. Awarded a gold medal by the Société et centrale d'agriculture, and a large vermeil medal by the Société et centrale d'horticulture. 1 vol. 396 p. 88 figures in text. Br., 3 fr. 50. Hardback. 5 fr. In addition to the honorary awards just mentioned, the author of this manual has obtained an attestation that guarantees the value of his work in the eyes of the public, as well as attesting to the accuracy of his research and the usefulness of the concepts contained in his work. This attestation comes from twenty-five market gardeners from the city of Paris who, after reading Mr. Courtois-Gérard's work, declare that they give it their full approval, as being in line with the good growing methods in use among them, and authorize the author to publish it under their patronage. This work is officially recommended for teacher training colleges, etc. This new edition has been enlarged by a chapter on the enlture of seed-bearing plants and a market garden vocabulary. 31. Guide pratique d'Hydraulique urbaine at agricole, ou Traité complet de lesablissement des conduites d'eau pour l'alimentation des villes, des bourgs, châteaux, termes, usines, etc., comprenant les moyens de créer partout des sources abondantes d'eau potable, by M. Jules LAFFINEUR, civil engineer, etc. Complementary work to the Guide pratique de l'Ingénieur agricole (see above, series H, no. 3), 2nd printing, supplemented. 1 vol. 130 pages and 2 plates, 3 fr. In publishing this work, Mr. Laffineur's aim was to bring together in a single volume the main findings of experimental hydraulic science. It contains all the information, formulas and applications for water management. 32. Guide pratique pour la Culture des plantes fourragères, by M. A. GOBIN, former pupil of the Ecole ue Grand-Jouan, director of the Val-d'Yèvres penitentiary colony (Cher). 1 very large vol. 680 p. with fig. Two parts sold separately, 8 fr. 1° PRAIRIES NATURELLES, irrigations, pâturages, with an appendix reproducing the law of June 2, 1866 on agricultural associations. 1 vol. 284 pages, with numerous figures. 3 fr. 2° ARTIFICIAL PRAIRIES. Root crops. 1 vol. of 388 p. and 87 figures. 3 fr. 50 Forages are the basis of all cultivation, and it is now accepted by all intelligent farmers that in order to grow wheat, you need to grow meadows. Gobin's aim was to write a very practical guide indicating everything that needs to be observed to obtain the best results and avoid useless expenses: but as he says in his preface, if the very title of his book has made it a law to restrict himself to the cultivation of forage plants and to abstain from scientific considerations useless to the goal he pursues, he has not forbidden himself the practical applications of science insofar as they relate to the explanation of phenomena or the improvement of cultivation methods. a "This is what we mean by practice, and not just manual routine, which consists in knowing how to hold the ploughshanks, load a wagon with sheaves or handle a scythe - the latter is sufficient for a worker, the former is necessary for the least intelligent farmer. "Intelligent practice dictated this guide, which quickly achieved the success it deserved. 38. Culture de l'Olivier, son fruit et son huile, by M. Joseph REVNAUD (de Nimes), merchant and manufacturer. 1 vot., 300 pages. 4 fr. This book is the fruit of thirty-five years of hard work, long vigilance, numerous trips, patient research and meticulous experimentation: it has been the subject of numerous awards, and Mr. Reynaud's processes have been quickly adopted by a large number of oil extractors. 40. Guide pratique du Vigneron, culture, vendange et vinification, by FLEURY-LACOSTE, president of the Société centrale d'agriculture du département de la Savoie, member of several learned societies. 1 vol. 137 pages. 3 fr. There are many books on the art of making wine. Unfortunately, many of them are little more than slavish reproductions of earlier works, while others are merely the result of the personal experiences of individual systems. Mr Fleury-Lacoste is both an educated and a practical man. In his Guide du Vigneron, he has avoided both these pitfalls; his book will be consulted with fruit, and its precepts can be adopted with confidence. What's more, His Excellency the Minister of Agriculture, who is certainly more competent than we are, has just urged Mr. Fleury-Lacoste to continue his studies by subscribing to this excellent little treatise. This is the highest praise that can be heaped on the work. 41. Manuel pratique de Jardinage, contenant la manière de cultiver soir même un jarain ou d'en dirigerla culture, by M. COURTOIS-GÉRARD, grain merchant, horticulturist, 6th ed. 1 vol. 396 pages, 1 plate and numerous figures in the text. Br., 3 fr. 50. Hardback. 5 fr. We refer to the note accompanying no. 28 (Manuel de culture maraìchere) for Mr. Courtois-Gérard's claims to public trust. In the Manuel du jardinier, professional gardeners will find advice, new details and practical information they may not know about; garden owners and amateurs will find precise, clear instructions that will avoid all kinds of misunderstandings and errors. 42. Guide pratique de la culture du Saule et de son emploi en agriculture, notamment dans la création des oseraies et des saussaies, avec un appendice sur la culture du Roseau, par M. M.-J. KoLrz, chevalier de l'ordre R. G. D. de la Couronne de chêne, agent des eaux et forêts, etc., etc. Vol. in-18, 144 pages and 35 figures in text. Br. 2 fr. Bound 3fr. The aim of this work is to highlight the advantages of cultivating willow on suitable soils, which can often only be made productive with the help of this species. In this way, Mr. Koltz provides a means of bringing wasteland into production, and in this respect, his treatise is a real service to agriculture. In some areas, the common reed is an essential complement to wicker: Mr. Koltz's appendix on this plant contains interesting details, especially for owners of land that is now completely unproductive. 63 43. Guide pratique de la Culture du coton, by Dr. Adrien SICARD, general secretary of the Société d'horticuliure et du comité d'aquicutture pratique de Marseille, etc. 1 vol. 143 pages, with figures in text. 3 fr. This guide, written by a competent man, is the fruit of long practical studies. Where Mr. Sicard makes a statement, he is speaking from personal experience. For example, the figures included in the text, which give an exact idea of the cotton plant and its details, were photographed by him and one of his sons. 45. Guide pratique du tracé et de l'ornementation des Jardins d'agrément, by Mr. T. BONA, former architect, director of the Ecole de dessin industriel de Verviers. 1 vol. 304 pages. 4th edition, completely revised and illustrated with 238 figures in the text. Br., 2 fr. 50. Hardback. 3 fr. 50 There are a few special works on the composition and ornamentation of gardens: unfortunately, they are generally expensive, and most of the authors display pretensions that are reflected in the classification they have adopted: when it comes to gardens, they have serious, terrible, melancholy, cheerful, mournful, etc. genres; Mr. Bona believes that we should forget the land at our disposal and embellish it with creations in keeping with its situation. 46. Guide pratique de la Culture du caféier et du cacaoyer, suivi de la fabrication du chocolat, by M. P.-H.-F. BOURGOIN D'ORLI, 1 vol. 100 pages. 3 fr. This book is the fruit of long experience acquired by the author through several years' practice and his own observations in Asia and America. 46 and 50. Le Caféier et la Canne à sucre, set, bound. 5 fr. 48. Acclimatation des animaux domestiques, Etude des animaux destinés à l'acchmatation, la naturalisation et la domestication: Animaux domestiques, méthodes de perfectionnement, mammifères, oiseaux, poissons, insectes, vers à soie; précédée de Considérations générales sur les climats, de l'Exposé des diverses cla-sifications d'histoire naturelle, etc., pouvant servir de Guide au Jardin d'acclimatation; par M. le docteur B. LunEL, former professor of natural history. 1 vol. 188 pages, with figures in the text. 8 fr. BIBLIOTHÉQUE LACROIX. In this guide, Dr. Lunel has concisely summarized the notions of acclimatization scattered throughout a large number of voluminous works. This book will be consulted with fruit by all those interested in the great question of acclimatization. 49. Guide pratique d'Entomologie agricole, et petit traité de la destruction des insectes nuisibles, by M. H. GOBIN. 1 vol. 279 pages, with fig. in text. 4 fr. This easy-to-read treatise conceals a great deal of science beneath its light-hearted surface. The volume consists of familiar letters addressed to a new rural landowner. All the insects that attack fields and their produce and animals are reviewed, and, best of all, the author has indicated the means of getting rid of this invasive plague. The book ends with scientific nomenclatures with French names. 50. Guide pratique de la Culture de la canne à sucre et Traité de la sucrerie exotique, by M. P.-H.-F. BOURGOIN. D'ORLI. 1 vol. of 156 pages. 3 fr. This guide is not, like many manuals, a book made from other books. For many years, Mr. Bourgoin d'Orli has made a special study of sugarcane and its cultivation in several equatorial and tropical regions. In this volume, as in the case of coffee, he has brought together the results of his experience and personal observations. Sugar handling is dealt with in full in this work, which is indispensable to owners and growers who want to turn all or part of their holdings in the colonies into sugar factories. (For Essai des sucres, see série G, n° 48.) (For Betterave and its aleoolis ation, see série G, n° 1.) 52. Guide pratique de l'Ostréiculteur, ou Culture des huîtres et procédés d'élevage et de multiplication des races marines comestibles, by Mr. Félix FRAICHE, professor of mathematical and natural sciences. 1 vol. 175 pages, with figures in text. 4 fr. Railways and shipping, by shortening distances, have created outlets for edible marine breeds that had hitherto been lacking. From this, and other causes that Mr. Fraiche indicates, the impoverishment of oyster beds. The author, inspired by the work of M. Coste, demonstrates that oyster farming is an industry that is easy to create and develop, and that yields profitable results for those who know how to exploit it. (For Pisciculture, see same series, no. 20.) General layout of a soup garden! CHAPTER II Calendar August Calendar September Calendar October Calendar November Calendar December Calendar February Calendar March Calendar April Calendar Mal Calendar June Calendar July CHAPTER III Gardening instruments Tools for plowing and planting Quis for transpon Instruments for watering Instruments for pruning and trimming trees CHAPTER] Raking and plowing CHAPTER V Manures and fertilizers CHAPTER VI Of layers CHAPTER VII Mulipicalon of plants Sowing 3 seeds Sowing in layers Sowing in the ground Sowing in the open broadcasting Sowing in rows or rays Sowing in pockets Transplanting Onions Cajeux Bulbils Tubers Claws or legs SChlesonSeparatons des racines Sotons ou Coulants Marcottes Marcottes simples Marcottes par stranqulation Marcoues par incision Marcottes par cépée Marcottes de racines Boutures Soutures à l'airlibre Boutures under cloches and under frames Cuttings by root sections CHAPTER D Grafting Grette en écusson Grette en tente sur tubercule Grette en placage Graft de la vigne 6 bis Gffe herbacée 6 te Gffe en couronne (Pline) Grette ordinaire par approche Gffe par approche compliquée CHAPTER" De la conservaton des plantes. Bells. Frames. Pailassons. Orangere De la rentrée des plantes d'orangerte et de leur traitement en hver De la sorte des plantes d'orangerie et de leur trattement pendant l'été Composition de la terre qu'il faut donner aux plantes ci-Composition of the soil to be used for the following plants CHAPTER XI Vegetable garden CHAPTER X Diseases of vegetable plants CHAPTER X Fruit garden Planting me Stone fruit trees Pome fruit trees Disbudding Forced cultivation of cherry trees Forced cultivation of fig trees Forced cultivation of currant trees Forced cultivation of peach trees Forced cultivation of plum trees Forced cultivation of grapevines CHAPTER XIV Tree diseases CHAPTER XV Pleasure garden SECTON Plants for borders Abustes Perennials forming clumps Bulbous plants Annuals propagated from seeds SECTIONII. Plants for bedding and flowerbeds. Annuals and biennials SECTION III. Outdoor perennials and bulbs SECTION IV. Temperate greenhouse plants that can be cultivated in the open ground in summer SECTION V. Plants for fomenting water Floating-leaved plants Plants rising above the surface of water SECTIONVI Plants for rock gardens Trees and shrubs SECTION VII Climbing plants for walls, cradles, arbors Annuals and perennials Climbing plants for temperate greenhouses that can be put in the ground all summer long Shrubs SECTION VIII Deciduous shrubs and bushes SECTION IX Evergreen ornamental shrubs and bushes SECTION X Heather shrubs SECTION XI Deciduous ornamental trees SECTION XII Coniferous trees CHAPTER XVI Destruction of harmful plants CHAPTER XVII Vocabulary of the main gardening terms Table of contents Alphabetical table Table of figures ALPHABETICAL TABLES Abies, see Fir trees Apricot trees, Abronia umbellata, White acacia, see Robinia. Acer vorr Maple. Achillea, Aconite, Aconitum, see Aconite. Acorus, Acroclinium roseum, Actæa spicata Adonide, Adonis, see Adonide. Æsculus, see Chestnut tree. Aoeratum. Golden garlic, Allantus, Arrele. Gorse, Alaterne, Alcea, vor Rose Trémière. Alizier, Alisma, Alnus, see Aune. Alstroemeria, Althæa, vor Hibiscus Alternantbera spatula, Ayssum Amandier, Amarante, Amarante à crête, vorr Celosia à crete Amarantoide. Amarantus, see Amaranth. Amaryllis Amelanchier, Amorpha Amygdalus, see Almond tree. Anagallis grandiflora, Ananas Anchusa, vorr Bugloss Ancolie Andromeda, see Asimina Anthemis des teinturiers. Antirrhinum majus see Snapdragon Apalanche vert, see Prinos verticillata. Apocyn, Apocynum, see Apocyn. Aquilegia see Ancolie Arabis verna, vor Torrette printantère Aralia Arpousier, Arbre aux quarante écus, see Gingko bilobe Arbre aux Anémones, vor Calycanthus Arbre de neige, see Chionanth. Holy tree, see Azedarach Strawberry tree, see Arbutus Unedo. Arputus see Arbutus. Araucaria, Arenaria, vor Sabline Argemone grandiflora, Argentine see Cerastium tomentosum. Argousier, Aristoloche Arroche des jardins, Artichoke, Arum Arundo donax, Ascleplas, Asimina virginica, Asperges Asperula odorata, Asphodèle, Asphodelus see Asphodèle. Aster Aster Sinensis, see Daisy Queen. Astragale, Astrantia, Atragène, Aubépine, see White thorn Aubergine Aubrietia deltoida, Aucuba, Auricule see Primevere auricule. Aune, Azalea, Azarero, see Cerasus tustanica Azédarach Azerolier, vorr Epine d'Espagne. baguenaudier, Balisier, see Canna lndica. Bambusa balsam. Barbre de capucin, vor Chicorée sauvage Barbeau see Centaurées. Barkhausia rubra, see Crepis rubra. Bartonia aurea Baselle, Basil, Begonia. Belle-Dame, see Arroche. Belle-dejour Belle-de-nuit, Bellis perennis, see Pâquerette. Berberis, see Epme vinette Beet, Betula, see Birch, Bidens atrosanguinea, see Cosmos Bignonia, Ble de Turquie. vor But Cornflower, see Centaury. Bocconia, Bois-bouton, see Cephalanthus. Bois-cuir, see Oirca. Bois de Sainte-Lucie, see Cerisier odorant. Bois-jol, see Daphne mezereum. Boltonia Bonduc, Bonne-dame, see Arroche. Bonnet de Prêtre, vor Fusam commun. Birch,

Azure pellet, vor Echinops ritro. Snowball vorr Sterile viorne. Bourgène, Tree borage, see Celastrus scandens. Boussingaultia baselloides. Buttercup, see Achillea ptarmica Brachycome Brassica see Cabbage. Broualle, Broussonetia, Browallia, see Broualle. Brunella grandiflora, Budolela Lindleyana, Buglose, Bugrane Buis Buisson ardent, Buplevrum Butomus umbellatus. Buxus, vor Buis Cacala sagittata Caladium, Calandrinia umbellata Calcéolaires Calendula, see Calendula. Caltopsis, see Coreopsis Callistephus hortensis, see Reine-marguerite. Calomeria, see Humea. Caltha palustris, see Marsh marigold. Calycanthus, Calystegia, Red chamomile see Pyrethrum roseum. Campanula, Canna Indica, Cantua coronopitolla, see lpomopsis elegans. Caprer Capucines. Caragana, Cardamine pratensis, Carde poirée, see Porée à carde Cardoon Carob, Carpinus, see Hornbeam. Cassia, see Black currant. Castanea vor Chestnut Catalpa Catananche cærulea, see Cupid blue. Cedar Celastrus scandens, Celer Celosia, Celtis see Hackberry. Centaurea, Centranthus macrosiphon, Cephalanthus, Céraiste, cerastium, see Céraiste Cerasus, vor Cerisiet. Ceratonia see Carob tree. Ceratophylum, vor Cornifle. Cerfeui Cerfeui bulbeux Cersiers Cerisier odorant, Cersier à fleurs doubles, Cestrum Chænostoma polanthum. Chalet Chamæcerasus, Chamærops Edible mushroom, Charieis heterophylla, see Kauffussia amelloides. Chataignier, Cherranthus, Cheiranthus maritimus, vorr Julienne de Mahon. Chelone, see Galane. Chêne. Chenillette, Chervis. Chevrefeuille, Chicorée, Chicot du Canada, vor Bonque Chincapin, see Castanea Americana. Chionanthus Chirouis see Chervis. Cauliflower Chrysanthemum, Chrysocoma, Ciboule, Ciboulette, Cinéraires hybrides, Cissus quinquefola, see Virginia creeper Civette, see Ciboulette Clavalier Clarkia, Clématite, Cléome Clethra, Cobæa scandens, Coelestina cœrulea volr Ageratum cœruleum. Coignassier Coignassier de la Chine, Colchicum, see Colchicum. Colchicum, Coleus, Collimsia, see Baguenaudier Commelina tuberosa, Comptonia asplenifolia, Cucumber, Coniza, see Seneçon en arbre. Potato conservation, Cauliflower conservation, Cabbage conservation, Comfrey Convallaria maialis, see Muquet de mal. Convolvulus see lpomæa Convolvulus tricolor, vor Belle -de-our Coquellcot Coquelourde, Corbeille d'or, see Alyssum. Corbeille d'argent, vor Thlaspi vvace and Tourette printanière. Coréopsis Corète du Japon, Corntchon, see Cucumber. Comnifle Comouiller, Cornus see Dogwood. Coronilla emerus, Corydalis formosa, Corylus see Hazelnut. Cosmos bipinnatus, Cotoneaster, Couronne impériale squash, vorr Fritilara Imperialis. Crambe maritima, see Sea cabbage. Cramolaria fragrans, vorr Martynia fragrans Cranson, vor Raifont Cratoegus, vorr Alizier. Crepis rose, Cress Crosus vernus, Croix de Jérusalem, vor Lychnis Crucianella, Cryptomeria, Cucurbita see Squash. Cuphea, Cupidone bleue, Cupressus, see Cypress. Cyclamen. Cydonia, see Coignassier. Cynoglossum see Cynoglossus. Cynoglosse, Cyprès Bald Cypress, Cytise, Oanlia Daphné Datura, Decumaria barbata, Delphinium vorr Pied-d'Alouette Dent-de-lion, vor Pissenit Deutzia, Dianthus, vor OEillet, Dictamnus albus, see Fraxinelle. Didiscus cæruleus, see Hugelia cœrulea Dielytra spectabilis, Diervilla lutea, Digtale pourpre Dimorphotbeca pluvialis, see Calendula pluvialis. see Chinese loname. Diospyros, see Plaqueminier. Dirca palustris Dodecatheon meadia, Doronia Dracocephalum Eccremocarpus scaber, Echalote, Echinops ritro Eloeagnus, see Chalef. Emilla sagitata, see Cacalia sagittata Enothères, Epervière, Ephémère, see Tradescantia. Epi de la Vierge, see Ornithogalum pyramidale Epllobium Epimedium, Spinach Epinard d'été, see Tétragone étalée. Thorn Barberry, Maple ErCa Ergeron Erinus, Erophorum, see Cottongrass. Erodium, Erysimum, Erysimum barbarea, see Velar. Erythrina Escholtzia Calitornica, Estragon Eucalyptus globulus, Eucharidium elegans, Eupatoire, Eupatorium, see Eupatoire Eutoca viscida, Evonymus, volr Fusain. Fagus see Beech. Farfugium, Faux Ebénier. vor Cytise) Faux Indigo, see Amorpha. Faux Jalap see Belle-de-nuit Faux Pistachier, vor Staphylea Fennel, Fennel marine see Perce-plerre. Feve, Fevier Eicoide Fiquier, Filaria, Fléchière, Fleur de la Passion, see Passiflora. Fontanesia Forsythia suspensa, Fothergilla Ferns, Strawberry bushes, Raspberry bushes, European Fraxinella. Fraxinus vor Frene. Frene Fritillaria, Fumaria, see Fumeterre. Eumeterre. Funkia subcordata, see Hemerocallis Japonica. Fusam Fuschia, Galanthus nwalis. Bale Galega officinalis, Chaste tree, Gaultheria Gaura biennis, Turkish grass, see Saxifrage. Genêt, Cenévrier, Genista see Genêt Gentiana. Geranium Red geranium, see Pelargonium zonale. Cess Geum coccineum, Gilia androsacea see Leptosiphon androsaceus. Gilia coronopifolia, see lpomopsis elegans Gilla densiflora, vor Leptosiphon densifloros Oinkgo bibola Giroffee Giroflée de Mahon, vor dulenne de Mahon Gladiolus Claieul des marais, see lris des marais. Gleditschia, see Févier. oycine Gnaphalum margaritaceum, see Immortelle Gomphrena globosa, see Amarantoide Gordonia, border grasses, Grande douve, see Ranuncul. Grenadilla. Gooseberry, Gunnera scabra, Gymnocladus, see Bondue Gynerium argenteum, Gyosophila, Helesia Hamamelis, Harcot Haricot d'Espagne, Hedera see Ivy, Hedysarum, see Saintoin. Helenium autumnale, Helianthus, vor Solel Hellanthus argophyllus, Helichrysium. see Immortelle Heliotrope d'hiver, vor Tussilago fragrans. Helotrope Heliotropium, see Heliotrope. Hellebore. Hellebore blanc, see Varaire. Hemerocallis, see Hemerocallis. Spring hepatics, Heraclum Turquoise herb, see Japanese ophiopogon Herbe de Ste-Barbe, see Velar. Hesperis matronalis, vorr Julienne des jardins. Hetre Hibiscus, Hieracium aurantiacum, see Hawthorn Hippophæ mhamnoides. see Sea Buckthorn. Hydrangea Hotela Japonica, Hops, Holly Hugelia cœrulea, Humea elegans, Humulus lupulus, see Hops. Hyacintnus orientalis, vorr Hyacinth Hydrangea Hydrocharis, see Morrene. Hypericum, see St John's wort. bers tOur-mlasp Chinese loname. see Holly Immortelle, Impatiens balsamina, see Balsamine. mdigotera, lpomoea lpomopsis elegans. tea Jacée see Lychnis dioica. Hyacinth Jasmine, Virginia Jasmine, vorr Biononia radicans. Jonc fleurt see Butomus umbellatus. Jonquille, see Narcissus Jonquilla Juglans, see Noyer. Julienne de Mahon, Julienne des jaroms, Juniperus, see Juniper. Kalmia Kauffussia amelloides, Kerria Japonca see Corète du Japon. Ketmie, vorr Hipiscus. Koelreutera, Koniga, see Ayssum maritima Laitues Lamium orvala, Lantana, Larix see Larch. Lathyrus, see Gesse Laurier, Laurier Saint-Antoine, vorr Epllobium spicatum Laurus, see Laurier. Lavatère à grandes fleurs, Lawn's-grass Lentilles, Leptosiphon. Leycesteria, Ivy, Lioustrum, vor Troëne. Llas Lilacs de terre, see Muscari monstrosum. Litum, VOTUIS Snail Large-flowered flax, Perennial flax, Lnaigrette, Toadflax Linum perenne, see Perennial flax Lippia repens, Liquidambar, Ls des lncas see Alstroemeria pelegrina Saint-Bruno lily, see Phalangium liliastrum. Liseron tricolore, vor Belle-de-jour, Loasa, Lobelia, Lonicera see Chevreteuille. Lophospermum, Lothier roug Lunaire annuelle, Lunaria annua, vorr Lunaire annuelle. Lbpn Lupinus, see Lupin. Lychnide Lychnis, Poppy, see Lychnide. Lycium Lysimachi, Lythrum virgatum, see Lousewort. Lamb's lettuce. Maclura, Macre Madaria elegans, see Madia elegans. Madia elegans, Magnolia Mabonia, Mais Mascolmia maritima see Julienne de MahonMalope grandiflora Malus see Apple tree. Malva vorr Mauve Marronnier, Martna Massette Matricaria mandiana, Maurandia, Mauves Negasea crassifolia, volr Saxiraga crassifola Méleze Melia see Azedarach. Melitot Melilotus, vor Menot. Melongene see Aupergine Melons Melon d'eau, Menispermum Canadense, Mentha piperita vor Mentne poirée. Menthe povrée Menyanthes, Menziezia, Merendera bulbocodium, Mersier, Mesembryanthenum, vorr Ficoides. Mesplus Germanica vor Neflier. Micocoulet, Mignardise, vor OEilet mignardise Millepertuis, Mimulus Mirablis Jalapa, vor Belle-de-nuit Molène purpurine Monarda didyma Moræa Sinensis, Morelle grimpante, Morma longiflora, Morrène, Morus, vor Môrier. Garden muller. Morier à papier, see Broussonetia. Muscari Forget-me-not, Myrica, vor Galé. Nalade Narcissus, Narcissus, see Narcissus Naumburgia vorr Lysimachia Nave Neflier Negundo, see Maple negundo Nemesia floribunda, Nemophila, Water lily, Nierembergia Nicotana wigandioides, Nigella Hazelnut, Walnut American walnut, Nyctago hortensis, vor Mirabilis Jalapa Nycterma selagmoides Nompæa see Water lily. Nyssa, see Tupelo. OEmlet OEillet mignardise, OEillet de la Chine, OEillet de poëte OEillet flon, OEillet d'Inde, see Tagetes OEnothera, vor Enothere. onion Olvier de Bohème, vorr Chalet Omphalode printantere, see Cynoglossum omphalodes. Onomis, see Brugrane Ophiopogon du Japon, Oreille d'Ours, see Primevère auricule. Hare's ear, see Buplevrum. elm Three-leaved elm, see Ptelea trifollata. Omithogalum pyramidale, Spring Orb Orobus vemnus, see Spring Orb. Osei Oselle épmard Oxalis, Pæonia vor Pioine. Palurus. Parsnip, Papaver, see Poppy, Daisy, Parnasia palustris, Passiflora, see Grenadilla. Pasteque vor Watermelon. Sweet potato, Patience des Jardins, Patience aquatique, Paulownia, Pavia vor Horse chestnut. Poppy, Peach trees, Double-flowered peaches, Pelargonium zonale, Large-flowered pansy, Pentapetes phoenicea, Pentstemon, Perce-pierre. Periploca Persicaria, Pers Periwinkle, Water Pess, Perite-Marguerte. see Bells perennis. Petunia Peupler Phacela. Phalangère, Phalangium, see Phalangère Phalaris, Phascolus see Bean, Philadelphus, see Seringat. Phlomis Pnloz Phlox brummundi, Pied-d'alouette Pied-d'alouette grand Pied d'alouette des blés, Pied d'alouette vvace Pigamon, Piment Pimprenelle, Pins Pinsapo, see Sapins. Pmus vor Pins. Pissentit, Pwoine herbaceous Pwoine in tree, Planera Water plantain, see Alisma. Plaquemmer Platane Platanus, vorr Platane Plumbago Larpentæ, Podolepis gracilis. Pomciana Gilesi Leek, Poirée blonde Porée à cardes, Pear trees Double-flowered apple trees. Poi Pois de senteur, see Gesse odorante Perennial pea. see Gesse à larges feulles. Poivre long vor Piment. Blue Polemom, Pelemonium caeruleum, see Polemom. Polanthes, see Tuberose Polygonum, see Persicalre. Pomme-d'amour, vor Tomato Potatoes, Apple trees, Double-flowered apple trees, Pompadoura, see Calycanthus. Pontederia cordata Marsh marigold, Populus, see Poplar Porte-Chapeau see Paliurus. Portulaca vor Purslane. Potentilla, Pumpkin, see Squash Purslane, Large-flowered Purslane, Primevere, Auricle Primrose, Prinos Blackthorn, see Thorny plums Plums, Thorny plums Double-flowered plums, Prunus see Plums. Prunus mahaleb, see Cerasus mahaleb. Ptelea trifollata, Lungwort, Pulmonaria, see Lungwort. Pyrethrum, Pyrethrum Indicum, see Chrysanthemum. Pyrus vor Poirier. Quercus, see Oak. Badis Rafort Rapunzel, Ranunculus, see Ranunculus. Raves, Régence, see Mâche d'Italie. Reine-Marguerite, Renoncule, Renouée Réseda Rhamnus, vor Bourgène, Alaterne. Fhodanthe Mangles Rhododendron, Fhuparbe Enus see Sumac. Ribes. see Gooseberry. Ricin, Ricinus, vor Ricin Bobinier, Romaines, see Lettuces. Ronce Rose trémière, Rose de Noel, vorr Helleborus niger. Rose d'Inde, see Tagetes erecta. Rose du cie see Rose-du-Ciel poppy. Rosebush, Water-rose, see Spargantum natans Cattail reed, vorr Arundo dona" Ribbon reed vorr Phalaris arundinacea Rupue see Bramble. Rudbeckia, Rumex vorr Oselle Ray grass, English, Sabline, Sarran springaner, see Crocus vernus. Sagitaria, vorr Fléchière saintoin d'Espagne Saintoin du Caucase, Salcare efflée Salisburia, vorr Gmgro blloba Sali see Willows Salpiolossis sinuata Salsify white Salsit́s norr, see Scorsonère. savia Sambucus, see Elderberry. Saponaria, Savory, Sage see Salvia. Willows, Saururus cernuus, Savonnier, see Koelreuteria. Saxifrage Scabiosa, vorr Scabieuse. Scarole, see Chicory Schizandra coccinea, Schizanthus Schubertia desticha, see Bald cypress. Scille Scirpus lacustris, Scorsonère d'Espagne, Scutellaria macrantha, Sedum pyramidale see Saxifraga pyramidalis. Sedum Sempervivum, Senecio, see Senecon. Sequoia, Seringa Silene Sisyrinchium, see Bermudagrass. Solanum, Solel Solidago see Goldenrod. Sophora Sorbier, Sorbus see Sorbier. Souci des marais, see Marsh marigold. Soue Souvenez-vous-de-moi, vor Myosotis palustris Sparganium natans, Specularia speculum, vorr Campandla speculum. Sphenooyne speciosa, Spiræa Japonica, see kerria Japonica. Staphyles Statice Stenactis speciosa, Stevia Stramonium fastuosum. see Datura fastuosa. Sumat Sureau Sureau aquatique see Viorne obier. Symphorine Sycomore, see Sycamore maple. Symphoricarpos see Symphorine. Symphytum, see Comfrey Sisyrinchum. see Bermudagrass. Syme see Lilac Tagetes, Tagetes patula vor Okillet d'Inde Tagetes erecta, vor Rose d'Inde Tamarx Tanacetum, vorr Tanaisie. Tanaiste Taxodium, vor Sequola Taxus VORII létragonolobus purpureus, see Lotier rouge Thalctrum, vor Pigamon Thé d'Oswego, see Monarda didyma. Thlasot Yellow Thlasp, see Alyssum saxatile. Thlaspi vivace, Thrachymene cæerulea, vorr Huoela cœrulea Thuia, Thunbergia, Apes Thyme, see Daphne Cneorum. Tordia Tilleu Tilia vor Tilleul Tomate Toumefortia, Tourrette printanière. Trachelium cæruleum, Tradescantia, Trapa natans, see Macre Trefle deau, vorr Menyanthes tritollata Triacanthos vorr Févier d'Amérque Fritollum, vor Cytisus sessiltolius. Troëne Tropoeolum, see Nasturtiums. Tuberose. Tulip Tulipier, Tupelo, Turritis verna, vorr Tourrette printanière. Tussilag Tussilago, see Coltsfoot. Ivpha see Massette. Ulex, vor Gorse Ulmus, see Elm. Vaccinium, vor Lingonberry. valerian, Greek valerian, see Vararian Polemom. Velar de Barbarie, Veratrum see Varaire. Verbascum phoeniceum; vorr Purpurine mullein Verbena, vor Verbena. goldenrod Japanese varnish, see Allantus glandulosa. Veronques. Vernonia Vers Verveine, Viburnum, see Viorne. Vigne de Judée see Morelle grimpante. Vigne vierge, Vine, Villarsia Vinca vor Pervenche. viola tricolor, see Pansy. Violette marine, see Campanule à grosses fleurs Viorne Violette odorante, Viola odorata, see Violette odorante. Vrolla, vor Gattilier. Vitadinia, Volublis. see lpomæa purpurea. Wellingtonia, see Sequoia. Wilavia grandiflora Weigella rosea, Wigandia, Xanthorhiza Xanthoxylum, see Clavaller. Xeranthemum annuum, see Immortelle Vucca, Zauschneria, Zea, mais. see Maize. Zinnia TABLE OF FIGURES Parçiu ammn polace Thermosiphon mecuson Ring graft Tent graft Veneer graft Crown graft Gtesre par approcre Ena8 2 10 Pineapple greenhouse Melon T'e talle - Melon, 2nd size Melon Se talle Peach tree, 2nd year - Peach tree, 8th year Peach tree, 4th year Eabie- se amnee Peach tree, V-shaped Forcing greenhouse Fi9 20 Cattail pear trees Fig2 Fan-shaped pear trees Fi9 22 Palmette pear trees F92. Double-stemmed palmette pear trees -9 20 Goblet apple tree F92 Cord apple tree FiO 2 Vigne à la Thomery TABLES DES MATIERES. Avertissement Table in alphabetical order of authors' names Cataloque in alphabetical order of subjects Cataloque in methodical order of subjects or series Catalogue général des ouvrages publiés par la librairie Lacroix, autres que ceux qui font partie de la bibliothèque Cataloque généra des ouvrages publlés par la librairie Lacroix, autres que ceux qui font partie de la bibliothèque