- MAR 4 - LBRAIRIE J.-B. BAILLIÈRE RT FILS, 19, RUE HAUTEFEUICIE BIBLIOTHÈQUE SCIENTIFIQUE CONTEMPORAINE SFR. SOIl COLLECTION OF VOLUMES IN-16 IJFR.SO Comprising 300 to 400 p. and illustrated with fig. interspersed in the text 100 VOLUMES ARE ON SALE: PHILOSOPHIE DES SCIENCES Principes de philosophie positive, by Auguste COMTE. 1 vol. in-16............................................ 3fr, 50 Les sciences naturelles et l'éducation, by TH. HUxLEY. of the Royal Society of London. 1 vol. in-16............. a fr. 8o Les sciences occultes, by G. PLYTOFF. 1 vol. in-16, fig. 3 fr. b0 La magie, by 6 PLYrOFF. 1 vol. in-16 with 71 fig...... 1 fr. 50 ASTRONOMIE ET MÉTÉOROLOGIE Phénomènes électriques de l'atmosphère, by G. PLANTÉ. 1 vol. in-16, with 45 figs............................ 3 fr. 50 La prévision du temps et les prédictions météorologiques, by G. DALLET. 1 vol. in-16, with 30 figs........... 3 fr. 50 Les merveilles du ciel, by G. DALLET. 1 vol in-16, with 60 figs.......................................... 3 fr. 50 PHYSICS Le microscope et ses applications, by Ed COUVREUR. 1 vol. in-16. with 120 figures.................................. 3 fr. 50 Les anomalies de la vision, by IMBERT, professor at the Faculty of Montpellier. 1 vol. in-16, with fig.............. 3 fr. 50 La lumière et les couleurs, by Aug. CHARPENTIER, professeur à la Faculté de Nancy. 1 vol. in-16, with 21 fig...... 3 fr. 50 Les couleurs, by E. BRucKE. 1 vol. in-16, with fig.... 3 fr. 50 CHHIMIE Milk, by Duclaux (of the Institute), professor at the Paris Faculty of Science. 1 vol. in-16, with figures......... 3 fr. 50 Les théories et les notations de la chimie moderne, by A. DE SAPORTA I vol. in-16.............................3 fr. 50 La coloration des vins, by P. CAZENEUVE, professor at the Faculté de Lyon. 1 vol. in-16, with 1 pl................... 3 fr. 50 Ferments et fermentations, by Léon GARNIER, professor at the Faculty of Nancy. 1 vol. in-16, with 65 fig...... a fr. 50 ART MILITAIRE ET MARINE Bateaux et navires, by the Marquis de FOLIN. 1 vol. in-16, with 132 fig.......................................... 3 fr. 50 L'artillerie actuelle, canons, fusils, poudres et projectiles, by colonel GuN. 1 vol. in-16, with fig...............3 fr. 50 L'électricité appliquée à l'art militaire, by colonel GUN. 1 vol. in-16, with fig................................... 3 fr. 50 INDUSTRIE Les chemins de fer, by A. SCHœLlEa. 1 v. in-16, 90fig. 3 fr. 80 La télégraphie actuelle, by L. MoNTILLor, director of telegraphy. 1 vol. in-16, with 80 fig...................... 3 fr. 50 La lumière électrique, by L. MonTillor. 1 v. in-16, 200fig. 3 fr. 50 La galvanoplastie, by E. BOUANT. 1 vol. in-16, 34 fig. 3 fr. 50 ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT POSTAL. 14. LIBRAIR J.-B. BAILLIERE ET FILS, 19, RUR HAUTEFRUI L.M La photographie et ses applicafions, par J. LEFÈVRE, 1 vol. in-16. avec 93 fiaures et 3 photographies....... 3 fr. 56 La navigation aérienne et les ballons dirigeables, par H. De GRAFFIGXY. 1 vol. in-16. with 42 fig ............... 3 fr. 50 AGRICULTURE Les maladies cryptogamiques des céréales, by J. LoVERDO. 1 vol. in-16, with 50 figures........................... 3 fr. 50 La truffe, by Dr FERRY DE LA BELLONNE. 1 vol. in-16, with 20fig. and one etching................................ 3 fr. 50 Les abeilles, by Maurice GIRARn. 1 vol. in 16 with 80 figs. 3 fr. 50 L'alcool, by A. LARBALÉTRIER 1 vol. in-16, with 62 figs. 3 fr. 50 La vigne et le raisin, by Dr HERPIN 1 vol. in-16... 3 fr. 50 MINERALOGY AND GEOLOCY The French Alps, by A. FALSAN. 2 vol. in-16, with figures. Each volume.................................. 3 fr. 50 Les Vosges, by BLeiCHeR. 1 vol. in-16, with 5° figures. 3 fr. 50 Les problèmes de la géologie et de la paléontologie, by Tu. HUXLEY. 1 vol. in-16, with 34 fig.................. 3 fr. 50 Les tremblements de terre, by FOUQUÉ, member of the Institut. 1 vol. in-16. with 56 figures. 3 fr 50 Les minéraux utiles et l'exploitation des mines, by Louis KNAB. 1 vol. in-16, with 74 figures...................... 3 fr. 50 PALÉONTOLOGIE The ancestors of our animals, by Alb. GAUDRY, member of the Ins- titute. 1 vol. in-16, with 49 figures. 3 fr. 50 L'évolution des formes animales, avant l'apparition de l'homme, by F. PRIEM 1 vol. in-16, with 175 fig... 3 fr. 50 Les plantes fossiles, by B. REvaulr. 1 col in-16, 52 fig. 3 fr. 50 Origine paléontologique des arbres cultivés, by G. DE SAPORTA. corres; ondant de l'Institut. 1 vol. in-16, 44 fig..... 3 fr. 50 ANTHROPOLOGIE ET ARCHÉOLOGIE Les merveilles du corps humain, sa structure et ses fonctions, by E. COUVREUR, 1 vol. in-16, with 100 figures.... 3 fr. 50 L'évolution sexuelle dans l'espèce humaine, by H. SICARD. 1 vol. in-16, with figures.......... 3 fr. 50 L'anthropologie criminelle, by FRANcoTTE 1 v. in-16, 50 fig. 3 fr.50 La place de l'homme dans la nature, by Th. HUXLEY. 1 vol. in-16. with 84 fig....... 3 fr 50 Le préhistorique en Europe, by G. COTTEAU 1 v. in-16, fig. 3 fr 50 Les pygmées, by A. DE QUATREFAGES (de l'Institut), professor at the Museum 1 vol in-16, with 31 figures. 3 fr. 50 Archéologie préhistorique, by Baron J. DE BAYE. 1 vol. in-16, with 51 fig...................................... 3 fr. 50 L'homme avant l'histoire, by Ch. DEBIERRE, professor at the Faculté de Lille. 1 vol. in-16, with 84 fig............. 3 fr. 50 L'Egypte au temps des Pharaons, la vie, la science et l'art, by V. LORET. 1 vol. in-16, with uaures................ 3 fr. 50 BOTANIQUE Les fleurs à Paris, culture et comiñerce, by Ph. DE VILMORIN. 1 vol. in-16, with 150 figs......................... 3 fr. 50 Les Orchidées, by D. Bois. 1 vol. in-16, with fig..... 3 fr. 50 ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT POSTAL 2 Les champignons, by A. ACLOCQUE. 1 vol. in-16. 100 fig. 3 fr. 50, La biologie végétale, by P. VUILLEMIN, chef des travaux à la Faculté de Nancy. 1 vol. in-15, with 83 fig......... 3 fr. 50 ZOOLOCIE La cellule animale, by J. CHATIN. 1 vol. in-16, with fig. 3 fr. So Les problèmes de la biologie, by Th. HUXLEY. 1 vol. in-16. 3 fr. 50 Evolution and the origin of species, by Th. HUXLEY. 1 vol. in-16............ ............................ 3 fr. 50 La géographie zoologique, by De E.-L. TROUESSART. 1 vol. in-16, with 50 figs ........................... 3 fr. 50 Les sociétés chez les animaux, by Paul GIRon. 1 vol. in-16, with 53 figs......... 3 fr. 50 Les industries des animaux, by Fréd. HOUsSAY, professor at the Ecole normale. 1 vol. in-16, with 50 fig...... a fr. 50 Les facultés mentales des animaux, by D' FOVEAU DE COURMELLES. 1 vol. in-16, with fig..................... 3 fr. 5o La vie au sein des mers, by L. DoLLo. 1 vol. in-16... 3 fr. 60 Sous les mers. Undersea exploration campaigns, by Marquis de FOLIN. 1 vol. in-16. with 44 fig... 3 fr. 50 L'huitre et les mollusques comestibles, by ARNOULD LOCARD. 1 vol., in-16, with 50 tig. ...................... 3 fr. 50 La lutte pour l'existence chez les animaux marins, by Léon FREDÉRICO, from Liège. 1 vol. in-16, with 50 figs......... 3 fr. 50 Le transformisme, by Edmond PéRien, professor at the Muséum. 1 vol. in-16, with 87 fig........................... 3 fr. 50 Les végétaux et les animaux lumineux, by H. GADEAU DE KERVILLE. 1 vol. in-16, with 50 fig.................... à fr. 50 Les sens chez les animaux inférieurs, by E JOURDAN, prof. à la Fa- culté de Marseille. 1 vot. in-16, with 50 fig..... 3 fr. 50 Les parasites de l'homme, by L.-R. MONIEZ, prof. à la Faculte de Lille. 1 vol. in-16, with fig..................... a fr. 50. La vie des oiseaux, scenes d'après nature, by Baron d'HAMON- VILLE. 1 vol. in-16, with 20 pl..................... 3 fr. 80 HYSIOLOCIE L'Evolution du système nerveux, by Dr. H. Beaunis, prof. à la Faculté de Nancy. 1 vol. in-16, with 200 fig........ 3 fr. 50 Les poisons de l'air, empoisonnements et asphyxies, by N. GRÉ- HANT. 1 vot. in-16, with 21 fig....... 3 fr. 50 La science expérimentale, by CLaude Bernaro, 1 v. in-16. 3 fr. 50 Technique microscopique et histologique, by Mathias DUVAL, professor at the Facuité de Paris. 1 v. in-i6, fig..... 3 fr. 50 La vie et ses attributs, by E. Boucnur. 1 vol. in-16.. 3 fr. 50 CHOLOGIE PHYSIOLOGIOUE Magnétisme et hypnotisme, by Dr. A. CULLENRE. 1 vol. in-16, with 28 fig...................................... 3 fr. 50 Les émotions chez les hypnotiques, by J. Luvs, of the Académie de médecine. 1 vol. in-16, with 28 pl................ 3 fr. 50 Le somnambulisme proyoqué, par H. BEAunis 1 vol. in-16, avec fig.. ..................... 3 fr. 50 Hypnotism, double consciousness and personality alterations, by Dr. AzAM. 1 vol. in-16, with fig.............. 3 fr. 5o ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT POSTAL 2 BIBLIOTHEQUE SAINTE GENEVIEVE E DES CONNAISSANCES 8 LES PLANTES POTAGÈRES 2T LA CULTURE MARAICHÈRE 1e AINTI SIBLOTHEQUE BIBLIOTHEQUE SAINTE GENEVIEVE 210 593557 BEL (J.), Les Maladies de la vigne et les meilleurs cépages français et américains, 1890, 1 vol. in-18 jésus de 306 pages, avec 111 figures, cart. (Bibliothèque des connaissances utiles). . . . 4 fr. BELLAIR (G.), Les Arbres fruitiers. 1891, 1 vol. in-18 jesus, 360 pages with figures, hardback (Bibliothèque des connaissances utiles). 4 fr. BOIS (D.), Le petit Jardin, by D. Bois, assistant at the Muséum, 1889, 1 vol. in-18 jesus, 352 pages, with 149 figures, hardback (Bibl. des conn. utiles)... . . . . . . 4 fr. - Les Plantes d'appartement et les Plantes de fenêtres. 1891, 1 vol. in-18 jesus, 360 pages, 150 figures, hardback (Bibliothèque des connaissances utiles) ... . . . . 4 fr. BONNIER (GASTON), Les Plantes des champs et des bois. Excursions botaniques. 1 vol. in-8, 690 pages, with 873 figures and 30 plates, including 8 in color. ... ... ... ... ... ... . 24 fr. BREVANS (J. DE), La Fabrication des liqueurs et des conserves. Introduction by CH. GIRARD, director of the Municipal Laboratory. 1890, 1 vol. in-18 jesus, 384 pages, 39 figures, hardback (Bibliothèque des connaissances utiles) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 fr. - Le Pain et la Viande, 1892, 1 vol. in-18 jésus with 100 figures, hardback (Bibl. des conn. utiles)... . . .. . . . . . 4 fr. - Vegetables and Fruit. 1893, 1 vol. in-18 jésus with 100 figures, hardback (Bibl. des conn. utiles).... . . . . . . 4 fr. BROCCHI (P.), Traité de zoologie agricole et industrielle. 1 vol. in 8 of 984 pages, with 603 figures, cardboard... ... ... . 18 fr. BUCHARD, Le Matériel agricole. Machines, tools and instruments used in large-scale and small-scale farming. 1890, 1 vol. in-16, 381 pages, 142 figs, hardback (Bibl. des conn. utiles). ... . 4 fr. - Les Constructions agricoles et l'Architecture rurale. 1891, 1 vol. in-16, 392 pages, 143 figs (Bibl. des conn. utiles). 4 fr. DEGOIX, Hygiène de la table. 1892, 1 vol. in-16 of 160 pages (Petite bibliothèque médicale). . . . . . . . . . . . . .7 fr. FONSSAGRIVES, Hygiène alimentaire, 2nd edition I vol. in-8. 9 fr. HÉRAUD, Les Secrets de l'économie domestique. 1888, 1 vol. in-18, 350 pages, with 200 figures. Cart. (Bibliothèque des connaissances utiles)... . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 fr. - Les Secrets de l'alimentation. 1890, 1 vol. in-18 jesus of 423 pages, with 225 figs. Cart. (Bibliothèque des connaissances utiles). 4 fr. LARBALÉTRIER, Les Engrais et leur application à la fertilisation du sol. 1891, 1 vol. in-18, jesus of 360 pages, with 68 figures. Cart. (Library of useful knowledge). . . . . . . 4 fr. MONNILLOT, Les Insectes nuisibles aux forêts, aux céréales et à la grande culture, à la vigne, au verger, au jardin fruitier, au potager et au jardin d'ornement. 1891, 1 vol. in-18 jesus, 306 pages, with 156 figs (Bibliothèque scientifique contemporaine). 4 fr. CHRIBAUX et NANOT, Eléments de Botanique agricole, 1 vol. ir-18. jé sus of 328 pages, with 260 figs, 2 col. plates and map. . . 7 fr. VESQUE, Traité de Botanique agricole et industrielle. 1885. 1 vol. in-8 of XVI-976 pages, with 598 figures. Hardback. 18 fr. Lyon. - Imp. PirRAT AINÉ, A. Rey Succezseur, 4, rue Gentil. - 4728 CHEF DES CULTURES AU FLEURISTE DE LA VILLE DE BORDEAUX LES PLANTES POTAGÈRES ET LA CULTURE MARAICHÈRE Aoec 64 Figures intercaldes ed dans le texte ORIGINE. - CULTURE CULTURE DE PLEINE TERRE CULTURE DE PRIMEURS (COUCHES ET CHASSIS) VARIÉTÉS. - GRAINES MALADIES ET ANIMAUX YGISIBLES USAGES PARIS LIBRAIRIE J.-B. BAILLIÈRE ET FILS 19, RUE HAUTEFEUILLE, PRÈS DU BOULEVARD SAINT-GERMAIN 1893 All rights reserved ANCIEN LIRECTEUR DES ASILES PUBLICS DE CADILLAC ET DE BORDEAUX TÉMOIGNAGE D'ESTIME ET DE RECONNAISSANCE ERNEST BERGER. There aren't many books on practical market gardening; at least those that can be consulted with advantage, those written by men in the trade, who have put their hands to the grindstone, as the saying goes. The good ones are expensive; the others are incomplete, too old or written especially for certain regions. It was to fill this gap, and to offer a book that could be consulted with profit just about everywhere in France, that we wrote Vegetable Plants and Market Gardening. This work, conceived on a new plan, can be consulted by the amateur as well as the gardener: each will find information of interest. We have emphasized only the practical side of cultivation, what it is necessary to know in order to do well. After giving some general ideas on how to create and set up a low-cost market garden, we go on to describe each plant: 1° Origin; 2° Cultivation in the open ground and early crops on beds and under frames, appropriate to different climates; 3° Description of the best varieties to grow; 4° Seeds, practical means of harvesting and preserving them, and their germination period; 5° Diseases and pests, and the best ways of destroying them; 6° Uses and economic and nutritional properties of plants. The last part includes a calendar of sowing and planting for the twelve months of the year. The book is illustrated with 64 figures, thanks in large part to the kindness of Messrs Vilmorin et Cie, which show the appearance of the species described and make it easier to recognize them. All the plants, even almost all the varieties we mention, have been cultivated, tested and studied by us with the greatest care. We can therefore affirm that by following exactly our cultivation instructions, which are the fruit of serious and reliable observations, good results will be obtained. October 1892. E. BERGER THE MARKET GARDEN PART ONE ESTABLISHING A MARKET GARDEN CHAPTER ONE THE SOIL I. CHOICE OF SOIL. - When you want to create a market garden, you need to choose good soil, of such a type that its composition lends itself to the cultivation of the various vegetable plants and activates their vegetation. Three main types of soil, taken separately or in combination, meet these conditions. 1° Free soils. - These are composed of: one-tenth carbonate of lime, one-tenth humus, three-fifths alumina or clay. This is the most fertile type of soil, and is generally suitable for growing all vegetable plants. It is easy to work with, and can do without soil improvers; it accepts all fertilizers, which it keeps decomposing for a long time, and from which it gradually benefits; it is also used as a base for composts intended for temperate greenhouse plants: BERGER, Plantes potagères. finally, it is used in mixtures with potting soil intended for seedlings or early plantings. In general, this type of soil is found at low altitudes. 2° Marsh soils - Composed of small quantities of sand, peat and humus, and very similar in fertility to free soil, these soils become much more fertile when amended with limestone or lean sand, which gives them porosity and makes them lighter and therefore easier to work. In their natural state, these types of soil are poorly vegetated and water remains stagnant for part of the year. In this case, when the subsoil is not too bad, the earth removed from the ditches is thrown back onto the other parts of the soil to raise it up; this work should preferably be done during drought, so as not to be hindered by water. This type of soil is particularly suitable for summer: because of the moisture in which the plant roots are located, they grow vigorously and magnificent results are obtained. In winter, it becomes too cold, and some plants suffer. 3° Siliceous-clay soils. - Their base is sand mixed with clay and limestone. They are easy to work, and most vegetable plants thrive in them; however, in hot weather, they can be a little scorching. There are many other intermediate soils. They are generally referred to by names that recall the two dominant parts. For example: Clay-limestone - composed mainly of clay and lime. Silico-calcareous. - Composed mainly of sand and lime. Many of these soils become excellent after a few years of cultivation, provided they have not been starved of fertilizer. In general, all soils that are not too compact are good for market gardening; sand, which is absolutely pure and very thin, can, with hard work and manuring, improve remarkably and become a first-rate soil for this type of cultivation. As the subsoil influences the quality of the top layer, its nature and depth must be taken into account. If the subsoil is compact and tenacious, and retains water, the plant layer will be constantly damp during heavy rains, and the plants planted there will suffer from this overabundance of water. If, on the other hand, the subsoil is porous and absorbent, the top layer will always be healthy. It is possible (though rare) for the top layer to be thick enough for the subsoil to exert no influence on it. It is therefore important to carefully study and choose your soil as upper and lower layers; those that are light, soft and deep are the best. II. exposure, orientation. - The choice of exposure is no less important, because of the major role it plays in plant growth. The best exposures are gentle slopes facing south, east or west, but always sheltered from the north as much as possible. In slightly steeply sloping soils, we prefer those dominated by clay. These soils retain a fair amount of moisture, as we have said, when they are on the plains, but here, because of their sloping surface, they quickly lose this excess of moisture through drainage and almost always remain healthy and warm, with the sun's rays acting more intensely than on the plains, whereas light soils, placed in the same conditions at the time of great heat, become scorching and even sterile; these same soils, placed on the plains or on gentle slopes, are excellent and completely fertile. To sum up, strong soils should be chosen as far as possible on slopes, and light soils on plains; however, these various conditions are often difficult to achieve because of the layout of the location or the means at our disposal, but we will get as close as possible. As important as it is not to have a soil that is too wet, it is equally important to choose a site that is supplied with the water essential for watering during hot spells, because without water in summer in dry soil, market gardening is impossible. CHAPTER II SOIL PREPARATION I. RUNNING. - Raking is an operation which consists in stirring up all or part of the plant layer, depending on its depth, so that the top soil takes the place of the soil below. This work should be carried out in autumn and during part of winter, in dry or cold weather. Avoid doing it in rainy weather, as compacted soil dries with great difficulty and has a poor effect on plant roots. Not all soils require deep ripping: in some low, damp soils, a good spade is all that's needed; a natural meadow, which has been worked for a long time, usually provides excellent soil that is very suitable for vegetable plants, and here deep ripping would be of no use. The spade is used for this purpose. Start by removing the turf in thin slabs, arranging them in square piles and placing them in beds, with the surface underneath; if the soil in which you are working lacks limestone, powdered quicklime or, failing that, well-crushed marl, or even plaster, is added; fermentation soon takes place, and after a year spent in this state, the whole thing forms a kind of potting soil that is spread in equal parts over cultivated squares. Such is the method used by certain growers in central France, which is worth noting and imitating. Once the turf has been removed, we start breaking up the soil, taking care to turn the top parts underneath. When deep trenching is required, the ground is divided into squares, so as to proceed in an orderly fashion, and to cut only those parts where the work can be completed. After this layout, a trench or gauge is opened, varying from 70 to 80 centimetres and even 1 metre in width. The soil from this first trench is transported to the site where the work is to be completed. The depth varies according to the nature of the soil and the thickness of the plant layer, at Om, 50 or Om, 60 at the most; this is quite sufficient for growing vegetables. Once the first trench has been opened, a second of the same width is dug, and the soil from this one is used to fill in the first. This process continues until the work is completed, and the last trench is filled in with the soil from the first one, which was transported there at the beginning. The tools most commonly used to carry out these major jobs are the German shovel, the Piedmont or Correze pickaxe, and the beche. Sometimes, a forked hoe is also used. If the land is very large, it may not be possible to break it all in the first year. In this case, the broken part will be reserved for tap-rooted plants such as salsify, carrots, etc., and the other part, which will only receive a good ploughing with a spade, will be reserved for tracing-rooted plants such as peas, beans, etc..... As the soil is broken up, a layer of half-consumed manure is spread over the broken-up area. This is spread regularly, and successive rains and frosts soak up the salts, which infiltrate the new soil and fertilize it. When this layer of manure is more or less stripped of its principles, a month or six weeks later, a new layer is spread and buried. In this way, the soil can be used for all kinds of crops from the very first year. As you break up the soil, you remove any stones, tuffs or pebbles likely to hinder plant growth; all these materials are buried in the alleys in place of the good soil, which is then transported to the squares. By this exchange, we put everything in its place, taking advantage of everything; the pebbles or stones will strengthen the soil in the alleys, and the good soil removed will benefit the jar- din by increasing the vegetation layer. II. TRACÉ. - Once the ground has been levelled and its composition evened out, we finish levelling it and lay out the paths. As for the width and number of these, we must keep in mind the principle that, since cultivation is the goal, we must divert as little land as possible, taking rigorous account of the necessities or conveniences of farming; from this point of view, we will lay out the necessary paths. The layout and direction of the paths will take into account the nature of the site, the position of the water supply, the ease with which it can be distributed, the location of watering wells, manure pits, obstacles, ditches or watering holes, etc.When the layout of the land allows a regular layout to be made, we begin by dividing it up by laying out the main path, which should be a good 1.50 m wide, in the direction of the slope of the land; we then lay out another transverse path of roughly the same width; after which, we divide the remaining land into squares, varying from 10, 15 or 20 m long by the same width, separated by 1 m paths. These alleys are lined with useful plants such as sorrel, thyme, strawberry and savory. On the other hand, manure pits should be placed at a distance from the house, because of the unhealthy fumes they give off, and the unpleasant sight of them should be concealed by planting green trees such as thuya, ligustrum, laurel-tin, etc. around the pits. Although the proximity of fruit trees is generally harmful to vegetable crops, if the trench is deep enough, two rows of apple or pear trees can be planted along the main paths. These trees, which should be raised to a certain height above ground level to reduce their impact on crops, should be trained and pruned every year, choosing varieties of average vigor that set fruit quickly. HI. AMENDMENTS. - Amending a plot of land means providing it with the elements it lacks, and introducing the improving substances needed to correct its nature and enable it to produce the plants you intend to grow there. It's important to carry out such work only after careful study of the soil, because it means recomposing the soil; giving it what it lacks, and in such a proportion that the result of the amendment is an improvement rather than the sterility that could occur if it were done badly; and finally, it means giving consistency to soil that is too light, and porosity to strong soil. Compact, clayey soils can be successfully amended by adding a reasonable proportion of lean sand. However, in some soils that are too clayey, the sand is unable to combine with the other elements, and tends constantly to penetrate the plant layer, arriving in the subsoil without having acted. In this case, crushed terracotta debris, broken oyster shells, coal ash, etc. are used to advantage. It has also been suggested that the surface crust of the topsoil should be calcined: under the effect of the heat of the fire, clay cracks, hardens and, as a result, produces the same effect as gravel. This is a good and practical procedure in certain regions where other types of soil improver are unavailable and would become very expensive. Light soils, which generally become very hot in summer, should be amended with compact materials, but 1 See D. Bois, Le petit Jardin, Paris, 1889 (Bibliothèque des connaissances utiles). Clay that is too compact will only produce a mediocre amendment, and clayey marls are preferable. Marsh soil, excavated or cleared soil, river mud and cistern sludge produce excellent effects on these soils, as they not only serve as an amendment, but also as fertilizer. The various types of marl that can be used on almost any type of soil "except limestone" produce good soil improvers if you know how to make the most of them, but you mustn't overuse them, as their role is not that of fertilizer, and too much of them would be harmful. Marl is usually applied to the soil in autumn. It is deposited in heaps; the frosts and rains of winter begin to disintegrate it, and in spring it is spread out and mixed with the soil. In market gardening, this type of amendment is rarely used, as it is time-consuming and sometimes costly. IV. CHAULAGE. - In certain limestone-free soils, liming is an excellent operation that considerably increases the value and fertility of the soil. Not only is lime a good soil improver, but it also destroys insects and weeds, and promotes the decomposition of plant and animal debris in the soil. All soils, regardless of their composition, adapt more or less well to lime amendments, which is why we advise you to carry out a few partial tests before working on large areas. We use stone lime just out of the kiln, which is laid out in small heaps, 5 to 7 meters apart, covered with a layer of earth about 25 centimeters thick. They remain in this state for two weeks 1. and, when melting is complete, we take advantage of a fine day to spread it and then bury it immediately, mixing it well with the soil; liming must be renewed every five years. V. DRAINAGE. - Soils that are too wet are unsuitable for all crops, and it is essential to rid them of this excess moisture. This is achieved by drainage, which consists in draining water through underground conduits. To this end, ditches are dug about 80 centimetres or 1 metre deep, 60 or 80 centimetres wide, and spaced 5 to 15 metres apart or more, depending on the degree of moisture in the soil. In these ditches, a series of clay, concrete or cement pipes are laid end-to-end, carefully covering the joints with shards of brick or tile, coarse gravel or broken stone, to prevent soil from penetrating; the pipes should be secured as they are laid. In certain localities where stone is readily available, the pipes can be replaced by gutter-shaped conduits, built by laying out the rubble, or by placing rough stone in the bottom of the ditches. As many cavities as possible are left, then covered with gravel, clinker, pebbles, crushed stone and so on. Pine wood is preferable to any other species, as it rots very slowly in the ground. This latter method is widely used in the south-west, mainly in the Landes region. VI. SANITATION. - Sanitation or external drainage consists of draining water into the open air, through wide ditches that are dug more or less deeply, depending on the humidity of the soil; these ditches are directed in the direction of the slope of the land. When water is plentiful, the first ditches are cut with cross ditches to speed up drainage. In all cases, a collecting ditch will receive the whole, discharging the water into the lowest parts and, preferably, into a stream. CHAPTER III LABOURING LAND Ploughing means stirring up and turning over the topsoil, loosening it by dividing its parts, in order to make it suitable for growing new crops. By turning over the soil, we bring to the surface the lower parts impregnated with the salts that have precipitated there as a result of the infiltration of water through fertilizers. Ploughing is generally carried out with a spade or fork, and in some regions, with a hoe. Today, spade ploughing is the only method used by market gardeners in major centers (Paris, Lyon, Marseille, etc.). In strong soils, the fork is sometimes of great use, even indispensable for getting the work done, as it digs in more easily. For this purpose, very strong forks, specially manufactured for this purpose, are used. When ploughing land for immediate planting or sowing, the clods are broken up and crushed as much as possible, so that the roots of the plants can easily penetrate and adapt. Ploughing should be more or less deep, depending on the plants to be cultivated. Plants with taproots, which penetrate perpendicularly into the soil to achieve normal development, require slightly deeper ploughing. Plants with tracer roots, on the other hand, require shallow ploughing. As a general rule, however, wherever possible, good ploughing should be carried out with a full spade. Clay-limestone soils are difficult to work in summer, because of their extreme hardness, and because they then form a compact, tenacious mass. In such soils, when irrigation is possible, this hardness is remedied by running water through the soil, leaving it to stand for a few hours; two days later, when the soil is dry again, ploughing begins; but if irrigation is not possible, and the spade is unable to divide the parts, the soil is first broken up with a hoe; then ploughed with a spade, breaking up the clods. In winter, strong soils require little ploughing; once the harvest has been removed, rough spading is carried out, retaining as many clods as possible. In summer, these soils need to be ploughed frequently, so that the heat can penetrate them more easily and remove the moisture they contain. This procedure is hardly applicable to vegetable growing, as you would never choose a strong soil for commercial cultivation. Light, sandy soils that are dry by nature retain their looseness for a long time, and require less ploughing than heavy soils. It is mainly in winter that deep ploughing will be beneficial, as rain and frost will correct the lack of moisture by impregnating the soil. In summer, it's best to choose a rainy or dark day to carry out the frequent plowing, hoeing and weeding required by this type of soil. In excessively wet soils, where water remains in winter, it is customary, as soon as heavy rains approach, to spade the free soil into large furrows or ados, and let it spend the winter in this state, until it is possible to penetrate it and bury the fertilizers. When a plot of land of a certain size needs to be spaded, the most expeditious means of reducing labor costs should be sought. First, divide the land into as many planks as you deem necessary, and then, at even number, open a trench with a good spade iron, and place the earth with the wheelbarrow on the end of the plank where you will finish. The surface of the soil is then turned over and levelled. Fertilizers are buried more or less deeply, depending on the type of plant you intend to put in them. Before reaching the end of this first plank, we move to the opposite side of the second, in order to break it in while keeping the surface uniform and the gauge equal; this means is the most appreciated and the most expeditious. In a market garden, cultivation is so intensive that it is impossible to determine the time of ploughing, which is carried out at all times, as a bed is emptied: ploughing, smoking and planting are carried out immediately. In a well-managed vegetable garden, you should never see any free squares. This advice applies above all to middle-class and public-establishment cultivation. CHAPTER IV SECONDARY WORK I. STRAIGHTENING, LAYOUT OF BEDS. - After ploughing, if the edges of the squares are not marked by a border, they are drawn with a chalk line, then the soil is divided into planks 1m, 25 to 1m, 40 and more wide, depending on the type of plants to be sown. The division paths are marked out by stretching the chalk line out straight, holding it between the two feet as you walk, and spacing them out more or less according to the width you wish to give the paths. When planting vegetables, which require a certain amount of space between plants, first draw the two outer lines, using the iron tracer or a simple piece of tapered wood, which serve as a guide for drawing the central line, without having to replace the string. With a little practice, it's easy to draw straight lines: for example, on a board where you want to draw seven lines, you'll only need to draw the cord for the middle line and the one on each side, i.e. for three lines only. This is the same way for ray sowing, except that the lines are drawn with the narrow end of the hoe, so that they are a little deeper. For transplanting certain plants in summer, and even seedlings, it is customary in dry soils to form beds with large edges; to do this, the soil is raked back into the paths and along the edges; in this way, the water used for watering is of greater benefit to the plants, as it does not spill onto the paths. II. HEDGING. - Whatever the method of sowing or the type of planting, soil preparation is of paramount importance, firstly for success and secondly for the eye. After the beds have been laid, if the surface of the ground is not suitable for sowing, it is raked or harrowed. This is done by walking a fork back and forth across the ground, breaking up clods, loosening the surface and bringing up stones. After sowing, the soil is harrowed again, this time to distribute the seeds and bring them into contact with the soil, covering them as it were; in light soil, this operation is sufficient to cover the seeds by a small volume. Around Paris, and in the neighbouring départements, this system is widely used, and is very rapid. III. WEEDING. - Weeding consists in pulling out weeds from young seedlings or plantations, and making them disappear: for seedlings, this work should be done when they are still young, so as not to shake them too much and lift them up. At the same time, if necessary, they should be thinned out. To be done properly, thinning requires a certain amount of practice, to be able to distinguish without trial and error which plants need to be removed. Women are generally better at this work than men; they operate with greater dexterity. In summer, when the soil is dry, water at least one hour before starting to weed, to give the plants and the soil surface time to dry out. Weeding should not be carried out during the hottest periods, as young seedlings will suffer and have difficulty recovering. As far as possible, choose dark or not too hot days, and if you can only work in the evening, especially if the area to be weeded is not very large, this will be preferable, as the night firms up the plants, and the coolness makes them stand upright. Whatever the time of year, unless it is raining, before leaving the work, give the weeded areas a good watering. IV. HOEING. - Hoeing is a superficial ploughing operation whose aim is to loosen the surface of the soil around the plants, making it more permeable to atmospheric influences and at the same time preventing weeds from growing. This work is carried out with a tool known as a hoe, and can be done in any season. The soil is disturbed to a depth of between 8 and 12 centimetres, depending on the type of plant being hoeed. Avoid hoeing when the soil is too wet, and wait until the morning dew has fallen; experience has shown that hoeing is most profitable when the plants are completely dry. As soon as the soil begins to harden, hoe again, as the more the soil is loosened around the plants, the better they will thrive. V. PLUMBING. - Leading is designed to bring the seeds into contact with the soil: it is done after harrowing with a fork and after raking, as far as possible, in dry weather and mainly in light soils; in strong soils, it would produce poor results. This work consists of treading the soil, either with the feet and walking at a slow pace, or with a stick, the back of a digging shovel, or even, in certain regions, with a small hand roller. This operation becomes necessary in soils that are too light, and ensures success by encouraging germination. CHAPTER VE FERTILIZERS AND FUNURES S4 Fertilized soil would be rapidly exhausted if it were not given back the fertilizing principles and salts it has lost through successive cultivation. This is the only way to maintain and perpetuate soil fertility. I. CHEMICAL FERTILIZERS. - There are a large number of chemically compounded fertilizers available today, but they have never given very good results and are therefore rarely used in market gardening. II. MANURES AND NATURAL FERTILIZERS. - The fertilizers best known and appreciated by gardeners are rotten or consumed manures; horse, donkey or mule manure is the most popular, and consequently the most widely used. In their fresh state, these manures give off a gentle warmth that lasts quite a long time, and are used in winter to make layers for planting and sowing early crops. When decomposition is complete, the resulting potting soil forms the base for crops or beds. In a vegetable garden, nothing should be wasted; all plant detritus from vegetable dressing, grasses, sweepings, in short anything likely to decompose through fermentation, should be piled up; on its own, this detritus would only form a fertilizer, not of zero effect, but of too slow efficiency; that's why it's preferable to combine it with other animal manures which, while improving it, also activate its fermentation. Not all soils are suited to the same fertilizers, so they should be distributed with discretion, according to the nature and needs of the soil. Horned cattle manure, which is greasy and unctuous, is suited to light, warm soils; by fertilizing them, it gives them the tenacity that binds their parts together and preserves a certain moisture. Pig manure, which is very cold, is also suitable for these same soils. Half-rotted manure from horses, mules and donkeys is suitable for cold, damp soils, lightening them by dividing the parts. This type of fertilizer is the most widely used, and is generally suitable for all soils, provided that decomposition is allowed to take place according to the nature of the soil for which it is intended. Rabbit and sheep manure are very hot and activate vegetation enormously. Pigeon and hen droppings, otherwise known as colombine, are the most powerful fertilizers known; they should only be used with caution, as they are so hot that they burn plant roots; soaking them in water for twelve to fifteen hours produces a liquid manure that is excellent for activating the vegetation of vegetable plants, especially cucurbits. Fecal matter is a very energetic fertilizer that always gives good results, but must be used with care. Used alone, they would burn the plants; mixed with manures, they produce very rapid fermentation, and consequently a highly stimulating fertilizer that all plants, especially cabbages, can handle. Whatever type of manure you use, we advise you not to use it straight from the stable; you need to pile it up for a few days, to allow fermentation and even decomposition to begin. Winter, autumn and the beginning of spring are the most favorable seasons for fertilizing land; however, when cultivating intensively, we fertilize in all seasons when the soil is ready, and with each new crop, so as not to exhaust the soil. There are exceptions to this rule, however, as root vegetables such as carrots and salifis do not adapt, or adapt poorly, to recent fertilization. During our excursions across France, we noticed that in certain regions, notably Vienne, Charentes and part of Gironde, farmers did not know how to collect and dispose of their fertilizers: as the manure leaves the stable, it is piled unevenly in a corner, outside or in the open air, exposed to sun, rain and anything else that dries it out and destroys its soluble and volatile principles. In this way, fermentation takes place only very unevenly, and the result is a poor fertilizer that lacks any stimulant, and fertilizes the soil only imperfectly; growers who treat their fertilizers in this way never get good results, and there's no reason to be surprised. To get good fertilizer, you have to do things differently. You dig pits of varying depths, depending on the needs of the farm, from 50 centimetres to 1 metre and more, 2 to 3 metres wide and 4 or 5 metres long; the bottom of the pits is sloped; in the lowest part, a hole of a certain width is reserved to receive the liquid manure, which is removed as the hole fills up, to be distributed over the various squares under cultivation. During hot spells, fertilizers in fermentation are often watered with this liquid manure, to speed up decomposition. When you can build masonry manure pits, coated with cement on the inside, you should not neglect to do so, as you will gain by preventing liquid fertilizers from escaping through infiltration. Alternatively, and less expensively, you can coat the bottom of the pits and even the walls with clay, into which you add a little hydraulic lime. Leached wood ashes, soot and plaster, although not considered proper fertilizers, can be used as good stimulants, influencing vegetation by stimulating plant organs to draw more nourishment from the earth and the atmosphere. They can be spread on plants as they begin to develop, in dry, warm weather; plaster is particularly good for crucifers, turnips, cabbage, etc. Poultry feather is a very powerful fertilizer that is not as widespread as it should be. Market gardeners in the south-west of France, particularly around Bordeaux, use it extensively. It gives very good results on all vegetable plants. Its effect is immediate, so to speak, but short-lived: about two months, or seventy days, are enough for this fertilizer to give all it can. It can be used at any time of year, and the results are always excellent, though preferably when vegetation is active in spring and summer. Leafy vegetables, i.e. those whose aerial parts can be eaten, such as lettuce, cabbage, spinach, sorrel, etc., seem to do better with it than root vegetables. Gardeners use this fertilizer in several ways. In the case of seedlings, the soil is hoeed, the manure placed in the gauge and a layer of feathers spread over it, so that it is about 5 centimetres above the soil. For transplants, cabbages, tomatoes, etc., they put a handful of manure on each plant, opening a hole with a hoe or by hand. In regions where planting is done with a hoe, the feather should be put in while forming the rays. As far as possible, use this fertilizer only when it is fresh, i.e. before it has undergone any kind of fermentation. III. LIQUID FERTILIZERS. - All manure juices make excellent fertilizers; they activate vegetation and should be used in the morning or evening, especially in hot weather. Care should be taken to ensure that the leaves of the plants to be watered are not too saturated. Fresh fecal matter, diluted ten times its volume, is excellent for activating the vegetation of all vegetable plants; if you have only this fertilizer at your disposal, you're sure to get magnificent results. Never use it unless the plants have fully recovered. IV. MULCH. - Mulch is short manure, rather dry than fatty, which is used to cover cultivated beds throughout the summer, to intercept the sun's drying rays and prevent the soil from being beaten up by watering. Seedlings benefit from being covered with a light mulch: as well as conserving moisture, it prevents the seeds from being disturbed by watering as they germinate; it is spread as evenly as possible, dividing the molecules well. It is particularly suitable for dry, hot soils. V. POT. - Potting soil is the result of the complete decomposition of manure, grasses, leaves, etc., reduced to a friable state. Potting soil made from layers of horse manure is considered the best. It is used to cover fine-seeded seedlings in the open ground, to protect them and ensure their emergence; it is also used to fill new layers for early crops, and to cover seedlings grown in pots. It is always a good idea to have a sufficient quantity of this type of potting soil at hand. CHAPTER VI WAYS OF ACTIVATING PLANT VEGETATION I. LAYING. - Layers are a powerful and indispensable means of activating the vegetation of certain vegetable plants. Since a large proportion of them cannot be sown in the open ground, which is not yet sufficiently heated to cause the seeds to germinate quickly, it is through layers that many of our cultivated plants begin their first development in winter and then complete their vegetation in the open ground, when the heat is sufficient. Any organic material that can generate heat when fermented can be used to make layers. Horse manure is the best choice for long-lasting warmth; working horse manure is preferable, as the straw is better broken down and impregnated than in luxury horse manure. These manures give very strong heat, but their action can be moderated by mixing them with annealed manures, hornbeam, oak or lime leaves, grass or moss. The heat of the layers depends on the materials used in their construction, and also on the thickness they are given; the thicker the layer, the stronger and longer-lasting the heat. It is therefore important to know the degree of heat required by the plants you want to grow, in order to place them in the conditions that will best promote their development. In market gardening, three types of layers are used. 1° Warm layers. - Hot beds are erected from December to March; their dimensions vary according to the length and width of the boxes to be placed on them; their thickness is proportionate to the heat required by the plants: it varies between 40 and 70 centimetres. Before starting to build the layer, the manure is mixed, if necessary, then the four sides are marked out with ropes and stakes. The manure is then taken in bunches and laid flat, going backwards; the impregnated parts are mixed with the dried parts. The impregnated parts are mixed with the dried parts and spread evenly over all the points to form a first even bed; each forkful is pressed down firmly with the back of the tool; any overhanging straw is brought in to form a straight, solid edge. Once this first bed has been spread out, it is trodden on, watered if the manure is too dry, then a second bed is placed, then a third, until the desired height is reached. The surface should be as flat as possible, with a few forks of manure in the hollows. If the bed is to be used for bells, it is edged; if, on the other hand, it is to be used for chests, these are placed as soon as the last bed is in place, and a small layer of manure is spread inside, tamped down and loaded with potting soil. The frames are then put in place, and covered with straw mats to help the bed get its first light, which takes six or eight days. Many growers around Paris and in the north of France build their beds all at once, which is quicker, but it takes a great deal of practice to ensure uniformity, and the results are no better than those obtained using the method just described. 2° Warm coats. - Warm layers are made in the same way as the previous ones; they are made from annealed or previously used manure, with a little fresh manure to give a stimulating effect; leaves, herbs, etc. are also added. All these ingredients must be well mixed and sufficiently moistened. These beds are very useful in January, February and March, for sowing or transplanting celery, tomatoes, chillies, etc. When a warm layer has been used up and has produced just about all the effect expected, it can still be used, as the manure has not yet been used up, so it can be reworked by mixing it with the same care as the first time; a little new manure can be added and an excellent warm layer can be formed. 3° Muted layers. - They are made in the same way as the others, and are very useful for transplanting seedlings made on warm layers, and for planting certain types of plants. Pits or holes for melons, which are made in the spring in the open ground, are merely deaf layers. Based on our experience, we believe that when you have good soil at your disposal, you should not neglect to mix it with the composts intended for cultivation in layers, after having sieved it thoroughly; this mixture gives consistency, prevents the soil from drying out too quickly, and plants develop much better in it than in pure potting soils. Layers are generally placed in a healthy location with good exposure, facing south, but in such a way that they can be reached as much as possible in winter by the sun's rays from east to west. II. ReCHaups. - In winter, when a layer begins to cool, it needs to be revived; this is done with the help of rechaups, i.e. by piling up good fresh manure or leaves in the paths and around the trunks, which are firmly tamped; they are often reshuffled, each time adding to them to fill the voids produced by settling. III. AccoT. - The accot differs from the rechaud in that, instead of using new manure, we use leaves, old manure, straw or fern. The aim is to prevent the cold from penetrating the inside of the trunk, so it's not necessary to build them up very thickly; 15 to 20 centimetres is enough. Pile them up around the trunks to their full height, keep the outer edge straight, and place E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 2 a frame of slats held in place by good stakes firmly driven into the ground. An accot lasts a whole winter, if you take care to reload as the soil settles. IV. EDGE. - Layers that are not to receive coffers should be edged, to prevent the soil placed on them from collapsing. There are several ways of edging a layer, either with strong straw pads, or with long, slightly twisted manures, which are secured with long wooden or wire pegs. Some growers border with a large board that they place sideways on the edge of the bed; the soil is then brought down to the foot and firmly packed, the board is supported by strong wire or wooden pegs; this is a good, inexpensive way. V. Apos. - Ados are flowerbeds, sloping to the south, that are successively established in a square or along a wall. Once the site has been chosen, the procedure is as follows: once the soil has been well tilled, lines are drawn at varying distances according to the width to be given to the ados, from 1.50 to 2 meters, then with the spade, the earth is removed from the front to reload the back. The back of the spade is used to beat the top of the glacis to hold the soil in place, or even better, to hold it in place with planks, which is preferable. The slope to be given to the teens is 15 centimetres per metre, then the rake is passed over the whole, and a certain thickness of compost is spread. This kind of work is excellent, as it produces vegetation earlier than flat cultivation, and always guarantees good results; it's especially during winter and spring that ados are needed. Only in the vicinity of Paris, in the north and east of France, are teas successfully used; in the Midi, they would only give good results in winter, at the time of the coldest weather. CHAPTER VII POTTING PLANT MULTIPLICATION Propagation by seed is the most natural method of reproduction, and also the one that gives the best results. Almost all plants can be propagated by sowing, except for a few genera which do not produce fertile seeds, such as tarragon and chives. As the choice of good seeds is one of the main conditions for success, the grower should harvest most of the seeds needed for his operation himself, and carefully select and raise all his seedbeds so that they are kept clean. All similar varieties should be kept away from each other, to prevent the mixing of fertilizing dust. Seeds should be harvested only when they are fully ripe and not completely dry; those of some genera, such as lamb's lettuce and sorrel, should be picked before they are fully ripe. Drying is completed by spreading them out on canvas. Certain types, such as spinach and salsify, which only ripen their seeds successively, should be visited every day; as soon as they start to turn yellow, they should be picked to complete their drying in semi-shade. Plants such as carrots, celery, parsley and cabbage, whose seeds, though ripe and even dry, are difficult to detach from their receptacle, should be tied up in bundles and hung in a well-ventilated attic, where the seeds will mature and dry out. Many seeds, such as sorrel and parsnips, only retain their germinative qualities for a short time, and only sprout in the first year. To avoid disappointment, you should choose seeds from the last harvest. Other seeds, on the other hand - beans, broad beans, peas, etc., all papilionaceous plants in general - retain their germinative power for a long time; their longevity is even considerably increased when stored in their silique or pod. In short, all seeds retain their ability to germinate to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the degree of permeability of their envelope, their consistency and their chemical composition. All these considerations must be taken into account by the grower, who must be familiar with the different types of seeds, know how long they germinate, and know how long it takes each plant to reach full development. This knowledge can be acquired quickly, with a little attention and, above all, practice. I. SOWING IN THE GROUND. - Not all seeds can be sown under the same conditions, and sowing must be modified according to the nature of the soil, the climate, and the size or tenacity of the seeds. The finer the seeds, the less they should be buried in the ground; some types even germinate without needing to be covered: raiponce, purslane, etc. All you need to do is lightly plumb the soil, spread a good mulch and water often if the weather is hot. Medium-sized seeds such as spinach, carrots and radishes should be sufficiently covered, while beans, peas and broad beans should be covered more thoroughly. Any seed should be covered with twice its volume. Light, loose soils are generally suitable for all kinds of seeds at almost any time, because their porosity makes them more suitable than others for germination and subsequent emergence. In strong soils, many seeds would not germinate, or would only germinate with difficulty, if they were not covered with loose soil or light loam. For certain seedlings sown in hot weather, if the soil in which they are to be planted is dry, it is a good idea to soak the seed in water for a few hours, to hasten germination. Beans and radishes lend themselves well to this system. We would point out, however, that many procedures have been advocated, none of which has produced good results. Let nature take care of itself, and we'll be better off. It is preferable to sow a little thickly, as it is easy to thin out afterwards, whereas if we do the opposite, it is not always easy to resow or transplant. II. broadcast sowing. - Broadcast sowing is the most commonly used method; most of our vegetable plants are perfectly suited to it. When this type of sowing is done in a plot of land divided into beds, only half is sown at a time. You take a handful of seeds with your right hand, and, with a rapid series of wrist movements in a semicircle, you give the seed free passage by squeezing or spreading your fingers more or less. You follow it with your eyes as it falls, to distribute it evenly. 2. Do the same on the other half of the board, avoiding spreading the seed over the part already sown, and in the path. On large plots, broadcast sowing is done differently. You take a handful of seeds and, by moving your arm back and forth in a slight semicircle, spread them over the soil; in large-scale cultivation, this is how it's done. When broadcasting fine seed, many gardeners mix it with fine sand, wood ash or potting soil to distribute it more evenly. A good sower does not need to resort to this expedient (except for raiponce), and we can affirm that we have always sown our seeds as they were presented. III. SOWING IN RAYS OR ROWS. - Once the soil has been loosened and evened out, trace out the necessary number of parallel rows, spaced out according to the development required by the plants you wish to sow. The depth of these rows varies between 4 and 6 centimetres. The seed is placed at the bottom of the comb, with the hand raised 15 centimetres above it; the wrist is moved back and forth slightly in the direction of the combs. The seed is then covered by folding back the edges with the rake. When sowing in rows and beds, it is customary not to fold over the seed, but to leave the outer edges of the two end spokes to form a bead, so that this bead, serving as a frame for the bed, arrests its shape and retains water for watering. In strong soils, it is sometimes difficult to cover ray seedlings well, so potting soils or sifted earth are used, which are distributed as evenly as possible in the ray; straw, if necessary, and water. To draw the lines for the seedlings, use the narrow end of the hoe, a pointed piece of wood, a tracing tool, etc. Some growers in the North, when sowing fine seeds in rows, use their feet to draw two rays at a time, spacing them more or less according to the distance between each ray. This procedure is very quick, but can only be used on light, recently ploughed land. IV. SOWING IN CLUMPS OR BUNCHES. - To sow in clumps, deep rays can be traced as for row sowing, and sown at the desired distance and in a chessboard pattern; they are covered by folding back one of the edges of the ray; the hoe, planter or hand can also be used if the soil is light. The most common method, however, is to dig holes with the hoe at equal intervals, more or less deep, depending on what you want to sow; you cover by rejecting some of the soil, and at the first hoeing, when the plants are a little larger, you finish levelling the soil. This method is particularly suitable for planting potatoes or any other large seed. In some central and western regions, beans are sown in this way, as a counter-plant to other crops. V. DIFFERENT WAYS OF COVERING SEEDLINGS. - There are several ways to cover field seedlings. In many fields, well-applied harrowing with a fork is sufficient for most small-volume seeds. A rake is also used, with the tines pressed lightly and quickly into the soil, then passed over the surface to smooth it out. This is the system that predominates in France and gives good results in light soils. After sowing, lightly harrow the soil with a fork, and plow if necessary; then, using a full or forked hoe, remove a certain amount of soil from the paths, throwing it right and left onto each half of the bed; distribute it as evenly as possible, pass the rake over it, then mulch if necessary. When sowing fine seeds in compacted soils, fine potting soils or sieved soils are used to cover them, bearing in mind that the seeds need to be buried to a greater or lesser extent depending on their volume. It will be objected that this procedure is not practical over large areas; this is true, but we are addressing amateurs, who often have vegetable gardens in poor soil. A market gardener, who makes a living of it, will not choose a clay soil to cultivate it. Gardeners in the north of France use a lot of potting soil, and most of their crops are grown in terra-cotta; this is a good method that can be applied to all soils. In the Midi, terreautage is not widely practiced; it is hardly used at all: gardeners say they are wasting their time; this is a big mistake, because in the opposite case, they would obtain better results, despite the fact that the mild climate favors cultivation. VI. SOWING ON BEDS. - Many of our vegetable plants, which provide us with their produce and ripen their seeds in a relatively short time, would yield little or nothing if we waited until the soil was sufficiently warm to sow them. By means of early sowing on warm beds, we are able to raise plants of a certain strength; we plant them when the soil is sufficiently warmed, a time which coincides with that when, without the help of beds, we would only be able to sow. Layer sowing differs little from full-earth sowing; it is done in rays or broadcast; lightly press down with the hand or bat, cover with light loam and water with a fine apple. Above all, it's important not to sow before the seedbed has had its first light. Despite all precautions, seedlings often wither; to avoid this, give them as much air as possible, in proportion to the strength of the young plants; keep the soil moderately moist, and shade delicate plants to avoid sunburn. CHAPTER VIII PLANTING - TRANSPLANTING I. TRANSPLANTING FROM THE GROUND TO THE NURSERY. - Transplanting into a nursery is very advantageous for many vegetable plants that cannot be sown in situ, such as cabbages, celery, etc.; it favors root emission and the plant's outward development; by transplanting, we obtain well-branched, perfectly formed individuals, whose recovery is assured when set in place. The plants to be transplanted should be chosen in their infancy, when the first two leaves are beginning to develop; if they are too old, they will not cope well with successive transplanting and will become less attractive. The soil in which transplanting is to take place must be recently ploughed and loosened. If transplanting takes place during hot weather, mulch lightly and only operate in the evening; if the heat is very intense, shade during the three or four days following transplanting. This work, while not difficult, does require care and attention. First of all, it must be carried out promptly, ensuring that the young plant is in perfect contact with the soil, without too much settling, and that the hole is properly filled underneath. Care must also be taken to ensure that the roots are not in any way turned back, as this would have a detrimental effect on recovery. II. PERMANENT PLANTING. - When a plant is sufficiently developed, whether it has been transplanted in the nursery or left on the bed, it must be planted permanently; this operation is carried out in the same way as above, with the difference that the distance between plants is calculated according to their own development. Plants are generally planted in a staggered pattern, and watered immediately after planting. In some dry, hard summer soils, a superficial wetting is done before transplanting, which prevents the soil from clogging the holes, and helps to speed up the work. When planting peppers, eggplants and melons in layers, keep the roots as clod-free as possible; dig the holes beforehand with a spade or hoe, and use a hoe to do the planting. Subjects planted in this way suffer little from this change. Planting with the hoe is preferable to any other method, but as it is less expeditious than with the planter, it is more commonly used. For summer planting, a dark or rainy day should be chosen; otherwise, planting should be done in the evening; never during the day, as the sun's rays would damage the plants and delay their recovery. III. DEPLANTATION. - Instead of pulling them out with force, at the risk of breaking almost all the rootlets, which slows down recovery, if the soil is a little hard, use a trowel, spade, hoe or fork; plunge the tool deep into the soil, lifting it up in large clods, then remove the young plants without breaking the roots. If the soil is too dry, water a few hours before uprooting. As far as possible, only pull a few plants at a time, to prevent them from wilting. IV. PLANT PREPARATION. - Many young plants, such as strawberries, leeks, chicory, celery, etc., need to be prepared before being put out to pasture, by cutting off about half the leaves and some of the roots. Chicory and escarole seem to grow more slowly in spring, if you take the precaution of sufficiently cutting the pivot. This preparation is useful, as it promotes balance between the above-ground and below-ground parts, i.e. between the stem and the root. As a general rule, all plants to be transplanted should have their pivots cut to improve their future performance. Parsley, for example, which has hitherto been regarded as a plant to be sown in situ, produces magnificent results when transplanted with the poppy cut off first. V. LAYERED TRANSPLANTING. - Transplanting in layers differs significantly from transplanting in the ground. Tomatoes, peppers and eggplants, which are sown early and very thickly over a relatively small area, must be transplanted when the first leaves begin to appear; the bed must be suitably prepared and filled with good potting soil; once transplanting is complete, the plants are watered and covered with frames, which are kept closed for a few days to facilitate straightening. Air is then given, ensuring that the young plants do not wither, and that there is no overabundance of humidity; shade is applied if necessary. CHAPTER IX WATERING I. WATERING SYSTEM. - Watering being the active agent of market gardening, having water nearby and in abundance is an important advantage, especially in soils prone to drought, especially as it is during hot weather that vegetables are most valuable; the most advantageous means of obtaining water should therefore be studied. In certain soils where water is found at average depths, it is customary to dig wells, as far as possible in the highest part; a pump is installed, and then, at each corner of the square, iron-rimmed barrels are buried, 25 or 30 centimeters above ground level; oil or petroleum barrels are generally used. In the south-west and south of France, cement sump pits are used, either made on site or ready-made by certain manufacturers. Water is channeled through underground pipes or cement, wood, cast-iron or zinc slabs, passing from one barrel to the next, all the way to the far end of the garden. Although this method is not very costly, it does require continuous and arduous work for the worker in charge of operating the pump. It is preferable to set up a merry-go-round that can be driven by a horse for the duration of the watering operation. Today, there are few market gardens that are not equipped with a merry-go-round and even larger or smaller collecting basins, depending on the surface area to be watered. With these, watering is quick and easy. If they are high enough, you can use a lance, a watering can and even drip irrigation. II. DIFFERENT QUALITIES OF WATER. - All water does not have the same qualities; it is more or less suitable for watering, depending on the substances it contains, and the substances that make up the soil it passes through. Well water, if dug in limestone soils, contains carbonate of lime; it is considered the least good for watering, due to the salts it holds in solution, which form a crust on the surface that prevents plants from enjoying atmospheric influences, and hinders vegetation. To be beneficial, all well water must be exposed to the air for a few hours before use. Water that is brought to the surface by pumps, or any other means that stirs it sufficiently, can be used immediately, because its passage through the various pipes warms it up to some extent. Running water from streams, rivers, channels, etc., is the best for watering; it is all the better if its point of origin is further away, and especially if it is beaten by the waterwheels of factories. These waters, which are aerated and warm, are generally suitable for watering all vegetable plants. Rainwater is recognized as the best and purest, and can be used for a variety of watering purposes, provided it has not been left to stagnate for too long. The stagnant waters of ponds, cisterns, fish ponds, etc., with little or no renewal, become, because of the innumerable substances that putrefy in them, veritable liquid fertilizers that must be used with circumspection, otherwise the plants watered will perish: because of the fatty matter they contain, they prevent the oxygen in the air from penetrating the roots of the plants. III. EpOquE OF WATERING. - It is hardly possible to determine the right time and circumstances for watering each type of plant. The nature of the soil, altitude, exposure, atmospheric disturbances, etc., are all causes which make it impossible to specify the right time. Watering in the open ground begins in April and does not end until September. Watering from April to the end of May and in autumn should be carried out mainly in the morning, or even during the day. At this time of year, when the nights are still cool, evening watering would keep the plants at a temperature that is too cold in relation to the heat of the day, and would slow down their growth. On the contrary, from the end of May until September, watering should preferably be done in the evening or early morning, never during the day, because of the high heat. If it's morning, the plants will benefit from watering all day long. If you water in the evening, evaporation or absorption will no longer take place as it does under the drying rays of the sun, and the roots will be able to draw assimilable principles from the water they have been given; the opposite happens if you water during very hot weather: evaporation takes place so quickly that it cannot benefit the plants. IV. DIFFERENT WAYS OF WATERING. - Not all plants need to be watered in the same way. Some should only be watered with great care, especially young seedlings or newly planted transplants. They are watered with the apple, the holes in which are more or less fine, depending on the strength of the plants. Often, too much watering will bed them down and mix them together, making it difficult for them to stand up again. Seedlings planted in beds or terra-cotta flowerbeds should be watered with apples with fine holes, as over-watering scatters the soil, burying some seeds too deeply and uncovering others, so that emergence is uneven and defective. When watering carrot, salsify and turnip seedlings in the open ground, the surface of the soil can sometimes become so hard during hot spells that one watering is not enough to moisten it all the way down to the roots. In this case, a light drenching is used to moisten the surface of the soil and prepare it for a second watering. If, despite this, the soil is not sufficiently soaked, water a third, even a fourth time, if necessary. In dry summer soils, water the surface before planting, then water each plant immediately and give it a good general soaking. For plants that are far away and already strong, water them with the spout, taking care not to uproot them, pour the water gently and close to the base, and to prevent it spreading too much, make a small funnel-shaped basin around each subject. Watering with a hose is a good idea, as it provides plenty of water. However, in certain calcareous soils, the soil compacts and hardens quickly, and frequent hoeing is needed to loosen the surface. V. IRRIGATION. - Irrigation or imbibition is an excellent way of stimulating vegetation during the hot summer months, but it is not applicable to all soils. Most gardens in southern France, Spain and Portugal are irrigated. The land is divided into narrow plots, or furrows, separated by a gutter, and water is successively brought to each of them. When one plot seems sufficiently watered, it is diverted to the second, and so on. This is an excellent method that always gives excellent results, so we must not neglect to apply it whenever possible. In a market garden, the various waterings must be carried out with discernment and proportioned in the same way, so that each plant is watered at the right time. Watering should be more or less frequent, depending on the intensity of the heat, the soil and the size of the plant. CHAPTER X CROP ROTATION AND COUNTER-PLANTING I. ASSOLEMENTS. - In market gardening, rotation is one of the first keys to success; it always produces beautiful, magnificent produce. Assolating a plot of land means alternating crops and fertilizers, so that the same type of plant only comes back every three or four years in the same soil, because a plant placed several years in a row in the same square, even if the land is well tilled and smoked, cannot produce a good harvest if the type is exhausting. In this case, what happens is this: the first year, the harvest is perfect; the second, there will be a decrease in the product; the third, the subjects will be puny, stunted, woody, degenerate and bastardized. So it's important to alternate crops, with exhausting plants following non-exhausting ones. The crop rotation that seems to give the best results, and which we have always practiced, is the three-year rotation, with a layer in the first year. The squares in part 1 are given copious manuring: vegetables requiring good manuring are planted there; the other part is also fertilized with decomposed compost; the third part, which was copiously fertilized the previous year, receives only liquid fertilizers, liquid manure, sewage, etc. The second part is fertilized with a mixture of fertilizers and compost. Fertilization distributed in this way is not very expensive, and gives just as good results as fertilizing with large quantities of fertilizers that are poorly distributed. Proper crop rotation reduces the use of fertilizers without reducing the soil's fertility; on the contrary, it improves it. Not all plants require the same amount of fertilizer, and each kind of plant draws its own principles from the soil, so that what is not beneficial to one kind of plant is beneficial to another. Taprooted plants do not do well with recent fertilization, but if they are planted after crops that received copious fertilization the previous year (leeks), they do well and grow vigorously; despite this, mulching and topdressing must not be neglected. We will exclude from this category all poor soils recently under cultivation, as they do not yet have the fertility required to be sown, and it is only after a certain number of years of cultivation, with annual manuring and good fertilizers, that we can begin crop rotation. II. CROP INTENSITY, COUNTER-PLANTATION. - Crop intensity depends on crop rotation; it's thanks to this principle and to well-understood counter-planting that some market gardeners harvest an enormous quantity of produce from a relatively small area of land. Here are a few examples of intensive cultivation, or rather counter-planting. Let's assume a well-exposed bed. In the second half of January, you prepare the soil well, then sow white-tipped radishes, or others, and cover them carefully; you then plant lettuces, raised under a frame: you can even plant green romaine; you interplant a few early marjolin or early rose potatoes; you harvest first the radishes, then the lettuces, then the potatoes. - Towards the end of February, cauliflowers are counter-planted in the potatoes. Once the potatoes have been harvested, the cabbages are worked well and sown with radishes, chicory, spinach, sorrel, etc., harrowed with a fork. Under no circumstances should you counter-plant a plant that could harm the one you are growing. In a square of cauliflower or other summer species, sown very early on a good exposure or on a bed, and usually planted around March 20th, alternate with romaine or spring lettuces; before planting cabbages and romaine, radishes can be sown; radishes are harvested first, then romaine, then cabbages. As the cabbage harvest begins, we plough the open ground well, then sow spinach or chervil, even purslane. When the cabbage harvest is completely finished, chicory, escarole or leeks are planted in its place. You can also remove every third row of romaine or chicory from a first-season plot, plow it under and plant tomatoes. Once the romaine has been harvested, draw two rows on either side of the tomatoes, sow them with spinach or radishes, or plant summer lettuces, reserving a small path for watering. As the tomato harvest draws to a close, we spade the intervals, then plant long leeks, after sowing radishes. At the end of winter, before the leeks are fully developed, as they are always needed for blanching or for sale, we first pull up every third or fourth row and transplant bacalan cabbage. It's easy to vary crops and make the most of them, depending on the gardener's intelligence. But as good and advantageous as this process is when it is well directed, it becomes onerous if it is not well understood, as counter-planting varies greatly and undergoes numerous modifications, depending on the nature of the land and its altitudes; it is especially in light, fertile soils that counter-planting can be varied ad infinitum. We have noted some good fertile soils, notably in the Charente and Gironde regions, where cultivation is still routine. Most of these soils are in the hands of winegrowers or bad growers, who due to their lack of method, their bias to work only according to their own ideas, and their disregard for all good practices, are making a hard living where, with less routine, more intelligent and more scientifically sound cultivation, they could find relative ease. But what is certain is that, in this trade as in any other, you can't know if you haven't learned, and you only become skilled through years of persevering, sustained work, preceded by well-understood teaching. The best apprenticeship is practice under the watchful eye of capable parents or teachers. Brought up in gardens, in the midst of cultivation, you acquire a taste for it, you inherit intelligent traditions, and, broken in early to current practice, you find yourself in a position to advance it later, for market gardening is an art, a science that can only be acquired through persevering effort, intelligent study and consummate experience. III. PREJUDICE, ROUTINE. - Many farmers are unfortunately too prone to prejudice and routine, a tradition that in some regions is handed down from generation to generation, and always faithfully observed. For example, many market gardeners claim that, for certain seedlings to be successful, they must be sown on the day of or the day after a certain festival, follow the course of the moon, soak the seeds in rainwater or old wine, sow on an old moon so that the plants don't bolt, etc. All this is a mistake, an error, a mistake! Mistake, mistake, all these are prejudices, above which any sensible man must know how to rise. The lunar star has no influence whatsoever on success; what is required is that the soil be suitably prepared, then sow in good conditions, and you will always succeed. 8 The description we are about to give of each type of plant is the fruit of serious and reliable observations; almost all the varieties we mention have been cultivated, experimented and studied by us. We have adopted an alphabetical description, which is better than botanical classification by family, which can only be understood by those already familiar with the science. In addition to the origin of the plants, we describe their cultivation in the open ground, in its various forms and adapted to different climates; the early cultivation of the most common plants; how to harvest the seeds, their germination period; the diseases and animals harmful to each plant, and the means of destroying them; the uses and economic and nutritional properties of the plants. ASSINTHE Artemisia Absinthium L. Compositae. Native, perennial; multiplies from seed in spring or from splinters or clumps. Used as a seasoning and vermifuge. CULTIVATED GARLIC OR ORDINARY GARLIC (fig. 1). Allium sativum L. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Linnaeus first gave Sicily as the homeland of Allium sativum, but later gave no origin. Several authors agree in denying Linné's assertions, but none of them gives a definite homeland for garlic. De Candollo claims that garlic was found spontaneously in the Kirghi desert of Soongarie in temperate western Asia. It has been cultivated for over 2,000 years. The English call it garlic, the Germans Knoblauch, the Basques baratchouria, the Bretons quinen, the Arabs thoum, the Chinese suan, the Spanish aïo, the Italian aglio, etc. CULTIVATION. - Cultivated garlic is one of the hardiest vegetable plants. FIG. 1: Common garlic. It can be grown in all types of soil and climate, with generally satisfactory success. The soils that seem best suited to its cultivation are lightly sandy open and marsh soils. Recent manuring with fresh manure seems to be contrary to its good cultivation, and arranges the bulbs to be greased in parts, i.e. instead of forming a rounded head at the top, the upper part of the cloves spreads out, bursting the film that covers them and no longer presenting any regularity in shape. Garlic of this nature, although losing none of its qualities, is depreciated by consumers. Garlic grown for a long time in the same soil gradually diminishes in volume, producing only walnut-sized bulbs with a dozen or so cloves. From time to time, garlic needs to be planted in different types of soil, and the seed renewed. The best time to plant garlic is from October 20 to November 20; you can continue until March, but the last plantings only produce round bulbs, sometimes quite large, which are highly appreciated on the markets, but not very profitable for the gardener. To get an early crop of green garlic, called aillet, you can start planting the cloves in September, and very thickly, 8 centimeters along the row and 15 centimeters between the rows; plant deep to get plenty of white. For good garlic planting, the soil must first be well ploughed with a spade. Smoke the soil with a well-consumed fertilizer, then mark out 1.10-metre-wide planks, dividing them into five rays; make a path 40 centimetres wide, then plant, taking the clove between thumb and forefinger and pushing it 3 or 4 centimetres perpendicularly into the soil, then raking it over to finish covering it. In some regions, notably in the West, garlic is planted with a flat or forked hoe, known in the country as a pic. The cloves are placed a few centimetres above the bottom of the ray; they are pushed in slightly to hold them in place; as the second ray is formed, the first is covered, and so on. In the seventh, no pods are used to form the pathway, but York sprouts, escarole, lettuce, etc. are planted. Before planting, all the small pods are set aside and planted separately, either for household use or for green sales; they are then placed at a short distance from each other and planted a little deeper to ensure plenty of white; they can even be buttered. When the plants have reached a height of 10 or 12 centimetres, the first light hoeing is carried out; a month later, a second, slightly deeper hoeing is carried out; then, around mid-April or in the first days of May, a third hoeing is carried out, but deep enough to plant lettuces, romaine and cabbages between each row of garlic. You can also sow beans, radishes, turnips, etc., or any other plants whose roots don't go deep into the soil. When the tops begin to change color, it is customary in some parts of the south-west to tie them in knots, as this is said to make the heads grow larger. This operation, which is nothing more than an old routine, produces no effect, and in no way increases the size of the bulbs. In our western and south-western regions, this is usually done in the second half of June and the first few days of July. Choose a nice, warm day. In light soils, weeding can be carried out fairly easily by hand, by pulling on the tops; but in strong, compact soils, we use the hoe or a small hoe. The bulbs are spread out as evenly as possible in the alleys or along the edges of the squares; they are arranged in equal rows; they are left like this for a few days, then turned over in the opposite direction. After this reshuffling, one day is enough to finish ripening the bulbs, at which point they need to be brought in. This work should be done in the morning, as the cool of the night has moistened the leaves and there is less risk of breaking them. Garlic is spread out in an attic or under a shed; you can even make uneven bunches, tying them two by two and hanging them in this state. As they ripen and dry, they are cleaned, counted and woven into bunches for sale on bad weather days. VARIETIES. - There are two perfectly distinct varieties of ordinary garlic. Early pink or black garlic. - The cloves are broad, thick, slightly elongated, obtuse and well arched; the skin enveloping the flesh is pale pink, sometimes grayish; this variety is more resistant to humidity than the following one, and is suitable for marshes where it reaches large dimensions. It is the most widely planted, productive and highly appreciated variety. Late white garlic. - A very valuable variety because of its slow growth rate.

can be stored for twelve to thirteen months. The pods are elongated, pointed, slightly curved and rarely very large; the tops are more elongated and spindly than in the previous variety, and the leaves more numerous; this is an excellent species. SEEDS. - Ordinary garlic has never produced seeds in our climate. DISEASES, PESTS. - Few diseases attack garlic. Sometimes, however, due to fertilizers and the nature of the soil, some heads rot and are affected by Rhizoctonia alluï. There's nothing you can do about this disease, which is due to the development of a parasitic fungus that starts at the base of the cloves, between the skins, in the form of numerous small white filaments, which then decompose them, giving off a putrid odor. Sometimes the leaves are affected by uredo or rust, but this disease is harmless. No animal attacks garlic, apart from slugs and snails which, when very young, will devour a few plants, but rarely. USES. - In cooking, garlic is used to enhance the flavor of dishes, making it an energetic condiment. In the south of France, people eat it raw with bread, drizzling it with oil, and consume a great deal of it. In the North, on the other hand, they use it sparingly. It is preserved in vinegar, like gherkins. Crushed and mixed with oil, egg yolk, salt and pepper, it makes up the aïoli of the Marseillais and is used to mask cold meats. Daily use of raw garlic, because of its pungent, acrid flavor, can cause stomach illness. Its highly viscous juice is used as a lut to glue pieces of broken porcelain. SPANISH GARLIC, ROCAMBOLE Allium Scorodoprasum Lin. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - It is not known exactly where the plant grows spontaneously: it is found around Paris, according to Cosson and Germain; in eastern France, according to Grenier and Godron; in the Alpes-Maritimes, according to Messrs Burnat and Ledebourt. It also grows in Russia, from Finland to the Crimea. It is not spontaneous in Spain, as its name might suggest. CULTURE. - Rocambole is a perennial plant, which differs from common garlic in that its bulbs become larger and its stems rise each year, bearing at their tips a number of small bulblets in place of seeds; for propagation, the use of cloves is preferable and quicker. Cultivation of this variety is the same as that of common garlic, with the difference that it is preferable to plant in January or the first fortnight of February, either for bulbils or cloves. If you don't want to harvest bulblets, pinch off the stems as soon as they appear. SEEDS. - Purplish flowers change into bulblets, which take the place of seeds. When the stems supporting them start to yellow, it's time to collect them. They are spread out in a well-ventilated, dry place, and when they appear sufficiently ripe, they are collected in boxes; they keep for a year. DISEASES, PESTS. - This variety suffers from the same diseases as ordinary garlic; insects have little or no effect. USES. - Although less pungent than common garlic, its uses are the same. ORIENTAL GARLIC Allium Ampeloprasum L. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Oriental garlic is considered a variety of wild leek. In fact, this plant bears many similarities to the wild leek: same growth habit, fuller in all its parts, same more pronounced flavor with a slight garlic taste. This flavor is somewhat repugnant, which is probably why it is rarely cultivated. CULTIVATION. - Oriental garlic can be propagated either by sowing its seeds in January and February in good exposure: when the young plants have reached a suitable size, they are planted and treated like leeks; or by planting its cloves in autumn, in November, and treating them like common garlic. To keep the heads looking good, it's best to pull them out only every two years. SEEDS. - This variety goes to seed every year, and good seed is obtained from two-year-old plants. It keeps well for three years, but we recommend sowing current-year seed if possible. DISEASES, PESTS. - Like leeks, Oriental garlic is sometimes affected by a worm that gnaws at the heart. There is only one remedy for this: cut off the stems below the insect's ravages, and bury the cut parts far away. Rust or uredo sometimes affects it, but this disease is not dangerous. USES. - The cloves can be used like common garlic; the green tops or stems, like leeks. ALKEKENGE, COMESTIBLE PEQUER Physalis philadelphica Lamk; Physalis chenopodiifolia Lam; Physalis atriplicifolia Jacq; Physalis violacea Carr; Phy- salis edulis Sims. Solanaceae. ORIGIN. - According to M. Bois, it was reintroduced in 1873 or 1874 by M. Balarce, then Minister Plenipotentiary of the Argentine Confederation in Paris, who sent seeds to the Société d'Acclimatation under the name of petite tomate du Mexique. This plant was studied by M. Bossin, who gave it the name Physalis edulis, already applied to another species. In 1882, M. Carrière found it, without any indication of origin, in the garden of the Société d'Horticulture d'Étampes, and named it Physalis violacea. GROWING. - Sow in March, under a warm frame, in layers. The seed is lightly covered and sprouts in a few days. Once the seedlings have developed their first leaves, transplant them to a warm bed, to help them branch out and grow hair. In May, we pull them up with their rootballs and set them at 0.60 in all directions, preferably in recently ploughed and copiously smoked soil. When the plants have grown sufficiently, a stake is placed at each foot, in order to attach and support the numerous branches, which can reach a height of 1 metre or more. A heavy mulch is laid around the plants, and they are watered copiously throughout the summer, hoeing deeply and often, especially at the beginning. When the stems have reached the desired development, they are pinched off. large quantity of small, smooth, round fruits (fig. 2), greenish at first, then light yellow when ripe. These fruits, covered by the calyx, which is purplish next to the stalk, must be picked as soon4. as they come into contact with it, otherwise the calyx will burst at the top and, due to the weakness of the stalk, the fruit will become heavy when it reaches this size, detach easily and fall at the slightest shock. It is therefore important to look after them every day, so that they can be picked fresh and in good condition. SEEDS. - To harvest the seeds, select a few beautiful, ripe fruits, place them in a warm place and, when they begin to rot, take out the seeds, wash them and dry them in the shade. They keep for eight years. We know from experience that, when this plant has been cultivated in a garden, it is rare to lose the species; there are always a few fruits that fall and whose seeds rise the following year. DISEASES, PESTS. - We know of no particular diseases that attack this plant. Slugs and snails devour it when it is young. USES. - In France, the various varieties of cockerel are not much appreciated; only in the Midi region are they eaten raw. In Spain, Germany and Switzerland, however, they can be found on the best tables. Pickled in vinegar, like gherkins, they can replace them; in fact, this is the main use we had for them in the public establishment where we ran the cultivation for a few years; the patients were very fond of these fruits, and most of them preferred them to other fruits pickled in vinegar. You can also make a very good jam by choosing absolutely ripe fruit and adding sugar of equal weight, lemon, orange peel, vanilla, etc.; reduce to three-quarters. ALKEKENGE OFFICINAL, COQUERET OFFICINAL Physalis officinalis Mœnch. Native perennial plant, found spontaneously in most of France. We found it in abundance, especially in the vineyards around Cognac (Charente); in some places, the soil was covered with it. The farmers of Charente do not like this plant and destroy it without mercy; they call it coqurou. USES. - We have known several connoisseurs who cultivate the officinal cockle for the beauty of its fruits, which are cherry-red when ripe; these fruits, which are eaten in certain regions, are generally known by the names of "cerise de Juif", "cerise de Mahon", "cerise d'hiver", "mirabelle de Corse", "coccigrolle", "baguenaude", "herbe à cloque", "physalide", etc., etc... But this species is most useful as a medicinal plant. The leaves, flowers and roots are aperitive; the fruits are diuretic. In some parts of France, the fruit is used to color butter red. ANETH A nethum graveolens L. Umbelliferae. Annual plant of southern Europe. Sow outdoors in spring. Seeds are used to flavor pickles and other preserves; leaves are used like fennel. ANGELICA OFFICINALE (fig. 3). Angelica Archangelica Lin. Archangelica officinalis Hoffmann. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Native to the Alps, where it grows at low altitudes, particularly in damp locations. FIG. 3 - Angelica officinalis. CULTIVATION - A perennial, or rather a triennial in our cultivation, angelica thrives best in deep, cool soil, fertilized with good, strong fertilizers. Sow from the second half of March to July, in nurseries, in racks. Cover the seed sufficiently with loose soil or compost. Water copiously when necessary, thin out, hoe and weed. In autumn or the following spring, plant them in rows 10 cm apart in all directions. The tips of the leaves are trimmed back slightly, without damaging the roots. Water immediately after planting; a few days later, hoe deeply, as much as possible after a good rain. You can start harvesting leaves as early as the second year. In the third year, the plant goes to seed, and continues to do so every year. For this reason, it is customary to destroy plantations that have reached this age; it is claimed, with good reason, that the leaves develop much less when the plant goes to seed. A plantation of angelica can last ten years or more, and we know of some that have outlived this age, and which nevertheless, with care, produce very fine products. Angelica is grown mainly around Niort (Deux-Sèvres) and near Clermont-Ferrand, in Auvergne, as a large export crop; it is also grown extensively in Bohemia. In Auvergne, growers usually plant 15,000 plants per hectare, and harvest 11 to 12,000 kilos of fresh stems, plus the roots, which can be dried, and even the leaves, which keep well once dried. It's a very profitable product, provided you have good, deep, moist soil that can be submerged if necessary. VARIETY. - Angelica has not produced any sub-varieties as such. The following varieties form distinct races that are grown in Europe only in botanical gardens. Angelica atro-purpurea Lin. - From America, where it replaces our Angelica officinalis, especially in the United States, where it is highly esteemed. Angelica lucida Lin. - Also from America, where it is much sought-after, especially in Canada. Same properties as Angelica officinalis. SEEDS. - The plant does not go to seed until the third year. As they detach easily from their receptacle, it's a good idea to collect the umbels as they turn yellow, and lay them out on cloths in the shade to dry. They keep for one to two years. DISEASES, PESTS. - There are few diseases that attack angelica; sometimes uredo or rust claims a few victims. Snails and slugs attack plants when they are young, but they don't seem to be too fond of them. Aphids, on the other hand, are more terrible, attacking the flowering stems as they are born and leaving them only when they die, i.e. when they are completely dry. The only way to combat them is to spray them often with nicotine reduced to 3 or 4 degrees. USES. - The highly aromatic angelica seed is used by confectioners to make highly prized liqueurs. Stalks and stems preserved in sugar make highly sought-after preserves. We even make a spirituous liqueur known as angelica ratafia. Here's how it's made: fresh angelica stems and bitter almonds are macerated in brandy, mixed with sugar syrup and filtered after a few hours' rest. It is said that Lapps eat the leaves, root and seeds. The stems are used to make an excellent cream, which is prepared as follows: 250 grams of fresh stems are cut into small pieces and infused for six weeks in 3 liters of brandy with 4 grams of cinnamon, 2 cloves, 6 grams of nutmeg and 1 kilogram of sugar melted in three-quarters of a liter of water. This liqueur is excellent for the stomach, and stimulates digestion. Stems also make very good jam: cut to length, throw into almost boiling water, remove from heat and leave to infuse for an hour, then remove the epidermis, i.e. the first skin. Then boil them until they are white and tender, let them drain, and throw them into a boiling sugar syrup two or three times. Leave to cool, then boil the syrup again the next day, add the stems and leave for twelve hours, remove and dry. We obtain 1 kilogram of candied stems with 185,500 of fresh stems. These candied stems are used extensively in pastry-making, and especially in making gingerbread. As for real angelica liqueur, here's the formula: Angelica seeds... ... ... ... . 30 grams Fresh angelica stems ... ... ... . 30 - Bitter almonds, blanched and crushed ... . 50 - White sugar ... ... ... . Alcohol 600... . Water ... ... ... ... . 1kg,500 ... . 6 liters ... . 1 liter. The root, which is the most active part, is used in many pharmaceutical preparations, notably in angelica wine. ANISE Pimpinella Anisum L. Umbelliferae. Oriental annual. Sow in spring in a well-placed spot. Seeds are used as a vermifuge and as a condiment in making liqueurs, sweets, etc. ARMOISE Artemisia vulgaris L. Compositae. Native perennial. Sows in spring in nurseries. It can also be propagated by separating clumps. Leaves are sometimes used as a condiment or decoction. GARDEN ARROW Atriplex hortensis L. Chenopodea. ORIGIN. - Annual, native to northern Europe and Siberia. Cultivated for less than two thousand years, it has become naturalized in Europe and in some parts of France. It grows abundantly in gardens and fields, mainly in topsoil, rubble and embankments, where it sometimes reaches considerable growth. In France, it is known by several names, the best known being: arrode, arronse, belle-dame, bonne-dame, érode, follette, irible, prude-femme, glorieuse, rouble, armol, etc. E. BERGER, Vegetable plants. CULTURE. - Garden arroche is not difficult to grow in the right soil, and succeeds everywhere, provided fertilizer is plentiful and the soil is sufficiently loosened. It is best sown in place, from March to August, in shallow rays 30 to 40 centimetres apart; sow lightly and cover lightly; and, if sowing during the heat of summer, mulch and water abundantly. When the young plant has developed its first three or four leaves, thin out and transplant if necessary, then give the first light hoeing; this operation should be repeated often, as should weeding. As arrowroot sets seed quickly, it's a good idea to sow often, at least every twenty days, so as not to run out. This plant freezes easily, and the first frosts destroy it; green arrowroot is the most resistant. VARIETIES. - There are four main varieties of edible arrowroot: Green arrowroot (Atriplex hortensis). - Typical species with dark-green, thick, fat, rounded foliage and strong, angular stems; very vigorous plant, not widely cultivated; the blond variety is preferable. Arroche blonde (Atriplex hortensis lutea). - The best and most commonly cultivated, and generally much appreciated; it's just a variety of the previous one; yellow-green leaves, very fleshy and fat. Red arrowroot (Atriplex rubra). - Stem and leaves are a beautiful carmine red. This color disappears with cooking; however, to remove it, it is a good idea to boil it in a first water. Less prized than the blond variety. Dark red arrowroot (Atriplex ruberrima). - Stems and leaves are a beautiful bright carmine red. This variety is rarely grown in the kitchen garden. It's best thought of as an ornamental plant, producing a very attractive effect when grouped in clumps. When cultivated for seed, these varieties should be kept far apart, as cross-fertilization is rapid and colors fade. SEEDS. - First-season seedlings ripen their seeds within the year. These seeds detach from the plant with extreme ease, and the slightest wind blows them away. To avoid this inconvenience, the uprights should be collected before the seeds are fully ripe. Once dry, the seeds are detached by beating them with a small flexible stick, or better still, by passing the stems between the two hands. They keep well for five or six years. Each gram contains around 250 seeds. DISEASES. ANIMAL PESTS. - Green and sometimes blond arrowroot sometimes suffer from a disease similar to powdery mildew, which develops on rose leaves. Affected leaves are stopped in their growth, curled, curled up, twisted, and the plant becomes stunted and no longer grows. This disease seems to develop on suffering plants, but is fortunately quite rare. Affected plants should be uprooted as soon as possible, and disposed of or buried. There is perhaps no vegetable plant, especially when young, that slugs and snails are more fond of, even devouring the root. There are even soils where it is hardly possible to grow it. These animals must be destroyed by all known means. USES. - Arrowroot is used in cooking to make herb soups. It is used in the same way as spinach, and many people prefer it to spinach. It is mixed with sorrel to correct its acidity. ARTICHAUT Cynara Scolymus Lin. Compounds. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant. According to De Candolle, it comes from the Cardoon (Cynara Cardunculus) found in southern Europe, northern Africa, the Canary Islands and Madeira. Moreover, he says, the artichoke has not been found outside gardens, and as the Mediterranean region, home of all Cynaras, has been thoroughly explored, it can be asserted that it exists nowhere spontaneously. CULTIVATION. - Artichokes thrive best in deep, well-smoked, slightly damp soil, and liquid fertilizers are ideal. The latter is less common and less practical than the former, as the plants that emerge from it rarely possess the qualities of the varieties from which they came: degeneration occurs easily; however, in a sowing of a certain size, there are plants equivalent to the seed-bearing type. This means of propagation is only useful for obtaining new varieties, or for countries where eyelets cannot be transported. Sow in February and March in pots, under frames, on a warm bed; or in April or May, in the field. Small holes 20 to 30 centimetres wide are prepared, filled with half-rotted manure and packed well. Cover with good loose soil, then sow five or six seeds per hole. Water immediately to facilitate germination, and when the young plants are strong enough, thin out, leaving three in each hole, hoe FIG.74. - Artichoke. and water. Seedlings, sown in pots, are planted under the same conditions. Whether sown in the field, in pots or in nurseries, many plants begin to bear fruit in August or September; you can then make a judicious choice of the best varieties by pulling out all the inferior ones; it is only in the second year, however, that it is easier to judge the varieties you have obtained; those you keep will then be multiplied by eyeletting. 4. Carnation is usually carried out towards the end of March, April or May, depending on the climate, after the old plants have been dethatched, i.e. cleared of the clods of earth or straw that surrounded them to protect them from frost. All the smallest carnations are removed, leaving only three or four of the finest for production. The best carnations that are removed and destined for new plantings must be carefully detached from the stump. Before planting, the cut is cooled a little with a knife, and the tips of the leaves are trimmed. The carnation is planted immediately, and a certain number of plants are set aside in the nursery to replace the missing ones in July and August. An old routine practiced by many market gardeners is to replant in September the base of stems that have ceased to produce, in other words, the old cores. They are planted in situ, or better still in a nursery, to be replanted the following spring. In this way, you can obtain vigorous plants that are sure to grow again, but care must be taken when detaching the stems to retain a good portion of the stump. This is a good procedure to imitate. Whatever the propagation method, the land to be planted must be recently ploughed deeply, and smoked copiously. Plant with a chalk line or forked hoe at 90 centimetres or 1 metre in all directions, and set two or three eyelets together at 10 centimetres in the shape of a triangle. Firmly pack the soil around the roots and water throughout the summer, weeding and hoeing frequently. In a market garden, artichokes are rarely planted alone; cabbages, romaine and even white onions are intercropped. When the old plants have yielded their first crop in the second half of July, cut off the stems and remove the dry leaves. Then water copiously, or irrigate if possible. This way, you'll still have a half-harvest in autumn. After this last harvest, the stems that have produced are also removed and, in November, they are worked into a strong cone of earth around each tuft, compacted well with the back of the spade. Some authors recommend surrounding them with straw or manure, an excellent system but impractical for large quantities. This method is only practical for the north, west, east and part of central France; the south-west from Bor- deaux and the south don't need this precaution, artichokes rarely freeze in these regions, although the winter of 1890-91 destroyed some plantations. In the last few days of March or the beginning of April, if the weather looks like it's going to be fine, we start, smoke and plow with a spade to bury the manure well. We then proceed with carnationing as described above. For an artichoke plantation to produce good yields, it must be renewed every four years, or five at the most. This operation must be carried out partially, so that production is staggered. This method, so well understood, is practiced by gardeners in the north of France, but not in the south-west, where, in some regions, artichoke plantations are kept for ten, twelve or even more years. So what happens? the produce becomes increasingly inferior in volume and, as a result, depreciated and less sold on our markets. To increase fruit size, we recommend splitting the stem in four immediately below the receptacle and inserting two pieces of wood or reed crosswise. This system is used by some growers in Perpignan, who obtain enormous artichokes in this way. VARIETIES. - At least forty varieties of artichoke are known, taking their names from the localities where they are most commonly grown. Among the best are: Artichaut gros vert de Laon. - Very large, fleshy, fertile, half-aged, scales spread at the top. This is the species most commonly grown around Paris. *Artichoke from Brittany. - Very large, excessively fleshy, white, very broad scales, very vigorous and productive plant, worthy of recommendation. Artichoke from Niort. - Very vigorous, very productive, seemingly derived from the previous variety, of which it has all the characteristics, widely grown in Deux-Sèvres, Poitou and part of Anjou. Artichaut vert de Provence. - Very early, medium-sized, very tender, not very fleshy, excellent for eating with pepper. The plant is more sensitive to cold than the preceding varieties; grown extensively in the Midi and Bordeaux regions, among the vines. Long purple artichoke or gray artichoke. - A fairly vigorous plant producing elongated, loose apples with loosely packed scales. Very early, this is the variety that is grown in large quantities in the Pyrénées-Orientales region and is shipped almost year-round to Paris. Purple artichoke. - Very early, small-headed, widespread in Charentes and Spain, very productive, excellent for eating raw. Artichoke from Macau (Gironde). - In our opinion, this is just a variety of the Camus de Bretagne, highly esteemed on the Bordeaux markets. Fairly large green, very tender, with tight, wide scales. The plant is vigorous and fairly cold-resistant. In the Médoc, at Macau, it is grown mainly among the vines. Saint Laud oblong artichoke. - Very large apples. Artichoke from Brittany. - Round heads, purple at first, then taking on a coppery hue, dwarf plant, fairly large, pointed scales. Roscoff artichoke. - Sweet Genoa artichoke. - Purple artichoke from Tuscany. - Widely cultivated around Florence and in Sicily. SEEDS. - To harvest the seed, let the first fruit rise, i.e. the one in the center, which is always more beautiful and better nourished than the others that follow. It should not be picked until it is ripe and almost dry. Seeds keep for six years. USES. - By blanching the base of the petioles in the same way as cardoons, they can be eaten in the same way as cardoons, as the flavor is much the same. When the friuts have reached half their size, they can be covered with a thick canvas, straw or moss bag, to keep them in the dark. After a few days, the fruit turns a bleached white and can be used for a variety of culinary purposes, with an exquisite taste. The receptacle is eaten either cooked or raw. The dried flowers, commonly known as hay or thistle, are used to curdle milk. As the plant is rich in tannin, it is used by buttermakers, who prefer to use the flower heads. Dyers sometimes use the leaves in a decoction. The leaves dye bismuth-treated wool golden yellow. Burnt stems yield a lot of potash. ASPARAGUS Asparagus officinalis Lin. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant, native to southern Europe. Grows spontaneously in many parts of France, notably on the Rhône and Loire islands. Asparagus has been cultivated since time immemorial, and the Greeks considered it a delicacy. The Romans sought it out with a kind of passion, especially the Ravenna variety, three of which, according to Pliny, were enough to weigh a pound. It was La Quintinie, head gardener of the Versailles kitchen garden under Louis XIV, who devised a way of growing asparagus. CULTIVATION - Asparagus thrives best in sandy soils with a significant clay content, on a healthy, permeable subsoil free of stagnant moisture. Asparagus is propagated by sowing the seed from February 15 to April, either broadcast, in beds, or better still in rays, spaced Om,40 apart. The seeds are covered with Om,04 or Om,05 of loose earth or light loam, and usually emerge within fifteen to twenty days; a few weeks later, the young plants are thinned out. Hoe and weed several times a year, and water during hot spells. Young asparagus should be used for planting after a year's sowing, as it is at this age that they will suffer the least from transplanting, and will therefore be the most successful (fig. 5). Two-year-old claws are still very good. After this period, I would not recommend planting, as older asparagus claws do not recover well, and you have to come back several times to get a complete plantation. Care must be taken when pulling out the claws, so as not to damage the roots too much; to do this, use a fork or a forked hoe, but don't be afraid to open up a good trench. In many regions, growers have the bad habit of planting too deep, with the result that the produce obtained is always inferior in size and quantity. This is because this plant, like any other, thrives and succeeds best in soil that is sufficiently smoky and, above all, warmed by the sun; and it's not by digging pits 50 or 60 centimetres deep that these conditions are met. So what happens? The soil in which the claws are to grow, being new and never disturbed or amended, receives the sun's rays only indirectly or, to put it another way, never at all; the result is poor vegetation. Here's M. Vilmorin's opinion on the subject! Generally speaking, we can say that the most important point, and the one on which success mainly depends, is not to remove the asparagus claw from the influence of heat, and to place it at the same time in an environment where it can find the food it needs in abundance. The claw must therefore be planted at a shallow depth, and covered with a fairly thick layer of soil only during the bedding season, when it is absolutely necessary to obtain asparagus of sufficient length". There are no special rules for planting asparagus; it is done according to the layout of the land, either in isolated rows between the vine rows, as is often done in the Gironde region; in rows along the walls, or in squares, or in beds. As this last method is recognized as the most practical, and the most widely adopted, we will describe it below. In autumn or early winter, the land to be planted is deeply ploughed. 1 Vilmorin, Les Plantes potagères. When it's time to plant, i.e. in February and March, and not in November as we've sometimes seen, we start by marking the spot where each bed is to be planted. The 1-meter planks, intended to receive the claws, are dug 15 to 20 centimeters deep, no more; the soil is thrown back into the 1.50-meter space left free for the path. After working the bottom of the pits, spread a 5-centimeter layer of well-consumed manure or potting soil, dried river mud or any other fertilizer; tamp it down by walking on it, cover with 5 centimeters of loose soil and level it off. Then draw two lines 25 centimetres from the edges, or 50 centimetres apart, and plant the claws 90 centimetres along the line, in a chessboard pattern. It's important, when placing them, to form a small pyramid of soil under each one, to give the roots a chance to sink in and seat the claw. The young roots are compacted with the hand to make them adhere to the soil, then covered with 4 or 5 centimetres of loose soil; the top is levelled, as are the intervals of the beds used for planting romaine, cabbage, radishes, turnips, etc., but the time needed for them to develop must be calculated, so that the intervals are free at the time when the beds need to be loaded or unloaded, fertilizers distributed and so on. Other care for the claws in this first year consists of frequent weeding and hoeing. In November or December, the stems are cut to 13 or 15 centimetres above ground level, then the soil is removed to a few centimetres above the level of the claw; a small layer of manure is spread on E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 3 each bed with a small layer of fat manure or good potting soil, and leave to overwinter in this state. In March of the following year, a good ploughing is carefully carried out, so as not to damage the roots; a little fertilizer is added, and the whole is buried in the soil; a small thickness of earth is added. The plantation spends the summer in this state, receiving the same care as the first year: weeding, hoeing, mulching, if useful; during hot spells, we water any plants that appear to be suffering. However, the heat hardly tires them at all in the first year. In the third year, the same operations are carried out, and in the spring, the plants are mounded more firmly; about 25 centimetres of soil is spread over the whole bed; the surface is levelled, as well as the bottom of the gaps. You can then start to produce a good small harvest. But it's not until the fourth year that a general harvest can be made. Thereafter, the same care is taken with cultivation; each year, more ridging is done to obtain longer asparagus. As for fertilizing, once the soil has been sufficiently amended, fertilizing should only be carried out every two years; in this case, in the year when fertilizing is not carried out, watering should be done with liquid manure; this is a very good operation which activates vegetation enormously. Planting between vines, as is often done in the South-West, particularly in the Gironde region around Bazas, is done in the same way, with the only difference being that there is only one row of claws per joualle; other care is exactly the same. A well-managed asparagus plantation can last from fourteen to sixteen years, producing magnificent products. However, when we pull up old plantations, despite the best we can do, we must be careful not to plant them again; this would be a bad operation. It's when the shoots start to appear above ground that it's time to pick them. This operation must be carried out with care, so as not to damage the new shoots. A special tool in the shape of a gouge is used, which is slid as perpendicularly as possible alongside the asparagus to be cut; once it has reached a certain depth, it is cut off. Many growers claim that it's better to remove the asparagus by hand or with a wooden spatula, and to split it at the base. This is how many good growers in Argenteuil operate. FORCED CULTIVATION. - Asparagus can be forced from October to February, in the open ground or on warm beds. In the open ground, forcing can only give good results if the planting has been done with this intention. The claws should be much closer together, so that no ground is lost; 30 or 40 centimetres in all is sufficient. Two or three rows are planted per board, depending on the width of the trunks to be placed on them. You don't start forcing until the fourth year; to do this, you dig 50-centimeter-wide, 40-centimeter-deep ditches on each side of the board, which you fill with good, well-packed horse manure from the stable; as you dig, you throw some of the earth back onto the board, place the chests with their panels, and form a good stove around them, which you often have to reshuffle and add new manure each time. Planks that have been forced the first year cannot be forced the second; this would compromise the harvest and ruin the claws. The same bed should therefore only be forced every two years. Forced cultivation on a warm bed is easier, gives better results, and is quicker and less expensive. But you need to have plenty of claws at your disposal, which is easy if you sow a few rows every year. Three- to five-year-old seedlings are the best for this type of cultivation. Old clumps that you want to destroy still give a good harvest. At the same time as we have indicated, we prepare good layers 40 to 60 centimetres thick. Place the boxes on top, add a little manure on the inside, tamping it down with your feet, then cover with 5 or 7 centimetres of a good mixture, half vegetable garden soil, half potting soil. Cover with a frame, and leave in this state until the layer has burned down; one week is enough. The claws are then placed upright, leaning against each other, with the collar at the same height. The ends of roots that are too long are trimmed back a little, and the soil is slid in with a small wooden palette; then water lightly, and cover with 5 or 6 centimetres of compost or more, depending on whether you want long, white asparagus. Some growers cover with moss, wood bran, even sand, etc. Eight to twelve days after these operations, the shoots begin to appear; they are cut as they develop. Care should be taken with the layers, putting heaters on them when they cool, and covering them with mats during the day, depending on whether you want green or white asparagus. VARIETIES. - Several varieties are grown, taking their names from the localities where they are widely cultivated, but in reality there are only two main breeds: green asparagus and violet asparagus. All those known as Ulm, Besançon, Polish, Marchienne, Ghent, Vendôme, Dutch, Bazas, Argenteuil, etc. asparagus are descended from these two races; all these varieties are improved by cultivation, and certainly have a special and distinctive merit. But it's the same with this plant as with many others: one variety produces magnificent products in certain localities, and very poor ones in others; moreover, all plants from seed are subject to sometimes singular variations. The growers of Argenteuil, who have been cultivating this plant for a long time, have succeeded by successive selections in improving the purple asparagus in a remarkable way. The resulting varieties have long been recognized as the best. SEEDS. - To harvest asparagus seeds, we choose the best shoots, when fertilization has taken place and the ovaries containing the seeds are beginning to appear; we put a stake on them, so that the wind doesn't break them; then, when autumn comes, after the first frosts, we pick up the ovaries, which have taken on a beautiful minium red color; we crush them in water, the seeds precipitate to the bottom, and the skins swim to the surface; it's therefore easy to get rid of them. The seeds are then spread out on cloths or boards, and exposed to the sun for a while, or better still in a well-ventilated place, in a draught where they dry out completely. They are then packed in small canvas or paper bags. They keep well for two years, but it's always best to sow the previous year's seed. DISEASES, NUISSIBLE ANIMALS. - We know of no disease that attacks asparagus. Sometimes, however, asparagus claws rot in autumn; this is due to the plant's poor constitution or to overly damp soil. In damp autumn soils, we recommend not covering with manure at this time, to avoid this disease. Slugs and snails are very fond of young asparagus shoots, gnawing at them and sometimes digging holes in them. These animals must therefore be destroyed by all known means. Geoffroy's Crioceris rubra is the most terrible enemy of asparagus. It's a small red insect, speckled with small gray and white spots, known as the asparagus tiger. The beetle lays two eggs, one in spring and the other in June and July. After the female has been fertilized, she wanders around the stems, looking for a place to lay her eggs. Each egg emerges from the body, coated with a material that sticks to it. After a fortnight, these eggs hatch into a multitude of greenish, dirty larvae, which devour the softer parts of the asparagus. It is in the larval stage that the locust does most of its damage, mainly because of the large numbers involved. When you notice that a patch of asparagus has been invaded by this insect, you must try to destroy it. To do this, take an airtight container into which a little oil has been poured; place the container under the plant, shake the stalks lightly, and all the insects fall in; the oil prevents them from escaping, so they are crushed. White grubs are also a terrible enemy of asparagus in certain soils. Destroying it is difficult, as there is only one way to do it, and that is to crush it. All the means that have been advocated, such as lime ash, tobacco juice, sulfur or other ingredients, have never given good results. Moles do not destroy asparagus, but they do wreak havoc, digging underground galleries that often expose their claws. They can be easily destroyed by placing wooden traps in freshly dug galleries. USES. - In France, white asparagus is eaten just as it appears. In Portugal and Italy, asparagus is eaten only after it has been left to green up, i.e. when it is a dozen centimetres above the ground. Asparagus root is one of the five aperitive roots, often used as a diuretic. The root's active ingredient is asparagine. Young asparagus shoots, known as tips, provide two medicines: syrup and extract. In Provence, the stalks are used to filter wine coming out of the vat. By fermentation and distillation, asparagus berries yield a very pure alcohol that makes excellent table liqueur. AUBERGINE or MÉLONGÈNE Solanum Melongena Lin. Solanum esculentum Lun. Solanaceae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to India, known locally as Bringèle, Marignan, Mayenne, Béringène, Bréhème, Mélanzanne, Œuf végétal, Pon- deuse and in Gascon dialect as Biédaze or Viédaze, etc. CULTIVATION. - The eggplant is propagated from seed, which is sown on a bed from January to the end of March. Cover the seed with about a centimeter of light, well-sieved potting soil; water and cover with panels; you can even leave them in the dark while germination takes place, by placing straw mats over the panels. Germination usually takes eighty or ninety hours. From this point onwards, the mats are removed, the plants are shaded in case of sunburn, and air is gradually added to prevent the plant from over-extending itself. Around four weeks after sowing, the seedlings will have sufficiently developed their second leaf. They are transplanted onto a warm bed prepared in advance and filled with 10 centimetres of a good mix of potting soil and loam. Place them 4 or 5 centimetres apart. As soon as they've been transplanted, water them and keep them smothered for two or three days to help them take root. Air is then given whenever the temperature permits, and around April 20 the panels can be removed, at least in the South-West; in colder regions, it's better to wait until May, but plenty of air must be given. Eggplants do very well, preferably in warm locations. In the vegetable garden, choose the best exposed squares for planting. In a well-sheltered bed, along a wall, it succeeds perfectly, but needs copious watering in summer, otherwise only small fruits are obtained. Eggplants can only be planted in the first half of May. Before then, as the soil is not sufficiently warmed, the young plants suffer and remain without any vegetation. There are several ways to set up the plants. Some market gardeners prepare the ground in advance, sowing radishes, lettuces or other vegetables, and when it's time to plant the eggplants, they plant among the other crops. These plants are harvested before they can harm the eggplants. The best way to plant eggplants is to spade and smoke the soil, which is then divided into plots 1.10 m wide. Mark out three radii on each one, observing a path 40 to 50 centimetres wide, then plant in a chessboard pattern 40 to 45 centimetres along the line, with a hoe, keeping a good clod at each foot, or with a strong planter. Water immediately and, a few days later, spread a good mulch over all the beds. Other care consists of weeding, hoeing and, above all, copious watering during the summer; liquid fertilizers are particularly suitable for this plant. We cut back the lowest branches, leaving three or four of the best placed, which should be pinched back when they have two or three flowers each. This is the best way to prune them, as experience has shown. VARIETIES. - We know several varieties: Early dwarf purple eggplant. - Low-growing plant, rarely exceeding 30 to 35 centimetres in height, well-branched from the base; medium-sized fruit of a beautiful purple-black color, very early and of excellent quality. Very early purple eggplant. - A new variety, derived from the previous one, of which it has more or5. less the same characteristics; fruits are smaller and more plentiful; particularly suitable for early cultivation. Long purple eggplant (fig. 6). - Excellent variety FIG. 6 - Long violet eggplant. fairly early, producing beautiful, superb fruit, very productive, the most popular on the market. Round purple eggplant - Very old variety producing large, elongated fruit; late, but very productive. Péhin black eggplant. - Round, dark purple, almost black, as well as part of the stem; semi-early, very productive and of good quality. Eggplant monstrueuse de New-York. - Improved variety of the old round one, producing enormous fruit; late and of mediocre quality. There are several other varieties of eggplant, but these should be considered more as collector's items than as varieties to be cultivated for profit. Among the best are Eggplant panachée de la Guadeloupe. - Esteemed by Creoles; White Aubergine (Solanum ovigerum), or egg plant. - More of an ornamental plant, it is said to be very unhealthy. Yellow eggplant; green eggplant, etc. SEEDS. - Sometimes, when the year is rainy in autumn, eggplant has difficulty ripening its fruit. So, when you want to harvest the seed, choose the best fruit early and let it ripen until the first frost. Then pick it, and when it starts to rot, take out the seed, wash it and dry it in the shade. It keeps well for four years. According to Vilmorin, one gram contains around 250 seeds. pests, harmful animals. - Sometimes, a few plants wither and desiccate almost suddenly: this is blanc or meunier, a cryptogamic disease, well known to market gardeners, which attacks the roots and destroys the plant; no effective remedy has been found. Sometimes, uredo attacks the leaves and fruit and, without destroying the plantation, does great harm to the plant by stopping its development. Well-dosed Bordeaux mixture is an excellent remedy. Slugs and snails are very fond of young fruit, which they partly devour by forming bizarre arabesques on the skin, which they seem to prefer to the flesh. They must be hunted down regularly to destroy them. USES. - Eggplant is a laxative and not very nourishing food. It should only be used when the fruit is perfectly ripe, otherwise it may cause discomfort through its pungency, due to the large amount of solanine it contains. In southern countries, eggplants are cooked on the grill over a low heat, after being cut into slices. They are then gradually soaked in oil or fresh butter, with a little salt and pepper, garlic and a few fine herbs. It can also be baked in the oven between two courses, making it an excellent dish. In our part of the world, it's eaten pan-fried like porcini mushrooms, with the same aftertaste, as a stew, in a white sauce, and so on. A few hours before cooking, we recommend sprinkling it with salt and pepper to draw out its water. It can also be dried: cut into thin slices, remove the skin and the spongy part. Throw it into boiling water for a few minutes, then remove it and lay it out on racks or linen. Dry in the sun or in an oven, and when the pieces are completely dry, store them in a healthy place. To use, fry in lukewarm water. Young fruit can be pickled in vinegar, like gherkins. AURONE Artemisia Abrotanum L. Compositae. Perennial, frutescent. Reproduces from seeds sown in April-May or from cuttings, which grow well in spring; for this, care must be taken to bring in old plants in autumn; the plant is not resistant to northern winters. Used like wormwood. BASELLE Basella. Chenopodea. ORIGIN. - East Indies. In America, where it is widely cultivated, it is known as Brèdes d'Angole. In France, it is known by several names: Epinard du Malabar, Epinard d'Amérique, Epinard de Chine, Epinard des Indes. CULTIVATION. - Baselle is not widely cultivated; this is a mistake, as it is easy to grow and can be very useful in summer, when the spinach it so advantageously replaces so easily goes to seed. In its native country, baselle is a biennial; but in our region, it's as an annual that it should be treated; perhaps in the Midi, on the shores of the Mediterranean, it could be considered as in its country of origin, i.e. biennial. Very easy to grow, Baselle thrives in any good, warm, well-smoked soil. Sow in a bed in March and transplant in May, always choosing the best exposure. It can also be sown after May 15 in rows 40 cm apart. Watering should be copious and regular. As the stems of this plant are somewhat voluble, for best production, they should be twigged with branches that are well branched at the base. For seedlings planted in rows, if they are too thick, thin them out to leave a space of at least Om, 10 between each plant. VARIETIES. - There are several varieties, almost all edible; the best are : Red Baselle and White Baselle, the most popular. Very broad-leaved Chinese Baselle (Basella cordifolia Lamk.), not widely cultivated. SEEDS. - Placed in a well-exposed spot, Baselle produces an abundance of good seeds. As they ripen only successively, they should be picked as they appear to be good; as soon as they are picked, they should be laid out in the sun for a few hours, then dried and ripened in the shade. They keep well for five years; 30 grams contain 1010 seeds; a liter weighs 460 grams. pests and animals. - Snails and slugs are very fond of young leaves; when seedlings start to emerge, sprinkle them with soot, ashes or powdered lime to prevent them from being eaten. Flea beetles sometimes attack baselle, especially in dry years. USES. - The leaves, which are thick and fleshy, are used in the same way as spinach; they have a finer, less bland taste, and are even said to be easily digestible and healthier than spinach leaves. In India, the fruits of the red baselle are used to dye Indian cloth, as in Senegal, but this dye is not very strong. BASILIC Ocimum Basilicum Labiatae. ORIGIN. - India, in dry, arid places. CULTIVATION. - Basil is not an essential plant, but it should have a place in the vegetable garden. Sow in February or March on warm or hot beds, or in April or May, in the open ground. You can also sow in well-drained pots or crates, which can be moved at will; emergence generally takes place in a short time, from forty to sixty hours, depending on the warmth of the bed or atmosphere. When the young plants have two leaves, they are transplanted onto another layer, watered and covered with panels to facilitate recovery. Once this has taken place, air is gradually added, and after a few days, the panels are removed. In May, we plant them in the open ground in a good warm exposure, in beds or, better still, in borders at Om,15 or Om,20 in all directions. During hot spells, water sufficiently and, to keep stems fresh and tender, cut them often, especially to prevent them from flowering. VARIETIES. - There are several varieties of basil; the best for the vegetable garden are : Lettuce-leaf basil. - Very good plant, with broad, thick leaves; very fragrant. Basilie grand violet. - A highly recommendable variety; dark purple leaves and stem, less broad than the previous one; very fragrant. Basilie grand vert. - Typical species, with dark green leaves and stems; fragrant, very hardy. In the second category, we'd like to mention: Basilie frisé. - Aniseed basil. - Fine purple basil. - Stocky varieties, forming tight, compact clumps, suitable for pot cultivation. In the south-west, gardeners grow few others. Basil tree (Ocimum Basilicum). - A plant with a very pleasant fragrance, growing to a height of 50 or 60 centimeters, a very good variety for growing in pots. SEEDS. - A few plants are left to grow, and when the ears are ripe and turning from green to red, they are cut and spread out on a cloth which is exposed to the sun for a few hours. The ripe seeds detach easily and fall onto the cloth. They are collected and dried in the shade; 30 grams contain at least 24,000 seeds; a liter weighs 530 grams; germination lasts eight years. DISEASES, PESTS. - We know of no disease as such that attacks basil. Snails and slugs are very fond of it, especially when the plants are newborn. To prevent them from being eaten, sprinkle with soot, ash, quicklime or sulfur. USES. - Basil is used as a condiment and to flavor sauces, all kinds of dishes and especially peas. It is also used to smoke hams and perfume hot baths. In medicine, it is used in infusions like tea. It is also used in vulnerary alcohol. BETTERAVE Beta vulgaris Lin. Beta rapa Moq.-Tan. Chenopodea. ORIGIN. - Biennial plant believed to be derived from chard or pear. (See Poirée.) Moquin-Tandon has divided this genus into three main varieties: 1° Beta maritima, the type species, which grows in the Canary Islands, on the Mediterranean and Ocean shores; 2° Beta cycla, the cultivated chard pear. 3° Beta rapa, the fleshy-rooted beet varieties. CULTIVATION. - Strong, free soils, well fertilized with good consumable fertilizers, are particularly suitable for growing this plant; adding a notable proportion of faecal matter or liquid manure to these fertilizers will produce magnificent vegetation. Beet is sown from March to May, in rows, nurseries or in the field. Nursery sowing is generally the most common in gardens. The narrow end of the hoe is used to trace small rays, 5 to 6 centimetres deep, 40 centimetres apart, 4 per bed. After sowing, the rake is passed over the whole area to cover the seeds. If the soil is too strong, cover with sifted earth or potting soil to encourage emergence. For in-place sowing, draw rays at the same depth, but 60 centimetres apart. The seed is covered with the rake, and when the seedlings have four or five leaves, they are thinned out, hoeed and even watered if possible during hot spells. Some growers use ploughs or hoes to make large furrows and sow or transplant beet on top. This method, which is generally used in agriculture, seems to give good results; we have seen some remarkable crops grown in this way. The best way to grow beets in gardens is to sow them in nurseries and then transplant them in place, in beds of four rows, 40 centimetres apart; a 60-centimetre pathway is left. On the line, we plant at 30 or 35 centimetres, depending on the variety. For transplanting, take advantage of a dark, rainy day and water each plant immediately after planting. When removing nursery-raised plants for transplanting elsewhere, give them a good wetting beforehand, so that they pull well. Before planting, trim the tips of the leaves and the pivot, if it is too long, and plant with a planter, taking care to pack the soil well around each plant. About a month after planting, give the first hoeing, which should be repeated two or three times during the course of vegetation. Water a lot if you want to obtain good yields. As soon as the beets start to grow, gardeners who grow for sale will start taking them to market, just as the amateur will start eating them. To make the best use of the land, sow radishes or lettuce among the beets. Beet to be kept over winter should be harvested in the second half of October. Choose dry weather and put them under cover in a cellar or other place where frost cannot penetrate. In regions where beet is grown for cattle, most growers don't have the space to house them indoors, so they choose a good, sheltered spot outside. They drive a good stake into the ground, then place the beets around it in a pyramid shape, the higher the pile, the wider the base. Once set up, the whole is covered with straw, heather, hay, etc., which is held in place by slats or straw braids attached to the top of the stake, and at the base to small stakes driven into the ground. Beets keep very well in this state until spring. VARIETIES. - Red beet, round. - Early, small, with rounded, half-flattened root, very dark, very good flesh. Red, black, flat Egyptian beet. - Very early, round root, irregularly flattened, entirely out of the ground, medium size, excellent quality. We have grown it extensively for a long time, and have always been satisfied with it. Bassano flat red beet. - A little rounder than the previous one, and more regular in all its parts, very dark and good flesh, medium earliness, fairly large. Dark red Whythe beet. - Elongated, medium size, very good quality, very sweet flesh; keeps very well. Red toad beet. - Very old variety, easy to distinguish from other species by its rough, thick, toad-like skin; very good, sweet, tender, keeps well, excellent baked. Dwarf red beet from Del. - New variety, round, pointed, fairly sweet, small, not very productive. Beet jaune de Castelnaudary. - Very old long variety, small, very sweet, excellent, but of average yield; highly esteemed in the South-West where it is widely grown. Long red or large red beet. - Late bloomer, the most voluminous of the varieties, with red flesh, but of mediocre quality, very well suited to large-scale cultivation. Eclipse" beet. - New variety with very sweet dark-red flesh, early but small. Reine des Noires" beet. - New variety, ovoid shape, dark red, sweet flesh, excellent quality; dark red foliage, very ornamental, medium size. Covent-Garden red beet. - Smooth root, slightly elongated, dark red, sweet flesh, very dark foliage, medium size. Strasbourg piriform beet. - Red salad beet from Treviso. - Early red beet from Dewcing. - These are new varieties. The last is very early, but small. We also grow a few yellow-fleshed varieties, but they don't have the same flavor as the red-fleshed varieties, so are superior in every way. In any case, yellow beets are not very popular. Big long yellow beet (fig. 7). - Very sweet, but tough, becoming quite large. Round yellow beet. - Very sweet, better than the previous one, more tender, more productive. SEEDS. - To harvest beet seed, in autumn, we pull up the most beautiful plants that characterize the species, store them separately in sand, and in spring, when frosts are no longer a threat, we plant them at a short distance from each other; we water immediately to settle the soil around them. When the uprights start to grow a little taller, they should be supported by stakes, or horizontally-laid laths, to which each stem should be attached. Care should be taken during vegetation to remove any shoots that develop late. In July and August, when the stems start to turn yellow, cut them back as the seeds ripen. Ripe seeds can even be collected from the stalk without cutting it off. Dry in the shade, attic or shed. They keep well for four or five years. Each gram contains 50 capsules or seeds, some of which have several embryos. The seed harvested in the North is superior to that harvested in a climate where the temperature is irregular and too high. DISEASES, PESTS. - Only slugs and snails destroy beet as it begins to grow; they can be preserved by sprinkling with ash or quicklime. USES FIG. 7 - Long beet. USES. - Beet is very healthy and refreshing. It is eaten in salads, after being boiled or baked. The leaf can be used in the same way as the Poirée. With sweet wine, it makes good jams. The young shoots that the roots throw into the cellar in winter are eaten as salad. BOURRACHE Borrago officinalis Lin. Borraginaceae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to Mediterranean regions, more medicinal than vegetable; borage should nevertheless have a place in the vegetable garden. CULTIVATION. - It is not very difficult to grow in the right soil, and succeeds everywhere. Its hardiness is even legendary, as it is sometimes found growing vigorously on walls. Sow in August-September or February-March. Autumn sowings are preferable, in that the plants, already strong in spring, acquire greater vigor and flower more. When the young seedlings have two or three leaves, transplant them at a distance of 40 cm, as you would a lettuce or chicory. Water immediately after planting, and weed and hoe when necessary. For this plant, choose the worst spots in the garden. However, if planted in good, well-smoked soil with sufficient exposure, it will produce better results. VARIETY. - There are three varieties of this breed: the first, with blue flowers, is the most common; the second, with pink flowers, and the third, with white flowers. SEEDS. - The seeds, which are very fine, fall as soon as they are ripe; so, to collect them, we must seize the moment when the ovaries appear ripe. They are picked and spread out on a cloth to dry out the seed. It is rare, once borage has been cultivated in a field, for it not to reseed itself in the second year. We once saw a borage bed that had been turned into a temporary walkway after the soil had been turned over. Three years later, the land was put back into cultivation, the whole area was spaded, and an innumerable number of borage plants sprouted shortly afterwards. The seeds keep well for eight years. USES. - Borage flowers, mixed with nasturtium flowers, are used to garnish salads. The chopped leaves, seasoned with vinegar, are eaten as an appetizer. In England and Italy, the flowers and leaves are cooked or fried. The flowers give a green color suitable for painting. BUNIAS D'ORIENT Bunias orientalis Lin. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant, native to western Asia (Russia) and naturalized in northern France. CULTIVATION. - This little-known plant is grown like wild chicory. It resembles wild horseradish and belongs to the same family. It needs good, deep, well-smoked, humus-rich soil, which will produce well-branched stems over a metre high. Once the soil has been ploughed, sow the seed in the autumn or, better still, in spring, either in rows or in rows, covering the seed lightly. Thin out if the seed is too thick, then weed, hoe and water during the hottest periods. It's a good idea to renew plantings every four years, if you want to have good vegetation. Young plants that have been thinned out can be transplanted, but you need to choose dark, rainy weather, as they suffer from transplanting during hot spells. Transplanted plants become much more beautiful than those left in place. SEEDS. - After a year's care, bunias go to seed the following spring. When the uprights start to turn yellow, pick them up and lay them out on cloths in a shady, well-ventilated spot. Seeds keep well for three years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Snails and slugs devour them when the plants are still young. The most damaging insect is the flea beetle, the terrible enemy of crucifers, which perforates the leaves with a host of tiny holes, stopping the sap flow. USES. - In field crops, it is used as green fodder. In vegetable growing, however, the young, tender shoots are eaten in white sauce, or boiled in water and eaten in vinegar; these young shoots, blanched like a capuchin beard, are delicious. CAPRIER Capparis spincsa L., Capparis sativa Pers. Capparidae. ORIGIN. - A thorny shrub from southern France, growing in Provence and throughout the orange-growing region. GROWING. - In northern France, caper cultivation becomes difficult and unprofitable, as the shrub freezes easily and needs to be carefully covered to survive the winter. Capers thrive best in dry places, on rubble, demolitions and old walls. If you have a retaining wall, or an embankment to the south, plant it in it, with the roots in the wall or embankment. The stems are brought out through a hole dug for the purpose. Every year, at the onset of winter, cut off the stems and fill the hole with straw or litter, moss, etc., to prevent frost from penetrating to the roots. It can also be grown in back-to-back greenhouses, tarpaulins, frames, and in pots or crates buried in summer at the foot of a well-exposed wall, where the pots or crates are sunk in tannin; in winter, they are moved into a greenhouse or orangery. Capers can be propagated by seed, marcottes or cuttings. For our variety, layering is preferable in that it produces a fast-growing plant. Propagation by seed is slower, as seedlings do not always clearly characterize the type, and many only flower after a few years. The thornless variety, Capparis inermis, propagates readily from seed. Sow in March on a warm bed, in pots or cups filled with a mixture of light, sandy loam: at least two years of greenhouse cultivation are needed before it can be grown as described above. SPECIES, VARIETIES. - The genus Capparis comprises several species; the main ones are : Egyptian caper (Capparis Ægyptia Lamk.). - A species highly esteemed by the Egyptians, who use it as a seasoning. The flower buds, preserved in vinegar, have the same properties as those of Capparis spinosa; they are antiscorbutic and stimulating. E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 6 and the young shoots. Mount Sinai Caper (Capparis Sinaica). - The flower buds of this variety are very large. They are candied in vinegar; same property. Câprier des Antilles (Capparis Breynia Lin ), long-fruited caper or devil's bean. - This variety is little cultivated in Europe. Capparis ferruginea Lin, Capparis amygdalina Lamk, Capparis octandra Jacq, bois caca, partly because of the color of its wood. - West Indian variety. We still grow: 1° Capparis mithridatica Forsk, from Egypt; 2° Capparis Dahi Forsk, from Egypt; 3° Capparis ovata, M. v. B. from Barbary. SEEDS. - Caper seeds do not ripen in northern France, unless the plants are kept in greenhouses. But in Provence, where the plant is widely cultivated for industry, they are easy to obtain. They keep well for three years. DISEASES AND PESTS. - We know of no disease or insect that attacks this plant. USES. - What is commercially available under the name of capers are flower buds picked before they bloom; they are all the more appreciated for their smaller size, and are used as a stimulating appetizer. The aqueous or alcoholic infusion of the stems serves as an excellent chemical reagent, for discovering acids and alkalis. With acids, it gives a fiery red color; with alkalis, it gives a very beautiful green color. Tropœolum majus L. Tropéolées. ORIGIN. - From Peru, where it was brought in 1684. Perennial in its native country and in our greenhouses, but annual in our outdoor cultivations. GROWING. - Nasturtium thrives in good, cool, well-fertilized soil; during hot spells, it needs copious watering to develop vigorously. It can be propagated from seed, sown in pots on beds in March, or from cuttings smothered in cloches, taken in August and overwintered. You can also sow in place, in April or May. As this plant is an obvious climber, to ensure sufficient growth, it is best to place it near a trellis, where it can be twined up with numerous branches, so that the tendrils can cling to it. Watering should be copious and regular throughout the summer, as the more water it receives, the better it will grow. VARIETIES. - Several dwarf varieties, some with dark flowers, are derived from the tall nasturtium; same cultivation and same uses. SEEDS. - A few of the most vigorous plants should be staked, so that the first flowers to appear are preserved, as it is these flowers that give the best seeds. They should be collected as they ripen, otherwise they fall off easily. Then dry them in the shade. They keep well for five years; one gram contains 7 or 8. DISEASES, PESTS. - In some iron-deficient soils, nasturtiums become chlorotic and grow poorly; in this case, simply add a little good layered compost mixed with silica sand to each plant, and they will soon regain their normal vigor. Slugs and snails are very fond of them when the plants are young; to keep them away, simply sprinkle them with the ingredients indicated above. USES. - The flower buds before they bloom, and the still-green seeds, can be prepared in vinegar for the same uses as capers. Place in vinegar, salt, pepper and bay leaves; boil, skim and throw in the well-cleaned seeds; remove three or four minutes later, drain and cool, and seal in jars with new vinegar; in this way, they keep for a long time and are very good. The flowers are used to decorate salads and roasts. The plant's juice dyes wool a solid yellow, but the color is not pleasant. LITTLE CAPUCIN Tropœolum minus. Tro péolées. ORIGIN. - Peru; also known as India cress. CULTIVATION. - Same as above. VARIETIES. - This variety should not be confused with the other dwarf species derived from Tropœolum majus. It forms a separate race which has produced its own varieties; it is frankly dwarf. SEEDS. - Same care as above. Many seeds fall to the ground before they are ripe; despite this, they are very good and should be collected. DISEASES, PESTS. - Same as nasturtium grande. USES. - Same as above. Tropœolum tuberosum. Tropoeolae. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant, native to South America; little cultivated and therefore little known. CULTIVATION. - Tubers, which are the size of a hen's egg, are planted in April in the open ground, in as loose, light, well-exposed soil as possible, 40 to 60 centimetres apart in all directions, in rows, in a chessboard pattern. Several deep hoeings are given during vegetation, until the numerous stems have completely invaded the soil. Once the first frosts have destroyed these stems, in November, we can start digging. Tubers, as long as they are buried in the ground, are not affected by frosts, so you can only pull them as and when you need to. USES. - M. Vilmorin says: "Cooked in water like carrots and potatoes, tuberous nasturtium roots are watery and have a rather unpleasant, albeit fragrant, taste. In Bolivia, where the plant is widely cultivated, the tubers are frozen after cooking. In this state, they are considered a delicacy and highly sought-after. Elsewhere, they are exposed to the open air in canvas bags and eaten half-dried. So it's hardly surprising that fresh tubers don't seem very good to us, since even in the country of origin, they are only eaten prepared. For our part, we have tried this tuber, cooking it in 6. several ways; we have never found it to be excellent. CARDON Cynara Cardunculus Lin. Cynara sylvestris Lamk. Composites. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant, native to southern Europe. De Candolle says that cardoon is indigenous to Madeira, the Canaries, the mountains of Morocco near Moga- dor, the south and east of the Iberian peninsula, the south of France, Italy and Greece, and the islands of the Mediterranean Sea as far as Cyprus. A few years ago, it was moved to Montevideo, where it has multiplied to such an extent that it occupies immense plains and invades the Uruguay and Plata countryside, as well as part of the Buenos Aires region, to the point of hindering communications. It is also becoming a nuisance in Chile. CULTIVATION. - Cardoon can be propagated from seed, sown from April 15 to June, in warm beds under a frame, or in the open air in May. You could sow earlier on warm beds, but most of the plants will bolt, making them unsuitable for cultivation. Sow in pots or nurseries. If you have sown in a nursery under a frame, you can plant them when the third leaf begins to develop in pits prepared as described below. For in-place sowing, each pit is planted with three plants arranged in a triangle. Water immediately after planting. Potted seedlings are planted in the same way, leaving only three of the best plants. For seedlings planted in situ, dig 40-centimetre-square pits, 1.20 m apart. These are filled with good, well-decomposed manure, which is well trodden down. This manure is then covered with a few centimetres of loose soil, then four or six seeds are sown per hole, and pressed in with the finger. Sprinkle lightly with the apple, and all that's left to do is monitor emergence. When the plants are strong enough, we thin them out, leaving only three feet per hole. After this, lightly hoe and water. Experience has shown that it is preferable to raise young plants in nurseries, and then transplant them into the field; success is just as good, and sometimes better; but care must be taken when planting to cut the pivot at each plant. As these plants don't invade the entire space reserved for them within a few months, lettuces are counter-planted, and radishes, spinach, pumice, etc. are seeded. During the summer, the plants are hoeed several times and watered copiously, especially during the first hot spells. In October, we start to bleach them, and successively throughout the winter. First, select the strongest plants, tie the leaves together without compressing them too much, then surround them with straw and tie them in place. About twenty days after this operation, the cardoons are sufficiently white (fig. 8), and can be eaten; left longer, they would rot. Cardoons are sensitive to hard frosts; as winter approaches, they should be surrounded by earth, new manure or fern, which should be stirred from time to time to prevent rotting. In this way, they keep perfectly well. They can also be uprooted and placed in a gauge along a well-exposed wall; they are covered every evening with mulch- FIG. 8. Bleached cardoon. sounds, but care must be taken to clean them often, otherwise they will rot quickly. Alternatively, after trimming the tips of the leaves, place them upright in chests, a short distance apart; dry sand is slipped into the gaps. In this way, they whiten in a short time, with the advantage that they do not rot. The sand could be replaced by dry leaf, in which case they would blanch more quickly. VARIETIES. - Several varieties are grown: Cardons de Tours. - This is the most esteemed variety, with thick, full ribs that blanch well without deteriorating too much; but it has many thorns. In spite of this, it is cultivated and much appreciated. Spanish cardoon. - A very vigorous variety, with broad, half-full, thornless ribs, widely grown in southern France and Spain. Cardon plein inerme. - Another very vigorous variety, and despite its name, the ribs are less full than those of the preceding varieties; very ample in all its parts, whitens well and quickly. Cardon Puvis. - Another very vigorous variety with no spines, very broad, half-full ribs, ample leaves, good quality. Red-ribbed cardoon. - Not very old and widely cultivated variety, differs from Spanish cardoon only in its red-tinted, half-full ribs. SEEDS. - Cardoon only goes to seed in the second year after sowing; if it goes to seed before then, it has been sown too early, and the seeds it produces are worthless. To harvest good seed, you need to select a few of the best plants as seedbeds. It can last fifteen years or more; on the contrary, the older it is, the better the seeds will be. These seedbeds should be treated in the same way as artichokes, i.e. they should be deadheaded each winter, and eyeballed in spring; only one fruit should be left on each stem, the middle one. In August, when they are ripe, they are cut, gathered in bundles, hung in a dry place away from rodents, and, during the winter evenings, the seed is cleaned, which keeps well for seven years. One gram contains 25 to 30 grams; the weight per liter is 630 grams. DISEASES, PESTS. - Cardoon is subject to the same diseases as artichokes (see p. 69). USES. - The blanched ribs are eaten after boiling in water to remove their bitterness; they are then prepared with a white sauce, or with roasts of any kind, which is always a delicious dish. The flower, generally known as Cardonnette or Chardonnette, is frequently used in the countryside to curdle milk, and is said to be an excellent substitute for rennet. Cardoon is appetizing and nourishing, but also very warming. The Romans ate the receptacle that bears the flowers, and the Italians also eat it under the name of Girello. Modern farmers cultivate cardoon for the fleshy part of the leaves. (De Candolle.) CARROT Daucus Carota Lin. Daucus vulgaris Neck. Caucalis Carota Roth. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Native biennial plant also found in temperate western Asia, cultivated for over two thousand years. The typical species is found throughout France, particularly in Poitou, Périgord and Angoumois, in uncultivated fields, in high, dry meadows and along rural roadsides. The carrot is second only to the potato as a cultivated vegetable. Its continual use in cooking means that considerable quantities are consumed. EARLY CROPS. - Although carrots can be grown in all types of soil, they prefer light, moist, soft, healthy soil, and above all, soil that has been sufficiently improved with good fertilizers. Carrots are sown in warm layers from December to February, in layers about 40 to 50 centimetres thick, built up with new manure and leaves. Fill them with 12 to 15 centimetres of a good mixture of potting soil and well-sieved vegetable garden soil. When the layer has set fire to, pack the potting soil well, then sow the seed, covering it with a centimetre or so of the same mixture. Water immediately, and put up the panels. Leave in this state, without letting in air, until emergence, which takes place in eight or ten days. From then on, you need to make sure you give the plants some air when the sun comes out, to prevent the young plants from withering away. Stoves are maintained to keep the heat more or less even. We thin out the plants as the need arises; however, we can leave them a little thick, because as soon as the carrots are big enough to be eaten, we start to remove them, always thinning out. In January, during the hottest hours of the day, we give them plenty of air when they start to get strong. In light, sandy soils, you can sow in the open ground in October or November among radishes, and cover with litter or straw mats, to produce new carrots in the early spring, which sell very well. But it's hardly possible to do this in strong, compact soils saturated with moisture. When you have a large number of frames and boxes at your disposal, you can place them on the beds, and then care for them like other seedlings. You can also sow on layers prepared as described above, at a good exposure, along a wall; but in the open air, without boxes or frames, these layers must be well bordered, sufficiently packed and covered with wind-breaking mats or litter. Produce grown in this way can be harvested early and well before that grown in the ground. This process and the previous one are what can be called hasty cultivation. FULL-GROUND CULTIVATION. - Carrots can be sown in the ground from February to September, all year round in the warm, light soils of the Midi and part of the South-West. But the best time to sow, which offers almost certain success, is spring, from March 20 to May 15. April is the month when growers generally sow carrots. Summer sowing is generally very successful from July 15 to September; in strong soils, sowing at this time often gives better results than spring sowing. For success to be good, the soil must at all times be suitably prepared and fertilized with good, well-consumed fertilizers, as fresh fertilizers, because of the ammonia and nitrogen principles they release, force vegetation too much and cause the produce to fork, i.e. instead of having beautiful, well-shaped, round and conical carrots, most divide into several roots of equal size, produce of this nature is little esteemed. There are several ways to sow carrots, either in rows or in beds. The latter is the best and most common method adopted by gardeners. When the soil is ready, lay out beds 1.20 to 1.30 meters wide. Proceed as described in the article on training (p. 14). Sow in fine weather. The soil is taken from the paths, thrown to the right and left, then raked to level and break up the clods, which are brought back to the paths. Mulch if necessary. The subsoil is sufficiently moist for capillary action to bring moisture to the surface. In certain soils where the soil is difficult to divide, we would do a poor job if we operated in this way; we simply pass the fork back and forth and across (we harrow, in other words), which partly covers the seeds, we pass the rake to bring the stones to the sides, to form a rim, and divide the paths. We've been doing this for a long time, and it's always worked out well for us. For sowing in rows, we draw four rays per 1.20 m bed, 4 or 5 centimetres deep; we cover the seed lightly with the rake, taking care to make the loosest soil fall into it; if the soil is too strong, we cover with soil or potting mix passed through the rake. In general, spring seedlings can do without mulch; but the same cannot be said of summer seedlings, which must be mulched without exception, unless you are working in damp soil, or better still in land where you will be watering often in the morning and evening. At this time of year, water evaporates so quickly that it is of no benefit to the plants if you don't water them thoroughly. Carrots need to develop quickly, so they need constant humidity, especially when young. Seeds usually germinate in twelve or eighteen days, depending on the time of sowing and the warmth of the soil. When they are 7 to 10 centimetres high, they are thinned out and weeded, a task that requires great care and attention. It's generally left to the women, who do it very well. If the soil is dry, the seedling is wetted a few hours before the operation, so that the weeding can be done easily; after the weeding, the seedling is watered again to facilitate the raising of the plants that have been shaken by the operation. As a general rule, carrots should not be thick if they are to produce good results. Three months after sowing, you can start harvesting, especially if you have sown early varieties. E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. Although carrots do not fear the cold, they can be damaged by frost, so they need to be covered. In November, cut off the tops and fill each bed with 10 centimetres of soil taken from the paths, levelling the surface. You can also cover with heather mats and leaves. Soil is preferable, however, in that you don't have to worry about it afterwards. We pull them out as and when we need them for the household or for sale. In the latter case, when they are destined for the market, as the tops are lacking, they are replaced by a heather stem, so that they can be tied and bundled. VARIETIES. - For early seedlings, early varieties are preferred: Early short carrot from Holland. - Introduced to our crops in 1800, it is one of the best varieties to grow. Very short carrot with frame (fig. 9). - Variety of the preceding one, very early, but yields little, suitable only for early crops. Half-length carrot, Nantaise or heartless. - A very good variety, becoming very large and of excellent quality. Carotte demi-longue d'Eysines, known in Bordeaux as the carrot à jus. - An excellent variety, derived from the old demi-longue, improved by the market gardeners of Eysines near Bordeaux. Becomes very large. Carotte demi-longue du Luc. - Very good variety, fairly early, productive and good storage life. Carotte demi-longue pointue. - An old variety, grown almost everywhere, very good for marshland cultivation; becomes very large. Half-long, obtuse carrot. - Very good, productive variety, excellent for large-scale cultivation, becoming enormous. FIG. 9: Red carrot FIG. 10: Very short, half-long red carrot from Chantenay. Carrot demi-longue de Carentan. - A very good variety with small, few leaves, rather small than large, almost cylindrical in shape, good for early cultivation, heartless. Carotte demi-courte obtuse de Guérande. - Very good species for cultivation in rich soils, becomes very large, very good quality. Chantenay half-long carrot (fig. 10). - New variety, very productive, good quality, wider collar than the Nantaise, from which it probably originates. Danvers half-long carrot. - Very good variety, productive and fairly early, new. Carotte courte à forcer parisienne. - New, very small variety, suitable for forced cultivation, very early, very good quality. James intermediate half-long carrot. - A new variety with a pointed shape, very good and productive. Long-rooted varieties are less cultivated than half-lengths; a few, however, are just as good for large-scale cultivation; but, in general, they are a little later, and less appreciated on the markets Carotte rouge longue de Saint-Valéry. - Very good variety, pointed shape, excellent flesh, fine, smooth, very red skin, intermediate between half-long and long carrots, excessively productive. Pale red Flanders carrot. - A variety highly esteemed and cultivated in the Nord region, around Lille, Roubaix, etc.; not very long, it becomes enormous and consequently produces a lot, the root is bright orange in color, pointed in shape; very good for large-scale cultivation. Long red Altringham carrot. - English variety, very good quality red flesh, can reach 40 to 50 cm in length. Long red carrot - Old and good variety, very productive and of good quality, it is one of the best long varieties to grow for the kitchen garden. Brunswick long red carrot. - Sub-variety of the previous one, highly esteemed in Germany, keeps very well and is of good quality. Heartless long red carrot. - Variety with very red flesh, obtuse at the lower end, sweet, excellent, fine taste. Long red carrot with green collar. - Very hardy variety, becomes very large, pale orange in color, excellent and very nutritious, suitable for large-scale cultivation. On

We also grow yellow- and white-fleshed varieties, but only in large-scale cultivation. They are good for animals, but not popular. Among the best are: Long yellow carrot. - Short yellow carrot. - White carrot with green collar. - White carrot with green collar from Orthe. - Vosges white carrot. - Carotte blanche de Breteuil. This variety is becoming huge. SEEDS. - To harvest carrot seed, most growers select the best plants in autumn and transplant them separately. In June-July, the umbels begin to ripen. The most advanced are picked first, and so on as they mature. Grain merchants don't operate this way: they leave the carrots in place, and remove only the degenerate or bastardized subjects. Seeds harvested in this way are just as good as those harvested in the previous way, but they also yield many more seeds. They keep well for four years; 30 grams contain 24,300 seeds, and a liter weighs 360 grams. DISEASES, PESTS. - Few diseases attack carrots; only uredo, in rainy years, partially destroys the leaves. On the other hand, loaches, slugs and snails are very fond of them. When the plants are young, they devour them. They must therefore be destroyed by any means necessary. USES. - Carrots are a good, healthy food; they are used in stews, casseroles, sauces, fried, etc. All doctors recommend them. All doctors recommend it. The old seeds are used to make liqueurs. Applied to animal feed, the carrot is one of the most useful plants; it is eagerly sought after by all kinds of livestock, and is particularly suitable for horses. Sliced and mixed with chopped straw, it makes an excellent feed for sheep. Carrots are also an excellent feed for cows, but they should be given sparingly and mixed with other substances: eaten alone and in excessive quantities, they would be rather harmful. Carrots contain 9 to 10% of a sugar that has been reported to crystallize. It also contains phosphates, alkaline salts and a volatile oil that gives it its exciting properties and odor. In northern France and Belgium, carrots are used to make a syrup known as poiré. The flower is the basis of the liqueur known as Venus oil. Root juice is also used to artificially color butter. The flowers dye paper dark red; the dirty red decoction dyes wool, silk, cotton and linen lilac after boiling for a few minutes; blue red with the addition of sulfuric acid, and blue gray with alum. CELERY Apium graveolens Lin. Sium Apium Roth. Seseli graveolens Led. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Native biennial plant. The typical species is found in many parts of France, notably Boulogne, growing in damp places. Wild celery has an extensive habitat. It can be found from Sweden to Algeria, Egypt and Abyssinia, and in Asia from the Caucasus to Baluchistan and the mountains of English India. It has been cultivated for over two thousand years (De Candolle). The typical species is known by several synonyms: ache, ache d'eau, ache des marais, épraux, etc. CULTIVATION. - Cultivated celery thrives best in cool, well-amended soils with good, energetic fertilizers; marshy soils are generally very good for growing this plant. The first celery plants are sown on warm beds in January and February. When the young plants are strong enough to withstand transplanting, they are transplanted to another bed or even to another earthen bed with a good southern exposure. These plants, especially those raised under panels, are good for setting out towards the end of May. Three months later, you can start harvesting them. In April or the first fortnight of May, depending on the region, seedlings are sown in the ground, but care must always be taken to choose a good, well-exposed spot. Once the soil has been well ploughed, the necessary beds are laid out, carefully raked to ensure a perfectly flat surface, sown and lightly covered with compost, then spread a little long manure evenly over the entire sown area. This manure is used to soften the impact of watering on the seeds, and to protect the young plants from excessive heat. Most of the time, these kinds of open-ground seedlings don't do well, either because the soil is stony or compact, or because slugs and snails devour them. It's much better to sow in thick layers, and when the plants are strong enough, transplant them into the open ground in a nursery. Shade them for a few days, until they are ready to take root; these young plants, if well cared for, soon develop rapidly, and in this way, you always have beautiful, well-fed plants to put in place. It's towards the end of May and in the course of June that we put them into final position. There are several ways of doing this, depending on the region: in some countries, plants are planted flat, while in others they are planted in pits. Pit planting is the most widely adopted. When the soil is well ploughed with a spade, pits are dug 45 centimetres deep if two rows are to be planted, or 30 centimetres deep if only one row is to be planted, 25 to 30 centimetres deep and 1.30 to 1.50 centimetres apart. The bottom of the pits is worked a little, then 10 centimetres of well-consumed manure is spread in the bottom, which is compacted by trampling on it several times. This manure is covered with 12 centimetres of soil taken from the edges and raked down; the bottom is levelled, then one or two lines are drawn and the celery is planted with a planter, after cutting off the tips of the leaves and trimming the roots. In between, plant rows of lettuces, radishes and spinach. For flat cultivation, which in some soils gives just as good results as pit cultivation, there are two ways to proceed: The first is to spade the soil, spread the necessary manure over it, then cultivate with a flat or forked hoe. Then plant one or two rows of celery and four rows of romaine or chicory, etc. The second method consists in digging up the soil and burying the manure, then drawing the necessary lines and transplanting with a planter. This method is quicker and gives just as good results as the first. Whether you do it one way or the other, remember that celery needs a lot of water to grow quickly, as well as good fertilizers. Hoe and mulch during hot weather. STUFFING. - Butting is an operation designed to whiten the base of the petioles, making them tender and edible. For this operation to be successful, butting must be done at least three times. The first ridging should be light, followed by a second one about three weeks later, and a third and final one a few days later. The soil must be well levelled out between each plant, so that there are no gaps, and care must be taken to ensure that not too much soil gets into the eye: to avoid this, celery plants are tied up, or held by a worker. Ridging should only be carried out when the plants are well dried out and the weather is dry. In some localities, market gardeners plant celery in beds like chicory, and bed them with annealed manure, leaf or litter; others pull up the stalks and place them in a trench side by side, and bed them with soil; still others place them in sand. Any method works, as long as you succeed. Celery is not particularly sensitive to frost, but high humidity is detrimental. VARIETY. - The best varieties of full-grown celery are: 7. Large celery. - Very vigorous plant, keeps well, very full ribs, good quality. Céteri gros violet de Tours. - Very vigorous variety, full ribs, good quality, excessively productive. Céteri plein blanc court à grosses côtes. - Very good variety, very wide full ribs, upright foliage, less ample in all its parts than the previous one, very pro- ductive, due to the width of its ribs. Full white celery. - A good, vigorous, full-ribbed variety, reaching 40 to 50 cm in height. Early short white celery. - Early variety, good for early cultivation. Céleri plein blanc frisé. - As above, good for early crops, but not very productive. Céleri plein blanc chemin or golden celery. - Excellent variety, highly recommended, the ribs are very full and of a golden yellow that makes them always appear blanched, and, because of this, this celery can do without ridging, provided the top and bottom are attached. We particularly recommend its cultivation. Céteri Pascal, full white (fig. 11). - New variety, semi-short, with wide, fleshy, tender ribs, good winter storage life. Light yellow ribs, very good, good storage life. SEEDS. - There are two ways of harvesting celery seed: the first is to plant the plants separately, with the same care as for ordinary cultivation, during the summer, but without ridging. Care must be taken to remove any plants that are not typical of the species. You can also, at the time of uprooting, select the most beautiful plants and transplant them immediately, at 30 or 40 centimetres; if you are too afraid of frost, you can cover them with straw mats or leaves; in spring, you can smoke them well, or water them with liquid manure. Towards the end of July, in August or September, depending on the region, the umbels ripen successively. They are picked as they ripen, FIG. 11 - Céleri Pascal, full white. and dried by laying them out on cloths in the shade; to detach them from their receptacle, they are struck with a small stick, or rubbed between the hands. They keep well for eight years. One gram contains 2,500 seeds. MAlaDiEs, NUISiBlE ANIMALS. - Celery is often attacked by uredo or rust. So, in the Charentes region of France, celeriac growers call it "brumé". The best way to destroy this disease, which only attacks the leaves, is to treat celery with Bordeaux mixture, two or three times, in the same proportions as for vines. This procedure has given us good results. Centipedes and white grubs are very fond of celery, and in areas where these animals thrive, it is not uncommon to find several plants completely lost, and fortunately the damage is only noticed once it has been done. To keep them at bay, we recommend placing a handful of crushed oyster shells at the foot of each celery plant. USES. - Celery plays an important role in the culinary arts, and is used in stews, casseroles, pâtés and other dishes. It is eaten cooked under meat, or on its own, fried or with white sauce. In many places, it is eaten raw as a salad, but in this state it is very indigestible. The root and leaves contain significant quantities of mannite. The offshoots and residues are eaten by cattle. CELERI-RAVE Apium Rapa L. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - A biennial plant in our cultivations, derived from full celery, improved by cultivation which has developed the root instead of the leaves. Celery root is nowhere found spontaneously. CULTIVATION. - Celery root is sown in March or April in beds in the open air, or better still, covered with panels. When the young plants are strong enough, transplant them to the nursery in the same way as for full-grown celery. In light, well-fertilized soils, seedlings can be sown in well-exposed beds; taking care not to sow too thickly, transplanting can be avoided. However, this operation should not be neglected whenever possible, as it promotes the plant's development. In June, set them out in good, well-ploughed soil, thoroughly fertilized with good, widely-used fertilizers. They are laid out in beds 1.25 m wide, divided into five rows at equal distances. Leave a path 40 to 50 cm wide between each bed, and plant 30 cm into the row, preferably in a checkerboard pattern; water immediately after planting, and continue throughout the summer. FIO. 12 - Celeriac. Before planting, the root tips and leaf tops are lightly trimmed, hoeing is carried out several times during the summer, and the lower leaves, which are yellowing and spreading on the ground, are often removed. Towards the end of August, each plant is lightly dethatched, even removing the few roots that may be in the way, and left in this state; about a month later, the soil is put back in place, with more soil added; this operation, which is practiced in Alsace, is designed to encourage root development, as it is mainly in August and September that roots form. Harvesting can begin in October and continue until March. In southern regions, they survive the winter without suffering, but in departments with harsh winters, it's a good idea to butter them up, cover them with straw mats and even tuck them in and bury them in sand. VEGETABLES. - Erfurth celeriac. - Very old variety, widely cultivated, early, the root is fleshy, becomes very large, and is of good quality. Céleri-rave gros lisse de Paris. - A very good variety to grow, probably derived from the ordinary celeriac, with very large roots, the largest of its kind, good quality. Ordinary celeriac. - A very old variety, quite productive, but no longer cultivated today in favor of earlier varieties. Small-leaf celeriac. - Very early variety, derived from the Erfurth celeriac, few roots, small rootstock. Giant Prague celeriac. - Very good new variety, with very large, clean root, short foliage and relatively few roots. Céleri-rave de Paris amélioré. - A new, improved variety, producing enormous turnips. Celeriac with variegated leaves. - New yellow variegated breed, round, fairly regular celeriac (curious variety to grow). SEEDS. - To harvest celeriac seed, proceed in much the same way as for full celery. Seeds keep well for five or six years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Same diseases as full-grown celery, although it seems to us that uredo rages less vigorously on this breed. Insects are the same. USES. - Celery root can be served with white sauce or fat; it also goes well with roasts, and is sometimes used in stews to replace parsnips. CERFEUIL Scandix Cerefolium Lin. Anthriscus Cerefolium Hoff. Cerefolium sativum Haller. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, long considered spontaneous in France. De Candolle says: "... In western and southern Europe, it appears to be adventive, more or less naturalized; but in southeastern Russia and temperate western Asia, it appears to be spontaneous. Greek authors did not mention it; the first ancient mention is in Columella and Pliny, who call it Cerefolium. The species had probably been introduced into the Greco-Roman world since Theophrastus. CULTIVATION. - Chervil is very hardy, adapting well to any soil; when well smoked, it succeeds in certain shady exposures, where it would be impossible to grow anything else. Sow in shallow rows 25 cm apart, from February to October. Seedlings sown from February to July go to seed immediately and produce few leaves; to avoid running out, sow every two weeks. During hot spells, water copiously and choose a shady spot. Seedlings sown from August to October don't come up until April the following year, after having produced abundantly over winter and part of spring. At this time, they can be sown among spinach, carrots, salsify, cabbage, lamb's lettuce and so on. Weed them as and when needed, before they harm other plants. VARIETIES. - Common chervil. - Most commonly grown for markets, with deeply cut, serrated leaves, winged in two or three rows, borne on a long stalk; semi-cylindrical, canaliculated on top and covered with very fine hairs. Curly chervil or double chervil with curly leaflets. - A variety that reproduces fairly well from seed; a few plants always revert to the type species, but a selection of rootstocks produces good results. This is an elegant variety, preferable to common chervil for decorating dishes; it has the same flavor and fragrance: cultivation is the same, but it seems a little less hardy. SEEDS. - Spring sowings grow quickly, but the seed is not very good; it is better to harvest it from autumn sowings, which provide a greater quantity; ripening takes place in June and July. The stems should be picked before the seeds are fully ripe; they dry out in the shade. These seeds keep well for two years. DISEASES, PESTS. - In silica-deficient soils, chervil does not grow well, if not well smoked, and takes on a yellow, stunted hue, which leads us to believe that this plant likes soils where iron is found in large quantities. It is rarely attacked by uredo. In most areas, young seedlings, especially those sown in spring, fall prey to slugs and snails, which are very greedy: the damage is greater in wet weather. This can be remedied by throwing soot or powdered quicklime on them early in the morning, or even better, by sprinkling them with milk of lime. White grubs and mites sometimes eat away at the roots, destroying part of the plant. USES. - Chervil is used as a seasoning in stews and sauces, and as a salad garnish; it is also used to dress cold meats. Doctors have often observed poisoning caused by hemlock, a wild plant that resembles the common chervil in every way, but is much taller, less green and has a fetid odor when crumpled, which distinguishes it from chervil. To avoid these mistakes, M. Vilmorin recommends growing curly chervil, which cannot be confused with chervil. TUBEROUS CHERFEUIL Chœrophyllum bulbosum L. Umbelliferae ORIGIN. - A biennial plant, originating in the same regions as common chervil; it is a very old species that is still little cultivated. This is a mistake, as it is only through cultivation that we will succeed in improving it, and if today the products are not very profitable, they could be very profitable. CULTIVATION. - After stratifying the seed in fine sand kept fresh since November, sow very thickly in February and March, covering sparingly. Choose a good sunny exposure, which is absolutely essential for this plant to ripen its bulbs. You can sow in autumn, but as germination only occurs in spring, it's best to stratify. Some time after seed emergence, and when the young seedlings are sufficiently developed, we give a first light hoeing, which must be repeated often, to keep the plants in a perfect state of cleanliness; we water copiously during hot spells. It's time to harvest the tubers when the foliage begins to yellow and dry out. Pull them out and put them under cover in a healthy place. They are best eaten fresh. SEEDS. - Tubers intended for seed production should be planted in March, 10 cm apart in all directions. When the stems begin to rise, they are staked to prevent them from being uprooted by the wind. Harvesting of the umbels begins in July; the seeds that ripen first are the best, and keep well for a year. DISEASES, PESTS. - This variety is subject to the same diseases as common chervil, and is eaten by the same insects. USES. - The flavor of this tuber is very similar to that of chestnuts. It is prepared like potatoes, and used in sauces like salsify; the flesh is very starchy and sweet, with a very pronounced, pleasant aromatic taste. It's a very delicate food, much sought-after in Asia. After soaking for a few hours in water, this tuber is very refreshing and aids digestion. Myrrhis odorata Scop. Chærophyllum aromaticum L. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Native perennial; grows in mountainous regions of southern Europe, mainly in the Alps, forming clumps 80 to 90 centimeters high; very hardy. CULTIVATION. - This plant is not very difficult to grow in the right soil, and succeeds just about anywhere. The seed is sown as soon as it matures in a nursery, or stratified in fresh sand, like tuberous chervil, for sowing in March. Sow very thickly, as this plant needs to be transplanted to succeed. Once the young plants have developed their first five or six leaves, transplant them into place, spacing them 50 to 60 centimetres apart, weeding and hoeing several times; they can be kept this way for several years. SEEDS. - In the second year of planting, the plants go to seed. We select the most beautiful stems and remove all the others. These umbels ripen in July. As the seed does not retain its germinative capacity for even one year, it should be sown as soon as it matures. DISEASES, PESTS. - Few diseases attack this plant, and, because of its rather strong odor, snails are not very fond of it. USES. - Its foliage is used like common chervil. In Spain, where it is generally grown, it is preferred. In France, it is little known and little cultivated. The plant turns yellow. COMESTIBLE MUSHROOM Agaricus campestris Lin. Agaricus alutarius Pers. Amanita edulis Lamk. ORIGIN. - Absolutely unknown. CULTIVATION. - In recent years, the mushroom has been widely cultivated. Not so long ago, the mushroom was grown only in and around Paris. The catacombs of Paris are particularly well-suited to this type of cultivation; in France, there are other quarries where success is just as certain: Chancelade, near Périgueux, Langoiran, in the Gironde, Mouthiers, Saint-Même, Bompart, Giget, near Angoulême, in the Charente. The latter have not yet been used for mushroom cultivation. It's astonishing that no industrialist or market-gardener has tried. For our part, we have no doubts about success. Although the mushroom is best cultivated in quarries where the temperature is more or less regular, it can nevertheless be grown successfully in cellars, caves, caverns or any dark place, and can also be grown in the shade outdoors from March to October. Wherever you choose to establish a mushroom bed, the key to success is to choose good horse or mule manure, well impregnated with urine, from strong, vigorous, well-fed animals that work hard and receive little bedding. Luxury horses, or those fed on green fodder or bran, produce poor manure, unsuitable for this crop. When leaving the stable, place the manure in a heap 70 to 80 centimetres wide and 50 centimetres high, close to where you intend to place the millstones; when heaping the manure, divide it well and discard any large straw. Tamp it down and water lightly, preferably on the inside, to prevent it from heating up. Eight or ten days after this second operation, the manure should be ready for grinding, brown in color, soft to the touch and creamy. The millstones are given a width of 60 to 70 centimeters, and a height of about the same at the top. They are then mounted in the shape of a humpback or slope, decreasing steadily until the desired height is reached. Once set up, the sides are combed with the spread-tine rake or fork, and the sides and top are beaten with the back of the shovel or the beater. If you're working in the open air, cover with a layer of litter or straw to prevent the surface from drying out too quickly; indoors, this precaution is unnecessary. Grindstones can be mounted in a variety of ways, either on square or half-square planks that can be leaned against each other and moved at will, or in tubs, half-barrels, wooden crates, etc., all of which make little difference to production. However, the two-slope grindstone generally gives the best results. You can see that the millstones have acquired the necessary degree of heat, i.e. 18 to 20 degrees centigrade, by inserting an ordinary thermometer, or even a stake thermometer. Most growers of this type use round pieces of wood, which they push into the millstone: a few hours later, they remove them and, taking them by the handful, check the heat; it takes a great deal of skill to get it right. Then the grindstones are larded, i.e. the white is introduced into them and divided into pebbles the width and thickness of the hand. With the right hand, the patties are introduced into the grinding wheel, while the manure is lifted with the left. The lardons are laid out in rows, 20 centimetres apart. The first row is placed 15 to 20 centimetres from the ground. Once the lardons are in place, the manure is put back in as before, pressing lightly with the hand. After seven or eight days, you come back to check on the operation. If the operation has been successful, you can tell by the small white filaments that are beginning to invade the manure; if any are missing, replace them, then cover the wheel with a small layer of about 3 centimetres of potting soil or kitchen garden soil, mixed in equal parts with demolition soil containing platras. The mixture is spread over all parts of the grinding stone, then tapped with the back of a hollow shovel to hold it in place; a fine apple is used to water very lightly and cover with bedding, if the grinding stone is placed outside, to prevent heavy rains from disturbing the soil; care is taken to ensure that the surface does not dry out. Fifteen or twenty days after the operation, depending on the temperature, the mushrooms begin to appear; as they are picked, the hole left by the mushroom must be filled in; a little earth is poured in. Every two days at least, you have to come and pick them. If you know how to maintain it, it can last for two or three months. Part of this maintenance consists in watering it from time to time with liquid manure, with plenty of water and a little saltpetre or guano added. If this solution can be heated to 25 or 30 degrees, success will be better, but in this case you need to water sparingly and little at a time. There are several other ways to grow. Although we haven't tried them, we feel we should reproduce them here. Dr. Labordette's method consists in replacing manure with lime sulfate or plaster stone, which is well compacted and to which is added a sufficient quantity of potassium nitrate; mushrooms weighing 600 grams obtained by this method are quoted. The ancients cultivated the mushroom, but by certain procedures that seem dubious and bizarre to us. A fig tree stump covered with manure was often sprinkled with a mixture of wine and water, or a black poplar stump, or the soil was frequently sprinkled with water in which laurel berries had been boiled. The Chinese, in order to obtain several species that are good to eat, place pieces of rotten bark and wood from poplar, elm, chestnut, mulberry and other species in good soil and in a suitable exposure; after a few weeks spent in this state, the mushrooms appear. Coffee grounds, when rotted and placed in a damp place under suitable conditions, give rise to an agaric that is highly prized in Naples. In Italy, blocks of a stone called Pietra fungaja are sold. It consists of hardened earth, mixed with black ramifications, and has been recognized as the mycelium of a species of boletus, Boletus tuberaster, which is much sought-after in Naples and other countries. These stones, placed in a cellar and watered, produce a harvest of mushrooms overnight. These blocks sell at a high price and are exported as far north as France, but they degenerate and, in most of France, a greenhouse would be indispensable for this type of cultivation. Here's another method: You need: 1° a wheelbarrow of cow dung without straw; 2° a jar of mushroom spawn, saltpetre or nitre; 3° a wooden box without a lid, one metre long and 50 centimetres wide. The dung is left to dry in the shade for two weeks, then piled into the box in a heap less wide and less long than the box, leaving about 15 centimetres all around. The dung is spread in layers by hand, mixed with good fine earth and sprinkled with a little water in which the saltpetre has been sprayed. The finished wheel will be about 10 or 12 centimeters high, and will contain all the saltpetre; it should be firmly packed. The white is then spread out, without breaking it up too much, and covered with dung, followed by 3 centimetres of earth. Tamp it all down, place it in the dark in a cellar, under a staircase, anywhere, cover it with a straw liner and you're done. Six weeks later, the layer is covered with mushrooms, which continue to grow for about a year, after which it's demolished and a new one is made with the white that has invaded the dung. When the layer is too dry, water lightly, but excess moisture is very bad. USES. - Every year, several families perish as victims of carelessness or good faith. Age, temperament, the degree of development of the mushrooms, the environment in which they have grown (the method of preparation, the length of time they have been eaten, the quantity ingested, etc.), all influence their properties. Cases have been reported of people experiencing symptoms of poisoning after eating small quantities of mushrooms that others had eaten in abundance without experiencing anything. In most cases, fear caused all the harm. Some species, eaten even in considerable quantities, cause only discomfort, heaviness and swelling; others produce weakness, stupor and temporary delirium; but unfortunately, too many are subtle poisons. Nausea, vomiting, collapse, stupor, convulsions and death are the symptoms of mushroom poisoning. As soon as these symptoms appear, a doctor should be called, but until he or she arrives, a vomiting agent or, better still, a vomit-purgative should be administered as a matter of urgency; if the appropriate help has not been given in time, or if the accidents only manifest themselves a few hours after ingestion, a purgative should be used, for example a potion made with castor oil and nerprum or peach blossom syrup, enemas made with cassia, senna and magnesia sulphate, or failing that, a strong decoction of tobacco. Vinegar, ether or salt water should be avoided, as they would spread the poison throughout the economy! 1 See Gautier, Les Champignons considérés dans leurs rapports avec la médecine, l'hygiène publique et privée, l'agriculture et l'industrie, 1884, 1 vol. gr. in-8 with color plates. E. BERGER, Vegetable plants. Mushrooms can be prepared in a number of ways: the best and most widespread is Bordeaux-style, at least for ceps. After the mushrooms have been washed and cleaned in various waters, they are drained and wiped dry with a white cloth, browned on the grill to dry out their water, then plunged into a frying pan full of boiling olive oil, butter or fat (oil is preferable). Then add the necessary condiments: garlic, pepper, salt, parsley, etc. This is a highly sought-after dish, and all mushrooms can be prepared in this way. Mushrooms are preserved by laying them out for a few hours in an oven, or in the sun to dry. Dried, these mushrooms are used to flavour sauces, salmis and stews; they can also be preserved in salted water, in vinegar for flavouring, or in olive oil. Cultivated mushrooms are widely used as food in London, Vienna, St. Petersburg and especially Paris. CHENIL Pulses. ORIGIN. - Indigenous and annual, it grows in uncultivated fields, old abandoned artificial meadows and, preferably, in stony, arid soils. CULTIVATION. - Cultivation is extremely simple. Sow in place from the end of March to May, preferably in a border, in a sunny spot. Weed and hoe several times during the summer, and water slightly during hot spells. VARIETIES. - Four different types: Large caterpillar (Scor piurus vermiculata L.). - Small caterpillar (Scorpiurus muricata L.). - Striped caterpillar (Scorpiurus sulcata L.). - Hairy caterpillar (Scorpiurus subvillosa L.). USES. - The fruits, which resemble certain caterpillars, are put in salads to provide surprises for people who don't know them. CHERVIS or GIROLLES Sium Sisarum Lin. Umbelliferes. ORIGIN. - A perennial plant native to Upper Asia, De Candolle says it grows spontaneously in Altaic Siberia and Northern Persia. It is doubtful, he says, that it was discovered in China or the Himalayas, and it is also doubtful that the ancient Greeks or Romans knew this plant. Littré derives chervis from the Spanish chirivia, but it is more likely that the latter derives from the French. One of its varieties has been cultivated in China since time immemorial, under the name Ninzy. It enjoys a great reputation there, and is said to revive the vital forces. Introduced to our shores around 1548, chervis soon spread to gardens and fields. Its roots were served as a delicacy. Linnaeus reports that in his day, chervis was grown in most gardens; later, it was dethroned by the potato, and since 1869, it has been rehabilitated. CULTIVATION. - Chervis is propagated by sowing seeds in March and April, or in August, September and October, either in the field or in a nursery. When the seedlings are strong enough, they can be planted in well-tilled, cool soil, with copious watering and frequent hoeing throughout the summer. You can also propagate chervis by splitting off the stem and keeping part of the crown, treating them like plants from seed. The resulting plants are less attractive than those grown from seed. The roots are not affected by frost. They should therefore be pulled out only as needed. SEEDS. - Chervis goes to seed in the first year, but the seed is worthless, and is only good in the second year. It is ripe in August-September. Cut the stems, or simply the umbels, lay them in the sun for two days, beat them and winnow them. They keep well for three years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Slugs and snails are quite fond of young chervis plants. Keep a close eye on them and destroy them. USES. - The root is eaten in the same way as salsify, fried or cooked in hot water; it can also be used to make very good purées. It is said to be very healthy. The flesh is white, firm yet tender, sweet, very floury, but sometimes a little fibrous. The flavor is mild, very sweet, fragrant, with a hint of celery. According to Mr. Sacc, it is the richest in nutrients of all food roots, and is so easy to digest that it was once recommended as one of the most powerful analeptics. It can provide starch, sugar and alcohol. The leaves are highly prized by cattle. CURLED CHICORICE or ENDIVE Cichorium endivia crispa L. Compositae. ORIGIN. - Annual and biennial. This spontaneous plant grows throughout the region centered on the Mediterranean, from Madeira, Morocco and Algeria to Palestine, the Caucasus and Turkestan. It is especially common on the Mediterranean islands and in Greece. On the western side, in Spain and Madeira for example, it is likely to have become naturalized through cultivation, as it grows in fields and along roadsides. There is no positive evidence in ancient texts of the use of this plant by the Greeks and Romans, but it is probable that they used it as they did several other chicories. The vulgar names give no indication, as they may have been applied to both species of Cichorium. They are not very varied, and lead us to presume a culture that has emerged from the Greco-Roman environment; one Hindu name is cited, Kasni and Tamul Koschi, but no Sanskrit name, which indicates a late extension of the culture to the East (De Candolle). EARLY CROPS. - The first curly chico. rees are sown from mid-December to March, on warm beds. The seed should emerge in twenty-four or thirty-six hours at most, so that the plant grows more slowly. If the seed germinates slowly, the chicory will rise immediately before developing. Once emerged, if sunburn occurs, give the panels some air to prevent the young plants from withering. When they have seven or eight leaves, transplant them permanently onto another 40-centimeter-thick layer, previously filled with 12 to 15 centimeters of a mixture of half potting soil, half sifted 3. garden soil. Plant at 15 to 20 centimetres in all directions, lightly water each plant and cover with a frame. Once the chicories have recovered, which takes two days, you can start to give them a little air, weather permitting, because in addition to the loss of growth caused by lack of air, chicories grown under frames are subject to a fungal disease, Peronospora gan- gliformis, whose development is favored by the concentration of air. Chicory can also be grown under cloches. Once a bed has been established, it is edged and loaded with the same mixture as described above. Place the cloches in position and plant five chicory plants under each one. Cover with straw mats in cold weather and keep warm. Radishes can be sown in the spaces left between each bell. OUTDOOR CULTIVATION. - Curly endive can be grown in any soil, but does best in slightly damp, well-fertilized soils. In dry soils, it requires a lot of watering. Sow outdoors from April to July. For the first sowings, choose a good exposure, and for summer sowings, a half-shaded exposure, if possible. Once the plants have developed, and are strong rather than weak, trim off half the leaves and the root tips, mainly the pivot, and place them in ploughed, smoked soil. If you use a hoe, the distance to be observed between each plant is 25 centimetres in all directions; cover the plants up to about half their total length, and water. Each bed usually consists of five or ten rays. In many parts of France, chicory is transplanted in 1.20-meter beds, divided into five or six rows. They are then planted with a planter, at 20 or 25 centimeters depending on the variety. For us, here's the way we've always done it: after the soil has been well ploughed and fertilized, we mark out with our feet the divisions of the beds, which should be 1.25 m wide; we sow radishes or lettuce to be cut, we harrow this sowing well, then we mark out six lines and plant the chicory. Radishes or lettuce are best harvested and removed before harming the chicory; after complete removal of these plants, a good hoeing is given, repeated at intervals of a few days, and copious watering is given if the soil is dry. Some authors recommend mulching the beds before planting; this is an excellent method that gives very good results and should not be neglected, especially in dry soils. However, no matter how practical, this method can only be applied to small areas of land: if large-scale growers were to mulch, the operation would become costly; we recommend keeping the soil surface constantly moist and sufficiently loosened. When chicories have reached the right stage of development, they are blanched. There are several ways of blanching chicory: gardeners in Bordeaux tie them with straw or rushes several times, always starting at the base; a few days later, the top is tied; chicory tied in this way whitens better than if it were tied all at once. In the Charente region, as in many other places, chicory is tied in a single operation; once all the leaves have been brought back vertically, a tie is passed over them and attached a few centimetres above about half the length of the leaves. This procedure is more expeditious than the previous one, in the sense that you don't have to come back to it. Other growers bleach them in the ground; they open a slanting trench, in the direction of the chessboard planting, bring all the lettuce leaves in, as if to bind them, and lay them in the trench more or less horizontally; they uproot a little, but never entirely; they are held in this state with the left hand, and the tool, held with the right hand, brings the earth over them: The soil from the second trench fills in the first, and so on; by this means, they blanch very well in eight or ten days, and are very tender. You can pull them out entirely and place them elsewhere in a trench, but they rot more easily. They can also be covered with mats, leaves, litter, etc., just as they can be uprooted and, after being thoroughly cleaned, placed side by side in the sand in a cellar or storeroom. Whichever method is chosen, the lettuces must be well wiped dry, otherwise the concen- tration of moisture in the heart will lead to fermentation and rotting of the outer leaves. Chicory can also be preserved well into winter, either by covering it during the frosts with heather, fern, straw, etc., which is removed during the day and put back in place in the evening, or with windbreaks, straw mats, wooden panels, or chests, so as to cover a few planks; this method of preservation only applies to northern regions where the temperature drops very low. In the Midi, this precaution becomes unnecessary, as plants do not freeze. VARIETIES. - Summer or Italian fine chicory. - Early variety, medium size, very old, leaves in tight rosettes, cut in the upper half. Suitable for first-season and early-season seedlings, it doesn't keep well in the late season and rots quickly. It is preferred over fine summer chicory (race d'Anjou), with tighter, more finely cut leaves and a larger, more rounded rosette. Chicorée frisée de Rouen (fig. 13). - An excellent variety, forming large, very full rosettes that blanch easily almost by themselves, provided they are planted close to FIO. 13 - Curly chicory from Rouen is grown in large quantities around Paris, as well as in the North and South of France; in Bordeaux, it is much appreciated at markets. Well suited to late crops, it is highly recommended. Chicorée frisée béglaise. - Excellent variety, derived from Rouen curly chicory and improved by market gardeners in Bègles, near Bordeaux; very full rosette, reaching 35 to 40 centimeters, whitens very well, not very sensitive to frost, highly recommendable in all respects. Chicorée de Louviers. - Another variety apparently derived from the fine Rouen chicory; very full, tight, rounded rosette, not very large, whitens well and keeps well into the late season. Chicorée mousse. - Variety forming a small rosette, leaves finely cut, curled, frizzy, tight, crisp, narrow white ribs; produces little, and must be planted fairly close together; particularly suitable for cultivation under panels or cloches. Chicorée frisée de Ruffec. - A variety highly esteemed in the West, with very ample rosettes, thick, tender, fleshy ribs, and a full heart that whitens well and in a short time; perfectly suited to summer and fall cultivation; we know of no other variety that is more resistant to cold, says M. Vilmorin; highly recommendable. Chicorée frisée de Meaux. - Very hardy variety, voluminous, 50 to 60 centimeters in diameter, very large ribs, tinted pink in their lower parts, long, erect leaves, loosely packed heart; gives a considerable yield, suitable for institutions for the insane or hospitals, does well in autumn. Picpus curly chicory. - Another very good variety for outdoor cultivation, somewhat similar in appearance to Chicorée de Meaux, from which it probably originated; tight rosette, very full heart, very curly, finely shredded leaves; does very well in dry soils. Chicorée frisée impériale. - White variety, wide rosettes, tall and full, finely-cut, evenly-curled leaves, upright, broad ribs; almost self-blanching, good for summer; in autumn, it is the first to suffer from uredo. Curly chicory always white. - Low yield, sparsely packed rosette, narrow ribs, well-cut, lacy, pink-washed leaves, pale yellow in color, giving it an etiolated appearance. Chicorée bâtarde de Bordeaux. - Intermediate breed between escarole and chicory, highly esteemed in the Southwest, very vigorous; rosette 50 to 60 cm in diameter or more, long, broad, erect, lobed leaves, loosely packed heart, whitens well when tied several times, good for growing in large establishments. Performs well in autumn, fears disease. Curly chicory, large pancalier. - A very good, new variety with a fairly full heart and broad, upright curly leaves that turn white without being tied. Chicorée frisée fine de Guillande. - New variety sent to us in 1886 by MM. Dupanloup et Cie, grain merchants in Paris; like the previous one, it is good for winter cultivation. Winter chicory queen. - A new variety with broad, curly, shredded leaves, it does well in winter in the Southwest. Winter curly chicory. - Breed very similar to fine Guillande chicory; stores well in winter; does not grow very large, but has a full heart. SEEDS. - To harvest chicory seed, sow in February or March, in warm soil, or even in the open ground in good exposure. When the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted in June. Select the most beautiful, well-stocked plants from the heart, and uproot the others. By August-September, the seeds are ripe. The stems are pulled out when they begin to yellow and dry out. They are laid out in the sun for a few days, shaded if possible, after which they are threshed. As the seed is difficult to detach from its receptacle, they should be soaked several hours before threshing, or even the day before. They keep well for nine or ten years. One gram contains around 600 grams. DISEASES, PESTS. - Every year, we have had to fight uredo, the same disease found on full-grown celery, generally known as rust. This parasite usually appears towards the end of August or the first fortnight of September, and almost always after alternating periods of rain and very hot sun. A few days later, all the leaves are invaded by powdery red spots, followed by rot, and chicory is done for. All that remains of the leaves is the toughest part of the midrib. This fungus spreads very quickly, so as soon as a few plants are found to be affected, they are uprooted and bleached underground. We tried several remedies: the one that gave us the best results was the following: 2 kilograms of fat lime diluted in 10 liters of water, add 500 grams of well-pulverized soot, mix everything together and brush each diseased foot. Repeating this treatment several times will eliminate the disease. The same mixture works well on celery. Peronos pora glangliformis or meunier rarely attacks open-ground plantations. Only under-frame crops are sometimes affected, but this parasite acts less intensely on chicory than on lettuce, which it destroys entirely. In soils where there are many white grubs or Turkish worms, it is not uncommon to see several chicories whose roots have been devoured by this insect. Unfortunately, we don't notice its ravages until the damage is done; but it seems that we've just discovered the remedy for this scourge; this remedy, called Botrytis tenella, is a cryptogam that attacks the worm and destroys it completely in a few days. All you have to do is put a few contaminated worms in the soil, and all those present will quickly be affected. The fungus is said to grow very well in boiled potato mashed potato. We even sell tubes in various doses, ready-made for a certain area of land. According to the authors, the remedy is infallible and always effective. When they are numerous in a plot of land, mites or fumaroles, known as bars in the Bordeaux region, wreak havoc by cutting the root between two plots of land and digging numerous galleries. They must therefore be destroyed. The roots of some chicories, particularly escarole, are also sometimes host to innumerable greyish aphids, which suck the root and halt the plant's development. Several remedies have been tried, but they were more damaging to the plant than the plague itself. Water the base of the plant with soot water, mixed with a little fat lime; this is the only harmless remedy for the plant that has given us good results. Phenic acid strongly mixed with water has been mentioned, but this remedy imparts a bad odor to plants. USES. - After being blanched, chicory is mainly used as a salad. It also goes very well with all kinds of meat, especially mutton and pork, in white sauces made with milk or butter; it is also an excellent seasoning for roast chicken. E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 8 Leaves are aperitif, tonic and refreshing. SCAROLE CHICORY Cichorium endivia latifolia Lin. Compositae. ORIGIN. - Same origin as curly endive, of which it is only a broad-leafed variety. CULTIVATION. - Scarole is grown in much the same way as chicory. It is sown from June to September, to be eaten in autumn and part of winter. It makes an excellent salad, tender and tasty; it is less sensitive to frost than chicory: some varieties survive the winter very well without suffering too much. Blanched underground, it is excellent and very tender. VARIETIES. - Autumn green round chicory. - Excellent early variety, well-filled, tightly packed heart, almost headless, wide rosettes, thick whole leaves, toothed, wavy at the edges, wide, thick, white, crunchy and very tender ribs. It is fairly hardy, withstanding cold temperatures of 4 or 6 degrees. It is one of our best varieties, albeit an old one. Chicory from Limay. - More voluminous than the previous variety, with ample, waffled leaves, broad, thick ribs and a fairly full, but not very tight, heart. Well-bleached, it flatters the eye, but is tougher than the previous variety. In good, moist soil, it produces a lot, becoming very large. Not yet widespread. Blonde chicory with lettuce leaves. - Rosette slightly wider than round escarole, very sensitive to humidity in the late season, broad, upright leaves, slightly wavy and waffled, a little leathery, heart not very tight. This variety needs to be planted close together, so that it can bleach on its own. Less hardy than the previous two, very sensitive to uredo. Turkish endive. - This variety, improperly known as béglaise escarole, is widespread throughout the West and South-West. It's one of our main winter salads, as it doesn't freeze easily in these regions. The leaves are almost as broad as they are long, with numerous long teeth along the edges. The inner leaves, folded inwards, form a kind of apple, sometimes very hard; blanched, they are tender. Sowing in September provides good planting in October-November. You can even plant later, harvesting in March-April, at the same time as winter lettuces. SEEDS. - As escarole can survive the winter without suffering too much, in the south-western departments and part of western France, it is planted very late in November with a view to harvesting the seed; these plants come up in the spring and the harvest is very abundant. In other regions, where the cold is more rigorous, we sow very early on the bed, as for chicory. MAlADIES, PEST ANIMALS. - Uredo invades round green escarole and blond leaf lettuce very easily, especially if cold rains persist for a few days. Same treatment as for chicory. USES. - Same uses as curly endive. WILD CHICORY Cichorium Intybus Lin. Compositae. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant, native to France and Europe, as well as northern Africa and western Asia, cultivated for nearly two thousand years, known as peasant's hair, écoubette. GROWING. - Wild chicory is very hardy, thriving in almost any well-amended soil. However, it thrives best in deep soils, where its long roots are at ease. It can be sown from March to July; April and May sowings are the best, and are the ones to choose especially, as the plants do not bolt. In gardens, it can be planted in borders and flowerbeds, sown in nurseries or in the field in shallow rays, about 3 centimetres wide and 20 to 25 centimetres apart. When the young plants have four or five well-developed leaves, they are thinned out if sown in place, and transplanted if sown in nurseries. Transplanted plants are always more beautiful than those sown in situ. The first light hoeing is carried out as soon as the soil hardens on the surface. Repeat the operation several times during the year, watering whenever necessary. Nursery plants are transplanted at 10 or 12 centimetres from the line, and if the soil is good, you'll get remarkably beautiful plants that produce a lot of leaves. Despite its bitter taste and roughness, wild chicory is much sought-after as a salad; it should be picked young to make it more tender and less bitter. There are several ways to grow capuchin beard in winter, a highly prized salad in Paris, northern France and even abroad. Here are a few of the most practical. We start blanching in the second half of November. To this end, a small layer of good horse or donkey manure is prepared in a dark cellar or storeroom. We pull up the chicories, and bundle them into bundles of about twenty feet each, holding the collars at exactly the same FIG. 14. - Bleached Capuchin beard. height. Securely tied with wicker, they are placed upright on the bed, side by side, the edges are formed with manure, and as the bundles are placed, the gaps are filled with the same manure or with potting soil. When you've finished placing the bunches, spread a few shovelfuls of potting soil over them, then water. After fifteen or twenty days, the chicory is ready for harvesting, and if you take care to cut the leaves flush with the collar without damaging it, it grows a second time; in Paris, it is usually sold with the root (fig. 14). When vegetation is exhausted, the bed can be reshuffled, a little new manure added, and other chicory planted again. If you don't have a cellar (which is more practical for gardeners), you can work under a frame. Once a good layer has been made, the boxes are placed, and the chicory planted as we have indicated. The panels are then placed and covered with straw mats and leaves, to provide the maximum shade necessary for wilting. Here's a method we think is worth quoting1. In the second half of June, sow wild chicory in rays 30 centimetres apart, with enough light in each ray for the plants to gain sufficient strength; during vegetation, water and hoe as much as necessary. For blanching in the cellar, I use either of the following two systems: either a frame made of four planks, 1 meter long and 1.50 or 2 meters high, which you lean upright against the wall in a dark place in the cellar, or one or more barrels (even barrels that have contained cement) which you drill with several rows of holes 2 to 3 centimeters in diameter and 7 or 8 centimeters apart. In November, a quantity of roots proportionate to consumption needs is pulled up. The root tips and leaves are cut off 2 or 3 centimetres1 Manuel pratique des jardins et des champs, by M. Daurel (Moniteur d'horticulture de Paris). from the collar. If using a frame, close the front of the frame, starting at the bottom, with a ceiling batten. Fill with soil up to the top of this lath, then place the roots horizontally on this layer of soil, with the collar in front and 4 or 5 centimetres apart; place a second lath on top of the first, leaving a sufficient gap between them to allow the shoots to pass through, cover with a second layer of soil on which roots are placed; continue in this way up to the top of the frame. If barrels are used, a layer of soil is also placed at the bottom, up to the level of the first row of holes, which are then filled with roots, with the collar slightly protruding, so that the settling of the soil doesn't drag them inside; soil and roots continue to be placed right up to the top of the barrel, which is, of course, ripped open. The barrels, like the frames, should be placed in the darkest corner of the cellar. In January, new frames or barrels can be set up, providing abundant salad over the winter. Although this procedure is said to give good results, we believe that success can be achieved by operating in the following way. Start by placing a thin layer of new manure mixed with annealed manure in a dark cellar, arrange it in a circle and trample it down hard, then place bunches of chicory in a pyramid shape: as you place the bunches, fill in the gaps with manure, which you must pound well with your hand. The layers are placed one on top of the other, with a slight gap between them. Once the pyramid is set up, you finish by throwing in a few shovelfuls of earth, then watering the whole thing. In this way, you can make heaps of any height and size; it's a good process that we recommend to amateurs. In some regions, notably around Paris, growers don't pull up chicory. In winter, they cover with heather, straw, manure or soil taken from paths, to a depth of 4 or 6 centimeters. When the chicory has grown sufficiently, we cut it between two plots of land, as we would an asparagus. VARIETIES. - Wild bitter chicory from Paris. - Variety closest to the type and probably the source of all other varieties: long, hairy, strongly toothed leaves, with acute lobes, sail- lant ribs, green or red. Placed in suitable soil, it produces many leaves, which can be cut several times during the summer, and are eaten either green or dry by cattle. It is the most esteemed and the best for making capuchin beard. Improved wild chicory. - Differs greatly from ordinary wild chicory in its broad leaves, much like a cone-shaped escarole; it is dulled and blistered, forming a small apple that is sometimes compact, fairly hard and tender; it is hardy and produces a lot. This variety was bred by M. Jacquin aîné; until now, it was thought to be a cross with escarole chicory. M. Vilmorin? claims the opposite, and we share his opinion. It's a highly recommendable variety which, in certain cases, can be blanched like chicory, and from which you can obtain ex-cellent nasturtium beard. 1 Vilmorin, Les, Plantes potagères. Improved variegated wild chicory. - Derived from the previous variety, it has the same characteristics, with the only difference being that the leaves are flagellated and spotted with reddish-brown. This color is brighter due to the plant's darker development, making it a very pretty salad when blanched. Improved curly wild chicory. - A variety that appears to be a cross between improved wild chicory and curly chicory; the leaves are lacy, cut, almost hairless. Do not sow these varieties before May, as they bolt. Among the large-rooted varieties, we'd like to mention: Chicorée à grosse racine de Brunsvick. - A variety with cut, almost spreading, long leaves and a large, long root. It is grown extensively in Germany and Belgium to make chicory coffee. Magdeburg large-root chicory. - A variety with whole, erect leaves, with few or no teeth, and very large, long, smooth roots. It is widely grown in northern France for the preparation of chicory coffee. Brussels or Withloof chicory. - A variety derived from Magdeburg chicory, widely grown in Belgium, where it is one of the main winter salads. We've grown it for a long time, and it has always given us magnificent results, so we have no hesitation in recommending its cultivation. It is grown in the same way as Paris bitter chicory: at the start of winter, it is uprooted and cleaned, with any inferior or undersized plants set aside. The leaves are cut off 3 or 4 millimeters above the collar; any shoots that have grown up around the9. collar are removed, and the root tips are cut off, reducing them to roughly equal length. Place them in a trench 40 or 50 centimetres deep, into which 20 centimetres of loose soil or compost has already been placed. They are planted in this potting soil 8 centimetres apart, with the collar at exactly the same height, and 15 or 20 centimetres below the top level of the trench, which must be filled with the mixture mentioned above. If you want them to start growing, spread 40 centimetres or more of good horse manure on the surface, depending on the temperature; three weeks later, you can start harvesting: to do this, remove the manure, dig up the root, and cut off the blanched apple, keeping a small portion of the neck. Roots replanted after this operation, and treated like capuchin beard, still grow and develop several excellent stems. Withloof makes an excellent, tender and appetizing salad. The regularity of its growth, which forms a small, tightly-packed head, makes it more appreciated than capuchin beard. In the public establishment where we ran the market garden for nearly a decade, we operated in a very simple way for blanching our withloof, and here's how: The chicory plants were pulled out of the ground as needed, prepared and placed side by side on a warm, fairly thick layer of fresh manure, mixed with a few leaves. The plants were buried up to the collar, either in sand, light loam, tannin, wood bran, etc... Once placed, they were watered, then covered with 10 or 15 centimetres of dry leaves or moss. The panels were placed on the trunk, and covered with double or triple mats to prevent daylight penetration; eight days later, harvesting began. It's a very quick process, and suitable for all crops. Here's how Mr. Poiret Délan! proceeds. In August, I cut the leaves 3 or 4 centimetres above the crown: these leaves can be eaten in salads, or fed to rabbits. When the time comes to take advantage of them, which is from November to March, I pull up my chicory, clean the roots, leaving them only 20 centimetres long; I cut the leaves about 5 centimetres from the collar, then place these roots upright under a bell, one against the other, in potting soil, on a pile of leaves. Even better is a mixture of manure and leaves which, through light fermentation, produces a temperature of 10 to 15 degrees centigrade, which activates the work. To make it easier for the plants to wither, the cloches are covered with manure or leaves. Under these conditions, this particular state of etiolation is achieved in twelve or fifteen days. Care must be taken during hard frosts, so as not to run out of plants suitable for consumption. The work should be repeated every eight or fifteen days. We think this method is excellent, and particularly suitable for amateurs who don't eat much of it, because if you work as Mr. Délan indicates, you'll always have good fresh produce at your disposal. SEEDS. - Although perennial, wild chicory goes to seed in its second year. This seed is ripe in August 1 Rerue horticole. September; the stalks are cut off and exposed to the sun; when they are dry enough to detach the seed from the receptacle, they are left outside overnight, to be threshed the next day, or they are wetted, and two or three hours later, they are beaten with a stick, and rubbed well between the two hands. The seed is then easily detached; it is winnowed and cleaned. One gram contains 700 seeds; it keeps well for eight years. DISEASES, PESTS. - This plant suffers from the same diseases as curly endive, and is eaten by the same insects. USES. - The large-rooted varieties are used to make chicory coffee. This type of production seems to have originated in Holland, and was introduced into Belgium towards the beginning of this century. The roots, after being boiled in various waters, can be eaten like salsify. In Sweden, the poor make bread from the root. Wild chicory is said to be excellent as animal fodder. Rabbits in particular are very fond of it, and it is a very good food for them. It can be cut several times a year, and last for eight or ten years. The whole plant turns a faint yellow. CULTIVATED CABBAGE Brassica oleracea L. Cruciferae. ORIGIN. - The typical species, with a tall, twiggy stem and glaucous, lobed, fleshy leaves, grows spontaneously on the seashore in southern England and Ireland, on the islands of Jersey and Guernsey, on the island of Laland in Denmark, on the island of Heligoland; in France, on the coasts of Normandy and Charente-Inférieure, on the northern Mediterranean coast near Nice, in Genoa and Lucca. Cultivated from time immemorial, the ancients applied it to all kinds of ailments and used it as an exclusive remedy. CULTIVATION. - Cabbage is very hardy, thriving in all types of heavily fertilized soil, and can be found just about anywhere, at a wide range of altitudes. However, it seems to do best in slightly strong, damp, slightly chalky soils. The best fertilizers for cabbage are manures mixed with fecal matter, sludge and city refuse, which should be used before decomposition. Watering each plant several times with liquid manure will produce magnificent results, even in poor-quality soils, but care must be taken when using this fertilizer, otherwise the results will not be what you expect. As a general rule, and with the right choice of varieties, cabbages can be sown almost all year round, in the open ground, with the exception of December and January, when it would be better to sow on a bed and then transplant to a good exposure. But the best seedlings, those which give the best results, and which are the most widely used in the South-West, are spring seedlings for the curly kite breed, and autumn seedlings for the cabbage breed - a rule adopted throughout France. Cabbage seedlings are usually planted in beds 1.20 m wide. They are broadcast a little thickly if you intend to transplant them, and less thickly if you intend to leave them on the bed. Lightly cover them with a fork and then with a rake, or spread 1/2 centimeter of soil taken from paths or from the ground over the beds. If sowing in hot weather, spread a light mulch over the beds and water often. When the plants are strong enough, and the first two or three leaves begin to appear, they are transplanted into beds, in rows 8 centimetres apart in all directions. Water as you go along. As far as possible, this transplanting work should be done when the weather is dark or in the evening, when the sun is less bright. It's a very good operation, which is almost essential for this type of plant, at least if you want to obtain beautiful, well-branched, strong plants with lots of hair. When the operation is carried out in very hot weather, it is urgent to shade the plants with windbreaks to facilitate recovery. The ground where the transplanting is to take place should be well ploughed and smoked beforehand, and the surface loosened with a rake. In many parts of France, such as Angoumois, Saintonge, Lot, Vienne, etc., market gardeners plant cabbages permanently with a forked or flat hoe; they form large rays and plant in alternate rays, so that the cabbages are 60 or 70 centimetres apart in all directions and in a chessboard pattern. Scarole, romaine, lettuce or any other vegetable is counter-planted in the false rays and between each cabbage, and removed before harming the cabbages. Smoke when planting, after first spreading the manure on the soil, and when making the comb, slide it into the bottom with one side of the tool. Consumed fertilizers should be used whenever possible. Old market gardeners claim that by doing this, the cabbages become much more beautiful. It's usually the women who place the cabbages. Those who are used to this kind of work are very quick. As soon as the cabbage is in place, they quickly pull a handful of loose soil over the roots, which they take from the bottom of the shelf, to hold the plant in place. A good racker can, without too much fatigue, give work to three people. As soon as the cabbages are covered, they are watered with the spout. Sometimes, in summer, when it's hot, we water a little on the soil, once it's been placed on the roots, but this doesn't prevent us from watering a lot once the cabbage has been buried. Planting with a planter is much quicker, and gives equally good results. The soil is well fertilized and ploughed, then radii are traced at 60 centimetres or more, depending on the species, then planted and watered, taking care not to pound the soil too much when doing the work. This is the way we've always done it, and we've never complained. Four or five weeks after planting, when the plants are well established, we give them a first deep hoeing, which must be repeated often. In areas where irrigation is possible, they should not be spared water, as they will grow all the better for the warmth and humidity they receive. DISEASES, PESTS. - Most cabbage seedlings, whatever the variety, and we could even say crucifers in general, have to suffer, especially in summer, from the bites of a small insect called the ground flea, because of its resemblance to the flea, but whose name is altise or tiquet (Altica oleracea). This little creature, which seems to prefer the young cotyledons and early leaves, pierces them through with an infinite number of tiny holes, stopping vegetation in its tracks; most affected plants succumb. There is no effective way of destroying them. We have tried several remedies, but have only succeeded in keeping them away for a while; the one that has given us the best results is this: Macerate soot in water, in which soda crystals have been dissolved; add a little plaster or lime to fix the product on the leaves, and brush with this mixture. You can also boil aromatic plants such as thyme, lavender, hyssop, wormwood, laurel, etc., mix this decoction with tobacco juice, or better still, boil the whole together, and sprinkle with this product. Another method: Throw soot, wood ash or lime on the young plants. When a cabbage seedling has suffered from drought, and vegetation has been slowed down, it is attacked at the base of the plant by a small white worm, which produces a nodule in which it is enclosed; there are sometimes quite a few on the same plant. We recommend popping them off with a fingernail or pruning-hook, and removing the insect. However, there's not much to fear from this worm, as almost all large cabbages, and kites in particular, have greater or lesser quantities, depending on the type of soil in which they are planted. Another insect that causes a lot of damage in certain years is the caterpillar. The best way to destroy them is to hunt for their eggs before they hatch; at the end of winter and summer, small butterflies of the piéride genus, with yellow wings spotted with black, flutter over the plantation and deposit their eggs, in hundreds, on the underside of the leaves; the eggs must be crushed immediately after they have been laid. USES. - Cabbage is a popular vegetable and is frequently used, especially by country dwellers. In northern Europe, it is the staple of the diet. It appears on the table of the rich and the poor alike. It is eaten cooked either lean or fatty; the classic cabbage soup is accompanied by the petit-salé of the Auvergnats; it goes very well with pigeon, goose or turkey quarters, or even partridge; it is delicious with sausages. Boiled cauliflower can be eaten au gratin, seasoned with butter, just as Brussels sprouts are delicious fried in butter. Young heads of any variety, boiled in salted water, can be eaten in vinaigrette like asparagus. Cabbage is a very healthy and restorative food, especially when prepared with meat. Robust, strong stomachs digest it easily and it does them a lot of good; but as healthy as it is for them, it is not very suitable for delicate people; it can produce serious indigestion and cause serious stomach illness. It is also forbidden to convalescents and the elderly. It is claimed that cabbage has laxative properties, and that people who use it frequently rarely need a purgative. It has been wrongly claimed, I believe, that cabbage imparts an unpleasant flavor to the milk and butter of cows fed on it. VARIETIES. - Now that we've covered the basics of general cultivation, let's move on to a description of the best varieties, highlighting the type of cultivation specific to each one. Botanists have divided cabbages into five classes: 1° Head cabbage; 2° Savoy cabbage; 3° Green cabbage; 4° Kohlrabi; 5° Cauliflower. HEAD cabbages Brassica capitata Hort. Cabbages in this class generally have a very large stalk, swollen in the middle; the leaves are fairly broad and smooth; the veins are prominent and numerous, with the median vein always well-developed and extending to the top of the leaf blade; glaucous in color, with a metallic sheen in some varieties (York oxheart). CULTIVATION. - Can be sown all year round, but the best time is July, August and September. They are planted as soon as the seedling is good. In ordinary winters, when the temperature doesn't drop above 8 degrees centigrade, they resist perfectly, and when the sun comes out, they develop rapidly. They can even be left in the nursery and not planted until spring; they do just as well, but are less early. Varieties such as Schweinfurt, Quintal, Bonneuil, Joanet, etc., have been very successful for us, sown in spring, and have produced magnificent products in autumn. For summer sowings, the varieties known as Bacalan gros, Bacalan hâtif and Bonneuil are those preferred by market gardeners. VARIETIES. - Varieties in this class are, in order of earliness: Chou d'Yorh petit and gros. - Two distinct varieties, rather small than large. Sugarloaf cabbage. - Slightly larger than the previous one. Beef heart cabbage small (fig. 15). - Medium-sized, very good and tender. Heart of beef cabbage large. - Similar to sugarloaf cabbage. Chou Bacalan gros. - The best and most esteemed of this class, very large, tightly packed, white and rustic. Bacalan hátif is a smaller sub-variety, a few days harsher. Chou de TourFIG. 15 - Heart of beef cabbage. laville - Very similar in shape to the above, but dwarfed and with blistered folded leaves. Lingreville cabbage. - Short-stalked, with large, wavy, blistered leaves and a pointed, very white head; not very productive. Joanet or Nantais cabbage. - Very good short-stalked variety; very hard, flattened, very white head; successful, sown in autumn. Brunswick or Tabouret cabbage. - Highly esteemed variety in Angoumois and Saintonge, where it is widely grown; very short stem; large, broad apples, very flattened at the top; highly recommended variety; does very well in fall and spring. Schweinfurth cabbage. - A very good variety, highly esteemed everywhere; very large, loosely packed apples, best sown in spring; the highest-yielding variety. Particularly suitable for large establishments, hospitals, asylums, etc. It is grown in large quantities in the departments of Vienne, Haute-Vienne and Loire-Inférieure, which ship them in batches to the Paris markets. Chou quintal. - Variety closely resembling Schweinfurth cabbage, but flatter; very large, firm head; a little late, but very high yielding; most widely grown in Germany for making sauerkraut, Pomeranian conical cabbage. - Late, high stem, cone-shaped, very tight and fairly large head, very productive, does well sown in spring; widely grown in Germany. Winigstadt pointed cabbage. - Similar in shape to oxheart cabbage; tight-knit, medium-sized head, late; does well in southwestern France, sown in autumn like Bacalan cabbage. Vaugirard cabbage. - Very hardy, withstands winter well without suffering too much; highly esteemed at Paris markets. Growers around Paris sow it late, in June, so that it does not begin to peel until after the frosts. Dax cabbage. - A highly esteemed variety grown extensively in the Landes and Pyrenees regions; similar in habit to the Milan cabbage of virtues; round, loosely packed, medium-sized head. Semi-tardy. Habas cabbage. - An excellent variety, widely grown in the Agenais region. It resembles the previous variety in shape; the head is larger, tighter and forms more quickly. Several other varieties of cabbage are also grown, which appear excellent and produce magnificent products in their country of origin, but which give very poor results elsewhere. We mention the following varieties as having been cultivated: Chou de Fumel or female cabbage. - Produces very fine products in Hérault and Haute-Garonne. Chou rouge gros, chou rouge petit, chou vert glacé d'Amérique, chou marbré de Bourgogne, chou rouge petit d'Utrecht, chou rouge conique, chou rouge foncé hâtif d'Erfurth, chou très hâtif d'Étampes. Among the new varieties introduced to the market in recent years, we should mention: Express cabbage, non-pareil cabbage, early Rennes cabbage, Christmas cabbage, Amager cabbage. MILAN CROW Brassica oleracea bullata. Race with more or less blistered, wrinkled or curled, intense green leaves (fig. 16); prominent midrib, acuminate in the upper part, rarely obtuse; the secondary veins are strongly apparent in some varieties and extend to the upper part of the leaf blade. The apples generally have less consistency than cabbages and are smaller, better tasting and more tender, especially when the first frosts have taken away the green taste. This breed of cabbage is more highly esteemed than cabbages, as they are less musky. CULTIVATION. - April and May are the best months to sow savoy cabbages. They are broadcast in beds. Mulch and water lightly to maintain constant soil moisture. When the plant is strong enough, it is thinned out and transplanted into a nursery. These cabbages are good for planting from June to August. 16 - Savoy cabbage. Early varieties can be sown as early as March for final planting in May and June. In summer, however, these varieties need plenty of water or cool soil to reach full growth. VARIETIES. - We will list them in order of earliness: Very early Savoy cabbage. - Very good, early variety, still little known, medium-sized head. Highly recommended. Small, early Ulm Savoy cabbage. - Variety with a small head, fairly high stem, strongly blistered leaves; very early, but not very productive; suitable for first-season planting. Very early Savoy cabbage from Paris. - Early variety, widely grown around Paris; medium-sized, firm head; glossy, dark-green leaves; very good for the first winter season (fig. 16). Early short savoy cabbage. - One of our best winter varieties. Short stalk, broad, finely blistered, dark-green leaves, firm, depressed head. This cabbage is very hardy and has good flavor. It is highly regarded at the market. Ordinary Milan cabbage. - An old variety that still has its merit; tall stalk, glaucous-green, slightly broad, blistered leaves, medium-sized, fairly firm head; highly esteemed in southwestern and western France, not very fussy about soil quality; excellent taste. Chou de Milan gros des vertus, also known as chou de Milan gros frisé d'Allemagne or chou de Paris - Very old variety, grown all over France; considerable consumption; tall stalk, large leaves, blistered at the top, dark glaucous green; fairly tight, flattened head. A very good winter breed. Milan cabbage, Pontoise late winter. - A tall variety with broadly blistered, glaucous, dark-green leaves and a large, very hard, late-ripening head. Generally formed in winter, it is the successor to Milan cabbage. This variety is said to be the type of the old Milan cabbage that Parisian market gardeners have improved. It's an excellent cabbage that we have no hesitation in recommending. Norwegian savoy cabbage. - Very late variety, fairly tall stem, erect, slightly blistered leaves, purplish in color, medium-sized, loosely packed head, forming very late. In winter, it withstands the most intense cold. Several other varieties are still grown, but are of little value outside their country of origin: Long-headed Savoy cabbage. - The elongated shape of the head is reminiscent of sugarloaf cabbage; it does very well in the late season. Early Savoy cabbage from Limay. - Very early and firm, very small head. Cabbage pancalier, small Joulin hâtif. - Very small head; very early. Pancalier cabbage from Tours. - Very early, but not very productive. Victoria Savoy cabbage. - Quite a good species, doing well in good, moist soil. Cape Savoy. - Very high stalk, tight head, degenerates easily, so that in a seedling there are only a few plants that pump well; fears frosts. Golden Savoy cabbage. - Short-stalked variety, medium-sized head, elongated, not very tight, yellow in color; prominent veins, very tender after the frosts have passed over it. New varieties include: Early Savoy cabbage from Aubervillers. - Early Agen cabbage. CROUX DE BRUXELLES - CHOUX ROSETTES Brussels sprouts are thought to have originated from Savoy cabbage. Its leaves, especially in the dwarf Brussels sprout, are very similar to those of the curly Savoy; they are blistered, dark green and form a small apple at the end of the stem. CULTIVATION. - Sow from March to June, in nursery beds, broadcast. The first seedlings, planted in June, will begin to produce towards the end of summer and throughout the winter. May sowings produce a little later, but the difference is so great that it is preferable to sow only once in the first half of April, and plant as soon as the seedling is good. E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 10 Cultivation is the same as for Savoy cabbage, except that the plants need to be spaced further apart so that they can pass easily between the rows and pick up the small apples; 50 to 60 centimeters is enough for the ordinary variety, and 40 to 50 centimeters for the dwarf variety. This cabbage thrives in good, moist soil, but should not be fertilized with strong fertilizers that force vegetation and cause the apples to grease, or to put it another way, prevent them from peeling. In order to encourage apple development, some growers have advised pinching the Brussels sprout once it has reached a certain height. We experimented with this procedure several times, pinching back every other row. The pinched row did not sprout earlier than the other, so we conclude that pinching reduces the yield without advancing development, so it's better not to pinch at all. Brussels sprouts are fairly cold-hardy, making them an excellent winter vegetable, very delicate and very fine, provided the apples are picked when they are firm; the smaller they are, the better they are appreciated. Brussels sprouts are not cultivated enough in France; this is a mistake, because a plot of land planted with this vegetable yields a lot. We have made comparisons, and have always found an advantage in its favor. In the establishment where we ran the cultivation for several years, we grew it in large quantities, and certainly, the production was good, and not only did we use the shoots as a dish, but the leaves were given to rabbits: in spring, when the plant was about to come up, all the heads that were a little plump, made tender by the frosts, were used for soup or certain dishes; they were very good. VARIETIES. - Ordinary Brussels sprouts (fig. 17). - The best variety, very productive, excellent quality; stems 70 cm to 1 m high, slender; spoon-shaped leaves, strongly petiolate and slightly blistered, slightly purplish. Numerous, widely spaced, very firm, small shoots, much appreciated in the markets. Dwarf Brussels sprouts. - Tall variety, 50 to 60 cm, with thick stem, broader, more blistered leaves than the previous one, larger shoots, closer together, less firm; perhaps a little earlier, but less productive. Sellier half-dwarf Brussels sprout. - This variety was sent to us in 1885 by MM. Dupanloup et Cie. We tried it, and the results were not as satisfactory as they had promised. It is a rather dwarf variety, but very vigorous, with fairly large, loosely packed shoots; needs to be improved. Brussels sprouts no longer ultra. - We have received this variety from Bordeaux, and it has given us very good results, but we don't think it can be made into a separate variety; it resembles the ordinary Brussels sprout in every way, but is perhaps not as tall. Half-dwarf Brussels sprout from La Halle. - A new variety not exceeding 65 centimeters, hardy and very productive. CHOU A GROSSES COTES ORDINAIRE This breed of cabbage, which botanists have classified as a Milan cabbage, is of little interest. It is grown very little in France, but a lot in England; it has the advantage of not being affected by even the coldest weather, which, on the contrary, is necessary for its qualities. CULTIVATION. - It is sown at the same time as Savoy cabbage, and cultivation is the same. It is mainly in autumn, under the influence of rain, that this variety develops most vigorously. The stem is short, the leaves are close together, very thick-veined and prominent, whitish yellow or greenish, with a thick, well-developed midrib. The head is small and usually absent. Cabbage with large fringed ribs. - A sub-variety of the previous one, but preferable for quality and production. Market gardeners near Paris grow a variety of green cabbage they call Bricoli; it appears to be descended from the cabbage with large fringed ribs, of which it is undoubtedly a bastard. It doesn't apple, but produces a large quantity of thick, extremely curly, lobed, petiolate leaves. It is very hardy and can withstand the coldest weather. GREEN CABBAGE. - FORAGE KOLS. - NON-POMMED CABBAGE Brassica virens. This class comes under the heading of agriculture, since the main use of its various varieties is as animal feed. However, once the leaves have been softened by frost, they can be used for a variety of culinary purposes. When the plant goes to seed, which happens every two years, the young, tender shoots are picked and eaten like asparagus or broccoli. Farmers in Charentes, Poitou, Haute-Vienne, Dordogne, Vendée, etc., take them to market. In general, all varieties of green cabbage have fleshy, fairly broad, almost smooth leaves, except for a few blisters (and those that are laciniated), the midrib is very well developed, the petiole is

long and very large, especially at the base. CULTIVATION. - Sow from March and April to July in good, freshly-turned soil; spring sowings are generally preferred. These cabbages are so hardy that the seedlings, though large, can be transplanted: we have replanted some very strong ones, which have recovered perfectly and developed vigorously. VARIETIES. - The same varieties to grow are : Cavalier or cow cabbage. - The most widely grown, very productive, develops very quickly, very hardy. Chou vert branchu du Poitou. - Very productive, hardy variety, highly esteemed in Poitou and Limousin. Chou moellier blanc. - Excellent variety, very productive and fast-growing; the stalk becomes very thick and strongly swollen in the middle; cut into thin slices, it is very tender and, like beet, is used as animal feed in winter. It can be used cooked or raw. Less hardy than beets, it fears the cold. In northern France, it is harvested before the frosts. - It differs from white moellier by the purplish tint of its stem; it is hardier and seems to withstand the cold better. Animals prefer white cabbage; its color, which probably has a particular odor and flavor, seems to repel them. Flanders cabbage. - Red, very hardy and productive. Chou mille têtes. - Native to the Vendée region, where it is widely grown, very productive, but sensitive to cold. 40. Chou de Lannilis blond. - Highly esteemed variety in Brittany, fairly productive. Daubenton's perennial cabbage. - Particular variety with long, hanging branches, fairly productive. Mowing cabbage. - Stems are almost nonexistent, giving rise to a number of lobed, green leaves with grayish-white petioles, forming a strong clump that can be mowed several times. This variety gives good results only if planted in good, cool soil. i ne" Sarthe forage cabbage. - Very good variety, ample foliage, widely blistered, fleshy petiole, very hardy. Also worth mentioning: Palmetto. - Very attractive, but not very productive. Naples kale. - More ornamental than vegetable, it produces swellings like kohlrabi, which suggests that it is intermediate between cauliflower and kohlrabi. 0192 Large green kale. - More ornamental than vegetable, this variety is very hardy. Short-stalked green kale. - Short-stalked red kale. - Red variegated kale. - White variegated kale. - Variegated laciniated kale. - Variegated poliferous kale. - Large red kale. All these varieties are particularly ornamental. CABBAGE Brassica oleraeca gongiloides L. ORIGIN. - According to De Candolle, it originated in the ancient world. Here's what he says: 1° Brassicas with fleshy roots are native to temperate Europe. 2° Their cultivation spread to Europe and India before and after the invasion of the Aryas. Cultivation of the various brassica species has spread to south-west Asia since the time of the ancient Hebrews, bringing the origin of its cultivation to over 4,000 years ago. - Kohlrabi is sown from March to June, in sufficiently loosened, fresh soil, in beds, in nurseries. Water and mulch according to the time of sowing. When the young plants begin to grow a little strong, they are FIG. 18 - Kohlrabi. thinned out to prevent the root from shrivelling, which would then become an obstacle to the growth of the fleshy part, which needs very rapid development to be succulent and tender. They are planted when they are a little strong, in the same way as other cabbage varieties. They are generally planted in rows of six, 35 cm apart. Water as you plant, and keep watering throughout the growing season. For, if they lack water, they become woody and cordate, and therefore unsuitable for consumption; nor should we neglect hoeing and weeding, which must be repeated often. Remove the yellow leaves from the base. These cabbages survive the winter fairly well without suffering. VARIETY. - Early white Vienne kohlrabi. - Very early variety, small size, short leaves, few in number; can be eaten three months after sowing. White kohlrabi (fig. 18). - A very good hardy variety, reaching a high volume. Early violet Vienne kohlrabi. - An early variety with more or less the same characteristics as early white kohlrabi, but with the difference that the kohlrabi is surrounded by a purple skin that extends to the leaf petioles and veins. Ordinary purple kohlrabi. - A variety derived from white kohlrabi, but distinguished by its violet color; it is hardy and grows very large. Goliath violet kohlrabi. - A new variety, remarkable for its size; we've had balls weighing 7 and 8 kilograms; it's likely that in very good, moist soil, you can get better; tender and tasty. CHOU-NAVET. - RUTABAGA. - TURNEPS Cabbage Brassica oleracea Napus. Another breed quite different from kohlrabi in that the tuber it produces is almost entirely in the ground, forming an ovoid mass almost as long as it is wide (fig. 19). This tuber becomes quite voluminous, especially in good, fresh, well-smoked soils. In dry, chalky soils, it has given poor results. CULTIVATION. - Like kohlrabi, it is sown from March to June, either in the field or in nurseries. We tried both types of cultivation to compare results. Plants raised in the nursery and transplanted developed as vigorously as those sown in the field; we therefore conclude that it is better to sow in the nursery and then transplant in the field. Cultivation care is the same as for kohlrabi. However, in England, Ireland and much of Brittany, this vegetable is grown on a large scale, just as beet is in the North. In these regions, cattle are very fond of this turnip, which is an excellent winter feed and seems to fatten them up quickly. In general, this plant keeps very well and can spend the winter outdoors without suffering too much from the cold. However, they should be eaten during the winter, as they quickly go to seed and become tough in spring. VARIETY. - White turnip cabbage - FIG. 19. Turnip cabbage. An excellent variety that keeps well, forming a very large, tender turnip with good flavor. Highly esteemed in the Angoumois region, where it is grown in large quantities, it is one of the best varieties. White turnip with red collar. - It differs from the previous variety by the reddish tint of the collar; the flesh is very white and tender. White smooth cabbage with short leaves. - Flattened variety, similar in appearance or shape to the flat Egyptian beet, very early, medium size, very firm white flesh, excellent as a vegetable variety. Yellow turnip or green-necked rutabaga. - Rutabagas are all yellow-fleshed, and therefore form a breed of their own. The above-mentioned variety produces a large, spherical, slightly rounded turnip with a greenish-purple collar. Red-necked rutabaga. - A variety with more or less the same characteristics as the previous one, except for the purplish-red collar; the flesh is very good. Yellow, flat, early Rutabaga. - Very early variety, medium size; highly recommended for the vegetable garden. Champion rutabaga. - Excellent variety, very productive, good for large-scale cultivation, highly esteemed in northern and eastern France. Drummond rutabaga, red-necked. - Skirving rutabaga (red collar). - West-Nor folk rutabaga (red collar). - Laing rutabaga (whole leaf). - Oval rutabaga. - These last varieties, like almost all others, are of English origin. Cauliflower Brassica oleracea Botrytis. Cauliflower is a breed apart and quite distinct from other cabbage varieties. Leaves are generally upright, whole, elongated, smooth, with smooth edges, rarely divided, bluish-green, more or less dark. Petioles are very large and prominent, both above and below, and yellowish-white with strong veins at the base. The apple, which is in a way nothing more than an assembly of the flower's supports, should be very tightly grained and white, with the middle more developed than the edges; these are the main characteristics of a good variety. CULTIVATION. - The best production centers in France are near Paris, Châlons, Saint-Brieuc, Arras, and a large part of Brittany; these products are shipped in complete vagons to the Paris market. Many growers specialize in this area, and are sure to make a good living from it. Many of our products are shipped to London. Cauliflower is also grown in Germany, England and Switzerland. As you can see, cauliflower is mainly grown in northern countries; it does well there, because there is always some humidity, it rains often, and cabbage only grows vigorously when the atmosphere is damp. This explains why cabbages planted in dry soils do not develop in summer, and when autumn comes, with its frequent rains, they grow vigorously. When you have land with a moist bottom, you're always sure of the result. Growing cauliflower is not difficult, but it does require a certain amount of know-how if it is to be a success; without this, a lot of trouble is taken, only to end in cruel disappointment, as we have seen time and again. Cauliflower needs rapid development. Otherwise, the apples don't form well, they are small, not very tight, they look like fruit that has suffered, and are therefore little appreciated. To obtain this rapid growth, especially in summer, when cauliflowers are most widely planted, they need to be placed in moist soil, sufficiently fertilized with good, energetic fertilizers, and given abundant watering or irrigation. However, there are certain dry soils where summer cultivation, despite copious watering, always gives poor results. To prove the point, let's take a look at our comparative experiments. At the same time, we planted demidur Paris cauliflowers in three squares of different soil types: the first square was marsh soil, a little peaty, and consequently very wet. The second square was alluvial, with a high clay content. The third square was a silico-calcareous soil, very dry in summer. The plantations in the first two squares were not watered, while those in the third square were watered copiously throughout the hot season. At harvest, the apples in square number 1 were magnificent, with very tight, white berries; those in number 2 were quite pretty, but much smaller; those in number 3 were small, poorly formed and hard. It is therefore easy to conclude that cauliflower thrives best in strong, deep or moist soils, or in soils that are difficult to dry out. Cauliflower is sown at three different times: 1° in winter, for spring and summer; 2° in summer, for autumn; 3° finally, in autumn, for spring. The first seedlings are usually sown in a greenhouse or under a cloche, in January or February, on a warm bed. When the plant is strong enough to withstand transplanting, it is placed on another warm layer. During cold spells, they are covered with straw mats and gradually given air to get them used to the outside temperature. Towards the end of March or the beginning of April, they are transplanted into place, and produce in June-July. From the end of March to May 15th, we sow in the open ground, with good exposure; we transplant in place, as and when the plants are good, and we have products which follow one another from July to September. For these kinds of seedlings, it's best to choose tender or Salomon cauliflower, or even better, semi-hard Paris. The latter variety always does well, sown at any time of year, and is used almost exclusively by Parisian market gardeners. Summer seedlings can be sown from June 1st to 15th; they are planted in July or August, on a dark or rainy day. Properly treated, these plants bear fruit in October and November. This cultivation, which seems simple, becomes difficult if you don't have a lot of water. The last seedlings are sown in the ground in August-September, in well-exposed beds. The seedlings are planted out in good exposure and, when the cold arrives, covered with windbreak mulch. In the south of France, they overwinter fairly well without suffering, or keep very well under the slightest shelter. They are planted in March, and produce in May or June. Hard cauliflower is well suited to this season. When planted out, they are arranged as described for head cabbage. Lettuce or chicory can be counter-planted. Tender cauliflower can be planted much more tightly than other varieties. When the young plants are taken up, if possible, they should be watered well with liquid manure, and this operation should be repeated often while they are young. Hoe several times, and deeply. Often, as frost approaches, the apples on many plants are barely formed and too small to be eaten straight away. So, although they grow little, E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 11 during cold spells, we recommend the following method, which has worked well for us. Bring all the leaves over the apple in the shape of a cap, tie them loosely with a raffia or a rush; then leave them in this state for a few days; it takes cold temperatures of 8 or 10 degrees to reach the apples thus swaddled. When you want to keep some apples in winter, you can still try this method. When you realize that the temperature is going to drop, you choose a fine day, when the cabbages will be well wiped. Tear them off and put them in a cellar or storeroom. After removing the outer leaves, plant them upright in sand, which should be dry rather than damp. They should be visited frequently to remove any rotting leaves. Aerate them whenever the temperature permits. They can also be stored for some time, by hanging them upside down and keeping some of the leaves. This method requires a great deal of care to succeed, as the leaves quickly become moldy, so they need to be visited often. They can also be stored as follows: Start by forming a circular layer with good horse manure, which should be well compacted; when it is 15 centimetres high, place the first row of cauliflowers, previously stripped of most of their leaves and with their roots; arrange them in a circle, side by side, without squeezing them too much, with the apple outside the manure. Once the first row has been planted, the roots are covered with manure, which is carefully placed between each plant. Place a second bed of manure high enough so that the second row of cauliflowers doesn't touch the first, and continue in this way until the wheel is completely finished, which can be raised as high as you like. It's essential that the middle is always below the edges, to form a conical wheel. If they are placed in a healthy, warm environment, they will keep for a long time without deteriorating. In general, heads of cauliflower, placed in the various conditions we have just described, almost always wilt. The best way to restore them to their original freshness is to leave them with a fairly long stalk, which can be lightly pressed into damp sand, or even better, into wet moss; in this way, cauliflowers are as fresh as when they were growing. VARIETIES. - The cauliflower genus, thought to derive from green cabbage, has been classified into three main varieties: tender, semi-hard and hard. There is no particular characteristic that distinguishes them at first sight: the difference exists only in earliness, in the more or less tight grain, and in quality. Tender cauliflower - Generally small, very early, producing a small, tight head and dividing quickly. Semi-hard cauliflower. - It produces a fairly strong, upright plant, with a much larger, tighter-grained, whiter head than soft cauliflower. Hard cauliflower. - This is a strong plant, producing a large globular head, excessively tightly packed, very fine-grained and of excellent quality. Tender Paris or Salomon cauliflower. - Very early, forming a medium-sized, loosely packed head that does not keep long, suitable for winter and summer sowing. Early Erfurth dwarf cauliflower. - Very early variety, very short stalk, good head, grain a little tighter than Salomon, very white, does not keep well pure; its seeds must be obtained from Germany if you want to have very good products. Semi-hard Paris cauliflower. - Excellent variety, can be grown in any season, and produces fine products; large, firm, tight-grained apples; stores well; very hardy, highly esteemed on the markets. Chou-fieur Lenormand. - A very hardy, productive variety, which gave birth to the following variety and, it is claimed, has been advantageously replaced by it. Lenormand short-stalked cauliflower. - Very valuable variety in all respects, rustic; very short stem, leaves a little spread out, short, very thick, large, very firm head; long-lasting, extremely productive. Chou-fleur demi-dur de Saint-Brieuc. - A variety widely grown in Brittany, very hardy, producing globular apples with an excessively tight, very firm texture and a slightly musky, bland taste; ideal for export. Paris hard cauliflower. - A very common variety around Paris, where it is grown in large quantities, very late, hardy, forming large, regular apples with very tight, firm seeds. Dutch hard cabbage. - A semi-late variety grown on a large scale in Germany, where it is highly esteemed; we have tried growing it several times, but find that in slightly warm climates, the apples are relatively small compared with the development of the plant, which is excessively vigorous. Stadthold cauliflower. - A late variety, with a good, tight head and about the same growth habit as the hard Dutch variety, not widely grown in France. Walheren hard cauliflower. - A very late variety, to be sown in late March, first half of April, for autumn production. Sown in May or June, like broccoli, it spends the winter very well and apples very early in the spring. Excellent, tight-grained and firm. Giant Naples cauliflower. - About as hardy as Walkeren's, very large, very tall, very large head, firm, tight grain. English hard cauliflower. - Very late and resistant to cold. Alger cauliflower. - Very vigorous, with a large, high stem, a little late. Sicilian black cauliflower. - Vigorous and hardy; sown in autumn, it overwinters and apples in spring. New or little-known varieties include: Fournier's improved all-season hard cauliflower. - Similar to the old hard cauliflower, but a few days earlier; large, globular head with tight, white seeds; suitable for autumn cultivation. Châlons improved cauliflower. - Magnificent species with very large head, fine, tight grain, very firm, does well in autumn, its main season. The Dupanloup house in Paris, from which we obtained these two varieties, won first prize for this variety in 1885. Early dwarf Alleaume cauliflower. - Short stalk, large head with tight, white seeds; suitable for early crops. Lemaître short-stalked cauliflower. - Very good variety, early white, fairly large. Giant Naples cauliflower, half-early. - High-yielding variety, should be planted quite far apart. SEEDS. - Cauliflower seed is extremely difficult to obtain pure, which explains why it is always so expensive, costing from 70 to 120 francs per kilogram. When a variety is localized, it reproduces freely; the same variety sown elsewhere will produce bastardized plants. To harvest good cauliflower seeds, sow in September. In February or March, or even April, depending on the region, when they are ready for harvest, you choose the best-formed, stocky, vigorous plants, with a firm, tight head, free from small leaves mixed with grain. We cover the formed apple with a leaf to prevent it from hardening off; when it starts to open, it will rise, so it must be uncovered; we often water around the stem with the neck of the watering can. When the seedlings start to bloom, pinch off the tips of the most vigorous ones to feed the branches below. Watch out for aphids, and destroy them by spraying with salt water or nicotine, or sprinkling with powdered quicklime. As the siliques ripen, cut them off and lay them out on a cloth to dry in the sun; all that's left to do is winnow and clean them; it's said that the seed that's ripe first is the best. Seeds are good for five years; 30 grams contain 9880 seeds. BROCOLI Brassica Botrytis cymosa Broccoli (fig. 20) is an excessively late variety of cauliflower. It is assumed that all our early varieties are descended from this race, which itself comes from kale. The leaves are longer, narrower, more numerous, less darkly colored, with stronger, whiter veins than in cauliflower. The stalk becomes much FIG. 20. - Broccoli cauliflower. more voluminous, the apples in the whites are generally very large, fairly firm and very fine-grained. CULTIVATION. - Cultivation differs little from that of cauliflower, but is much easier. Sow from April to June in nurseries. Transplant if possible, and plant out when strong enough, at least 60 cm apart in all directions for large varieties such as Mammoth, and 50 cm apart for others. Hoe often and water copiously during the summer. Between each cabbage and in the false row, lettuces, romaine, chicory, etc. are counter-planted, or purslane, radishes, etc. are sown. In the south, south-west and part of western France, broccoli winters quite well without any shelter, but in the north it must be protected from frost. The most practical way to do this is to lay it down, face north, and cover as much of the stalk as possible with soil up to the first leaves. It must therefore be planted deep, and the best way is to adopt furrow cultivation; plant at the bottom, and when winter comes all you have to do is lay the plant on one side and bring the soil over it. VARIETY. - Early white broccoli. - Very early, easy to grow, very hardy, apples well and tightly, fine-grained, firm, keeps for quite a long time. Easter broccoli. - Small, very early variety, many grayish leaves, very regular, medium-sized head, firm, tight-grained; very good quality. Ordinary white broccoli. - Very hardy, semi-late variety, reaching a high volume; fairly large, very white, tight head; keeps for a long time without spreading. Roscoff white broccoli. - Fairly early variety, resembling early white broccoli, of which it is probably only a sub-variety; fairly large, regular, tight, rounded, hard-grained head; keeps well, widely grown in Brittany, mainly around Quimper, highly esteemed in England. Mammoth white broccoli. - Very late variety, very hardy; large, white head, tight, fine-grained, rounded and firm; highly recommended. Angers early white broccoli. - Very good, hardy variety with good production. Late white broccoli from Angers. - Good hardy variety with very large, very white heads. Purple broccoli. - Breed improved by t4 FIG. 21 - Broccoli violet branchu. market gardeners from Bordeaux, very hardy; fairly large, purplish apple, highly esteemed in the South-West. Branchy purple broccoli (fig. 21). - Widely cultivated throughout the Midi. Leaves are very dark purple, broad and somewhat wavy or curled. The shoots are also purple, long and form small apples at the ends. These broccolis are much sought-after11. by the working class, who eat them like green asparagus; they are tender and very tasty. Extra-early white broccoli. - New variety, highly praised. Very white, fine-grained, medium-sized head; fairly hardy. SEEDS. - Broccoli seed is easier to harvest than cauliflower seed, and less expensive. It requires the same care in cultivation and the same precautions in harvesting. When the stalks are strong and loaded with a quantity of sometimes very heavy capsules, to prevent them from being broken by the wind, they are tied to stakes or slats. When the fruit begins to ripen, care must be taken to keep out the birds, which are quite fond of it and must be chased away with scarecrows. It keeps well for five years. COMMON CIBBAGE Allium fistulosum L. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant from Siberia (from the Kirghiz country to Baïcal); according to Donn, it was introduced in 1629. GROWING. - Chives are propagated from seed, sown in March or April and again in August, either in the field or in a nursery in good, well-smoked, recently tilled soil; the seed is lightly covered and lightly treaded. If sown in a nursery, when the young plants are strong enough, they are transplanted in place, either in beds or in borders, after trimming the roots, as is done for onions. Water lightly to facilitate recovery; other care consists of weeding and hoeing, and good watering in summer. This plant can also be propagated by dividing the stems, which are kept over winter under a leaf shelter, to be planted in spring. However, as it goes to seed every year, and provides many seeds, it is preferable to sow it, as it is more vigorous. In harsh winters, it should be covered with dry leaves or earth, and if you don't want to run out, place the clumps under a frame. VAriérés. - Ciboule commune. - Most commonly grown, hardy, elongated bulges, copper-red, very productive, fast-growing. Ciboule blanche hâtive. - Smaller than the previous variety in all its parts, with shorter, pinkish-white bulges; stiff, short, dark green, glaucous leaves. Less strong, with a finer flavor than common chives; more sensitive to cold. SEEDS. - The plant goes to seed in the second year, and is harvested in August; it is collected and processed like onions. It keeps well for three years; 30 grams contain around 2000 seeds. MAlaDIES. - When it develops rapidly, chives are sometimes subject to scald like shallots; this disease is due to the development of an underground fungus (Rhizoctonia) which attacks the roots and causes the plants to die. There are few remedies for this disease; just pull out the diseased clumps as soon as you notice them. USES. - Chives are frequently used in cooking, and the leaves are used as condiments in salads and omelettes. In the south of France, country people eat them raw with bread. CIBOULE VIVACE or CIBOULE DE SAINT-JACQUES Allium lusitanicum Lam. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant, native to the same regions as the above. CULTIVATION. - This breed is distinguished from the others by its numerous, elongated, reddish-brown bulbs and large, stiff, glaucous-green leaves. It does not produce fertile seeds. A few flower stalks develop in spring, but the ovaries remain sterile. It can be propagated by dividing clumps and separating them in March or April. Same cultivation care and uses as for the previous species. It is sometimes confused with the chive: however, it is easy to avoid confusion, as the chive is much less voluminous in all its parts. CIBOULET Allium Schœnoprasum L. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, found growing wild in southern France, temperate and northern Europe, Siberia, Kamchatka, northern America (Lake Huron). Cultivated for over two thousand years. CULTIVATION. - This plant, generally known as civet, reproduces by bursting its clumps in March or April; it is planted in borders at 20 cm in all directions, or in flowerbeds. Hoe often, water during the summer and spread a good mulch over the beds or around the plants. As these plants only need to be renewed every three or four years, every winter they are "terreauteed", i.e., after a good hoeing, about 4 or 5 centimetres of compost is spread over the bed or borders. Chives can withstand the coldest weather, but even so, it's a good idea, especially in northern climates, to cover them with leaves or manure. As they don't grow at this time of year, if you want leaves, pull up a few clumps and put them under a frame, on a warm layer as close as possible to the glass. You can even put them in pots and place them on the benches of a greenhouse. SEEDS. - Although chives produce a number of flower stalks topped by a bunch of purplish-red flowers, they do not produce fertile seeds. We have tried several times to get them to produce seeds by artificial fertilization, but have never succeeded. DISEASES. - According to our observations, this plant appears to be disease-free. USES. - More or less the same as the common spring onion; however, it is more frequently used in salads, herb omelettes and ham; it also goes well with snails. CUCUMBER Cucumis sativus L. Cucurbitaceae. ORIGIN. - An annual plant native to India, where it has been cultivated for over three thousand years; introduced into China two centuries before the Christian era. The cucumber is a creeping plant, with angular stems, rough to the touch and flexible; the alternate leaves are right-angled or shallowly cut; the flowers are yellow, single-petaled, cut into five roughly equal divisions, solitary, or more often in bunches of seven, eight or more, depending on the variety; it is mainly the male flowers that are grouped in this way and in greater numbers; but there is always a female flower, which can be recognized by the ovary already formed before the flower blooms. The flower is composed of a style with three stigmas, and three or four stamens without anthers. Female flowers are usually solitary, sometimes geminate. The fruit is cylindrical, oblong, smooth or lined with protuberances ending in a thorn, sometimes quite prickly. The rind is yellow, green or yellowish; the flesh is firm, transparent and watery. Cucumber cultivation is much the same as that of the melon, which it resembles in its botanical characteristics. It thrives in a variety of well-prepared, fertilizer-rich soils, but seems to do best in soft, slightly damp soils. The first cucumbers are sown in well-prepared soil from late March to June. This soil can be prepared in several ways. Some growers make holes 30 to 40 centimetres square, as deep, and 1m 20 apart. These holes are filled with good warm manure, which is firmly tamped down, covered with a few centimetres of soil and then sown. This is not a new process, but it gives fairly good results, especially in strong soils, as only a little soil is disturbed at a time. The most commonly used method consists in opening trenches, 25 to 40 centimetres wide and 20 centimetres deep. These are filled with fresh or half-consumed manure, compacted well and then covered with the looser soil removed from the trench; this is then stirred and crushed again with the spade. Rake over the whole to form a kind of ridge, and sow on the top of this ridge, after having formed a small trough where the seeds are to be placed; better still, trace a small radius with the hoe, sow along the whole line and cover with sifted loam mixed with half the soil; this precaution is essential for strong soils if you want good results. You can also sow in 10-centimeter pots placed on warm beds and without a frame; when the plants have developed their first two leaves, place them in well-prepared soil. This method works well: plants raised in this way produce earlier than seedlings planted in situ, but produce less: we have carried out comparative trials. When you have good soil at your disposal, i.e. sufficiently fertilized and fresh, you can operate in a different way. Once the soil has been well ploughed and fertilized, hoe it into rays 8 to 10 centimetres deep and 1.5 metres apart, and bring the soil from the edge of the rays to the middle, where the path should be, so that it is high; 50 centimetres from each side of the main ray, draw a small line for planting Romaines, which will be removed before harming the cucumbers; sow the seeds 10 centimetres apart on the line, cover with the mixture indicated above, or soil if fine enough, and water. Towards the end of April, this method can be tried with success. Once the young shoots have developed their fourth leaf, we recommend pinching them back, as this first pinch will soon give rise to four new branches, which will lengthen appreciably with their own particular vigor. The buds themselves will be pinched off at their third leaf, giving rise to a new series of branches which will be left to their own devices, but the tips of any that overgrow will be trimmed. Other care consists of watering during the hot season, hoeing, weeding and spreading a good mulch over the surface of the beds or at least around the plants. When cucumbers are grown for canning, they should be picked small and green. Picking should be done every two days, and the fruit should never be allowed to swell if you intend to pick small ones, as the crop would soon be exhausted; it's better to mark a few plants and let all the fruit swell. With a little care and time, con- combers can be rowed in the same way as peas, but with numerous branches. The first ascent of the stems is facilitated by tying them with rushes, after which they cling to themselves with their tendrils. They can also be trained in espaliers, as practiced in England and Russia, and directed as desired, as they lend themselves well to all sorts of shapes, provided you have the time to visit them often. Indeed, all these methods are better suited to an amateur than to a market gardener, who at this time of year is overwhelmed with work. In England, where cucumbers are grown extensively, special greenhouses are devoted to them, with the stalks attached to trellises a few centimetres from the glass, and when the whole greenhouse is furnished, the effect produced by the fruit hanging from all sides is quite original. VARIETIES. - Green cucumber, Petit de Paris. - A vigorous, high-yielding plant, much appreciated by confectioners, with small, attractive green fruits. Excellent variety for green harvesting. Generally grown everywhere. Large yellow cucumber. - Hardy, productive variety, producing beautiful fruit, good for green harvesting, generally grown everywhere. Very long green cucumber from China. - Little-known, new variety, fairly productive. Picked young, the fruit is long, green, with a few spines. Particularly suitable for candying. Ordinary long green cucumber. - A very good variety for outdoor use, giving fairly good yields, with long, green, good-quality fruit. Very large white Bonneuil cucumber. - An old variety with very large fruit, very productive, perhaps the hardiest, grown extensively around Paris for the perfume industry. Unsuitable for green harvesting, due to the yellow color of the fruit. Russian embroidered cucumber. - An early variety, producing small, dull yellow fruits dotted with small grayish lines, giving them a dirty appearance; can be grown for green harvesting. Long green Athens cucumber. - Vigorous, stocky, long, large fruit, keeps well, very hardy and fairly productive. Rollison's telegraph cucumber. - Variety bred by an English gardener, Mr. Walkelm, head gardener at the Manorhouse in Tooting, highly esteemed in England, where it is most commonly grown; long, early, crisp fruit; suitable for forced cultivation. Fournier cucumber, long green, early finish. - A new variety, very vigorous and fairly early; long, not very thorny, green fruit, very good for cultivation in the garden and for pickling. Fine Meaux gherkin cucumber. - New variety, not yet widespread, very productive, early, very good for preserving. Bourbonne improved gherkin cucumber - New variety, very productive, long, firm, green fruit, very good for preserving. Large, green, early gherkin. - New variety, high production, green, oblong, slightly elongated fruit, very good for confectioners. The following varieties are also grown: Early yellow cucumber from Holland. - Early white cucumber. - Parisian long white cucumber (fig. 22). Among the best English varieties are: Long green cucumber (Gladiateur). - Munroë long green cucumber. - Green half-long Bed-Fordshire cucumber. - Pike's defiance cucumber. - Man-of-Kant long green cucumber. - Duhe of Edinburgh green cucumber. - Green lony cucumber Doctor Livingstone. - Marquis of Lorne long green cucumber. - Tender and True green cucumber. We will mention a few other varieties of various origins. Quedlembourg giant long green cucumber. - This variety has not given us very good results in the garden. Full green Tuscan cucumber. - Very good variety for the Midi. Green Goliath cucumber. - Boston pick- ling cucumber. - Long green Cardiff cucumber. - A new, little-known variety, producing fruit 30 to 40 cm long. Almost all these varieties do not perform well in northern France when grown outdoors. SEEDS. - To obtain good seeds, choose FIG. 22 - Parisian long white cucumber. a few plants. When the fruit is characteristic of the variety, we mark it with stakes and add labels. We leave the fruit on the stalks until it begins to rot, then take out the seed, put it in a cloth and wash it with plenty of water. Dry in the shade. It keeps well for eight years. 30 grams contain around 1,500 seeds, and a liter weighs 500 grams. slugs and pests. - In addition to the slugs and snails that eat cucumbers, especially when they start to grow, cucumbers are also affected by a parasitic disease known as sucker disease. This is a small microscopic fungus that develops on the underside of the leaves, covering them with white or yellowish dust. Plants affected by this disease should be watered for a few days with a solution of lime and copper sulfate; if the disease persists, the sickest leaves should be removed and burned. This disease prefers etiolated, sickly plants, especially those lacking water. USES. - Cucumbers have long been used as food: their flesh is white, unpalatable, not very nutritious, and only suitable for strong stomachs. It is widely consumed in hot countries, due to its refreshing but somewhat laxative properties. It is eaten raw, in salads, with a strong seasoning, or cooked with lean or fat, and drizzled with the juices of roasted meats: raw, it is indigestible; cooked, it refreshes. The first fruits, picked before they are ripe and preserved in vinegar with various herbs, are known as gherkins, and frequently served on tables to stimulate the appetite. Cucumber pulp is used to make cucumber ointment, a cosmetic that is said to soften the skin. They are combined with sweet almonds to make calming and refreshing emulsions. SNAKE CUCUMBER Cucumis fiexuosus. Cucurbitaceae. ORIGIN. - India. CULTIVATION. - This plant is cultivated like melons, of which it is only a form; so it is wrong to call it a cucumber: it is called a snake because of the peculiarity of its fruits, which resemble a large contoured snake. We've had some plants whose fruits have become quite large and were not contoured: they were club-shaped; they ripened; they tasted more like melons than cucumbers. This plant is easy to grow. It is very hardy and more resistant to heat than gherkin cucumbers. SEEDS. - When the fruit is ripe, the seed is removed and cared for in the same way as for melons. MAlabiEs. - Virtually disease-free. USES. - When young, the fruit is used in the same way as gherkins, i.e. pickled in vinegar. This is the only use we know of. Cucumis Anguria L. Cucumis echinatus Mœnch. ORIGIN. - Annual plant from Jamaica; highly prized variety in Brazil, in Montevideo and Rio-Janeiro. GROWING. - Fruits are small, green and lined with fleshy, pointed, slightly curved protuberances, some of which form spines. The plant should be sown a little late, in May, to ensure sufficient warmth for rapid development. Same cultivation care as gherkin cucumber. USES. - Fruits can be preserved in vinegar or boiled and cooked in butter. GROSSED CUCUMBER Cucumis myriocarpus. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant of doubtful origin. Fruits are very small, quite good to eat, but bristling with long greenish hairs. Same cultivation and uses as above. ANE CUCUMBER Ecbalium agreste. ORIGIN. - Plant with perennial root, which becomes very large; small fruits, supported by a long, straight stalk, have the property of throwing their seeds forcefully and quite far, which is a great surprise to people unfamiliar with them. USES. - The fruits have been advocated as edible, but their pungent, bitter taste has caused them to be rejected. Cucurbits Cucurbita L. Cucurbitaceae. The squash genus includes all the varieties of Cucurbitaceae included under the names pumpkin, giraumon, gourd. In spite of the large number of varieties that exist, there are only three main races that cannot cross-fertilize each other; it is on these principles that M. Naudin's classification is based, to which we conform. CULTIVATION. - The cultivation of these different races is more or less the same. Squash are sown in the open ground, at the same time as cucumbers, in the second half of April, or in the first days of May. Pits are dug 45 to 60 centimetres wide and 15 or 20 centimetres deep. Fill them with good horse manure, mixed with other fermentable detritus. The manure is heavily compacted by walking on it. Cover the manure with loose soil, or potting compost mixed with vegetable garden soil. Sow three or four seeds per hole, cover with 4 cm and water. Instead of sowing in the field, you can sow in pots on warm layers and, when the cotyledons have developed, place them in the holes. Make a small basin around each plant and water. The distance between each hole varies according to the vigour of the variety you intend to grow. Generally speaking, 2 meters are required for small varieties, and 3 meters for others. When the squash start to grow, select the first two stems, then cut immediately above them; these stems soon grow vigorously. When they have reached 1.50 m, they are "marcotte", i.e. placed in a small gutter. They are held in this state by a small hook, and covered with soil. The buried part soon takes root, resulting in better vegetation. This operation can be performed two or three times on the same stem. On each of these stems, only one fruit is left; then the end of the branch two leaves above is pinched off; this must wait until the fruit is well knotted. A few days later, pinch back any fruit that has grown back into the leaf axils. Because of their very rapid growth and their herbaceous, watery constitution, these plants need copious watering in summer, especially if you want huge fruits, such as we have sometimes obtained weighing 80 to 100 kilograms, which is not uncommon, especially with large yellow pumpkins. Light hoeing is done at the base, and good, fat manure is used to mulch the crop. In general, farmers sow squash on piles of compost, or decomposing rubbish, and leave them to their own devices. The fruit develops quite well, but never becomes large, and this is just a fancy crop; these plants give better results grown in open fields. A few years ago, we planted them among our tomatoes, and as they were tied fairly high, the squash developed perfectly without harming the tomatoes. We encourage you to try this system, as you won't lose any ground. BREEDS AND VARIETIES. - Here is the list of cultivated races and varieties, according to M. Naudin's classification. Potir ons. Cucurbita maxima W. et A. ORIGIN. - Native to Guinea and cultivated for less than 2000 years. VArieres. - Large white pumpkin. - Vigorous variety, very large fruit, smooth dirty-white or yellowish rind, fine flesh with little color. Large yellow pumpkin. - The largest of all pumpkins; fruits weighing 80 to 100 kilograms or more are not uncommon. Very good, firm yellow flesh; prized in Paris markets and in the North. Green Spanish pumpkin. - Vigorous variety, medium-sized fruit, smooth, hard, green rind, succulent flesh, good keeping qualities, highly esteemed in the Midi region. Large green pumpkin. - Old variety, fairly vigorous, large fruit, cracked or embroidered rind, fairly hardy, good quality, little grown today. Bright red Étampes pumpkin. - Medium-sized fruit, with fairly wide, very pronounced ribs; bright orange-yellow rind; excellent firm, succulent flesh, keeps well, very hardy, highly recommended. Potiron gris de Boulogne. - Variety resembling the green Spanish pumpkin, very vigorous, bronze-green rind, fairly large fruit, fairly thick, bright yellow flesh, keeps well and is of excellent quality. FIG. 23: Turban squash. Ohio squash. - American variety, small fruit, very mealy yellow flesh. Valparaiso squash. - American variety, elongated lemon-shaped fruit, medium size, barely marked ribs, dirty gray, criss-crossed with small brodeE. BERGER, Vegetables. 12 very fine ries, fairly sweet pale yellow flesh, fruit does not keep well. Giraumon turban or Bonnet turc, Bonnet de prêtre (fig. 23). - Highly esteemed in the Midi, it is easily recognized by its turban or cap shape; very good, succulent, floury and sweet flesh. One of the best species to grow for small households. We also grow the following varieties: Brown squash. - Hubbard green squash. - Olive squash. - Valencia squash. - Small Chinese giraumon. - Eggplant squash. Pumpkin or Pepo squash. Cucurbita Pepo L. ORIGIN. - From southern Asia, according to Naudin; from America, according to some botanists; according to De Candolle, origin doubtful. VARIETIES. - Varieties belonging to this race develop less than those belonging to the pumpkin race. Leaves less large and with fairly pronounced lobes; branching stems very large, with strong, coarse and sometimes thorny hairs (fig. 24); medium-sized fruit generally of good quality and shelf life; stalk very hard at maturity and marked by five prominent angles. Seeds are smaller than in pumpkins, and almost always spotted or margined. Patagonian squash. - An old-growth variety, vigorous and hardy, very productive. Fruits 20 cm long, longitudinally marked with five regular, prominent ribs, good quality. Brazilian sugar gourd. - Small-sized variety, good production, very hardy, short, oblong, warty fruit with sweet yellow flesh, good keeping qualities. Marrow squash. - Runner variety with thin stem, deeply lobed foliage, small oblong fruit, FIO. 24 - Pumpkin, leaves and flowers. yellow or yellowish-white. It is a sub-variety of the Patagonian squash. The fruit is eaten young, when it is about half to a third of the size. When eaten at maturity, they lose much of their quality. They are highly prized in England, where they are widely consumed, and are known as Vegetable marrow. White non-runner squash. - Variety with short, thick stem, deeply lobed leaves, mottled with gray; elongated fruit, slightly swollen at the bottom. Flesh yellowish. Consumed like the previous variety. Touraine pumpkin. - Hardy variety, producing very good, huge fruit, but of mediocre quality. Italian squash or Coucourzelle. - Non-running, productive and hardy, with elongated fruits, spotted or mottled with yellow. In Italy, it is eaten in large quantities; it is used young and immediately formed. In this state, it makes an excellent and highly appreciated vegetable. Early cou-tors squash. - Courgeron de Genève, etc. Patisson. This genus, although classified in this race, is very different from the above-mentioned varieties; it is mainly grown as an ornamental plant, and is generally known by the synonyms Bonnet de prêtre, Bonnet d'électeur, Artichaut de Jérusalem, etc. Housewives usually place them on fireplaces as ornaments. These are non-running plants: pretty green leaves, with few lobes; very depressed, broad fruits, divided into obtuse lobes, which usually turn towards the umbilicus; very hard, orange-green yellow or flagellated green on a white background, depending on the variety; white, tender flesh, flabby and not very tight. VARIETIES. - Among the best varieties, let's mention : Yellow patisson. - Patisson panaché amélioré - Patisson galeux. - American white patisson (new). Coloquinte. CULTIVATION. - Very vigorous, but little cultivated; same cultivation as previous varieties. USES. - Can be used to hide a few ugly corners in the vegetable garden. They can even be used to decorate arbors, by climbing them up trellises. Their rapid growth makes them a first-rate plant for this purpose; what's more, the fruits, which are generally variegated or streaked, add a very pleasing decorative effect. The fruits are only picked when the first frost has passed over them, once dry, and when the inside is removed, they can be used to set seeds, which keep better than VARIETY. - These plants are very prone to interbreeding, which explains the indefinite number of varieties; the most commonly grown are: Striped pear coloquint. - Coloquinte galeuse. - Flat striped Coloquinte. - Pear-shaped coloquinte. - Oviform coloquinte. - Early apple coloquint. - Maliform coloquinte. - Coloquinte miniature. Bottle gourd, Calebasse, gourd. Cacurbita lagenaria L. ORIGIN. - From South America. CULTIVATION. - Same cultivation as previous races of coloquintes. These plants must be attached to a few stakes, trellises or oars, otherwise the fruit will develop poorly and not reach its normal shape. VARIETIES. - Some of the best to grow are: 12. Peach gourd. - Widespread everywhere, especially in Saintonge and Angoumois; after emptying the inside, peasants put them in the grape harvest when it is fermenting, then use them as a bottle, and put wine in them, which keeps very fresh. Siphon squash. - Another variety, widely cultivated in the Bordeaux region, and just about everywhere else, when the plant is made to climb, the fruit, which has a very pronounced terminal bulge, becomes very heavy; the neck then lengthens and thins, and the fruit in these conditions is better appreciated; it is not uncommon to find some containing 7 to 8 liters. In wineries, they are used as probes. Club gourd (fig. 25). - Like the previous one, but much larger and less regular. Courge plate de Corse. - A different variety from the above, with rounded, depressed fruits. Powdered pear squash. - A fairly large, pear-shaped variety, used for the same purposes as cucurbits. Butternut squash. Cucurbita moschata Duch. ORIGIN. - According to M. Coignaux, this genus originated in southern Asia. The name musk or moschata comes from the fact that these plants have somewhat musky flesh. GROWING. - Plants are generally very runny, with dark-green leaves that are sparsely lobed and speckled with white. They can also be recognized by the way the stalk spreads at the point of insertion on the fruit, dividing into five lobes and becoming very hard at maturity. VARIETIES. - Among the most esteemed varieties are: Naples solid squash. - Courge cou-tors du Canada. - Courge melonnée de Bordeaux. - VARIETY FIG. 25 - Club gourd. early coat rack. - Easter squash. - Provence nutmeg squash. - Yohohama squash, etc. Among the new varieties that we have not cultivated are: Mission squash. - Very early prolific squash. - Courge brodée de Thoumain, near Guitres (Gironde). - Portugal squash. - Corfu pumpkin. SEEDS. - To harvest the seeds of the different varieties of squash, giraumons, coloquintes, etc., we choose the best shaped, best characterized specimens, take out the seed, spread it on a cloth and leave it to dry in the shade; once it is dry, we enclose it in canvas or paper bags. It keeps well for five years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Squash is sometimes affected by a disease similar to celery uredo, a yellowish dust that clings to the underside of the leaves and acts on them like mildew on vines. Milk of lime and copper sulfate in the same proportions as for vines are excellent remedies. Sometimes, after vegetating for some time, the plant turns yellow and becomes chlorotic; the only remedy is to uproot it. In many cases, this chlorosis is only artificial, and is due to the ravages of the white worm that gnaws at the roots; before uprooting, it is therefore important to ascertain the cause of the disease. Sometimes subterranean fungi develop on the main roots, at the root collar, and in a short time the plant is lost. When young, plants are liable to be eaten by snails and loaches, which are fond of them. USES. - Gourds are frequently used, especially by the poorer classes. They are eaten in a variety of ways, usually cooked to make excellent lean soups or purées. Mixing them with milk, to which they go very well, makes excellent soups, but they are not suitable for weak stomachs. They are also used to make jams, marmalades and preserves similar to sauerkraut. Given to cows, they increase milk secretion. Fruits picked very young and small can be preserved in vinegar like gherkins. They are also used to make CRAMBÉ MARITIME orgeat. - CHOU MARIN Crambe maritima. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant, native to the coasts of Western Europe. Native to our coasts. CULTIVATION. - In France, it is grown very little, but in England, considerable crops are grown; at certain times of the year, London markets abound with this sea cale, which the English hold in high esteem. Crambé is propagated from seed, which must be sown as soon as it matures, in rows, leaving the desired distance between each plant, or better still, in nurseries. To do this, open small gullies 15 or 20 centimetres apart, 4 or 5 centimetres deep, and cover slightly with loose soil or compost. As soon as the seedlings have four or six leaves, place them in moist soil, as far as possible, well prepared and smoked to 60 centimetres in all directions. Seedlings are sown in the same way as cardoons, in bunches of three or four plants per clump. Put in more seeds than you need plants, thin out and water thoroughly. Instead of sowing the seeds as soon as they ripen, you can wait until spring, and sow early on warm beds, in small cups, at a rate of seven or eight seeds each. You can even sow on the bed very thickly, as some of the seeds have lost their ability to germinate and many do not germinate at all. Once the seedlings are strong enough, they can be planted. There is still a way of multiplying them, and it's the safest and the FIC. 26. - Crambe maritima, faster, but for this you need to have old plants at your disposal: we mean by sections or root cuttings. This is done in January and February. You divide old clumps of crambe, as you would an old sorrel plant. Put them in place, then water immediately. No matter how you plant it, you need to give it copious summer watering, frequent hoeing and weeding, and it's only after two or three years of good cultivation that you can begin to harvest; this harvest can last from eight to ten years. Before being released for consumption, crambé must be blanched (fig. 26) like cardoons; otherwise, the taste would be unbearably pungent and unpalatable; it is blanched from August to December. There are several ways to do this, either by imprisoning the stems in flowerpots or hollow tiles, placed side by side, covering the top and surrounding the base with earth so that no light can penetrate, or by using straw bedding, upturned wooden tubs, etc. Crambe can also be forced in the same way as for sorrel. As the roots always tend to emerge from the ground, cut the shoots fairly deeply, and as far as possible, don't let them go to seed, otherwise the plants will soon be exhausted. This plant grows spontaneously in seaside sands, i.e. in salty soils, and it is claimed that by spreading sea salt or ingredients containing brine, such as oyster shells, mussels and other shellfish, around the roots, we have a powerful fertilizer that contributes enormously to vegetation. SEEDS. - To harvest the seed, choose very vigorous clumps. They are left to grow, and when the seeds, which are very large, start to turn yellow, we pick up the stems where they have finished ripening in the shade. They keep for a year, rarely longer. DISEASES, PESTS. - Like all crucifers, crambe maritime is prone, especially when young, to flea beetle, which perforates the young cotyledons and first leaves. We recommend watering with salt water dissolved in limestone, as for cabbages. Slugs and snails are very fond of it, so it should be hunted down. USES. - Petioles are eaten blanched, like asparagus or cardoons, in a white sauce like celery root; cooked with sausage, they are delicious. They have a nutty flavor that's quite appealing. WALNUT CRESS Lepidium sativum. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - An annual plant of doubtful origin, according to De Candolle. I am inclined to believe that it originated in Persia, from where it may have spread to the gardens of India, Syria, Greece, Egypt and as far as Abyssinia: it was introduced into our crops in 1562. The plant is grown in Europe, northern Africa, western Asia and India. CULTIVATION. - Alen cress is an excellent plant, too little cultivated and too little known. Extremely hardy and easy to grow, it thrives almost carefree in any location and on any soil. Watercress is propagated from seed, which is sown almost all year round, except during the coldest months. Seedlings are sown in rays and very thickly. Cover little. During hot spells, sow in the shade, and since it is so easy to set seed, sow at least once a fortnight to avoid running out, and water abundantly if the soil is dry to ensure tender products. VARIETIES. - Cresson alénois frisé. - Deep-cut, almost laciniate, contoured leaves. Cresson alénois à larges feuilles. - Very good species, with broad, slightly serrated leaves, more abundant than in curly cress, less pungent. Cresson alénois doré. - A sub-variety of the previous one, differing in its pale green to yellow foliage, very vigorous and hardy, much appreciated. A few years ago, it was announced as a new variety; this was a mistake, as we found it mentioned in 1789. Dwarf, very curly watercress. - A new variety, producing a small tuft of attractive decorative effect. SEEDS. - Perhaps no other plant reproduces so easily. The seed germinates very quickly. At a temperature of 13 to 15 degrees, it sprouts in eighteen or twenty-two hours. When the stems begin to change color, they are collected and laid out on cloths in the sun. When they begin to dry, they are beaten; the seeds detach very easily. They keep for five years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Slugs and snails are not very fond of them and don't touch them. Only the flea beetle occasionally perforates the first leaves, but this does not cause much damage. We know of no disease that attacks it. USES. - The leaves are used as a salad garnish, or to garnish roasts. In winter, the seeds, because they germinate easily, are used to provide greenery indoors. It can be sown in planters or pots filled with moss or damp sand, in sponges, around a bottle or in clay, which can be given the most original shapes. EARTH CRESS Erysimum præcox. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - Native biennial plant, found in a spontaneous state, growing mainly in damp, shady places and in demolition soil. CULTIVATION. - Sow from March to August, omE. BERGER, Vegetables. 13 bre as much as possible, especially during the summer, in rays, or better, broadcast in beds; use a fork or rake to cover. Emergence is easy. When the plant is strong enough, as it only goes to seed in the second year, it is eaten by picking the largest leaves in succession. In the second year, when the plant goes to seed, one or two more harvests of leaves can be made, then the whole plant is harvested. This is usually done even in the first year. This plant is very hardy and not very fussy about the choice of soil; it does well everywhere; a few weedings and waterings in summer are enough; seedlings must be renewed every year, so that there is always a harvest to be had. SEEDS. - To harvest seeds, let the previous year's seedlings rise. The stems are collected, as with Alen cress, and stored in the same way. It remains good for three years. USES. - The leaves are eaten in salads, mixed with romaine or chicory. They are also used with steak. The English are very fond of this plant. CRESSON DE FONTAINE Sisymbrium Nasturtium L. Cardamine Nasturtium Mœnch. Nasturtium officinale Scop. Cardamine fontana Lamk. Crucifers. ORIGIN. - Perennial, native and spontaneous throughout Europe and northern Asia. Called cailli, watercress, fountain cress, body health, etc. (fig. 27), this plant is known and appreciated just about everywhere. CULTIVATION. - Cultivation is not difficult, but a good source of clear water is required. Attempts have been made to grow it in tubs or basins filled with soil, with the water changed frequently, but this method is rarely used except by amateurs. Besides, plants grown in this way are never very beautiful. Once you have a suitable plot of land, you can try growing them, as they are very productive. FIG. 27: Watercress. Most often, we dig pits 40 to 45 centimetres deep, 2, 3 or even 4 metres wide, divided by beds at least 5 or 6 metres wide, which we use for cultivation. These pits should be laid out in such a way that they can be submerged if necessary, and have a slight slope to allow the water to drain off slowly. If, on the other hand, the land is on a slope, and the source is in the upper part, ditches are dug across it, and the water from one will pass into the other successively. But to do this, the water must be well regulated, so that all the pits have water at the same time and none dries out. The size of the pits has no influence whatsoever on good cultivation: we've seen magnificent results obtained with very small spaces. Once the pits have been dug, the bottom is smoked and ploughed, and levelled as best as possible. Once this operation has been completed, cress stems are transplanted 10 or 12 centimetres apart, chosen from among the most vigorous and beautiful. Water is added gradually, and harvesting doesn't begin until the stems are well developed and cover the bottom of the pits. This operation should be carried out in spring and during August. If, on the other hand, you want to propagate cress by sowing, in spring, once the pits have been prepared, you make shallow furrows 20 centimetres apart and sow the seed. Then rake over the whole area, and beat in with a beater. At first, only a thin trickle of water is left to lightly sprinkle the surface; too much will wash the seed away. When the seedling has grown sufficiently, submerge it completely and continue. Propagation by seed is much more time-consuming, and so is rarely practised by true cress growers; the first method we have indicated is the most expeditious and practical, but there are not always enough cress fields to supply the seedlings. Watercress is harvested using large planks or boards, which are placed across the pits. Cutting is done with a serpette, taking care not to disturb the roots, which would be detrimental to future production. After cutting, the roots are pushed up with a long-handled bat. You can even spread a light layer of well-consumed cow manure over the entire surface, which is then pressed down at the same time. Watercress likes shade, and too much heat is harmful. They should therefore be secured with lath or heather trays, placed on prepared frames with strong stakes driven into the soil of the watercress bed. These stakes must be high enough to allow you to work under them easily. In the heat of summer and spring, the same pit can be cut every twenty days. But in winter, reproduction is slower. When extreme cold is expected, watercress should be submerged to keep it from freezing, and the water drained off when the temperature eases. A well-maintained watercress bed can last for several years. When it needs renewing, proceed as described above. SEEDS. - When you want to harvest cress seed, you let some of it rise in spring and, when the stems start to turn yellow, you cut them and dry them by laying them out for a few hours a day in the sun, then you beat them and put them in bags. A liter of seeds weighs 600 grams; 30 grams contain 121,600 seeds. Germination lasts five years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Watercress has few enemies. Flea beetles sometimes pierce the leaves, but this only happens in watercress beds where there has been a lack of water and the plant has suffered. On the other hand, it is prone to being invaded and suffocated by other plants which, although not parasitic, take over the water so quickly that it becomes impossible to grow. These harmful plants are: duckweed, beccabunga speedwell and bergamot. The latter is less harmful than the former, which multiply very quickly. So, when renewing a watercress bed, make sure you don't add any. USES. - Watercress is eaten in salads or raw under roasted meats: the legendary watercress steak is far from out of fashion. Chopped with spinach or sorrel, it makes a delicate dish. JAPANESE CROSN Stachys affinis. Labiatae. ORIGIN. - Japan-China. - Introduced in 1882, propagated by M. Pailleux, who named them after Crosnes, the village in Seine-et-Oise where he lives. M. Naudin has proposed naming this vegetable Stachys tuberifera. GROWING. - Propagates by rhizomes and cuttings taken in spring. Rhizome propagation is preferable; they are planted in April, at a good exposure, in light soil, well amended to 40 or 50 centimetres. Towards the end of May, when the stems have reached 15 or 20 centimetres, they are weeded and ridged. After that, only light weeding is needed to avoid disturbing the rootlets; water during hot spells. Towards the end of October, you can start eating the rhizomes successively throughout the winter; they are all the better for having been freshly plucked. There's no need to fear frost, as they can withstand temperatures of 20 degrees below zero. VARIETY. - Choro-Gi. - New variety announced by M. de Vilmorin. USES. - In this plant, the food part is provided by the rhizome-shaped roots in a pearly white string, the size of an Oxalis crenata. They can be eaten like fresh flageolet beans, or as a garnish around roast meats, fried in boiling fat after having been previously cooked in fatty broth; au gratin with truffles or mushrooms, in simple or mixed salads, in macedoine, in butter with chopped parsley à la maître d'hôtel. They are preserved in vinegar like gherkins and capers, and taste like artichokes. They are a top-quality foodstuff, containing all the substances you need to eat. The yield is sufficiently high for this plant to occupy a place in every home garden. CUMIN OF MALTA Cuminum Cyminum L. Umbelliferae. Native to Upper Egypt. An annual, this plant is sown in the open ground in May. The seeds are used in pastries and liqueurs. COMMON ECHALOTE Allium ascalonicum L. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Ancient authors have, to this day, given Palestine as the homeland of the shallot. It was brought back during the Crusades. It was found in the vicinity of the town of Ascalon; hence the scientific name Allium ascalonicum, corrupted into escaloigne, echalogne and finally échalote. But De Candolle destroys this assertion and says of this plant: "Despite the progress of botanical investigations in the East and India, this form of allium has not been found in the wild with any certainty. It therefore seems to me to be more than ever a modification of cepa, which occurred around the beginning of the Christian era, a modification less considerable than many of those observed in other cultivated plants. CULTIVATION. - The shallot is one of the easiest perennials to grow. It is very hardy and adapts well to any soil. It thrives in new demolition soils and platras, and seems to prefer soils with a certain amount of limestone. Most authors who have written about this plant claim that it does not adapt to recent fertilization; this is a mistake. By using only well-rotted manures, you can smoke the soil immediately before planting, and the shallot will succeed perfectly. Shallots are propagated by their bulbs, which are planted from November to February; autumn plantings are preferable in the south and south-west. Medium-sized bulbs are chosen, and buried so that the top part is level with the soil being worked. In some parts of the Midi and the West, bulbs are planted with a hoe, and the soil is raked as described above for garlic. But in general, and especially in the North, planting is done with a non-tapered planter, or simply with the thumb and forefinger, which is quicker; but the soil must be freshly worked. It is divided into plots of five or six rays, spaced 20 or 25 centimetres apart. The line is set at 20 centimetres. During the course of vegetation, we hoe and weed several times. When the tops begin to yellow, in June or the first two weeks of July, we pull them off and lay them flat on the ground. Leave them like this for three days, turn them over several times, then bring them into a well-aerated attic or shed, early in the morning when the tops are still moist and not brittle, to keep them intact. VARIETIES. - Common shallot. - This variety, which is the most commonly grown, is undoubtedly the best and most esteemed; very hardy, it produces abundantly. There are several other varieties, all derived from this one: Échalote hâtive de Niort. - Bulbs slightly larger than the common shallot; produces less. Échalote grosse de Noisy. - A variety highly esteemed in Paris; grows very large and keeps well. Echalote petite hâtive de Bagnolet. - Bulbs as small as a small spring onion, produces a lot and early. SEEDS. - The common shallot rarely flowers and produces few or no seeds. We have tried every possible means to obtain seeds, but have been unsuccessful. MAlAPiES, NUiSiBlE ANImALS. - In certain areas, shallots are subject to a disease that gardeners call scald, but which is produced by Rhizoctonia allii, a parasitic fungus with whitish or grayish filaments; this parasite attacks the base of bulbs and causes them to rot. We noticed that it always developed on buried clumps. To prevent this disease, which we have seen destroy whole fields of shallots, you need to dig up the diseased plants, and this operation will not only stop the disease, but also make the bulbs grow. 13. Uredo or rust sometimes invades the tops, but this disease only develops in the late season, i.e. when the shallot is ready to be pulled. USES. - Shallots are frequently used in cooking to enhance the flavour of dishes, such as the traditional shallot steak. It is also preserved in vinegar, like and in the company of gherkins. In some places, it's cooked under an open fire, and eaten with pepper or seasoned with oil. It's a delicacy that, it's said, was highly prized by the ancients. Picked young and still tender, the leaves are used as a salad ingredient, and can replace chives. Echalotte is an aperitif, but frequent use is harmful to health. JERSEV SHALLOT Quite a different breed from the common shallot, resembling an onion and tasting a little like one. Leaves are glaucous, long and quite bulbous in the middle. Bulbs are small, averaging six to ten per clump. CULTIVATION. - Same cultivation as the common shallot. SEEDS. - This breed goes to seed every year and produces fertile seed. If sown in July-August, a fairly good crop of bulbs can be obtained the following year. In some parts of the Charentes region, this breed is known as the onion of plenty, and is often confused with the potato onion. USES. - The Jersey shallot is highly esteemed in England and Ireland. It can be used for a host of culinary purposes, such as stews, sauces, or candied in vinegar; it keeps quite well, especially if care has been taken to let it ripen properly. OROINARY SPINACH Spinacia oleracea L. Miller. Chenopodea. ORIGIN. - The origin of this plant is doubtful. Olivier claims to have found it in the wild in Persia; according to FIG. 28 - Common spinach. Cassini, it comes from Asia Minor and was cultivated by the Arabs, to whom we owe its introduction into Europe. It does not appear to have been known to the Greeks or the Romans, although several scholars believe they recognized it in the Greek Crysalachanon. Pierre de Crescence claims that the spiny-fruited species was the first to be cultivated, which would explain the name spinach given to the genus. Spinach has been cultivated in Europe for around two centuries. De Candolle gives Persia as the home of the common spinach, where it has been cultivated for 2,000 years. It is also highly esteemed in China and Manchuria. CULTIVATION. - This is one of the easiest vegetables to grow. It is sown from February to November, in rows spaced 30 to 35 centimetres apart, or broadcast in beds. Cover the seed with the loosest soil possible. Spinach does well in a variety of growing soils, but preferably in low-moisture, well-smoked soil, with good, energetic fertilizers; feces and feather are suitable. When young, watering with liquid manure gives good results. Seedlings sown from February to July go to seed within the year; so, to ensure that you always have some to pick, it's essential to renew seedlings at least every fifteen or twenty days. Water copiously and often. On the other hand, seedlings sown from August to November only come up the following year, in April, after having given an abundant harvest throughout the winter, and round-seeded varieties are preferred. Viroflay spinach has always given us good results. For spring and summer, choose the prickly-seeded varieties, which give a better harvest and rise more slowly than the round-seeded variety; to hasten germination, market gardeners usually soak the seeds in water for twelve or fifteen hours. Once the seeds have sprouted, they need to be watered copiously and often, to prevent them from rising so quickly, and as soon as the plants are sufficiently developed, they can be pulled out for consumption. For winter plants, on the other hand, we start by picking the lower leaves, and only pull them out in spring, when the plant is rising. The most developed leaves are picked one by one, respecting the youngest. This apparently time-consuming operation can be carried out quickly, especially by people who are used to it; women are good at it. In general, market gardeners don't sow spinach on its own; it's always combined with lettuces, lamb's lettuce, chervil, etc. When it's ready to sell, we pull it out, always thinning it out; the roots are used to tie it up in small bunches. VARIETIES. - Spinach has been divided into two classes: prickly-seeded and round-seeded. Spinach with prickly seed (Spinacia spinosa Mœnch). - Common spinach. - A variety closely resembling the wild plant cultivated in some areas. Leaves are long, narrow, sharp, very sagittate and of mediocre quality. English or winter spinach. - A recommendable variety, producing very broad, long, thick leaves; it is very hardy and stands up fairly well to our winters; it is very good and well suited to spring and summer sowing. Epinard camus de Bordeaux. - Probably derived from the previous variety and improved by market gardeners in the Bordeaux area. Produces a rosette of rounded, well-developed, thick leaves; highly esteemed on markets in the South-West region. Round-seeded spinach (Spinacia glabra Miller). - This breed differs from the previous one in its seeds and vegetation. The leaves are broader and fuller, forming a compact, tight tuft; the leaves are fuller in all their parts than the other breed; they are said to taste better. Spinach monstrueux de Viroflay - A highly recommendable variety, producing very broad, sometimes 20 to 25 cm-long, thick leaves; very hardy, suitable for autumn sowing. Flanders spinach. - A widespread variety grown extensively in northern France; broad, hardy leaves; can be sown all year round. Lettuce leaf spinach. - Variety with broad, dark-green, very blistered leaves, spreading, compact clump, medium size, hardy, medium yield. Slow-rising spinach. - A little-known variety, which goes to seed less quickly than its predecessors. Green, blistered leaves; tight, compact clump; good yield, does well sown in autumn. Catillon's lazy spinach. - New variety, broad, thick, slightly blistered leaves, very heat-resistant. SEEDS. - Some authors recommend harvesting seed from spring-sown varieties, as this produces more and faster, but the seed is less nourished and not as good as that taken from autumn-sown plants. It's best to choose autumn-sown plants that have produced several leaf harvests. They start to come up in April, and the seed is ready for harvesting towards the end of June or July, depending on the soil. Generally, the seeds don't ripen all at once, and when you notice that a few plants are turning yellow and that the seeds clustered around the stem are changing color, pull them out and lay them on sheets or blankets in part-shade. From then on, you'll need to spend most of your time with them, until you've finished pulling them out. When they are completely dry, remove them from the stem by passing them between your fingers, clean them and bag them. They keep well for up to four years. 30 grams contain 2360 seeds, a liter weighs 530 grams. DISEASES, PESTS. - Spinach is sometimes affected by a fungus of the miller genus, which attacks the roots and kills the plant in a few days. This disease seems to thrive particularly in chalky, heavily smoked soils, as we have observed several times in our crops. There is no cure for this disease. Cutworms sometimes cause serious damage, cutting the root a few centimeters below soil level, causing the plant to turn yellow and die; the damage is only noticed when the roots are cut out; the best remedy is to destroy these worms by digging up the soil. Cutworms and white grubs are most common in light soils. If Botrytis tenella gives good results in destroying white grubs, as announced, let's hope it will be possible to wipe them out. USES. - Spinach is frequently used in cooking. Deprived of its primary water, it is a light, healthy food. It is used in lean soups. It can be prepared in a variety of ways, with butter or fat, or mixed with sorrel to soften its acidity. Alexandre Dumas was very fond of spinach, and prepared it in his own way: after boiling it, he seasoned it with goose fat. The leaves dye the wool prepared with bismuth nitrate a bright, solid, greenish lemon-yellow. Dried leaves produce a green alcoholic dye used to color table liqueurs. ESTRAGON Artemisia dracunculus L. Oligosporus condimentarius H. Cass. Composites. ORIGIN. - Herbaceous perennial, native to northern Asia, introduced into our cultures in 1596, known as serpentine, dragon herb, dragone, etc. FIG. 29: Tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus). "CULTURE. - Tarragon does not produce fertile seeds, so it is propagated by separating clumps in spring or July. It is generally planted in well-ploughed, well-smoked beds with good exposure. Lines are drawn and planted at 30 to 35 centimetres in all directions, watering as soon as planting is done and copiously during hot spells. In May, spread a good mulch over the beds, and loosen the soil surface with good hoeing. Although native to Siberian regions, tarragon fears the extreme cold of our winters, and to preserve it as frost approaches, cover the clumps with a few centimetres of compost, manure, straw or, better still, dry leaves; planting should be renewed every three years. To make sure you don't run out of tarragon in winter, place trunks on the boards; surround the trunks with thick stoves, rearranging and renewing them often. You can also prepare good layers, place the chests and panels on them, then pull out the clumps of tarragon and place them as tightly as possible, covering them with 6 centimetres of potting soil. When the stems start to appear, air them frequently. Cover with straw mats overnight to keep the stems fresh all winter long. Seeds of a plant called Russian tarragon (Artemisia Redwskii), which has the habit and appearance of tarragon but nowhere near the flavour, are commercially available; unscrupulous seed merchants sell the seeds of this plant as those of true tarragon, which produces none. The annual Tagetes lucida has also been recommended as a possible replacement for tarragon, its leaves having much the same odour and flavour. We doubt that cultivation of this plant will become widespread. SEEDS. - We have already said that tarragon does not produce seeds. The flower, however, is well formed. All the organs are perfect, so why this infertility? Could it be that too much heat at flowering time over-excites certain generative organs to the detriment of others? We can't say for sure, but there's something abnormal going on to keep this plant sterile. In the past, it must have produced a few seeds, because all the old authors who wrote about horticulture before 1800 mention it as multiplying from seed. Perhaps this is a mistake. DISEASES AND PESTS. - We know of no disease or insect that attacks this plant, probably because of its strong odor. USES. - Tarragon is widely used as an excellent condiment and salad dressing. It is also used to make omelettes and in pickles, which are preserved in vinegar. By macerating it for a few hours in vinegar, it flavors it. In Persia, people eat it mixed with bread. FLORENCE FENNEL Fœniculum dulce L. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant native to Italy. CULTIVATION. - Florence fennel is sown in March-April, in shallow rays 45 to 50 centimeters apart. The seed is lightly covered, and sprouts within a few days. When the plants are sufficiently developed, they are thinned out so that the remaining ones are 10 to 15 centimetres apart. During hot spells, water copiously and hoe several times. Young plants that have been thinned out can be transplanted into a bed prepared for this purpose; they recover quite well and produce a crop that succeeds those left in place. In July-August, a new seedling is sown for winter harvesting. When the base of the petioles is sufficiently developed and the whole forms a fairly voluminous whole, the soil is mounded and brought in around it. A fortnight later, you can start harvesting, continuing successively with the most advanced and the first ridged plants. SEEDS. - Fennel seeds are harvested from the first seedlings sown in spring. Choose the most beautiful plants that come up in summer; the seed is best harvested in August-September. It degenerates easily; it keeps well for four years. 30 grams contain 3450 seeds, a liter weighs 240 grams. DISEASES, PESTS. - Young fennel plants are sometimes eaten by large yellow slugs that gnaw at the base of the stalks; they can be destroyed by skewering them with a wire rod; or they can be kept away by putting unleached ash or quicklime around the stalks. USES. - The petiole base is eaten after blanching, like celery. The leaves are used to garnish cold meats. They can be boiled and eaten as a salad, or used to flavour certain dishes. A few leaves boiled with chestnuts give them an excellent taste. In France, fennel is little used. A knob of fennel is added to the court bouillon in which fish is cooked; but in Italy, it is the leading vegetable, and this is probably the origin of the popular Italian saying: Finocchio e pane mi bastan (I only need fennel and bread). In Italy and Provence, young shoots are eaten in soup or salad; on the Cape of Good Hope, they are cooked or roasted. Seeds are preserved with gherkins. Seeds are used to make liqueurs. The whole plant turns dark yellow. The essential oil is widely used in perfumery. BITTER FENNEL Fœniculum vulgare Gært. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - A perennial that grows naturally in France, preferably in rubble, roadsides and dry, arid places. Some authors give this plant as originating in Africa, where it grows abundantly in wasteland, to such an extent that it is considered a weed. CULTIVATION. - Same as Florence fennel. USES. - This variety is little cultivated; as a vegetable, it is preferred to the superior Florence fennel; in some regions, it is grown for its seeds, which are used to make liqueurs. SWEET FENNEL Fœniculum officinale. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Same origin as the previous variety. Perennial, biennial, distinguished from the preceding race by its less slender, thicker stems, more glaucous in color, by its sheathing petioles, swollen at the bottom, by its seed, which is much larger and twice as long, and finally by its less elevated, stockier habit. CULTIVATION. - Same care in cultivation. USES. - Same uses. Orobus faba Brot. Faba vulgaris Mill. Faba vicia L. Faba major Rivinus. Potamogeton bifolium Lapeyr. Leguminosae, Papilionaceae. ORIGIN. - According to De Candolle, the cultivation of fava beans dates back to prehistoric times in Europe, Egypt and Arabia. It was introduced into Europe, probably by the Western Aryans, during their first migrations (Pelasges, Celts, Slavs). It was later brought to China, a century before the Christian era, and even later to Japan, and more recently to India. As for the spontaneous habitat, it's possible that it was doubled a few thousand years ago, one center being south of the Caspian Sea, the other in northern Africa. The bean would therefore originate from the south of the Caspian Sea and has been cultivated for over 4,000 years. CULTIVATION. - Fava beans thrive in all types of well-smoked soils, but they do best in strong, free soils. The first beans are sown in October, and then fortnight by fortnight until March, so as not to run out. After all, they're only eaten green and half-formed, and successive sowings mean you can enjoy them for a long time, and make good use of them. Depending on the soil, they can be planted in rows of 40 or 50 centimetres, or in beds of four rows of 35 or 40 centimetres. Follow a 60-centimeter path. We sow at 50 centimetres, on the line, further apart if necessary when the soil is good, because with these kinds of plants we must avoid confusion,

which causes them to wither and delays early production. 237 In most cases, the lines are traced with a tracing tool, or simply stretched out with a string, then the beans are sown by pushing them in with the thumb at a distance of around 5 centimetres, or with a lightly eulogized planter. In either case, a little soil is brought in to cover them. In the south-west of France, farmers sow beans in furrows, at least 70 or 80 centimetres apart, putting four or five rows in each. This system is not bad in that the plants, although a little tightly packed, still receive air and don't wither. Production is generally very good. When the beans have reached a height of 7 to 8 centimetres, the first light hoeing is carried out when all traces of dew have disappeared. This operation is repeated every few weeks. Beans should never be watered, as the high humidity causes them to turn yellow. When the plant has reached a height of 35 to 40 centimetres, we pinch off the tip, which usually coincides with the tenth or twelfth leaf, and pinch off the top. The purpose of this operation is to stop the upward movement of the plant and to force the sap into the lower parts of the plant, which greatly advances fruit formation. In Angoumois, Saintonge and Quercy, beans are sown in small furrows with a forked or flat hoe; this is not a bad way of working, but it cannot be applied to all soils. VAriéTés. - Aguadulce bean with long pods (fig. 30). - One of the best varieties to grow in gardens, the pods are very long, from 35 to 40 cen- FIG. 30. - Aguadulce bean with long pods. 239 centimeters by 4 centimeters thick, they are particularly suitable for green sales. Seville bean. - An early variety with very long pods, highly recommended for green sales. Fêve de Windsor. - Hardy variety with numerous short pods, containing only two seeds. Fêve Julienne. - Variety with numerous pods containing only three beans, they are upright and grouped in threes and fours; very hardy, very good for green manure. Fève Julienne verte. - Distinguished from the previous variety by the green color of the bean, it is a later variety. Early dwarf broad bean. - A completely dwarf variety, it does not exceed 35 or 40 centimeters in height, with small, upright, very numerous pods, grouped in twos or threes, containing two or three square, thick, swollen beans. Suitable for early and forced cultivation. Fève de Mazagran. - A very good variety for large-scale cultivation, with numerous pods and small seeds. Fève naine verte de Beck. - Bean with white flowers. - Beans with long pods. - Violet bean, etc. SEEDS. - To harvest good seed, you must sow with this intention, i.e. treat the plants with the cultivation care we have indicated, but leave all the fruit, not picking any, as the first to form are the best and earliest. The plants are left to dry on the spot, then brought in, and when the weather is bad, they are shucked. The seed keeps well for five or six years. However, we recommend choosing seed from the previous year. 500 grams contain around 250 to 300 beans; a liter weighs 620 grams. MAlADIES, PEST ANIMALS. - Sometimes in poor soils, beans are affected by rust or uredo. It is difficult to destroy this disease, which rapidly invades plants, and the remedy we have indicated for chicory is the only one that has given us good results. The bean's cruelest enemy is the black aphid (Aphis nigra), which develops more especially on the upper part of the stem, but if you take the precaution of pinching early enough, its progress is impeded; several remedies have been tried, none of which produced any effect; nicotine alone seems to have given some results. USES. - Broad beans are an invaluable source of nourishment, and it is to be regretted that their use is not more widespread, as they could be of great help to the less well-off classes. Like beans and lentils, broad beans are very nourishing, and contain a considerable proportion of a nitrogenous substance, legumin, which is very similar to animal casein and contributes greatly to their nutritional qualities. According to Payen, 100 parts of beans contain: 24.40 legumin; 1.50 fat; 51.50 dextrin and sugar starch; 3 cellulose; 3.60 mineral salts; 16 water. Picked before they are fully ripe, when they are still green and dried, the product is less abundant but even more nourishing. Young shoots are eaten in salads and used in lean soups. E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 14 Fava beans are frequently used to fatten animals, and can be used as a good substitute for oats for horses. In some countries, it is mixed with wheat flour. The sweet scent of fava bean flowers has led to their use in perfumery in the form of distilled water; this water is used as a cosmetic, as is fava bean flour, which has been attributed with the property of removing freckles. In England, broad beans are cooked with honey and used as fish bait. Dry stalks yield a lot of potash when incinerated. GLACIAL FICOID Mesembryanthemum crystallinum L. Ficoidae. ORIGIN. - Native to the Cape of Good Hope. Perennial in greenhouses, but grown as an annual in our gardens. CULTIVATION. - Sow in the same way as spinach, in March, April or, better still, February on warm beds, transplant into small pots and plant out in May. Other care consists of weeding and hoeing, and above all good watering throughout the summer. This plant is resistant to the hottest weather, but the leaves are small and not very succulent. It's best to keep it well watered, as the yield will be quintupled. SEEDS. - To harvest the seed, select a few good plants and let them flower. When the capsules are ripe, they are collected, left to dry and the seeds extracted. One gram contains 5700 seeds, a liter weighs 760 grams and lasts five years. USES. - The leaves are chopped and cooked like spinach. Used in herb broths. It is said to be very healthy and nourishing. In Bourbon, the leaves are often eaten as a vegetable. In the Canaries, the seeds are pulverized and cooked; in the same islands, soda ash is extracted from this plant. FRAISIER COMMUN, FRAISIER DES BOIS Fragaria vesca L. Fragaria vulgaris Ehr. Rosaceae. ORIGIN. - The common strawberry is native to Europe, from the Shetland Islands and Lapland to the mountainous regions of the Midi, Madeira, Spain, Sicily and Greece. It is also found in Asia, from northern Syria and Armenia to Daourie. The strawberry plants of the Himalayas and Japan, which various authors have attributed to this species, are perhaps not, and this makes me doubt the habitat in China given by a missionary. It occurs spontaneously in Iceland, in the northeastern United States, around Fort Cumberland and on the northwest coast, perhaps even in the Sierra Nevada of California; the habitat therefore extends around the Arctic pole, with the exception of eastern Siberia and the Amur River region. The strawberry plant has been known since antiquity, but was little cultivated. Virgil and Pliny only mention it in passing. Cultivation was introduced to France in the 15th or 16th century. Champier, in the 16th century, spoke of it as a novelty in northern France, but it already existed in the Midi and in England (De Candolle). In France, the common strawberry is found in a spontaneous state just about everywhere, usually growing at the edges of hedges bordering forests, in high forest woods, where it seems to prefer damp clearings. Today, Fragaria vesca is rarely cultivated, preferring the Alpine strawberry, which has the advantage of producing fruit for part of the summer. CULTIVATION. - Same cultivation as the four-season strawberry. VARIETIES. - This breed has produced two distinct varieties in terms of fruit shape: Fraise des bois petite hâtive de Chatenay. - Early, small, round, dark-red fruit, very fragrant, does not come up. Strawberry from Montreuil. - Vigorous, very fertile plant with elongated, dark-red fruit, very late and productive, does not come up. USES. - Same uses as the four-season strawberry. ALPES OR FOUR SEASONS STRAWBERRY Fragaria alpina Pers. Fragaria semperftorens Hayne. ORIGIN. - This breed originates from the Alps, where it grows at fairly high altitudes. It was brought to France in 1754 by Fougeroux de Bondaroy, who had picked it on Mont Cenis. - Strawberry plants in general, and the small-fruited breeds in particular, are not very fussy about choice of soil; however, light, moist, healthy soil is preferable. In dry soils, watering is essential in summer if good production is to be achieved. Strawberry plants are propagated by runners, which are planted at two different times: in March or April, or at the end of summer, in August, September or even November. Planting in August and September is best, as the young plants have time to recover before the cold sets in, making them more resistant to the low temperatures of winter. In the early summer, they grow vigorously and, depending on the soil, form good clumps that produce abundantly. Those planted in April-May, on the other hand, don't bear fruit until the following year, apart from a few rare flowers here and there. Common and Alpine strawberries reproduce readily by sowing; sow as soon as the seeds are ripe, in June or July, in a slightly shaded bed with light, loose soil. Sow in small rays, lightly covered with good potting soil, and in ten or twenty days the seeds will sprout. As soon as the seedlings can withstand transplanting, they are thinned out and planted out in a nursery, and when it's time to set out in September, they are put in place as you would another runner. In spring, they produce as abundantly as those propagated in any other way. You can also sow in March-April, on a warm bed; the seedling is transplanted, on another cold bed, or in the open ground, and put in place towards the end of May or June. This procedure is somewhat safer, but also takes longer. Whichever propagation method you choose, the soil must first be ploughed deeply and fertilized with good, well-decomposed fertilizers. Horned cattle manure seems to be a good choice. Strawberries are planted in beds 1.20 m wide, with four 30-centimetre radii divided by 50-centimetre paths. Plant at 30 cm 14. along the line and in a checkerboard pattern. If the plant is small, put two together and, as soon as planting is complete, lightly water each plant to pack the soil around the roots. Before planting, trim off as much as possible of the root tips and leaves, and choose plants with white roots. Avoid planting FIO plants. 31. - Strawberry plants with black roots are a sure sign that they are too old. In the first days of March, as the new leaves begin to develop, hoe them deeply, taking care not to uproot them. We hoe again in April, then spread a good mulch over each bed. Other care consists of weeding, and above all, frequent watering, if you want to obtain good production. In seasonally dry soils, irrigation produces excellent results. In October, remove all runners and dead or yellowed leaves. The following year, the same cultivation care is required, as in the third year. After this period, most clumps die back and rot in winter, making planting irregular and requiring renewal. What's more, the fruit on vicious plants is smaller and less fragrant. FORCED CULTIVATION. - This breed of strawberry can hardly be forced. For this cultivation, see pineapple strawberry. VARIETIES. - La Meudonnaise, once highly esteemed around Paris; slightly blistered, blond-green leaves; large, dark-red, conical fruit, ripens late, very fragrant. Janus strawberry. - Good improved variety of the Alpine strawberry, very fertile, elongated fruit, bright red when ripe and remontant. Belle de Meaux (fig. 31). - New variety; large, conical, dark carmine-red fruit, very fragrant. It is said to be far superior to other varieties in terms of production and taste finesse. Fraisier des Alpes sans filets or Gaillon strawberry with red fruit. - This variety is very different from the others; it does not produce nets and multiplies by dividing clumps. Particularly suitable for borders, it is very hardy and produces abundantly throughout the summer. Netless Alpine strawberry with white fruit. - Same cultivation and hardiness as the previous variety, but the fruit is not very fragrant and not much appreciated on the markets. ANANAS STRAWBERRIES Fragaria grandiflora Ehrh. Fragaria ananassa Duch. ORIGIN. - Very obscure origin; it has never been known where it came from. It is from this breed, crossed with the Chilean strawberry, that the innumerable varieties of large hybrid strawberries, commonly known as English strawberries, originate. OUTDOOR CULTIVATION. - Cultivation is much the same as for the four-season strawberry. Preference should be given to runners that develop in the late season, and care should be taken to ensure that the plants from which they come are productive, as often the most beautiful runners are chosen from poor plants that are vigorous but not very productive, leading to degeneration. Multiplication by sowing is only done to obtain new varieties: in a sowing, there are always few subjects that characterize the species well. FORCED THERMOSIPHON CULTIVATION. - Forced cultivation is certainly not difficult, but it does require a certain amount of practice to succeed. There are several ways of doing this. In this type of cultivation, the most important point is how to prepare the plants for fruiting, since success depends on this and on the aeration of the plants at flowering time. In June or July, select the best runners and plant them 10 cm apart in a well-prepared bed, with plenty of smoke and, if possible, in part-shade. Water often. In October, pull out the runners and put them in six- to seven-inch pots filled with a mixture of 1/4 bedding mix, 1/2 garden mix and 1/4 leaf mix. Put three or four runners per pot, close to the sides rather than in the middle, and the plants develop much better. Once repotted, the pots are half-embedded in sand, tan, potting soil, etc., and shaded for a few days to facilitate growth. Shade them for a few days to help them recover, and leave them in this state until it's time to put them under tarpaulins or in greenhouses to force them out. Cover them if the cold is too severe. When the time comes to force them, i.e. around December 15, we clean them well, remove the yellow and dead leaves and put a certain quantity in place to be heated. We stagger the plants so as to have some to force until those in the open ground begin to produce. Push the pots about halfway into the tan or escarbill and space them 5 to 6 centimetres apart in all directions, then start heating. At first, a gentle heat of 12 to 15 degrees centigrade is maintained, day and night, until the fruit begins to knot, at which point the heat is increased to 20 to 25 degrees. From the moment we start heating, we take care to water the plants, which must be done regularly so that none dries out and wilts, which is their downfall. Water often and lightly, until the flowers appear; from then on, water no more. Once the fruit has set its knots, continue the operation until maturity. Whenever it's possible to give the fruit some air, this should be done, especially when sunburn occurs, rapidly raising the temperature under the windows. The fruit must not touch the ground. You can keep them elevated with rush ties supported by small sticks placed around the pots, or even better, you can make your own little wire rings that last for several years. Another very good way of preparing plants for forcing is to select the best runners in June and July and, without disturbing their attachment to the mother plant, repot them in small cups which you bury in the ground. They are held in place by wooden hooks. These young plants, under the influence of copious watering, develop rapidly and by the end of the summer are beautiful subjects perfectly prepared for forced cultivation. When the plants are weaned in October, they are potted into larger pots, of which there can be three in each 6-inch pot. Of course, this process is time-consuming and costly, but the plants grow vigorously and always produce excellent results. It's an excellent process, highly recommended for amateurs. The varieties that lend themselves best to forced cultivation are : Docteur Morère. - Docteur Nicaise. - Lucie Flament. - Gloire de Zuidwick. - Duc de Malakoff. - La Chalonnaise. - Marguerite. - Jacunda, etc.- Young plantations from the previous year, which have produced a first crop in the open ground, can also give good results if potted early and treated as described above. As for heating, the best systems are small, very low gabled greenhouses, 3 meters wide inside, with benches 1.10 meters wide on each side, and a passageway 80 centimeters wide in the middle. The benches are secured by T-irons resting on dice driven into the ground. The floors of these benches are made of terracotta tiles, also supported by T-irons and angle irons; one or two hot-water pipes run 25 or 30 centimeters along the underside of the bench. The tops of the benches are filled with tan, wood bran or sand to accommodate the pots, which are half-buried. Tarpaulins 1, 60 or 2 meters wide can also be used, with a tiled floor as described for the greenhouse, and a hot water pipe running underneath, 25 centimetres from the wall. As all the heat is concentrated underneath, you need to create openings that can be closed off at will, to let a little warm air into the part above where the plants are located. This tarpaulin system is very good, and gives very good results, but we prefer the small greenhouse where it's easier to keep an eye on the plants. HATÉE CULTIVATION UNDER CHASSIS. - In the early days of January, prepare good layers at least 50 or 60 centimetres thick, with 10 or 15 centimetres of charcoal or tannin residue, let the first fires start and place the strawberry pots in them, burying them about halfway. Cover with a frame. Other care consists of aeration as often as possible, to avoid mildew, as the damp heat of the layer often kills the strawberry plant. Water very sparingly, just to prevent the plant from wilting; you don't need to dunk the plants in water, the mist that comes off is enough; it's only when the fruit has set that you need to water seriously. Water is poured at the base of the plant, without wetting the leaves. Keep warm around the trunks and cover with mats at night to concentrate as much heat as possible. When the fruit has set, we give it plenty of air, and if the sun shines too hot, we shade it. When the heat of the layer diminishes, we prepare another and place them on top. Plants put into forcing in the first days of January won't bear fruit until the end of March, or the first fortnight of April. Another way of bringing forward the ripening of strawberries by a few days in spring is to place boxes and their panels on the beds in March; the paths are dug 20 centimetres deep, and filled with good warm manure up to the height of the boxes. From time to time, these stoves are reshuffled to maintain fermentation; air is given frequently, the plants are watered and cleaned often; in this way, ripe strawberries are produced a few days before those grown in the open ground. VARIETIES. - Here is a list of good varieties. Hybrid strawberries. - Carolina superba. - Vigorous, hairy plant, glossy green leaves, large, slightly flattened, short vermilion fruit; semi-late. Docteur Morère. - Very vigorous, hairy plant, large, broad, dark-green foliage, very large, slightly short, enlarged fruit; very productive. This variety is grown almost everywhere; it is one of the most recommended. Docteur Nicaise. - Plant of average vigor, relative fertility, very large fruit, weighing 40 to 50 grams; semi-hasty. Duc de Malahoff. - Very vigorous plant with large, dark-green leaves; large, enlarged, short fruit; very juicy yellow flesh; excellent, highly recommended variety. Marguerite. - Very vigorous, dark green foliage, very large, elongated, vermilion-red fruit, very sweet, fragrant white flesh; ripens late. Gloire de Zuidvick. - Excessively vigorous, attractive grayish-green leaves, large, conical, semi-early fruit, bright scarlet color, melting flesh. Strawberry Lucas. - Vigorous plant, bright green leaves, oblong, fairly large, dark red fruit, pale pink flesh, juicy, fragrant. Deserving varieties include: Général Chanzy. - Admiral Dundas. - Duke of Edinburgh. - Elton improved. - Goliath. - May Queen. - Cressent seedling. - Princess Royal. - Victoria. - Louis Vilmorin. - La Reine. - Won- derfull Myaths prolific. - Valentin Lebœuf. - Vicomtesse Héricart de Thury. - Sir Charles Napier. - Sabreur. - Jucunda. - Comte de Paris. - Doctor Hoog. - Bayard. - Belle Cauchoise. - La Chalonnaise. - Lucie. - Souvenir de Kief. - Belle de Paris. - Edouard Lefort. - Reine des hâtives. - Souvenir of Bossuet. - Captain. - Anna de Rothschild. - Sir Harry. - Muscadin de Liège. - La Constante. - Premier. - Sir Joseph Paxton. - Monseigneur. Fournier. FRAISIER CAPRON Fragaria elatior Ehrh. Fragaria moschata Duch. ORIGIN. - Perennial, indigenous plant. In the past, this breed was honored and cultivated everywhere; today, it is grown only in botanical gardens, where hybrid strawberries are preferred. CULTIVATION. - This type of strawberry is very hardy, multiplying easily through its numerous runners, but as there are both male and female individuals, it is essential to plant both for fertilization to take place, and when you intend to plant, you will need to label both at the time of production. Like the wild strawberry, this breed produces only one crop in spring, and does not come up again. VARIETIES. - Raspberry Capron. - The best-known and most widely cultivated in the past. The plant is very tall, with blond-green foliage and numerous, spherical, purplish or wine-colored fruits. The flesh is white, slightly yellowish, with a raspberry flavor. Belle Bordelaise. - Plant stockier than above, blond-green foliage, slightly grayish, large fruit, E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 15 254 FRAISIER ÉCARLATE DE VIRGINIE - FRAISIER DU CHILI elongated sometimes, very fragrant, raspberry-like, sometimes rises. It is still grown near Bordeaux. VIRGINIA STRAWBERRY Fragaria virginiana Ehrh. ORIGIN. - Perennial, from South America. CULTIVATION. - A little-known breed that is little cultivated today, due to its fruits, which are small and few in number, and do not come up. It is very hardy, and can remain in the same soil for longer than other breeds. An attempt has been made to fertilize this breed with the pineapple strawberry, and the resulting plants are very beautiful and hardy; same cultivation as the "four seasons" variety. CHILE STRAWBERRY Fragaria chilensis Ehrb. ORIGIN. - Perennial plant from Chile, brought back in 1714 by Frézier. Very common in the Andes, it is found everywhere. It is said to be so invasive in some parts of Chile that it has to be destroyed. CULTIVATION. - Plants belonging to this race are vigorous, stocky, with dark green foliage and very large, irregularly-shaped, bright orange fruits. It is from this breed, fertilized with the pineapple strawberry, that we have obtained the so-called hybrid or English varieties, some of whose fruits weigh up to 70 grams, and we certainly won't stop there: sowings and fertilizations continue, and there is no doubt that before long we'll be able to achieve something better. The Chilean strawberry is a little delicate; it fears the cold and especially winter humidity. In Brittany, it is grown extensively, but in healthy, sandy soils. Same cultivation as hybrid varieties. SEEDS. - To extract the strawberry seed, select the ripest, prettiest fruit; place on a shaded board; when decomposition begins, crush in a container full of water; the seeds will sink to the bottom and be scooped up for immediate sowing or drying. There's no need to wait until the fruit has decomposed. Once picked, if the fruit is ripe enough, the seeds can be removed. They keep well for up to three years. One gram contains between 800 and 2,500 seeds, depending on the species. pests, pests, pests. - The only pest that attacks this plant is white mould, which seems to develop mainly in plantations planted on top soil and where strawberries have been grown for a long time; the best remedy is to water the affected plants with a very clear milk of lime. We have tried iron sulfate, dissolved in plenty of water, but the results have not been satisfactory. Although few diseases attack strawberry plants, pests are very numerous. The white grub or chafer larva is very fond of its roots; in soils where they swarm, it is not uncommon to see entire beds destroyed in a short space of time; until now, the only means of destruction has been to kill it. Cutworms are still a terrible enemy, and there are some soils where you can't grow them because of this worm. If Botrytis tenella can destroy white and cutworms, growers will be delighted. Ants sometimes attack strawberries, but more often than not, they take up residence at the base of strawberry plants and dig galleries, or almost cover the plant with earth; to destroy them, place plates coated with honey on the ground; they go in and can't get out; then dip the plate in boiling water. Slugs are very fond of strawberries, which they gnaw off completely. Only those that touch the ground are damaged. Destroying these beasts is difficult, in the sense that they are always to be found. You hunt them morning and night, skewer them with a sharp wire, and throw them in a bit of slaked lime. You can also place cabbage leaves or pieces of carrot or turnip at some distance from the snail's body; the snail will take refuge under them to devour them, and then they're easy to catch. Snails rarely attack strawberries. The green and grey caterpillar sometimes devours the leaves in spring, so we look for it and crush it, which is the only way to get rid of it. The mole causes considerable damage to plantations, knocking them over and uprooting them by forming underground galleries. You must try to destroy them, either by setting traps or by lying in wait to kill them. We use wooden traps, which are better and safer than iron ones. The millipede is a very long, extraordinarily flexible little worm, which walks both forwards and backwards. It gets into strawberries that touch the ground, in very large numbers, and the inside of the fruit is completely devoured. There's no known way of destroying it. The molewort wreaks havoc in young plantations; it is especially in sandy soils, where they are abundant, that care should be taken. USES. - Strawberries can be served in a variety of ways, with wine, cognac, kirsch, rum, Madeira or even better, champagne. They can be eaten on their own, with sugar or mixed with raspberries. It is said that strawberries lose their fragrance when washed, but this is wrong. If you take the time to wash them half an hour before eating them, they recover their smell, and are cleaner and more appetizing. Strawberries are very digestive. Dissolved in water, they make a pleasant, soothing drink. They are preserved in jams and jellies. They even make an excellent liqueur when mixed with raspberries. Strawberries are used to make a syrup that is used to flavor creams and jellies. Strawberries quickly undergo vinous, alcoholic and acetic fermentation, and can be used to make wine, brandy and vinegar. Strawberries are balsamic and refreshing, and can only be criticized for their slightly laxative properties, which can be corrected with sugar and a little wine. However, as they are generally quite cold, it might be unwise to overindulge in them, especially after a big dinner; but on an empty stomach in the morning, or when the work of digestion has been completed, they are a most salutary dish. Perfumers use distillation to obtain strawberry scents that are very pleasant, and to which they attribute the property of making freckles disappear. In some countries, strawberry leaves are used instead of tea. Today, strawberries are the subject of a sizeable trade. We've managed to package them and ship them over fairly long distances, without them suffering too much. They still fetch a high price on the market, which proves that cultivation is lucrative. CULTIVATED RASPBERRY - -- Rubus idœus L. Rubus frambœsianus Lamk. Rosaceae dryadae. ORIGIN. - A shrub native to Mount Ida; at least, that's where it was first observed, but it is found spontaneously in mountainous regions throughout most of Europe, especially in woods and stony places. Rarer in wooded plains. GROWING. - The raspberry is a perennial shrub that is extremely easy to grow. It thrives in all soils, provided they are not too dry or chalky. It does best, however, in moist soils and semi-shaded exposures. We have seen it planted in northern exposures with very good results. It is propagated by rooting offshoots, which spring up in large numbers around old plants. Preferably choose those with the best roots and medium size; prune them a little if they are too long, refresh the roots a little and plant. The ground on which you intend to plant, whether in a bed or in a square, must first be ploughed well and deeply, and thoroughly fertilized with good, energetic fertilizers. Raspberries are usually planted from November to March. They are planted in rows 90 cm to 1 m apart, sometimes further apart, depending on the fertility of the soil. Raspberries are widely grown in the Charente region, particularly around Angoulême. Market gardeners counter-plant garlic or shallots, as these are radiated with the forked or flat hoe, so they only put in raspberry plants every three or four rays, which gives about the distance indicated; it's an excellent planting system that we recommend. In general, once the land has been well prepared and laid out, market gardeners dig small square holes 15 or 20 centimetres apart, and plant, putting loose soil over the roots. Once the raspberry planting is complete, onions, romaine, lettuce, Bacalan cabbage, etc. are intercropped. Other cultivation care for this first year consists of frequent spading or raking of the soil. In autumn, after pruning, we give the plants a good drying, taking care not to uproot the plants that are to bear fruit. Smoke again, and every year again, as the raspberry bush is an exhausting plant: we remove the new shoots, which would thrive at the expense of the fruit-bearing stems. Watering is useless, because if you have to water with a watering can, it's better not to plant raspberries (unless you can irrigate abundantly). Raspberries will only perform well if the soil is naturally moist. Raspberries should not be left to grow freely, as some growers have found. It is preferable to train or trellis the plant, which is more regular and more tasteful, and the growing costs are never higher. The best method is counter-trellising, which consists of planting a few 1.50 m high stakes at each end of the row and in the middle, which are driven in 30 cm. Three rows of wire are stretched, the first 40 centimetres from the ground, the second 40 centimetres from the first, and the third at the top of the stake. The fruit-bearing branches are attached by bending them at 45 degrees, and the new suckers that develop and are well placed as fruit-bearing branches for the following year are attached vertically to the wire as they grow. A well-tended raspberry plantation can last ten years or more. The Dutch plant in 25-centimeter-deep troughs, with a little ridging each year so that the roots, which always tend to rise to the surface of the soil, are at a suitable depth. PRUNING. - In certain favorable soils, the raspberry bush acquires great vigor; the stems become very strong. These stems are biennial, meaning they grow the first year, bear fruit the second and then die. Pruning should be carried out during winter, from November to February. Choose four of the most beautiful and best-placed stems, fewer if the plant is not very vigorous, and cut them off above one eye, at about a third of their total length, sometimes more, depending on their vigor. All old wood from the previous year is removed, cut flush with the ground, and all unnecessary suckers are removed. VARIETIES. - Some sixty years ago, we only had a few varieties of little merit and completely primitive. Today, we have some excellent ones. Among the best are A fruit rouge. - Merveille des quatre saisons red - with large conical red fruit, reaching up to the frosts. Perpetual red. - Remontant, very fructiferous and fragrant. Belle de Fontenay. - Large, dark-red fruit. Catawissa d'Amérique. - Very remontant, with red fruit and good taste, very fragrant. Falstaff. - Excessively fertile, very good quality, medium red fruit. Superb from England. - Fertile, large conical red fruit; highly recommended variety. Double bearing. - Very beautiful red fruit, remontant, one of the best varieties to grow for the market. Belle de Palluau. - Very large, conical fruit; fairly productive. Hornet. - Very large red fruit, fragrant; productive, good quality. Framboise de Brabant. - Red conical fruit; fairly productive. Yellow or orange fruit. - Merveille des quatre saisons yellow. - Very large, very fragrant fruit; productive. Chile yellow. - Very fertile variety, large yellow fruit, very good quality. Jaune d'Anvers. - Large, conical, yellow fruit; very productive. Brinhles'Orange. - Vigorous, fertile plant with large, bright orange fruit. SEEDS. - To harvest seeds, do as for strawberries: wash the fruit and the seeds will preci15. pent at the bottom of the water, collect them and dry them in the shade. Seeds should only be sown with the aim of obtaining new varieties: it is rare for a seed to faithfully reproduce its species; as far as possible, only fresh seeds should be sown, as they only keep for a year or two at most. USES. - Raspberries are widely used as a healthy, refreshing and soothing food. It is eaten in the same way as strawberries, with which it is often associated. Raspberries, sugar and water are used to make a pleasant drink. It can be used to make wine, alcohol or mead. To make wine, blend 15 kilograms of red raspberries and 3 kilograms of freshly picked redcurrants. The stems and bunches are removed and crushed in the same mortar. After resting for twenty-four hours, the juice is squeezed and the following is added per liter: half a pound of sugar; half a liter of brandy. Mix well and leave to stand until blackberry season. Then take 5 pounds of these fruits, crush them with a liter of water, throw in a broth and let stand thirty-six hours; press and add: Half a pound of sugar; 3 decanters of brandy per liter of liqueur obtained, and mix the two liqueurs which are shaken vigorously. This wine is good to drink only after one year. Raspberry ratafia is obtained by mixing : 600 grams raspberry juice; 1 kilogram sugar; 2 liters brandy. The liqueur is left to settle and bottled. The syrup is made with two-thirds raspberries and one-third redcurrants. Infused in wine, raspberries give it a delicious taste and aroma; with white vinegar, they give raspberry vinegar, which is used to make syrup. In industry, raspberries are frequently used to make carbonated lemonades. It is also used to make jams, jellies, preserves, compotes, etc. Confectioners and pharmacists use it daily, making cakes, tarts, ice creams and more. In some French vineyards, raspberries are added to the vat to give the wine its aroma. Lathyrus sativus L. Cicercula alata Mœnch. Leguminous plants. ORIGIN. - Annual plant of doubtful origin. I consider it probable," says De Candolle, "that the species existed before being cultivated, from the southern Caucasus or the Caspian Sea to northern India, and that it spread to Europe as a result of ancient cultivation, perhaps mixed with cereals. It is therefore a mistake to believe that the plant is indigenous. The Greeks called it Lathyros and the Latins Cicercula. It has several synonyms: Dent de brebis - Jarra. - Domestic chickweed. - Swiss lentil. - Spanish lentil. - Breton pea. - Lentillin. - Square pea. - Pois gras, etc. 263 CULTURE. - Chickling is not widely cultivated in gardens; it is mainly used in field crops. It is sown in March-April, in rows 50 centimeters apart, preferably in sandy soil, with plenty of smoke, so that the grain is cooked, since there is perhaps no other plant on which the nature of the soil has as much influence as on this one. Indeed, chaff harvested in strong soils succeeds perfectly and even produces a lot, but the grain is not cooked, and therefore becomes inedible; at most, it is good for animals. Other cultivation requirements are the same as for peas. - Chickweed is virtually disease-free; only snails and loaches are very keen on it when the plant starts to grow. Mice and voles devour it as soon as it is sown, but fortunately this is rare. USES. - The seeds are eaten like beans; they are very nutritious and have highly appreciated lactiferous properties. Flour is made from them to fatten poultry and pigs; properly cooked, the seeds make an excellent and very healthy food, and the opposite occurs when they are not perfectly cooked. GOMEO Hibiscus esculentus L. Hibiscus ficifolius Mill. A belmoschus esculentus Mœnch. Malvaceae ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to South America, little cultivated and little appreciated in France. GROWING. - Okra is propagated from seed, which is sown on warm beds from February to April; when the young plants have grown their second leaf, they are transplanted to another warm bed 10 or 15 centimetres apart. In May, when frosts are no longer a threat, they are planted out at 65 centimetres. It's best to choose FIG. 32 - Long-fruited okra. a good exposure and sufficiently amended soil, as this plant needs a lot of heat to ripen its seeds. When first transplanted, they can also be placed in pots and cared for in the same way as other plants. This way, they won't have to suffer from transplanting. Other cultivation care consists of frequent hoeing around the plants and copious watering in summer. VARIETY. - Long-fruited okra (fig. 32). - Low stem not exceeding 55 centimeters, leaf cut like that of mallow, upright fruit 15 to 20 centimeters long, pointed, thin, 2 to 3 centimeters in diameter. A sub-variety with larger, hanging fruit is grown. Round-fruited okra. - Stem 49 to 50 centimeters long, fruit 16 to 17 centimeters long by 40 centimeters wide, obtuse; earlier than the previous variety. SEEDS. - In Paris and northern France, seeds rarely ripen in the open ground, they need the greenhouse; from the Charentes, and moving up to the southwest and south of France, they ripen perfectly in good exposure. When the fruits containing the seeds have changed color, they are ripe: they are picked and laid out to dry in the sun. The seed then detaches quite well; it keeps well for five years, 30 grams contain 450 grams, a liter weighs 620 grams. USES. - When not yet fully developed, sliced and boiled in soups, sauces or even flavored water, okra fruits make these liquids thick and viscous, giving them a tangy flavor that the Creoles of Martinique and Guadeloupe find very pleasant, as they eat a lot of them. The seeds have been advocated as a substitute for coffee, and we have tried them; we doubt their use will spread. In Brazil, the fruit is eaten cooked with poultry. ORDINARY CURRANT Ribes rubrum L. ORIGIN. - The red currant is native to northern and temperate Europe, as well as to Siberia as far as Kamtschatka, and in America from Canada and Vermont to the mouth of the Mackensie River. Unknown to the Greeks and Romans, cultivation of this plant was only introduced in the Middle Ages. The cultivated plant differs little from the wild plant". (De Candolle). CULTIVATION. - The currant generally adapts well to all kinds of soil, and even exposure, as it can be found at many different altitudes. We know of some that have been planted under large trees, and mixed with other shrubs. Despite this, they grow well and produce a lot. However, this plant prefers cool, deep soil and a well exposed position. The currant can be propagated from seed, but this is a time-consuming and expensive method. It is rarely sown except to obtain larger-fruited varieties. The best way to propagate is by cuttings, which take very well. We choose young shoots of the year for this purpose, and put them in place or in a nursery, but they take so well that it's preferable to put them directly in place; this avoids transplanting, which is always detrimental to the plant. Cuttings are taken from October to February. Cuttings taken in autumn will always give better results than those taken later. Redcurrants can also be propagated by splintering rooted plants, which can be found in fairly large quantities in old clumps. Other cultivation techniques include removing dead wood and cutting back large stems to rejuvenate them. We spade around the plants at least twice a year, and give them several rakes or hoeings to prevent weeds from getting into the clump. PRUNING. - You can give the currant any shape you like. By pruning, you can form counter-trees on wire, in a ball, in a cone, in cords, etc. Pruning consists in removing dead wood and clearing the interior to avoid confusion, and all the current year's shoots are cut at five or six eyes above the previous year's size, i.e. above the impasto. VARIETIES. - Red currants. - Dutch red currant. - Long, tight bunches, very large, light-red fruit; late and very vigorous. Queen Victoria currant. - Loose, very long clusters; fairly productive. Versailles redcurrant. - Numerous, very large, light-red fruits in long, tightly-packed bunches. Hátive de Bertin. - Tight clusters, dark red fruit; very early. Cherry currant, large fruit. - Short, sparsely-packed bunches; large, light-red fruit; vigorous, stocky plant. Chenonceau currant. - Beautiful, loosely packed clusters. Glory currant from Sablons. - Fertile de Palluau - Fertile d'Angers, etc. White-fruited currants. - White currant from Holland. - Quite large fruit of very good quality, firm, transparent flesh. Transparent currant. - Very long clusters with large berries. Boulogne currant. - Imperial cherry. - Versaillaise. - Whites grapes - Verrières blanches, etc. GROSEILLER A FRUIT NOIR, CASSIS Ribes nigrum L. Ribes olidum Mœnch. ORIGIN. - The origin of the word blackcurrant is not well known. It is thought to derive from the highly esteemed liqueurs once made in Cassis, Provence, exclusively from the fruit of this plant. According to De Candolle, "blackcurrants exist in a spontaneous state in northern Europe, from Scotland and Lapland to northern France and Italy, Bosnia, Armenia, all Siberia and the region of the Amur River and the western Himalayas, often naturalizing, for example, in central France." CULTIVATION. - The blackcurrant differs from the redcurrant only in its slightly larger size, its lighter green leaves and the scent of its wood. The fruit, which is a beautiful jet-black color, must be picked as soon as it ripens, otherwise it will fall off. Cultivation is the same as for the redcurrant. As blackcurrants regrow less than redcurrants, you should not cut off too much old wood, which would reduce production. Same pruning. THORNY CURRANT. MACKEREL CURRANT Ribes Uva crispa L. Ribes spinosum Lamk. ORIGIN. - De Candolle says: "This currant grows spontaneously throughout temperate Europe, from southern Sweden to the mountainous parts of central Spain, Italy and Greece. It is also found in northern Africa, in the Aures mountains. Mr. Ball has found a fairly distinct variety in the Atlas mountains of Morocco, it exists in the Caucasus, and in more or less different forms, in the western Himalayas". This shrub grows in arid, stony areas. CULTIVATION. - The thorny currant is propagated from seed, marcottes, cuttings taken from two-year-old wood and rooted splinters. Cuttings take root with greater difficulty than other varieties. Because of its numerous, tight thorns, it is very suitable for forming impenetrable hedges, and is so hardy that it can be planted in all exposures and soils, VARIETY. - There are several varieties. Some come from England or America, where they are highly prized; green, red, purple or yellow fruit. Among the best are: Britannica, downy yellow. - Justicia, fluffy white. - Creeping Jane, smooth yellow - Favorite rouge, smooth red. - Whinhams Industry, large, dark red-brown fruit. - Washington, spiky pink. - Peace-Maher, smooth red - Roaring Lion, smooth red. - White-Smith, smooth green. French varieties include Ovoid green, transparent spiky, dull red, yellow, etc. SEEDS. - To harvest seeds, we select the most beautiful fruits and spread them out on planks. When they are fully ripe, they are crushed in water; the seeds sink to the bottom, are collected and dried in the shade; they keep well for a year. For best success when sowing in spring, they should be stratified in sand immediately after harvesting. DISEASES, PESTS. - The currant is sometimes affected by a disease that rapidly destroys it. This is a species of white fungus that develops on the roots and causes them to rot. It is frequently found in soils that are too damp. It has been suggested that diseased plants be watered with a very clear milk of lime. Small green caterpillars that devour leaves are also sometimes found, depending on the year, especially on red currants. We have seen young plantations completely stripped of leaves. The remedy is very difficult: you have to look for the eggs, which are laid in the shape of rings on two- or three-year-old wood, and destroy them. USES. - The currant is widely used. The fruit is eaten, and jellies are made from it. The fruit is used to make soothing and refreshing drinks, syrup and a pleasant wine that is drunk in the North, and even brandy. In medicine, redcurrants are refreshing and astringent, and stimulate the appetite. The acidity of redcurrants, more intense in the red varieties, results from the abundance of malic and citric acids. The currant is a medicated food that nourishes and refreshes. The leaves are used to dye yellow, the branches to dye black. The gooseberry breed is so named because the fruit is used green in a sauce for mackerel. In France, the fruits are used for little other than eating them raw, but in England they are used to spice up certain sauces before they are ripe. They can be eaten on their own, or as an accessory to meats. They are also used to make delicious cakes. When ripe, they are used to make a highly prized wine. Blackcurrants produce an excellent tonic liqueur, good for the stomach. It also makes a very good ratafia. As well as the seeds, unscrupulous confectioners use the wood and leaves to give perfume to a syrup they call blackcurrant. The fruit juice is dyed blue by alkali, purple by tin salt. A lacquer is obtained. The leaves give a yellow dye used to color brandy. COMMON BEANS Phaseolus vulgaris. L. Leguminosae, Papilionaceae. ORIGIN. - An annual plant of uncertain origin. It is said to have originated in South America, and to have been imported in the 14th century; it has not been found growing spontaneously anywhere, which proves that it has been cultivated for a very long time. The bean has several synonyms: Faverolle, faviole, fayau, faséole, fayon, fève à visage, fève de mer, mongette, banette, etc. OUTDOOR CULTIVATION. - In general, beans thrive in all sufficiently fertilized soils; however, they do better in light, moist soils. The first beans are sown in the open ground in the first half of April, and successively until June. In the south of France, you can start sowing in March. Early varieties are preferred. There are several ways to arrange bean sowing, with each region following its own traditions. In the Charentes, Dordogne, Vienne, Vendée and Deux-Sèvres regions, for example, beans are combed with a forked or flat hoe, as is done for garlic. This is an excellent method. In the South-West and part of the Midi, it is sown in beds, and here's how it's done for dwarf breeds. Once the soil has been well prepared and smoked, use the narrow end of the hoe to make small gullies Om, 10 and 50 centimetres deep. Sow in clumps at 25 or 30 centimetres along the line, or grain by grain at 8 centimetres. Cover lightly by about 3 or 4 centimetres, depending on the size of the seed. If the soil is too compact, cover with fine earth or compost. Rowing varieties destined to succeed dwarf breeds are laid out in rows of three rays at 40 centimetres. A fourth line is traced with the tracer to plant romaine, which is removed before it harms the beans. These are divided by a 50-centimetre path, which, once the lettuces have been removed, gives a 90-centimetre passage between each bed. This distance is necessary, firstly to form a bead of earth on each side, to retain water for watering and for the worker to pass through with his watering cans. You can also sow in clumps, using a hoe or a thin planter to make holes 40 centimetres apart in a chessboard pattern, in which you place five or six beans and cover. As beans in general, and row beans in particular, need a lot of air to grow well and produce a lot, this last method is the best and can be adopted everywhere. In some regions, notably the Charente, market gardeners have laid out their rowing bean beds in five rays at 30 centimeters. This distance is much too close, because once the beans are a little high, the middle three rows receive very little air and light, and consequently produce little. We've made this observation to a few growers, who have continued as before anyway - it's a routine that's hard to change. Whatever the sowing method used and whatever the variety, when the beans have reached a height of a dozen centimetres, they are hoeed, and then repeated at intervals of a few days. Chestnut, oak, plane and hazelnut are suitable for this purpose; in the Landes and part of the south-west, where there are many pine woods, they are used almost exclusively. A lath is placed on each bean, or tuft, and the appearance of these branches, generally very straight, produces a pretty eye-catching effect. The two rows around the edges are planted with the tallest branches slightly inclined towards each other, while the shorter middle branches are planted vertically. When the bush beans have reached a certain level of development, they are ridged; this operation is necessary in summer to maintain constant humidity and prevent the roots from being affected by heat, which would be detrimental to the plants. During hot spells, if the soil in which you have sown is dry, you must not spare watering, which must be very copious, and we even recommend irrigation if possible, as production will depend on watering if the soil is not naturally damp; without water, plants dry out, flower badly and often die before they have produced a quarter of their yield. Sometimes, in strong soils, as soon as the beans are sown, a heavy rainstorm settles and hardens the soil surface. In this case, the seeds would not stand up well if left as they are, so this crust needs to be broken by light hoeing. EARLY CROPS. - Beans in their green state are generally preferred by consumers, and when they can be harvested early, they represent a good source of income. Early beans can be grown in a variety of ways, using thermosiphon-heated tarpaulins, hot-layer frames or cloches. Thermosiphon cultivation is quick and successful. Sowing can start after December 15, and harvesting can begin in the second half of February. Thermosiphon will always give the best results, as the heat is even and the beans develop very well and produce a lot, but its use becomes expensive. As growing beans in hot frames is more difficult, and is the most widely used method, we will describe it below: In the second half of January, prepare a good layer 60 centimetres thick. Load it with 15 centimeters of good potting soil mixed with equal parts of vegetable garden soil. After this, the beans are sown in small clumps of three together, 35 or 40 centimetres apart. Four rows are planted per 1.33 m. After sowing, cover and pack well, water very lightly, and put up the panels. You can also sow one by one at 15 centimetres along the row. Under the influence of the background heat, the beans are quick to sprout; from this point onwards, you need to watch out for mildew, which is the main enemy of this crop; you need to go over it often to remove the affected parts, and give it air as much as the temperature allows, and gradually. Cover with straw mats during the night, surround the trunks with good stoves and reshape them often, adding manure each time. When the beans have reached a height of 25 centimetres, they are tilted towards the top of the trunk, secured with small wooden hooks. The ends of the stalks soon rise after forming a circuit, but the lower part remains flat. Despite this operation, which is only intended to prevent the beans from touching the glass, the trunks can be raised if necessary. When the flowers start to appear, give them plenty of air and frequent watering. Instead of sowing beans in place on the bed, as we have just indicated, some growers transplant them, i.e. they sow on a very small area, and when the plants have grown their first leaves, they transplant them on a bed prepared in advance. This method gives just as good results as sowing in place. So you can choose either system. The first beans are usually harvested six weeks after sowing. Cultivation under cloches starts in the second half of March, and is carried out in much the same way. Once the bed has been prepared, it is edged, the soil is put in, the cloches are placed in a chessboard pattern, and three or four beans are sown under each one, or transplanted, which is preferable. As soon as the crop has recovered, air is added. Keep the bells above them for as long as possible, raising them on three stakes or flowerpots, and remove them when all danger has passed. When it's cold, especially at night, cover with bedding or straw mats. The varieties that lend themselves best to these various growing systems are: 1° Belgian dwarf black bean; 2° White and yellow flageolet bean; 3° Early Dutch dwarf bean; 4° White bean with waffle leaves; 5° Russian Emperor bean; 6° Early Lyon glory bean; 7° Dwarf flageolet bean, the triumph of the châs- sis; an excellent novelty for this crop. SEEDS. - To harvest bean seeds, keep a piece of planking without picking them, and leave them to ripen on the ground. They are then picked and laid out in the shade in a well-ventilated, rodent-proof place. They are husked and put into small bags until the time comes to sow them. For varieties with oars, we recommend preventing them from climbing by pinching them. This will produce a very good crop of beans. Although beans retain their germinative powers for a long time, three years and sometimes more depending on the variety, it is preferable to choose seed from the previous year if you want to be successful. VARIETIES. - Bean varieties are extremely numerous. We have divided them into 1° Dwarf beans without parchment or mangetout; 2° Dwarf beans with parchment; 3° String beans without parchment or mange- tout; 4° String beans with parchment for shelling. 1° Dwarf beans without parchment or mangetout. Canada yellow bean. - Very vigorous variety, 40 to 50 centimeters high, very numerous pods, green, then yellow; very good for eating green. Chinese yellow bean. - Excellent variety, highly esteemed in the Southwest, very good for green harvesting. Fairly long pods, turning yellow at maturity; ovoid, sulfur-yellow bean with bluish circle around the umbilicus. E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 16 Haricot-beurre dain du Mont-d'Or. - Extremely early variety, 40 to Z0 centimeters high, vigorous, numerous pods, quite long, beautiful pale yellow, excellent for eating green. Dwarf black Alger bean with long pods. - Very productive variety, excellent for green harvesting, frankly without parchment, long yellow pods. Dwarf black Alger bean. - Very dwarf and productive, fleshy pods, whitish yellow, early and of very good quality, highly esteemed on the Paris market. Dwarf beurre blane bean - Very dwarf, productive, less hardy than the preceding bean; transparent pods, about 10 cm long, wax-white, excellent when green, very good when dry. Émile bean. - Curved pods, 10 to 12 centimeters long, green, very dwarf and very early, suitable for forced cultivation. Dwarf white quarantine bean. - Medium vigor, fairly productive, very hardy, early, green pods 10 to 12 centimeters long, broad and flat, highly esteemed in the Midi, especially in Toulouse. Dwarf bean, white, early, without parchment. - A variety that lends itself well to large-scale cultivation, with a fairly high, branched, 50-centimeter-high stalk and green, fleshy, slightly curved pods. In wet years, beans stain easily. Dwarf, white, single bean - White, flat, elongated grain, productive, really without parchment; suitable for the last season. Among the new and still uncommon varieties are: Extra-early mangetout bean. - Very early variety, no more than 25 cm high, white grain, long, fleshy pods. Dwarf bean, prolific, no parchment. - Small, white grain, very fleshy pods, very good, high-yielding variety. Improved Valentine bean. - Very good variety for green harvesting, round pods, no parchment. Good gardener's bean. - Variety with long, fleshy, round pods, slightly curved and entirely without parchment, highly recommended for green harvesting. Dwarf Lyonnais bean with very long pods. - Dark brown, elongated kernel; very long, cylindrical pods. Early Fleuriel yellow bean. - Frankly parchmentless, very productive. Dwarf bean with purple pods. - Fleshy, tender, attractive purple pods that turn green when cooked. Dwarf Russian Emperor beans, extra-early. - Attractive green pods, round, long, straight, fine, fleshy, entirely free of parchment and excellent flavor; fine, long, round, pinkish-brown grain, mottled with darker brown. Excellent for market sales. Dwarf butter bean, unrivalled golden color. - New variety, derived from the Mont-d'Or dwarf butter bean, very productive and of excellent quality, frankly without parchment. Dwarf Prédome bean. - Dwarf marbled Prague bean. 2° Dwarf string beans. Early Belgian black bean. - Very old variety, very dwarf, early, high yielding, highly esteemed for green harvesting, well suited to forced cultivation under frame; hardy; highly recommended as an early crop. Bagnolet bean, or Swiss grey. - Highly esteemed and widespread in the Paris area and throughout the North, where it is grown in considerable quantities; straight, long, numerous pods; excellent for green harvesting, which is its main use. Very hätif de Chalandray yellow bean. - Very early, very dwarf, suitable for forced cultivation and green harvesting. Dwarf flageolet bean. - Highly esteemed everywhere, it is eaten when the beans are three-quarters formed; it is highly regarded in Paris. There are several sub-varieties much preferable to the old species; among the best are: Ha rico flageolet dain, Triomphe des châssis - New variety of extreme earliness, small size, suitable for cultivation under chassis or cloches. White flageolet bean with long pods. - Excellent, highly esteemed in Paris, can be eaten green or when the beans are formed, stiff stems, long, fine, very beautiful pods. Chevrier flageolet bean with evergreen beans. - Very productive and good quality. Haricot flageolet merveille de France. - Very pro- ductive, early and with long pods. Early dwarf flageolet bean with embossed leaves. - Very distinct from other flageolets due to its embossed leaves and small size. Very early Étampes flageolet bean. - Very early, very productive, hardy, very dwarf, suitable for early crops. Black flageolet bean. - Red flageolet bean, or Rognon de coq. - Juane flageolet bean. - Three very productive varieties, distinguished only by the color of the beans. Flageolet bean, king of greens. - A new variety, not yet widely grown, excellent for eating as beans. Bonnemain bean. - Small, very productive variety, forcing well, white beans. Dwarf rice bean, Comtesse de Chambord. - White grain, very small, round; short pods; very hardy. Yellow cent pour un bean. - Very productive, very dwarf, hardy; small, oval, bright golden-yellow bean. Rilleux or Lyonnais yellow bean. - Round, thin pods over 20 cm long; very hardy. Haricot jaune d'Ampuis or Barbès. - Very good, hardy variety. Dwarf Russian bean. - Matte pale nankin-colored beans; very productive; good for shelling and greening. Dwarf Eclipse or Shah of Persia bean (fig. 33). - Large production variety; pods 20 to 25 cm long, thin and straight, beautiful green; black, flat and elongated bean; excellent for green harvesting. Haricot gris Rousselet du Moulin-à-Vent. - Very early, very hardy; long, thin, very green pods; high yields, Improved dwarf Barbès bean (new). - Very long pods; good for green harvesting. Chocolate bean. - Very good for green harvesting. Dwarf bean, Merveille de Paris. - Vigorous variety; long, fine, green pods; very productive. Swiss bean, dwarf, white, early. - Very dwarf variety; long, straight pods; very productive. Dwarf bean, Lyon glory. - Long pods, black, purplish background, fairly productive. Dwarf saber bean. - Mexican salmon bean. 16. - Dwarf Soissons bean. - Red Orleans bean. - Saint-Esprit bean. - Swiss grey bean. - Everyday kidney bean. - Oxblood Swiss bean. Q detoni, a Q FIG. 33: Dwarf Eclipse or Shah of Persia bean. 3° String beans without parchment, or mangetout. Mont-d'Or butter bean. - Very productive variety, excellent for eating green, always tender and filletless, even when beans are formed, highly recommended; purplish-brown marbled beans. White butter bean. - Very good variety, for green eating; vigorous, very productive. Black Alger bean. - One of our oldest butter bean varieties, productive, frankly parchmentless, hardy. Large white bean, mangetout with long pods. - Very long pods, flat elongated bean; good quality, very productive, hardy; excellent as a flageolet. Haricot de Plainpalais, Haricot blanc de Genève - Frankly parchmentless variety, narrow, long pods, white grain. Haricot Princesse, string bean. - Productive, very vigorous variety of fairly good quality. Purple-podded bean. - Very vigorous and good quality, early, very productive and highly recommended as a mangetout. Black saber bean. - A very beautiful giant variety, late, productive and of fairly good quality. Haricot Prédome à rames. - A very good variety, highly esteemed in Normandy and Brittany, where it is grown extensively. Excellent for eating green; very tender pods, brittle and threadless, even when ripe; white, round grain. Among the new varieties, we should mention: Haricot beurre panaché à rames. - White grain, marbled with purple, golden-yellow pods with red speckles. Bulgarian bean without parchment. - Very productive variety, hardy in the Midi and Sud-Quest, very vigorous, but a little late. Golden-yellow string bean. - Striated yellow grain, fairly long, very full pods; early and fairly productive. Japanese cherry bean - Variety cultivated for several years, medium-sized, fleshy pods, round, dark-red grain, fairly good. Haricot Reine de France. - Pods 20 to 25 cm long, white, fairly tender; buff-colored bean with black spots. Prolific bicolored coco bean. - Early variety, frankly without parchment, very productive and hardy; round pods; medium-sized, oval, almost round bean. Improved Mont-d'Or butter bean with yellow pods. - Excellent variety, very productive and especially very good, highly esteemed in Lyon; very long pods. Haricot beurre ivoire à rames. - Very late, high yielding, hardy; long, fleshy pods; very good for filleting. Giant white bean without parchment (fig. 34). - Very productive, vigorous, good quality. Other old varieties include: Marbled Prague bean or pink coco. - Widely grown in the South-West, Midi and part of Charentes, and known as Mongeon. Intestine bean. - White or Gros Sophie coco bean - Grey zebra bean. 4° Parchment string beans, for shelling. Soissons string bean. - A very high-growing variety, cultivated everywhere, very productive and of good quality; long, broad, slightly arched pods; very large, white beans; excellent for flageolet and dry eating. Haricot sabre bean. - Very vigorous variety; long, slightly arched pods, thick, containing seven to nine beans; excellent for flageolet and dry cooking. Rowed rice bean. - Not very vigorous variety, about 1.30 m tall; numerous, small, short pods; very small, generally cooking grain; requires well-smoked soil. Liancourt bean. - Hardy, vigorous, late variety; eaten dry, rarely green. FIO. 34 - Giant white bean, without parchment, with oars. 285 Partridge-eye bean. - A very old variety, still cultivated in some places, but little appreciated because of its low production. Haricot rouge de Chartres. - Very vigorous, hardy and productive variety; long, arched pods containing five or six wine-red seeds; can be eaten dry. New or less common varieties include: Haricot de Soissons vert à rames. - Vigorous, productive, green-grained variety, less hardy than ordinary Soissons. Very early Englefontaine bean. - Very hardy, fairly productive. Ronceray green string bean. - Very productive variety, fairly early, excellent for eating as a flageolet; green bean. Butter flageolet bean. - Very hardy, long pods, golden yellow, red bean. Red Soissons bean. - Harlequin bean, etc. MALaDlEs, NUISIBLE ANIMALS. - Sometimes, especially in silica-poor soils, beans are affected by chlorosis, turn yellow and stop growing; the best remedy is to water them from time to time with liquid manure in which a little iron sulfate has been dissolved, about 100 grams per 10 liters of water, and water at the foot as much as possible. Sometimes, as a result of sudden changes in temperature and too much prolonged humidity, the beans are affected by rot and rust or uredo; the pods are strewn with circular red spots which perforate the parchment and reach the beans, which are completely deteriorated. There's nothing to be done about it; fortunately, these diseases are fairly rare, and only show up in autumn, when the bean harvest is well advanced. White grubs, slugs, snails and crickets, when they swarm in a field, cause real damage to young bean seedlings. So we have to wage a fierce war against them. To protect the crop, surround the plant with powdered quicklime, soot and unleached ash, mixed in equal parts. USES. - Beans are widely used in the diet: along with potatoes, they are the staple of the poor man's diet. On the rich man's table, they are almost always served with a variety of meats, mainly mutton; everyone knows the ancient and traditional gigot aux flageolets, the delight of Parisians, or to put it better, of the majority of French people. Beans are popular simply because they're cheap. The ancients knew beans; Galen says that the Romans began their meals with beans preserved in vinegar and garum, to whet their appetites. Green beans are eaten half-formed. In Auvergne and Poitou, and even in Limousin, it is widely cultivated to be eaten dry, and in these regions is the main food of the peasants. It is very nourishing, but should not be eaten by weak stomachs or those with poor digestion. The pods can be pickled in vinegar like gherkins. Green beans can be preserved in several ways. Usually, they are blanched by throwing them into boiling, slightly salted water and leaving them for a few minutes after removing them from the heat; they are then drained, dried on cloths and placed several times in an oven, like prunes, on racks. Before using them, soak them first thing in the morning in lukewarm water. Alternatively, to preserve the beans, pour boiling water over them and leave them in for a few minutes, then cook them in boiling salted water, so that they are a little crunchy, drain them, sauté them in butter with parsley, and bottle them with their sauce when they are cold; in the bottles, they are given a five-minute boil. Flageolet beans can be preserved in the same way, but need to boil for three hours. They make excellent flour for fattening domestic animals. Burnt stalks yield a lot of potash. SPANISH BEANS Phaseolus multiflorus Wild. Phaseolus coccineus I.. ORIGIN. - South American plant. Perennial in its native country, but annual in our cultivations, called Haricot bouquet, Haricot à fleurs, etc. CULTIVATION. - Runner beans are excessively vigorous and hardy plants, at least in the Midi; they become more delicate in the North, due to the lack of heat. The varied colors of their flowers make them highly appreciated as ornamental plants. Runner beans are grown in the same way as Phascolus vulgaris, but as they are very vigorous, they need to be rowed with high branches. VARIETIES. - Runner bean. - Large, vigorous, productive variety; broad, short pods, light wine-red beans with black spots, red flowers. White runner bean. - Very vigorous variety, the best to grow for eating, reaching 3 meters or more in height; white flowers in numerous clusters; broad, flattened pods; very large, thick, white beans. Bicolor runner bean. - A vigorous variety, highly original for the oddity of its flowers, which are half red and half white; highly esteemed in the North, where it is grown as an ornamental. Black runner bean. - Very vigorous, fairly hardy; short, broad pods; completely black bean. Hybrid runner bean. - Very vigorous variety; flowers with the same variegation as the bi-colored bean; broad pods; grayish-yellow grain, spotted with brown. DISEASES, PESTS. - This breed is much hardier than Phaseolus vulgaris, resists disease and is rarely attacked by insects: slugs and snails will devour a few young plants. USES. - The runner bean is a very popular plant in the South of France. It can be eaten as a half-formed bean or green, when it is edible; but when dry, it is not as good as an ordinary bean, is not very floury and has an unpleasant pungent taste. In southern Spain and part of Portugal, this breed is grown to the exclusion of all others. The liter weighs between 730 and 735 grams, and 100 grams contain around 75 beans. LIMA BEANS, Phaseolus lunatus L. Phaseolus inamœnus L. Phaseolus lunatus macrocarpus Bentham. ORIGIN. - Perennial in its native country, annual in our cultivations. This breed is mainly cultivated by E. BERGER, Vegetables. 17 in the Argentine Republic, the United States, the West Indies, Havana, almost all the French colonies in America and throughout Africa. CULTIVATION. - Cultivation of this breed is much the same as that of the above-mentioned varieties, with the difference that in the North and in Paris the pods almost never, or rarely, all reach maturity. In cold years with rainy autumns, they don't ripen at all. Throughout the Midi, and particularly in Provence, it does fairly well; it's only from Toulouse onwards that we can begin to grow it successfully. The Lima bean should be sown early, towards the end of April or first fortnight of May, at the best possible exposure. In temperate climates, we recommend sowing in pots, under a frame, and then planting in the open ground, when the soil is sufficiently warm. It requires the same cultivation care as row varieties. As it grows very tall, it should be given sufficiently high stalks. VARIETIES. - Lima bean. - Very late; broad, short pods, joined by several together; white, yellowish, flattened bean, very elongated and broad, a little kidney-shaped. 90 seeds weigh 100 grams. American growers' catalogs mention several other sub-varieties of this bean, with green, yellow and white seeds. Marbled Cape bean. - Very characteristic variety; dark red beans around the umbilicus and at one end; the rest are white with red dots. Each bean weighs 1 gram. Stéva bean. - A variety of Phaseolus lunatus, known in Havana as the fève plate or fève créole, this bean is highly prized by rich and poor alike. Very early: the first pods ripen quite well in the northern climate and in Paris. In the Midi, it is a perfect success. Yellowish-white grain, similar to Lima, but smaller. COWPEA BEAN. DOLIQUE MONGETTE. Dolichos unguiculatus L. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to South America, highly esteemed in tropical countries, and in Europe. in warm countries such as Portugal, Spain, Italy, etc., and in France in the southern zone. CULTURE. - This breed, which grows to no more than 60 centimeters in height, does quite well in Paris and the North, provided it is given very good exposure. Cultivation is the same as for dwarf common beans; straight or curved pods, almost cylindrical, 20 to 25 centimeters long; dirty white grain, with a small black spot around the umbilicus. Grain merchants in Italy and Portugal mention several varieties, differing from this one only in grain size. USES. - This breed is eaten green and half-formed; dry, the quality is far inferior to the others. Dolichos sesquipedalis L. ORIGIN. - Annual. From South America. Highly valued in Buenos-Ayres, Montevideo, Chile. CULTIVATION. - In some parts of Provence, this species is widely cultivated and does very well. We have grown it in Bordeaux and have been very satisfied. Cultivation is the same as for Soissons string beans. As this plant is very heat-loving, it needs a good, sunny exposure and lots of watering in summer. This is the only way to ensure success. VARIETIES. - Cuban cowpea bean. - An extremely curious variety of the asparagus cowpea bean, introduced from Havana some ten years ago: it is far superior to the previous variety. We have grown it for a very long time and have always been satisfied with the results it has given us. This variety is vigorous and relatively hardy: it grows very tall, up to 3.50 m, or more, depending on the soil. Very numerous pods, grouped in threes and fours, 50 to 60 centimetres long. SEEDS. - Pale, wine-yellow color, white umbilicus encircled by a small black line; small seeds. 100 grams contain 630 seeds. USES. - The pods are eaten green, very tender and tasty, especially when they are about half as long. Dried, the asparagus bean has no flavor and is rather bad than good. DOLIC BEAN LABLAB Lablab vulgaris Savi. Dolichos Lablab L. ORIGIN. - This species is widely cultivated in India and tropical Africa, says De Candolle. Cultivation is at least three thousand years old: "The lablab is unquestionably spontaneous in India, and even, it is said, in Java. It has become naturalized in the Seychelles Islands as a result of cultivation. The authors' indications do not allow us to say that it is spontaneous in Africa. CULTURE. - The lablab bean is grown very little in France, a lot in Egypt, and a little in Spain and Italy. This breed is very vigorous: it can reach 4 to 5 meters in height; very productive in hot countries. Same cultivation as paddle varieties. Should be considered more as an ornamental plant than as a vegetable variety. Not very productive in the North. The seeds, three or four per pod, are white or black, as there are two varieties, one with white flowers, the other with purple. USES. - In America, the lablab is cultivated for its grain, which is eaten like soissons in France. HVSOPE Hyssopus officinalis L. Hyssopus decussatus Persoon. Hyssopus myrtifolius Desf. Hyssopus ruber Mich. Labiatae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, evergreen plant, or rather sub-shrub, native to Spain, according to some authors, and Italy, according to others. GROWING. - Hyssop is easy to grow. It is usually planted in borders and pruned, like thyme, twice a year, in March and September. It is propagated by sowing seeds in rows in spring. Cover sparingly, as the seed is very fine. When the young plants have reached 7 or 8 centimetres in height, they are transplanted to the edges of driveways. Weed and hoe frequently to rid them of weeds. It can also be propagated with rooted cuttings and cold cuttings. It thrives best in strong, chalky soils, and is hardy enough to withstand the ordinary winters of northern France. Plantations should be renewed at least every four years. SEEDS. - In spring, we keep a few plants, which we don't prune as they rise, and in July, when the ears are ripe and before they are completely dry, we pick them with care, as the seed detaches very easily. They are spread out on a cloth and exposed to the sun for one or two days. The seeds are collected and winnowed. They keep well for three years. According to Vilmorin, 1 gram contains 850 seeds. DISEASES, PESTS. - In very rich, heavily fertilized soils, every year many plants succumb to the attacks of powdery mildew, which attacks the roots and especially the crown. Affected plants first wilt, then turn yellow. We know of no effective remedy to destroy this parasite. As soon as it is noticed, the plants must be pulled up without mercy and thrown away or burned. The site should be spaded as closely as possible to other plants, in order to destroy all the germs of the disease. As for insects, they are not very fond of this plant, and hardly touch it, probably because of the strongly aromatic smell of all its parts. Sometimes, however, flea beetles pierce the leaves, but we have never observed any significant damage. USES. - Hyssop is used in cooking to enhance the flavor of dishes, especially sauces. It is frequently used, especially in northern France, with thyme in green pea stews. The buds of the young, still-tender branches are used in particular. It is also used in Russian salads. The Jews used hyssop to make purification brushes. CHINESE IGNAMUS Dioscorea Batatas Decaisne. Dioscorea Japonica Hort. 295 ORIGIN. - The Chinese call it Sain-in. According to Dr. Bretschneider, this plant is indigenous to China, as it is mentioned in the oldest work on medical matters, that of Emperor Schen nung. According to M. de Vilmorin, the yam was introduced to France in 1848 by M. de Montigny, French consul in Shanghai. There are several races of yam, all cultivated and highly esteemed in warm countries, particularly India, Japan and China. CULTIVATION. - Chinese yam is not widely cultivated in France, at least not as a standard crop, due to the great difficulty involved in digging up the tubers, which are usually found between 60 cm and 1 m deep. This plant can be propagated from bulblets born in the leaf axils, but this method does not give as good results as propagation from medium-sized tubers about the size of an index finger, which are planted whole. These tubers can be put into vegetation as early as March, in 10-centimeter pots placed on beds. In May, the tubers are removed from the pot and planted in the ground; this will produce earlier and more abundant crops. Otherwise, the best time to plant tubers is the first half of May in temperate regions, and April in the south. The soil in which you intend to plant must be well-developed and of good natural composition: you can't expect to get good results from poor-quality soil. Water, too, must not be lacking, and if possible, irrigation should not be neglected, as the plant stops growing when it lacks moisture; however, this moisture must not be stagnant. Once the soil has been prepared, plant with a chalk line or draw lines spaced Om, 40 apart. Plant at 25 centimetres on the line, tighter if you want smaller tubers. Twenty days after planting, we ream them up with branches at least 1 metre long, which is enough for the stems to wrap around them, and at the same time, hoeing is much easier than if the plants were lying on the ground. During the summer, the plants are hoeed several times, and then pulled out in November. The tubers, which are sometimes very long and large, weighing up to 1 kilogram, keep very well, much like potatoes. VARIETIES. - There are several varieties of yam, all imported from Japan or China. SEEDS. - In our regions, the bulblets that sprout from the leaf axils take the place of seeds. They are harvested in autumn, before the plant is grubbed up. DISEASES, PESTS. - The yam's natural enemies are snails and slugs, which devour the young stalks as they begin to grow. Cutworms can also eat tubers. The plant sometimes turns yellow towards midsummer, but this is due to excessive humidity or the soil's lack of siliceous matter. USES. - The rhizomes are eaten like potatoes; the flesh is white, light, floury and very pleasant to the taste. CULTIVATED LETTUCE Lactuca sativa L. Composites. ORIGIN. - An annual plant of ancient origin. It is said that the first seeds were sent from Rome to France in 1540 by Rabelais, who sent them to Cardinal d'Estrée. The typical species grows in southern Europe, northern Africa and western Asia. The Lactuca genus has been divided by botanists into two distinct races: head lettuces and romaine lettuces; the habit of each of these genera is so different that it is easy to recognize them. HATÉE AND EARLY LETTUCES. - The cultivation of early lettuces is extremely easy: all you need is the right tools, and sufficient equipment consisting of bells and panels. Twenty years ago, Parisian market gardeners used to grow this type of lettuce extensively, and found it a profitable winter crop. Today, early lettuce is still grown, but less so than in the past. The capital's markets are invaded by fresh produce from the Midi, Spain, Algeria, etc., which contributes to a decline in all similar products. What's more, for some years now, lettuces grown under glass have been subject to a terrible disease, Perono- spora gangliformis. The first early lettuces are sown towards the end of September and October, under frames or cloches on the ground, with good exposure. However, if sowing without panels, make sure the seedlings are as close as possible 17. to the glass. If sowing under cloches, first prepare the soil with a spade, then spread a small layer of potting soil over the surface. The cloches are placed before sowing, to fix the exact location, then the seed is sown, treaded and covered with potting soil; under a frame, the same procedure is followed, with watering. Don't let the air in; once the plant has risen, if it's too thick, thin it out a little, and if it's sunburned, shade it. When the plant is strong enough to be transplanted permanently, prepare an ados, place three or four rows of bells in a chessboard pattern, lift the plant as much as possible with the root ball, and plant five to eight lettuces under each one, depending on the species, water and press lightly on the top of each bell to fix them firmly to the ground, so that no air penetrates. Shade or smear the inside with loosened soil. Panel planting is preferable, as there is no wasted ground; generally, six or seven rows are planted in 1.33 panels. When the sun's rays are hot, if the glass is not smeared, it must be shaded; similarly, when frosts occur, it must be covered with straw mats. If the weather is too cold, the cloches should be lined with bedding or dry manure, with the straw mats on top. In this case, it's preferable to use cone-shaped straw mats, which fit over the bell, thus saving a lot of labor. The plantations are visited from time to time, dead or rotten leaves removed, weeded and lightly watered if necessary. About a month or forty-five days after sowing, the lettuces should be ready to harvest. Sowing should be staggered from fortnight to fortnight until February, so as not to run out. From November onwards, sow on warm beds. The cultivation methods described above apply to the north of France, as well as to temperate regions. In the south of France, a good sheltered exposure is sufficient in winter. All the varieties known as spring lettuces lend themselves very well to early cultivation. These are the only varieties that can give good results. CULTIVATION IN THE OPEN GROUND. - Head lettuces generally thrive in all soils that are sufficiently fertilized, and preferably in those that have been under cultivation for a long time. Lettuces should be planted in recently tilled soil: they are planted in rows of four at 25 centimetres apart, 20 or 25 centimetres apart on the row, sometimes more, depending on the species. Smaller varieties, such as gotte or crepe lettuces, can be planted closer together. Each plant is watered with the spout as soon as it is transplanted. A few weeks later, when the lettuces have started to grow, we give them a first hoeing, which we repeat a few days later. The surface of the soil must be constantly loose to encourage growth. VARIETIES. - Gardeners divide lettuces into four groups: 1° Spring lettuces; 2° Summer and autumn lettuces; 3° Winter lettuces; 4° Cutting lettuces. 1° Spring lettuces. - These varieties are all small or medium-sized. They are sown from February to the end of April. The first sowings should be made on warm beds, or in a well-exposed bed, or at least sheltered by windbreakers. In northern France, the first plantings in March are made on costières or ados. But in parts of the West, South-West and South of France, this precaution is not necessary. Laitue gotte (white seed). - A very old species, small in size and well suited to forced cultivation. Laitue gotte (black seed). - Little different from the previous one, very early. Slow-growing gotte lettuce. - Excellent variety, almost all apple.

Pancake lettuce (with white and black seeds). - Two small varieties, very good for forced cultivation. Tennisball lettuce (black seed). - A very old variety in cultivation, a little bulkier than crepe, apples well. Red-edged or red cord lettuce. - Excellent variety, larger than gotte, very good and highly regarded on the markets. Tom-Pouce lettuce. - A new, highly recommendable species, small in size and good for forced cultivation. 2° Summer and autumn lettuces. - There are a great many lettuces in this class, and some are very large. They are sown in nurseries from March to July. Transplant when the plant is strong enough, and water copiously during hot spells. A good mulch is necessary in dry soils. Blonde summer lettuce or non pareille lettuce, royal lettuce. - This variety is universally known. It is grown almost everywhere; medium size; round, tight head; white seed. Laitue blonde de Versailles. - A very fine variety with a large, elongated, firm head; white seed. Berlin blond lettuce. - Black-seeded variety, fairly tight head, tender and tasty. Chavigné blond lettuce. - Quite large head, very full and tight, forming quickly, very slow to set, highly recommended. Lettuce Bossin. - Large, not very tight, very wide, up to 40 cm in diameter. The midrib, very accentuated at the bottom, makes it depreciate, very tender, black seed. Maltese lettuce. - Quite large, not very tight, very tender, resists heat well; white seed; suitable for the Midi. Brown Batavia lettuce. - Tall, elongated head, not very tight, tender, rises quickly, very good for hot climates. Naples cabbage lettuce. - Very large variety, like apple, which is tight and firm; keeps well; white seed. Batavia blond lettuce. - Tender, loose-headed variety; white seed. Big brown lazy lettuce. - Excellent variety, known as meterelle lettuce in the Southwest; very hardy; black seed. Big lazy blond lettuce. - A very good summer variety, good head and tight; white seed. Lettuce merveille des quatre saisons or red Besson lettuce. - Very good hardy variety, can be sown in any season; black seed. Palatine or red lettuce. - Very good variety for summer, good head, black seed. Other varieties include Simpson's early lettuce. - Small, white seed. Red Dutch lettuce. - Black seed. Blood lettuce, improved. - White seed. Greasy green lettuce. - Small, peeling well, black seed. Lorthois or Trocadero lettuce. - Small, white seed. Big Normandy lettuce. - Medium, yellow-seeded. New or recent varieties include: Giant blond lettuce. - Very fine variety, apple FIG. 35 - Giant blond lettuce. large, firm, hardy, good heat resistance, white seed (fig. 35). Large, stubborn brown lettuce. - Firm and tight. Ohio lettuce. - Firm head, good size, very good for summer, white seed. Triumph lettuce. - Rounded head, very large, very hardy, difficult to set seed. 3° Winter lettuces. - These varieties are very hardy, and survive our ordinary winters quite well with some shelter. They are sown from August to October. Young plants, when strong enough, should be transplanted to a good exposure, to speed up production. The first seedlings produce lettuces that are good for harvesting before or during the winter, but the last plantings in October, or the first two weeks of November, overwinter, and vegetation starts up again in February. They bolt towards the end of April and are followed by spring seedlings. Passion or babiana lettuce. - Excellent variety, good head, medium size, very hardy, successful only at this time of year, white seed. Red winter lettuce. - Very fine variety, hardy, good head, good size, very good for the South-West, white seed. Brown winter lettuce. - Medium-sized variety, small, tight head, very hardy; white seed. Large blond winter lettuce. - Very fine variety, hardy and of good quality; white seed. New varieties include Trémont winter lettuce. - Excellent variety, hardy, fairly strong head, tight; white seed. White Passion lettuce. - Hardy and of good quality; black seed. 4° Cutting lettuces. - This breed includes varieties that do not head, that are sown very thickly, in all seasons on beds, on ados or in the open ground; in general, they are always mixed with other crops. Some of these varieties form a small apple, but not very tightly packed. Among the best are Beauregard leaf lettuce. - A very fine, tender variety, much appreciated in the markets. American leaf lettuce. - Leaves tinted bronze-red, very tender. California leaf lettuce. - Very vigorous variety, high yielding, very tender and tasty. Ordinary cutting lettuce - Blonde cutting lettuce. Generally speaking, all varieties of head lettuce can be grown as cutting lettuces; they just need to be picked young, although certain breeds are always hardy. In Bordeaux, these are called baby lettuces. SEEDS. - Seeds are easy to harvest. Spring and summer lettuces bolt the first year, only winter lettuces bolt the following year. Varieties sown after June do not ripen their seeds in the North. When the height of the plants is sufficiently high, and the seeds begin to form, you need to keep an eye on the birds, which are very fond of them. They keep well for four years. DISEASES, PESTS - Early lettuces, grown under cloches or panels where they need as little air as possible to succeed, have for some years been invaded by a cryptogam that rapidly destroys them, the Peronospora gangliformis, called miller by Parisian market gardeners. This parasite develops with extraordinary rapidity under the influence of concentrated humid heat, and generally begins with small, barely visible yellowish or white spots on the underside of the leaves, usually near the veins, especially the midrib. When the spots come together, a multitude of small, vertical, mold-like fibers become visible, each fiber or arbuscule surmounted by a reproductive sporule. After a few hours of rejoining, the oldest affected part becomes mortified and decomposes, leaving the leaf as a rotten mass. On the advice of Mr. Millardet, Professor of Botany at the Bordeaux Faculty of Science, we have carried out several trials to curb this disease. Bordeaux mixture, as used today for vines, would give good results, but the toxic principles of copper are an obstacle to its use; however, by washing the lettuces in clear water with a little sulfuric acid, there is nothing to fear. A very simple and above all harmless treatment, which has given us the best results, is as follows. Dissolve one kilogram of white plaster in 10 liters of water, add a little well-sieved soot, mix everything together, and use it to drench lettuces affected by the disease; ensure that the liquid is distributed over the leaves in the form of rain, a syringe for drenching greenhouses works well; to remove the plaster adhering to the leaves, drench them with fresh water a few hours before cutting them, and then wash them with plenty of water. Nicotine, reduced to a tenth and mixed with fat lime, has not given satisfactory results. Brown lettuces seem to be more resistant to this disease than blondes. This disease seems to develop especially on plants grown on beds. Let's hope it doesn't become more hardy, and that our outdoor plantings don't suffer from it! Slugs and snails are very fond of young lettuce plants, as are white grubs and cutworms, which cut the roots. Destroy them by any means necessary. USES. - Lettuce is an excellent vegetable, much appreciated on all tables. It is used either cooked in fat or raw in salads. ROMAINE LETTUCE CULTIVATION. - Romaine lettuces, which have a different shape to ordinary lettuces, can be grown in the same way. VARIETIES. - They are classified into winter, spring and summer varieties. 1° Winter romaine lettuces. - Sow not too thickly, in August-September, in a well-smoked bed. When strong enough, they are planted in good, recently ploughed, smoked soil and watered immediately. The last plantings should be done in the first fortnight of November, no later. Green winter romaine lettuce. - Very old variety, good head, not very sensitive to cold, black seed. Winter green Romaine. - Fairly hardy variety; medium-sized head, fairly tight, black seed. Winter red Romaine. - Very hardy, high, fairly large, tight head, very slow to bolt, black seed. 2° Spring romaine lettuces. - Balloon romaine lettuce. - Very bulky variety, strong, tight, white head, black seed. Blonde romaine lettuce. - A very old variety, grown just about everywhere, hardy, adaptable to all temperate climates, as long as it has plenty of water in summer. Early, it can be grown under frames or cloches, white seed. Lettuce verte maraîchère. - A very old variety, excellent, not very tight and white, hardy, white seed. Romaine grise maraichère. - Highly esteemed by growers around Paris for early vegetables, medium size, apples well. Slow-growing blond lettuce. - A new, little-known variety, it bolts very late, with black seeds. Trianon early blond romaine lettuce. - New variety, large, very full head, white seed. Early flat romaine lettuce. - New, very good for cultivation under cloches, white seed. Potato lettuce. - Very small, black seed. 3° Summer romaine lettuces. - These varieties are more resistant to summer heat, but can be sown in spring, just as spring varieties can be sown at this time. They can be sown from the second half of May to July. Among the best varieties are Alphange romaine lettuce. - Black and white seeds, two varieties with little distinction. English brown romaine lettuce. - White and black seeds. Perfected variegated or blood lettuce. - Flagellated with reddish spots; very tender. SEEDS. - Seeds are harvested in the same way as head lettuces. USES. - Same uses. LAVENDER Lavandula Spica D. C. Labiatae. Indigenous, perennial, this plant reproduces by separating clumps and taking cuttings in autumn and spring; can be propagated by sowing. Used as a condiment in sauces. LENTILLE Ervum Lens L. Lens esculenta Mœnch. Leguminosae. ORIGIN. - Native annual. COOKING. - The lentil (fig. 36) is a plant of great FIO. 86. - Lentil. cultivation, it is rarely grown in gardens. It prefers a soft, light soil, which is where it produces the most and at the same time where the grains are the hottest. This legume is very easy to grow. It is sown in March, in rows or bunches. Weed when necessary. It requires no further care until harvesting, which takes place towards the end of August, beginning of September. SEEDS. - To preserve lentils well for sowing, it's best to leave them in their pods until it's time to sow them. They keep well for four years. VARIETIES. - Lentille large blonde or lentille de Lorraine. - Green Puy lentil. - March lentil. - Winter lentil. Common lentil, a variety grown extensively in Eastern Europe and Germany. lentils, pests. - Lentils are sometimes affected by bruchids, a small beetle whose larvae develop in the grain, partially gnawing it, and then dying. Lentils, ravaged by this insect, are unpalatable and harmful to health. Many remedies have been tried to prevent the bruchid from depositing its eggs, but none has worked. As a result, lentil cultivation has been abandoned in many parts of northern France, where the insect is rampant. USES. - Same uses as beans. Valerianella olitoria Mœnch. Valeriana Locusta L. Valerianae. ORIGIN. - Indigenous annual herbaceous plant, known locally as Boursette, Blanquette, Clairette, Poule grasse, Barbe de chanoine, Coquille, Pommette, Laitue de brebis, Orillette, etc. CULTIVATION. - Lamb's lettuce is not very difficult to grow in any type of soil. However, it seems to do best in light, well-smoked soils. They are sown from August to October, broadcast, in beds, alone or among other crops such as turnips or radishes. Sow fairly thickly, covering sparingly; the most important thing is to tread the soil sufficiently after sowing. Other cultivation care consists of weeding, in order to remove the weeds that invade. FIG. 37. - Round-leaf lamb's lettuce. VAbieTes. - Round-leaf lamb's lettuce (fig. 37). - A very good, hardy, tender variety, highly esteemed on the markets, especially in Paris, where market gardeners grow it almost exclusively. Mâche verte d'Etampes. - Very good variety, forming a rosette of tight leaves, tender, withstands cold well. Mâche verte à cœur plein. - Tight, firm rosette, short, intense green leaves, very good variety, less hardy than the preceding ones. Large-seeded Dutch lamb's lettuce. - Hardy, productive variety, comes very large and very good for northern countries. Italian or Regency Lamb's lettuce (Valerianella eriocarpa Desv.). - Distinct from common lamb's lettuce in that it is blonder in all its parts, and in the length of its foliage. Rosette, fairly full, tender and tasty, it is especially suited to the Midi. Italian lamb's lettuce. - A variety derived from the previous one, with broader, rosette-shaped leaves, very strong and full. Mâche de Lyon. - A good new variety, highly regarded at Lyon markets, with broad, spoon-shaped leaves. Mâche à feuilles panachées. - Variety with variegated or marbled yellow or white leaves; not very productive, it seems destined to disappear from cultivation. SEEDS. - Seeds are harvested from seedlings sown in October. They generally ripen in June. As soon as they are ripe, the seeds detach easily; it is therefore necessary to pick the uprights before they are fully ripe, and lay them out on cloths in the shade, where they will complete their drying, then simply beat them with a stick to detach the seeds. Some seeds always fall to the ground. In this case, once the seed carriers have been removed, we recommend sweeping the surface of the soil, removing the largest clumps of earth and immersing the whole lot in a tub of water. The seeds float to the surface, where they are collected and dried in the shade. They keep well for four years. For seedlings, it's best to choose seeds that are two or three years old; they germinate better and faster than those from the previous year. DISEASES, PESTS. - In naturally damp winter soils, lamb's lettuce sometimes suffers from uredo or rust; excess humidity can also cause yellowing, but there's no need to worry too much about these diseases, which are rare. Slugs are very keen on young seedlings, which they would devour completely if we weren't careful. Ashes, soot, quicklime or hydraulic lime thrown on the seedlings will keep them away or kill them. USES. - Lamb's lettuce is used especially in salads. SWEET CORN Zea Mays L. Grasses. ORIGIN. - Corn was imported from America to Europe around the middle of the sixteenth century. An annual plant, it is known locally as Turkish wheat, Spanish wheat, Barbary wheat, Garouille (in the Charentes region), Indian wheat, etc. CULTIVATION. - Corn is sown in place, in April-May, in well-smoked soil. It is laid out in rows 50 centimeters apart, and at the same distance along the row; during the summer, it is hoeed and weeded several times, and it is customary to bring back the soil a little around each plant, in the form of a mound, to prevent the roots from being affected by excessive drought. Many growers, in order not to lose ground and at the same time to guarantee it, sow a tuft of dwarf beans between each corn plant. This is an excellent method. VARIETIES. - Early dwarf sweet corn. - Very good dwarf species, not exceeding 70 centimeters, white grain, very sweet. Sweet corn, wrinkled, evergreen. - Late and fairly tall. Vigorous, very tender ears. There are still a dozen varieties of sweet corn, highly esteemed in the United States, where this vegetable is in honor. In France, they are rarely grown. Varieties cultivated in large-scale farming, although less sweet than the above-mentioned breed, can nevertheless be used for the same purposes. SEEDS. - To obtain good sweet corn seeds, select a few vigorous plants, and keep their first fruits. When they are ripe, in September, or even earlier depending on the region, they are harvested, then their husks are removed by turning them towards the base of the cob. In this state, they are exposed to the air and sun, where they ripen completely. The seed keeps for two years. DISEASES. - The only disease we know of is ergot, which develops on the ears of corn. There is no remedy, but affected ears must be removed, as it is a poison. USES. - Sweet corn is widely used in the United States, where it is served on every table. The young cob is used, when the kernels are still in their milky state, just as beans are used in France. The whole ear is also used when it is just formed. In France, the main use is to pick the ears very young and pickle them in vinegar like gherkins. In this state, they make an excellent condiment. MARJOLAINE VIVACE Origanum vulgare L. Labiatae. A native perennial that can be propagated in the same way as thyme. It has the same uses. WHITE MARRUB Marrubium vulgare L. Labiatae. Indigenous, perennial, sown in the spring. It can also be propagated by dividing clumps. The leaves are used as a condiment. MARTYNIA Martynia lutea Lindl. Sesame. From Brazil, annual, this plant requires a lot of E. BERGER, Vegetable plants. 18 heat to develop. Sow on a bed in March; plant in the open ground along a wall facing south in May. The oddly shaped fruit can be pickled in vinegar like gherkins. CURWOOD Malva crispa L. Malvaceae. Annual, from the East. Sow in a nursery in April, preferably on a bed; transplant when plants are about 8 cm high. The leaves are used to garnish desserts. Melissa officinalis L. Labiatae Perennial plant of southern Europe. Reproduces by dividing clumps in spring. During winter, it must be covered with litter or long manure, especially in northern regions. The leaves are used as a condiment and in the preparation of liqueurs. MELON Cucumis Melo L. Cucurbitaceae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to tropical Asia, cultivated since time immemorial. The cantaloupe melon (cantalupo) was imported from Italy to France by Charles VIII in 1405. EARLY CROPS. - Growing early melons is much easier than you might think. Here's the one that has always worked for us, and which is the most practical. In January, prepare a good thick layer of horse manure and oak leaves; place the trunk and fill with 12 or 15 centimeters of soil mixed with free-range earth. The fires are allowed to burn through the layer, which takes three or four days, then the seed is sown in rows 95 centimetres apart, the seed is covered, and the straw mats are spread over the panels and maintained until emergence, which takes thirty-six or forty hours. During the day, we remove the mats, weather permitting, wipe off any mist, give the plants some air if the sun appears, and shade them. When the young plants are strong enough, i.e. when the first two leaves begin to appear, they are transplanted into 10-centimeter pots, planted up to the cotyledons, and at a rate of two plants per pot, face to face close to the sides; once this is done, the pots are watered and buried in a new layer, where good warmers have been set up to the height of the trunk. When the young melons have grown sufficiently, they are topped above the first two leaves. This pinching, which constitutes the first pruning, encourages the two branches to emerge from the axils of each leaf. Once they have reached this stage of development, the melons must be placed in their final position. In a layer prepared as described above, and this time filled with 14 or 15 centimetres of potting soil, two or four plants are planted in the middle of the trunk, depending on the species. Water lightly, then cover with panels, keeping a close eye on the mould that is bound to grow inside the trunks. Also, when the sun comes out, air is gradually supplied and warmers are set up, often needing to be reworked to maintain their warmth; pruning must not be neglected either, and must be carried out in good time. Towards the end of April, give the plants plenty of air and lightly baste them. Cover with mats every evening until this time, to prevent chilling. In May, the melons begin to ripen, and successively until mid-June or even later, if sown a few days apart. The best varieties for this type of cultivation, and at the same time those whose fruit is best appreciated, are: the cantaloup Prescott petit hâtif; the cantaloup noir des Carmes; the cantaloup de Bellegarde, etc. There is no need to grow other varieties. HATÉE OR SEASONAL CULTIVATION. - Parisian market gardeners, who excel in melon cultivation, have adopted a system they call culture de saison (seasonal cultivation), but which in reality is nothing more than hasty cultivation. Towards the end of March, beginning of April, a good bed is prepared for sowing, in the same way as indicated above. Once the seedlings are sufficiently developed, they are transplanted into 9-centimetre pots, which are then buried on the bed, or transplanted directly onto the bed at a distance of 10 centimetres in all directions. In May, prepare a series of layers, one in front of the other, in a vegetable patch where the previous year's fertilization had been imperfect; place the trunks in them and fill them with 15 centimetres of the best soil in the patch, levelling it as best you can. Three days after this operation, the melons are planted, either in clods, if they have been transplanted onto the bed, or in pots. When the plants are well established, and even when they have grown sufficiently, temperature permitting, the panels are removed and cultivation takes place in the open air. CULTIVATION UNDER CLOCHES. - Melons are sown at the same time as above. Around May 15, in the North, or earlier if the region is temperate, trenches 50 or 60 centimetres wide and 35 centimetres deep are prepared, filled with warm manure at least 50 centimetres thick and then loaded with the best loose soil, producing a sufficiently rounded bed. Rake well to even out the top and plant 1 metre apart along the line. Immediately after planting, cover the melons with cloches and wrap them in litter or heather for a few days to help the plant take root. As soon as the melons have picked up and are beginning to vegetate, the cloches are lifted to give them a little air, gradually increasing until they are removed, i.e. when the branches can no longer fit under the cloches. In many cases, growers keep the cloches up for a few days, supporting them with three racks placed in a triangle. In this way, it is said, the plants benefit from a greater amount of heat than in the open air. However, around June 10, they can be removed. Other cultivation care is the same as for plants grown without panels. Water sufficiently, but not excessively. These cultivation methods apply to temperate regions and the north of France. In the Midi, Centre and South-West, they are not applied in the same way. GROWING ON TEENS. - Growing on teens is the most common method, and the best for full soil. Once the soil has been ploughed with a spade, lines are drawn with a chalk line, 1.40 m apart. The ends are marked with stakes; once this is done, a 40-centimeter trench is opened with the spade, i.e. 20 centimeters are taken from each side of the line, to a depth of 35 to 40 centimeters. The soil from the trenches is discarded to the right and left. The trenches are then filled with good horse manure, well moistened with urine, 18. tamped down by trampling on it several times, then covered with soil, preferably the best. A rake is passed over the whole, which should form a bulging part in the middle, the axis of which should be the line originally traced, which is re-established by placing the string in the holes of the stakes left for this purpose at the start of the operation. Once the melons have been sown or transplanted into pots, towards the end of April or May, they are planted in pairs, 1 or 1.20 m apart on the line. When planting, form a good basin around them for watering, and cover with cloches or small glazed wooden squares specially designed for this purpose, much used in the South-West. Other care consists of watering, pinching and light hoeing around the plants. CULTIVATION IN THE GROUND. - Open-ground cultivation is very easy, and is the practice in the South of France: Toulouse, Avignon, Arles, Mont- pellier, Perpignan, Narbonne, etc. In Tours, Angers and Nantes, this type of cultivation is practiced, but only on limited areas. Farmers in Gironde and Lot-et-Garonne grow it among vines and in open fields. In the first few days of May, the ground where the melons are to be planted is thoroughly hoeed, then round holes 40 to 50 centimetres in diameter are dug, 40 centimetres deep at 1.50 or 2 metres apart. Fill them with still-warm horse manure, tamp it down and mound the soil, forming a kind of funnel at the top, then sow. Place four or five seeds per hole and water lightly with an apple. When the melons have sprouted, select three of the most beautiful and uproot the others; then spread a light mulch around them; all that remains is to prune them. In general, growers only topped the plants and then left them to grow wild; despite this, we have seen some really beautiful products, but they need the sun of the Midi. The best varieties for this type of cultivation are the maraicher melon, the Cavaillon melon, the sucrin de Tours melon and the green melon, etc. PRUNING MELONS. - There are two main pruning systems advocated by melon growers, and they apply to all varieties and all crops. First system. First pruning. - When the stem is sufficiently developed, it is pinched above the first two leaves, giving rise to two lateral branches in the axils of each leaf. While performing this first pinch, remove the two buds that begin to appear under the cotyledons. Second pruning. - As the two lateral branches mentioned above have sufficiently developed their third leaf, they are pruned above the second, giving rise to four new branches. Third pruning. - The four new branches, once they have grown their third leaf, are also pruned above the second. This is almost always the last pruning. It encourages the emergence of new branches, which generally bear fruit. However, there are certain varieties where a fourth pruning becomes necessary. In this case, we always pinch above the second leaf. When a fruit is well set, pinch off the branch bearing it, one or two leaves above. Some of the other branches are then removed and become useless. As a general rule, if you want to obtain beautiful fruit, leave only two per plant, one on each side. Second system. - This pruning procedure is much simpler than the previous one, and generally gives just as good results. It consists in pinching the main stem above the second leaf, cancelling the cotyledon buds, and, when the lateral branches have developed their sixth leaf, pruning above them and then waiting for the fruit to appear; when it is set, operate in the same way as indicated for the first system. VARIETIES. - The best and simplest classification for melons is that adopted by M. de Vilmorin. They are divided into two main series: embroidered melons and cantaloupes. FIG. 33 - Embroidered melon, lon sucrin de Tours, etc.; 1°Embroidered melons (fig. 38). - We will mention only the best species: Melon de Cavaillon with red and green flesh. - American pineapple melons, with red and green flesh, or pocket melons. - Hon-flower melon. - Market melon. - Me- 2° Cantaloupe melons (fig. 39). - Alger cantaloupe melon. - Carmes black cantaloupe melon. - Black cantaloupe melon from Portugal. - Cantaloupe melon. Prescott. - Prescott cantaloupe melon, silver-white background. - Sucrin cantaloupe melon, etc. SEEDS. - To obtain good melon seeds, you need to choose beautiful fruits that are characteristic of the species. When you eat them, you remove the seed, wash it and dry it in the shade. The best to sow is the three-year-old variety. The germination period is six years. DISEASES AND PESTS. - The melon is affected by several diseases, miller on the roots and uredo on the leaves, and sometimes by another parasitic disease, which resembles mildew on the vine; the best remedy is Bordeaux mixture. Grey and green aphids also wreak havoc in certain regions, where the undersides of the leaves are eaten away in a multitude of places. It has been suggested to dip poultry feathers in oil, and to prick them among the affected melons, or to place small boards coated with coaltar: the flying insects stick to them and succumb. Nicotine easily destroys aphids. Snails are very fond of young seedlings, especially when they start to emerge. A sprinkling of ash or soot will keep them away. USES. - When perfectly ripe, slices of melon are eaten at the beginning of a meal to stimulate the appetite. It is said that melon is very indigestible, so it should only be eaten in moderation. The young fruit, as large as walnuts, can be preserved in vinegar like gherkins. WATERMELON Cucurbita Citrullus L. Cucurbitaceae. ORIGIN. - African annual. CULTIVATION. - Watermelons need a lot of warmth to develop, so they are rarely grown in France, except in the South, on the Mediterranean coast, in Antibes, Grasse, Gap, etc., where they do well. In the north, the fruit almost never reaches its normal volume, which means it's never good. In the Midi, melons are sown in the ground, as is the case for melons grown outdoors. In the North, they need to be grown in a hurry. If you want beautiful fruit, don't prune them. VARIETY. - There are two species: the red-seeded watermelon and the black-seeded watermelon. From these come a multitude of varieties, prized in America but little grown in France. The beautiful melons we see on our markets are shipped in part from Spain. USES. - The pulp is eaten like a melon; the main use is to make jam, which is excellent. PEPPERMINT Mentha piperita L. Same cultivation and uses as the following. GREEN MINT Mentha viridis L. Labiatae. Indigenous, perennial, multiplies by dividing creeping stems in spring; plant in well-smoked, moist soil, recut stems in autumn and cover with compost. The entire plant is used as a condiment, as well as to make flavored liqueurs or baths. NAVET Brassica Napus L. Cruciferae. ORIGIN. - Biennial plant from temperate Europe. CULTIVATION. - Turnips are not very difficult to grow in the right soil, and thrive almost anywhere. However, they seem to prefer limestone soils; depending on the environment, they are either mild or strong. Turnips can be sown from March to September; the first seedlings, from March to May, set seed immediately, while those sown after this time do not set seed until the following year. This plant should therefore be considered an autumn vegetable. Sow broadcast, in patches, in recently ploughed and smoked soil. Cover lightly by harrowing with a fork. Straw. When the young plants have grown their third leaves, thin out, weed and water. Watering must be copious during hot spells, as turnips, to be good and tender, must not suffer any break in their vegetation; they must be eaten at about three-quarters of their size. To get them very early, sow them in January and February, under cold frames or on muted beds. In the past, Parisian market gardeners used to grow this type of crop a lot, which provided them with good profits, but which they have now more or less abandoned. The best varieties for this type of cultivation, as well as for first-season seedlings in the open ground, are: the Munich turnip or rouge plat de mai, the turnip des vertus Marteau, the rond de Croissy, the blanc plat hátif, and so on. In the south of France, turnips make it through the winter without suffering too much, but in the north they suffer a lot and become hollow. That's why market gardeners are in the habit, when cold weather approaches, of digging them up, burying them in the sand outside and covering them with litter when the temperature is too low. Others put up windbreaks, glass frames or wooden panels. FIO. 40. - Turnip var. Hammer. FIG. 41 - Red turnip, flat, early, whole leaf. VARIETIES. - There are a considerable number of these, of which we shall mention the best known: Navet demi-long des vertus, var. Marteau (fig. 40). - Croissy turnip. - Navet rouge plat de mai ou de Munich. - Round green turnip. - Very early, full-leaf, flat red turnip (fig. 41). - Half-long, white turnip. - Limousin turnip. - Norfolh, white. - Montmagny yellow turnip. - Globe white turnip. - Navet cougoulou du Kahsmir, a new and very deserving variety. - Golden ball yellow turnip, etc. SEEDS. - Roots from the previous year, selected in autumn, are planted in March: by June or July, the seeds are ready for harvesting. They are treated in the same way as cabbage seeds. They keep well for five years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Turnips are virtually free of fungal diseases. However, there is no shortage of insects; the most dreaded is the flea beetle (Phyllotreta nemorum), which attacks young seedlings and destroys them in a matter of days, especially in dry weather. To combat them, plants can be sprinkled with unleached ash, pyrethrum powder, black soap solution, nicotine, etc. Some growers have recommended soaking seeds in brine, rolling them in flower of sulfur, plaster, lime, etc., before sowing them. We have not tried any of these procedures. The white grub is also an enemy of the turnip: in soils where this insect abounds, most of the roots are eaten away. USES. - The root is an essential ingredient in stews. The leaves, blanched in the dark, are excellent for a variety of dishes. Before flowering, the young shoots are used in the same way as broccoli. AROMATIC NIGEL Nigella sativa L. Ranunculaceae. Oriental annual. Sow in spring in E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 19 place, with good exposure. The ripe seed is used as a seasoning in various culinary preparations. ONION Allium Cepa L. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - According to De Candolle, the onion, which is an annual and sometimes perennial plant, was found growing wild in Persia, Afghanistan, Beluchistan and Palestine. Its cultivation dates back over four thousand years. CULTIVATION. - Cultivation is extremely easy, and can be done in several ways, depending on the region. In the south and south-west, sowing takes place in August-September, in beds or in the field; transplanting takes place in October-November and in January, February and March. In the North and Centre, sow in February and March, in rows or wide beds. When the plant is strong enough, thin it out and transplant in areas where the seed has failed. Weed and wait for maturity. This method is easy and gives good results: however, the produce is less attractive than with the Midi method, where the plants are transplanted. Onions thrive best in light, humus-rich soils; liquid fertilizers are well suited to them, and by renewing them often, you can obtain magnificent products. Young plants intended for transplanting must undergo a preliminary operation, which consists in cutting off the roots by about half their total length, without touching the leaves. They should not be buried too deeply, and should be watered as soon as they are planted. Other care consists of light hoeing and weeding. When you want very small onions, which are used whole and are always highly prized on the market, sow very thickly in February or March, water if necessary to encourage emergence, then water only rarely; this way you obtain very small, perfectly healthy bulbs which, the following year, replanted as seedlings, give quite beautiful products at the end of the summer. Young seedlings are also well-suited to being covered with tan or grape marc: this method has been adopted by growers in the south-west of France, and has proved very successful. Similarly, to force and activate the vegetation of early white onions in spring, a certain quantity of poultry feathers should be added to the fertilizer. Onions are harvested when the leaves are completely yellow and dry. Ripening can be accelerated by laying the stalks on the ground, either with a rake or simply with your foot. It is even claimed that this operation promotes bulb enlargement. VARIETY. - There are many varieties of onion. Early varieties include: White onion, small, extra-fine 42. - White onion, small, extra-early Barletta. early Barletta (fig. 42). - Queen's early white onion. - Very early Nocéra onion. - Early Paris white onion. - Early white onion from Valencia, etc. Good-keeping varieties include: Oignon jaune de Danvers. - Oignon jaune paille des vertus, - Lescure yellow onion. - Oignon géant de Zittau, - Oignon jaune soufre d'Espagne. - Trébons yellow onion. - Early yellow piriform onion. - Ordinary pale red onion. - Niort pale red onion - Aigre onion. - Giant Rocca onion (fig. 43). - Round, flat Madeira onion. - Dark red onion. - Flat red Italian onion, etc. SEEDS. - In autumn, or in February and March, select the best onions and plant them in rows 40 to 45 centimetres apart, 20 centimetres apart. When the flower stalks are sufficiently developed, as the head is very FiG. 43. - Without this precaution, the wind will quickly destroy them by detaching them from the base. Once ripe, they are gathered into bundles and hung in a dry, well-ventilated place. Once dry, we extract the seeds by rubbing them between our hands or on a sieve, and, to clean them quickly, we plunge them into a vase filled with water: the best seeds rush to the bottom; we collect them and spread them out in the shade on cloths or planks to dry. They keep well for two years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Onions can suffer from a number of parasitic diseases. The most terrible is rhizoctonia, which starts in the lower, inner part of the bulb; affected parts give off an infectious odor. Rust sometimes attacks the leaves, which then dry out rapidly. USES. - Onions are used daily in the kitchen, and it would be difficult to do without them; they are pickled in vinegar like gherkins. In the south of France, country folk eat it raw, with pepper. It's said to be quite healthy. EGYPTIAN ONION or ROCAMBOLE A type of onion that differs greatly from other races in its habit and type of vegetation. The stem, which rises each year, produces small bulbils at the top, which take the place of seeds. CULTIVATION. - These small bulblets are planted in spring, in rows 25 cm apart, in dry rather than damp soil, as they rot easily. It is only the following year that they come up, and in turn produce new bulblets; as for the bulbs, they are average, but difficult to preserve, the bulblets keep much better. USES. - Same as onion. VAriety. - The Catawissa onion (fig. 44), introduced from America as a perennial, is only a sub-variety of the Egyptian onion; its stems are taller and less swollen in the middle. The bulblets are elongated, smaller and very prolific, for as soon as they reach full size, they themselves develop a fistulous stem, which produces new bulblets, so that on one plant there are sometimes two or three tiers of green shoots and bulblets. Same cultivation as the Egyptian onion. PATATE ONION The patate onion is a special breed, which produces a vine like Jersey shallots. CULTIVATION. - It is planted in February or March, in loose, well-smoked soil from the previous year. In July-August, the bulbs are harvested successively from the center, as it is quite rare for them to reach maturity all at once, which is why many growers have given up cultivating them; preservation is all the more difficult the larger the bulbs. Does not produce seeds. USES. - The flesh is very sweet and of excellent quality. COMMON GARLIC Rumex Acetosa L. Polygonaceae ORIGIN. - Native perennial, improved by cultivation; typical species found in low, damp meadows. GROWN OUTDOORS. - Common sorrel is propagated from seed and clump fragments; sow from February to August in well-smoked, recently tilled soil; divide clumps at the end of winter, before they sprout. Sorrel is well-suited to borders and flowerbeds, but should be renewed every four or five years. Market gardeners plant sorrel in beds among spinach or other vegetables; most pull up young plants for sale, and therefore sow them successively throughout the summer. The seed, being very fine, needs almost no covering. Transplanted, this plant succeeds better than sown in place; very voracious, it can take all powerful fertilizers, especially liquid manure: hoe, weed and water copiously during the summer. FORCED CULTIVATION. - Sorrel is insensitive to the cold, and frosts only slow down its growth. To get sorrel through the winter, especially in the North, it must be forced; this operation can be done in place or on a bed. In situ, the boxes and panels are placed on boards, the paths are dug out a little and filled with good stoves of fresh manure; at night, they are covered with straw mats or litter, and if the day is sunny, they are given a little air: the stoves are often reshuffled and stirred, fresh manure is added each time, and they are lightly basked from time to time. After preparing the bed, which is at least 40 centimetres thick, we fill it with 15 centimetres of potting soil, then plant the sorrel very tightly. Old clumps that you want to destroy are good for this, but two- and three-year-old clumps are preferable. During cold spells, cover with straw mats and aerate, depending on the temperature; this way, you'll have sorrel to pick all winter long. VARIETIES. - Several varieties have emerged from the common sorrel, with leaves of varying widths. We quoteFIG. 45. - Belleville sorrel. rons: Belleville broad sorrel (fig. 45), the best and most widely cultivated. - Lettuce leaf sorrel. - Giant blond sorrel. - Virieu sorrel - virgin sorrel, etc. SEEDS. - Seeds are harvested from two- or three-year-old seedlings from the previous year; they will be all the better for it; as soon as they are ripe, they fall off easily, so you need to keep an eye on the seed holders; as they don't all ripen at once, you successively collect the good ones, put them on cloths and expose them to the sun. They retain their germination capacity for two years. DISEASES AND PESTS. - Sorrel is attacked by a white mildew that develops on the roots, especially on old clumps, and destroys them fairly quickly; to get rid of it, the affected plants must be pulled up. Leaves are sometimes eaten by a number of small insects, notably a leaf beetle (Gastrophysa raphani), which, in May and June, can be found in innumerable numbers on the leaves, gnawing them right down to the roots. The aphid (A phis rumicis) also wreaks havoc, especially on seedlings. All these insects are difficult to destroy, even to keep at bay, and the remedies recommended to date are of dubious effectiveness. USES. - Sorrel is used daily in the kitchen, in lean soups and purées, and in combination with spinach to make excellent lean dishes. GARLIC AND SPINACH Rumex Patientia L. Polygonaceae. ORIGIN. - Native, perennial. CULTIVATION. - This species, found almost everywhere in the wild, is little cultivated. It produces abundantly very long leaves, which appear at the end of winter, a few days before the other races. Same cultivation, same uses as common sorrel. Little damage from insects. VIRGIN SUGAR Rumex montanus Desf. Rumex arifolius All. Polygonaceae. ORIGIN. - Native perennial plant, the wild type of which is found spontaneously in the fir forests of central France and in the Alps. CULTIVATION. - This species does not produce seeds, so it can only multiply by bursting its clumps in February or March, or in October. The leaves are broader than those of common sorrel; it is less acidic. Same cultivation care, same uses. 19. OXALIS CRENELÉE Oxalis crenata Jacq. Oxalidees. ORIGIN. - From Peru, perennial in its native country, but annual in our cultivations. CULTIVATION. - Oxalis is a fancy vegetable, so it is rarely grown in France. It is propagated by its tubers, which are planted in May in good, well-smoked soil with good exposure. In northern France, tubers should be planted from April onwards, in pots placed on warm beds. Plant them in rows 80 cm apart in all directions. When the stems have grown sufficiently, we bury them or cover them with potting soil to encourage bulb formation. To harvest the bulbs, wait until the first frosts have destroyed the upper part of the stems. USES. - The young, tender shoots are eaten in salads or as sorrel. The tubers, highly prized in South America, are eaten like potatoes, after being dried in the sun or in an oven to remove their acidity. PAK-CHOI. CHINESE CAU Brassica Sinensis L. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - Annual plant from China. CULTIVATION. - The pak-choi is a breed of cabbage completely different from the European varieties; it looks more like a pear than a cabbage; the petioles are large, elongated, fairly pure white, the leaves a shiny dark green. Sowing begins in February and lasts until September; the best sowings are those made in July and August, as the plants don't bolt until the following year. Sow preferably in rows 40 centimeters apart, thin out several times, water copiously while young, weed and hoe, pulling the soil back a little around the plants to help them overwinter; only in the Midi do they resist frosts well; in the North, they suffer greatly and are sometimes lost altogether. USES. - The leaves are eaten like cabbage, and the petioles are used in the same way as chard. After being boiled in salted water, they are eaten like asparagus, and make excellent lean soups. PANAIS Pastinaca sativa L. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Native plant, biennial. CULTIVATION. - Parsnips are easy to grow, and thrive in any soil that is sufficiently amended and fresh; slightly heavier soils seem to suit them better. Sow in spring, either broadcast or in rows 40 cm apart, covering the seed, which germinates capriciously. When the plants are strong, thin them out and transplant in places where the seed has failed, after trimming the tips of the leaves. Hoe and weed several times during the summer, water and mulch if the soil is too dry. Parsnips are very hardy, resisting even the most severe frosts, so they can be harvested as needed. This plant is mainly grown in the North, Normandy, Brittany and around Paris, but is rarely cultivated in the South of France. VAriety. - Round parsnip, the best. - Long parsnip with hollow crown (fig. 46). - Guernsey half-long parsnip. - Improved parsnip (Le Bian). SEEDS. - Parsnips go to seed in the second year of sowing, in July-August; when the umbels change color, they are cut and spread out on cloths which are exposed to the sun to complete ripening. They detach very easily from their receptacle. Germination lasts only one year. DISEASES, PESTS. - Slugs and snails devour young seedlings; white grubs sometimes gnaw the roots. USES. - Parsnips are an essential ingredient in a good pot-au-feu. It is also eaten with fat or in white sauce; it is said to be a FIO. 46. - Long parsnip. excellent food for horses. Convolvulus Batatas L. Convolvulaceae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, but annual in our crops; from South America, cultivated in all warm countries. CULTIVATION. - Without being difficult to grow, the potato requires meticulous care, especially when it comes to preserving the tubers, which is the most delicate point. The best method, which has always worked for us, is to bury them in pine bran, avoiding them touching, and to place them in a warm, healthy spot. Potatoes can be propagated from seed, but this process is not widely used in France. It can be propagated by tubers, and by cuttings, which can be taken in warm layers under a bell, or in tan. To do this, tubers are planted early, in December or January, also on layers. Once the young cuttings have recovered, they are placed in small 7-centimeter pots on warm beds, and given larger pots as they develop. In the Midi region, they can be planted in the open ground from April, on muted beds or ados. In the North, they have to be planted on layers, under panels in March-April, as you would do with early melons. When frosts are no longer a threat, i.e. in May, the boxes and panels are removed, and the plant is grown in the open air. This plant needs a lot of water in summer, so that it can develop easily. It's only after four to five months that the tubers are ready for harvesting; for this, wait as late as possible, and when the first frost has destroyed the tops, as it's mainly in the late season that they grow. Keep a close eye on them, as they do not keep well. VARIETIES. - There are a large number of potato varieties, most of which are of little value in our climates; the best for our regions are : Malaga pink potato. - Ile-de-France potato. - White Tahitian potato. Patate grosse jaune. - White Sageret ovoid potato. - Patate violette et rouge, etc. DISEASES, PESTS. - In our climate, the potato is virtually disease-free. Yellow snails are quite fond of tender young shoots. White grubs dig tubers. USES. - The flesh of the potato is sweet and very tender, a little watery; it is used like potato. Cooked in ashes, it is excellent. PERCE-PIERRE Crithmum maritimum L. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - Indigenous, perennial plant found growing in old walls or on cliffs along the seashore. CULTIVATION. - Sow as soon as the seed is ripe, i.e. in autumn; the following spring, transplant the plants, preferably at the foot of the walls; comes without any care. USES. - The leaves can be pickled in vinegar, like gherkins. PARSLEY Petroselinum sativum Hoffm. Apium Petroselinum L. Umbelliferae. ORIGIN. - This biennial umbellifer grows wild in southern Europe, from Spain to Macedonia; it has also been found in Tlemcen in Algeria and in Lebanon (D. C.). CULTIVATION. - Parsley is very hardy, adapting well to all types of soil. It is sown from February to September, either in the field or in nurseries; in general, it is sown in the field; this is a mistake, because to obtain beautiful products, they must be transplanted; this operation is carried out when the plants are still young; the pivot is trimmed before planting; parsley is arranged in beds, rows or, better still, bor- dures; all exposures are suitable. The seed is slow to germinate, taking between twenty-five and thirty days for regular emergence. In a hot greenhouse, we germinated it in twelve days. To grow well, this plant needs to be kept very clean, so no effort should be spared in weeding and hoeing, and to avoid running out in summer, it should be watered copiously. In winter, parsley doesn't grow much: so to avoid running out as the cold approaches, place boxes and their panels on the beds, and surround them with good stoves when production diminishes. You can also pull up old plants, with their roots, and place them side by side, on a layer previously prepared and loaded with 25 centimetres of potting soil mixed with free earth; you bury them up to the collar. Water, then cover with panels; all that's left to do is provide air when the weather permits. This way, you'll have parsley to pick all winter long. VARIETIES. - Large Naples parsley. - Very vigorous, rather like celery. Fern-leaved parsley. - Very curly dwarf parsley - Two very good varieties, with very finely cut foliage. Dark green curly parsley. - A highly recommendable novelty, contrasting with its blond-green predecessors. Large-rooted parsley, sweet early. - Same crop as parsnip. The roots, which reach a certain volume, are eaten like parsnips. The leaves have the same uses as common parsley. Parsley with large, long roots. - Very long roots; less productive and less popular than the preceding variety; same cultivation. SEEDS. - Parsley seeds are harvested from the previous year's seedlings. They usually ripen in August-September. Umbels should be cut preferably in the morning, at dew, so that ripe seeds cannot fall out. They are then laid out on cloths in part-shade; once dry, all you have to do is strike them with a stick to detach them from their receptacle. They retain their germinative capacity for three or four years. Practitioners consider the two-year-old seed to be the best. DISEASES, PESTS. - The root aphid is the most dreaded of these enemies, living in innumerable numbers above the crown and sucking the sap. Fortunately, they are not found in all soils. Slugs and snails are not very fond of parsley. USES. - Parsley is very useful in the kitchen, where it is used every day. Cooked or raw, it is used in sauces, stews and lean soups. PE TSAI Brassica Sinensis L. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - Annual plant from China. CULTIVATION. - This vegetable is little cultivated in Europe; it is a race of cabbage in the genus of Pak-choi, but with a much duller overall color. Same cultivation and uses as Pak-choi. COMMON PEPPER Capsicum annuum B. Solanaceae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant from Brazil. CULTIVATION. - Peppers are grown in much the same way as eggplants. Sow in warm beds, transplant in January or February, very close to the glass, and give air FIG. 47. - Piment cardinal. whenever the temperature permits. In April, for the Midi, and in May, for the Nord, they are planted in well-worked and sufficiently smoked soil; they are planted in the same way as eggplants; many growers dig 25-centimeter-square holes which they fill with well-consumed manure or potting soil, and then plant. This is a very good method for unimproved land. During the summer, water copiously. Weed and hoe frequently, and in very dry soils, spread a good mulch around the plants. VARIETY. - Long red pepper. - Widespread variety, good yield, very strong flavor. Long cayenne pepper. - Very widespread, very strong flavor. Long yellow pepper. - Good variety, grown in the Midi, very strong flavor. Piment Cerise. - Small, round fruits, excessively hot flavor. Chili pepper. - Erect, productive fruit, very hot flavor. Purple pepper. - Vigorous, hot flavor. Sweet chili pepper. - Good variety with large late fruits. Spanish sweet pepper. - The largest of its kind, very mild, much appreciated in the South of France and in Spain, where it is grown almost everywhere. Monstrous pepper. - Mild, irregularly shaped fruits. Tomato pepper. - Fruits are flattened and grooved like tomatoes, not very productive, with a sweet rather than hot flavor. New, good-quality varieties include: Piment cardinal (fig. 47). - Red fruit. Chinese or celestial pepper (fig. 48). - Numerous conical fruits, changing color from green to creamy yellow or purplish, to coral red and golden yellow, very original. Ruby-King. - American variety, very large. Golden-yellow mammoth. - Very large, sweet. Piment carré doux d'Ampuis. - Giant Procopp pepper. - Cranberry pepper, three new, highly recommendable varieties, etc. FIG. 48. - Chinese pepper. SEEDS. - Chilli seeds are easy to harvest. When the fruits are ripe, they are picked, laid out in the sun for a few hours, and the seed is removed and dried by laying them out on cloths in the shade. It keeps well for four years. In the Paris climate, it does not always ripen well. MALADIAS, PEST ANIMALS. - In certain soils, probably poor in silica, chillies, despite the best care and fertilization, become chlorotic and do not grow; they are stunted and die. We've tried several remedies, none of which have worked. Slugs and snails devour it when it's young. The former attack the stem, which they perforate, the latter the leaves. Care should therefore be taken with young plantations. USES. - Young fruit is pickled in vinegar and combined with gherkins. In the south and southwest of France, they are eaten raw in salads. In Spain, when the fruit is ripe, it is dried in the sun and then used in the same way as pepper. PIMPRENELLE PETITE Poterium Sanguisorba L. Rosaceae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, native. CULTIVATION. - This plant practically grows itself. It requires almost no cultivation care. It is sown in the spring, in March or April, or at the end of summer, in August-September, in rays 30 centimetres apart; once emerged, thin out if necessary. Weed and hoe several times during the year, removing dead leaves as they occur; when they have set seed, shave them off completely. It is best grown as a border plant. USES. - Eat young leaves in salads. DANDELION Leontodon Taraxacum L. Taraxacum officinale Wigg. Taraxacum Dens leonis Desf. Compositae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, native. CULTIVATION. - Dandelions have only been cultivated in gardens for about twenty years. In the past, we were content to collect those that grew spontaneously in meadows. Today, through successive selections in seed carriers, we have succeeded in improving this plant; the varieties we have created are fixed, reproduce well and have an unquestionable superiority over wild plants. FIG. 49: A very early improved dandelion. Dandelion is sown in spring, in March and April, in the field or in a nursery for transplanting, in rows 40 centimetres apart and 5 centimetres deep. Cover the seed very lightly and, if the weather is warm, water, otherwise emergence will be poor. When the plants are strong enough, they are hoeed for the first time, and then weeded again during the summer. The young plants to be transplanted are selected when they have grown their first three leaves. They are planted at the same distance as above, but 5 centimetres apart. Water immediately after planting. From November onwards, we start to bleach them, doing this in the same way as we do capuchin beard. In spring, when they start to grow, we bleach them in place, either by covering them with sand, litter or soil, or by placing them on a bed, etc. VARIETY. - Improved full-hearted dandelion. - Very early improved dandelion (p. 49). - Mossy dandelion. - Chicory dandelion. A very remarkable novelty forming a compact clump of long, upright leaves; blanched, it is delicious. SEEDS. - Dandelion goes to seed in the second year after sowing, in spring; the seed is ripe towards the end of April and May; it keeps for two years. USES. - Green or blanched, eaten as a salad. PEAR Altium Porrum L. Liliaceae. ORIGIN. - Leeks are biennial, originating in Mediterranean regions, according to De Candolle. CULTIVATION. - The leek is an excessively voracious plant, and only succeeds well if the soil in which it is planted is thoroughly fertilized with very powerful fertilizers. Liquid fertilizers, especially fecal matter, produce the best results. Leeks are sown from December to July. The first sowings, from December to February, should be done in a warm layer under a frame, or in a flowerbed with a good southern exposure. The layer should be filled with 10 centimeters of potting soil, mixed with a third of vegetable garden soil, all well levelled, then sown, and with a small board, the seed is placed in the soil and covered with 8 millimeters of the same mixture; water and cover with panels; give air, when the temperature permits. When the young plants are sufficiently developed, they are transplanted to beds and planted in the ground. These leeks are ready for harvesting in June, succeeding those of the previous year. From February to July, leeks are sown in the open ground, broadcast in beds in soil that has been smoked and prepared for a few days. If the soil is loose enough, it is covered with potting soil, grape marc or even tannin. Then spread a good mulch. Spring sowings are generally the most popular. When the plants are as big as a goose feather, they are transplanted into the ground in beds of six rows, 20 or 25 centimetres apart, depending on the variety. Plants are planted 15 centimetres apart on the line; the beds are divided by a 50-centimetre path, where early cabbages or other vegetables are planted. The young plant, which has had the tips of its leaves and about half its roots trimmed, should be planted fairly deeply, so that when it is uprooted it has as much white as possible. In the South-West and part of the South, they are planted inclined and very deep, and when they are strong enough to be sold, they are unshovelled on one side, and laid down by burying them up to the birth of the leaves. This produces a lot of white, but the plants never get too big. Long leeks are preferred for this purpose. In the North, some market gardeners pull them out and bury them side by side in a gauge. Other cultivation care consists of weeding, frequent hoeing and copious watering in summer. VARIETIES. - Monstrous Carentan leek. - Excellent variety, very productive and voluminous. Poireau gros de Nîmes. - Very large and hardy; particularly suitable for the Midi. Poireau long d'hiver de Paris. - Very good variety, highly esteemed in the North; especially suitable for late-season planting; very hardy. Poireau gros court. - A very good variety, highly recommended for the Centre and Midi regions. Poireau jaune du Poitou (fig.50). - A very good variety; highly esteemed in the West, where it is grown extensively. FIG. 50. - Yellow leek from Poitou. Very large Rouen leek. - Very hardy; does well throughout the North. Long leek from Tarentaise. - A vigorous breed, highly esteemed in the Lyonnais region; very hardy; withstands the harshest winters without the tips of the leaves suffering. There are other varieties of leek grown in England and America: those we have tried have not given us good results. In certain parts of the Charentes region and in Lyon, a breed called poireau à gousses or poireau perpétuel is cultivated, which in our view must be the wild leek found spontaneously throughout the Midi. Cultivation seems to have improved it somewhat. SEEDS. - Leek seeds are harvested in the same way as onion seeds. They keep for two to three years. DISEASES, PESTS. - In dry soils, leeks are attacked by a small white worm, acro sporium, which gets into the heart of the plant and wreaks havoc by gnawing the young leaves. The best way to destroy it is to cut the stem below the affected part, but once is rarely enough: if necessary, you'll have to go back two or even three times. Slugs and snails sometimes devour young seedlings. USES. - Leeks are used every day. It is used for pot-au-feu. Excellent cooked in its own juice or in white sauce. Cooked on the grill and seasoned with oil and vinegar, it is a very popular dish on the Ocean coast. A refreshing and healthy vegetable. PEAR or BEITE Beta vulgaris L. Chenopodea. ORIGIN. - Native biennial plant found in sandy seaside soils throughout the Mediterranean region as far as the Caspian Sea, Persia, Babylonia and the Canary Islands. Cultivated for over two thousand years. GROWING. - Pear trees are very hardy. They can be grown in much the same way as beet. They are sown from March to May, 40 to 50 centimetres apart. If the plant is too thick, it is thinned out to leave a 30 to 40-centimeter gap between the rows. Plants removed during thinning can be transplanted after trimming the pivot and root tips. Water immediately after planting, choosing a rainy or dark day for the job. Weed, hoe and water during hot spells. E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 20 About seven or eight weeks after sowing, you can start harvesting the pear, choosing the best-developed leaves. In Lyon, where this plant is widely grown, it is mounded like artichokes. It survives winter very well in the Centre and Midi, without suffering too much, but in the North, even in Paris, heavy frosts destroy it. In these regions, when cold weather approaches, it's a good idea to FIG. 51. - White pear. cover them with bedding or straw mats, or to bring them into the vegetable greenhouse. White pear can also be planted as a border plant, just as it can be sown in August and September for spring consumption. VARIETY. - Common blond pear. - Highly esteemed in the East and part of the West, where it is the staple of country folk's lean soups. Poirée blonde à cardes blanches de Lyon. - A beautiful and honest variety, with very large leaves and broad ribs, highly esteemed in Lyon, where it is grown almost exclusively, and is the most recommended: less hardy than the previous variety. Poirée à carde blanche (fig. 51). - Very good hardy variety, highly esteemed in northern France and Belgium. Poirée à carde blanche frisée. - Very blond, curly and blistered leaves; fairly hardy. Chilean yellow-ribbed pear. Chilean red-ribbed pear. - Two very tall varieties, reaching 50 to 60 cm, more ornamental than vegetable. Very broad-ribbed white pear with green leaves from Lyon. - An excellent variety, producing large, white, tender, fleshy and long petals. Better winter hardiness than golden-leaf pear. Cutting pear or spinach chard. - Very common variety, of mediocre quality; very hardy. SEEDS. - Pear does not set seed until the second year after sowing; seeds are harvested like beet. Germination lasts six years. DISEASES, PESTS. - It is attacked by the same diseases and insects as beet. USES. - Like cabbage, pear leaves can be used in lean soups. Mix with sorrel to correct its acidity. The petioles, or chards, can be prepared in a variety of ways: in white sauce, fried in butter, boiled in salted water; they can be eaten, like asparagus, in vinaigrette, etc. An excellent vegetable, but unfortunately not widely grown. peas Pisum sativum L. Legumes. ORIGIN. - Cultivated for over two thousand years; native to the southern Caucasus, Persia and northern India. Annual (D. C.). CULTIVATION. - Peas (fig. 52) are not difficult to select - - FIG. 5°. - Pea. of soil, it succeeds almost everywhere, provided it has sufficient fertilizer. However, it seems to do best in sandy soils, sufficiently mixed with clay. Peas are grown almost everywhere in France, varying from one locality to another, but they are most widely cultivated in the Midi, Sud- Quest and part of Brittany, as there is perhaps no other vegetable that gives the grower such remunerative results. Peas are sown very thickly, from the end of October to April, in rows spaced according to the vigor of the species: from 80 centimeters to 1 meter, for large row varieties; from 40 to 60 centimeters, for dwarf varieties; from 70 to 80 centimeters, for half-dwarf varieties. In production centers such as Bordeaux, Agen, Toulouse, etc., seedlings are sown on their sides, preferably facing south, so that when they germinate they are sheltered from the north. In vegetable growing, to make the best possible use of the land, seedlings are planted in two rows spaced at Om, 35 apart, with a pathway of Om, 60 for dwarf varieties; dwarf varieties are spaced as we have indicated, but without observing a pathway. When the peas have reached 6 or 8 centimetres in height, they are lightly hoeed; when they have doubled in height, the operation is repeated and they are lightly ridged, with the soil on either side. They are then trained with branches that have numerous ramifications right from the base. Chestnut, oak and poplar are excellent for this. Once the branches are in place, simply leave them to grow and weed them from time to time. Cultivation care is the same for dwarf varieties, and we recommend above all not neglecting to butter them properly: this is an excellent operation designed to prevent the first heat waves from reaching the roots; without this, the base turns yellow, and the harvest is compromised. 20. 30 years ago, market gardeners in the Paris area used to cultivate early peas; today, they have virtually abandoned them, since fresh peas from Algeria, Spain, the Midi, etc. are available almost all year round at the market halls. However, peas are still grown by amateurs. EARLY CROPS. - In the first few days of November, choose a good southern location, such as a hillside sheltered from the north. A warm layer of annealed manure, mixed with other detritus, is laid down. Place the trunks, then fill with 15 centimetres of vegetable garden soil, mixed with a little potting compost. Pack and sow in rows, 30 centimetres apart. Four rows are planted per 1.33-metre box; seeds are arranged in groups of three or four together, or one by one on the line at 5 centimetres. Cover with 2 cm, and water lightly if the mixture is too dry. Put up the panels, and give them some air during the day when the sun comes out, to chase away the humidity, which is very harmful. Cover with straw mats or bedding during the coldest weather. When they are sufficiently developed, as they always overextend, they are laid down towards the top of the trunk: to do this, they are held in place by a lath placed on the base of the stems, and this wood is removed when the heads are raised. Once the fourth leaf has developed, they are pinched off at the top. The best varieties for this type of cultivation are the following: Very early dwarf pea with frame. - Pois nain très hâtif d'Annonay. - Couturier dwarf pea. - Dutch dwarf pea. - Paris or Gonthier dwarf pea. - Blue-Peters pea. - Pois Merveille d'Amérique, etc. We can also operate in another way: we sow in a nursery under a very thick box, and once they have emerged, we spread a light layer of well-sieved soil over the entire sown surface to encourage the young roots to emerge. When the peas have reached 7 or 8 centimetres in height, they are transplanted three or four at a time into trays prepared as described above, or as follows: the trays are placed in a well-exposed position, directly on the ground, then a good iron or so of soil is removed from the inside and thrown back into the paths; once this has been done, the soil is ploughed and smoked; the peas are raked out and transplanted as described above. Water immediately after planting. Other cultivation care is the same as for the bedding method. VARIETIES. - There are a great many pea varieties, classified as follows: 1° round-grained shelled peas, both oar-shaped and dwarfed; 2° wrinkled-grained shelled peas, both oar-shaped and dwarfed; 3° peas without parchment or mangetout, both oar-shaped and dwarfed. We will mention the best varieties of each genus: Shelling peas, round-grained, rowed. - Early William pea. - Étampes marvel pea. - Dutch Michaux peas. - Michaux peas from Ruelle. - Clamart pea. - Leopold II pea. - Green pea. - Pois d'Auvergne. - Daniel O'Rourke pea. - Noyon green pea, etc. Dwarf round-grain shelled peas. - Very early dwarf peas. - Dwarf Couturier peas. - Dwarf Paris or Gonthier peas. - Full basket peas or Filbashet. - Blue-Peters pea. - Dwarf bishop pea. - Dwarf pea sunrise. - Pois nain l'évêque, long pods. - Dwarf pea of Touraine. - Pois orgueil du marché. - Pea princesse royale. - Very early dwarf pea from Annonay, etc. Peas for shelling, wrinkled grain, with oars. - Pea shah of Persia. - Telephone pea. - Green wrinkled pea with oars. - Duke of Albany pea. - Large white sweet wrinkled pea. - Sweet Knigth wrinkled pea. - Alpha pea. - Large green wrinkled peas (new), etc. Dwarf wrinkled peas for shelling. - American marvel peas (fig. 53). - Stratagem peas. - Pea profusion - FIG. 53 - Shucking peas, wrinkled grain, dwarf: American marvel. Dwarf snow pea (new). - Wilson pea. - Early white dwarf wrinkled pea. - The best of all peas. - Veitch wrinkled pea, etc. Peas without parchment or mangetout, with oars. - In this breed of pea, the pods are generally very large, fleshy and thick, with almost no parchment membranes, so that they are eaten like green beans, pods and all, and can be shelled; but the flavor of the beans is always a little pungent; highly esteemed in eastern France, Spain and Switzerland. Peas without forty-day parchment. - Peas without butter parchment. - Peas without H 2 D melting parchment FIG. 54. - Peas without melting parchment, from Saint-Désirat. 357 Saint-Désirat (fig. 54). - Giant parchmentless pea with very long pods. - Ram's horn parchmentless pea. - Green mangetout peas (new). Dwarf parchmentless or mangetout peas. - Early Breton dwarf parchmentless peas. - Very dwarf parchmentless peas, early to frame. - Dwarf white pea, etc. SEEDS. - To harvest good pea seeds, choose a piece of row and let it ripen on the ground. The first flowers, and consequently the first fruits formed, are recognized as the best for producing good early seeds. For this reason, we recommend pinching them off above the fifth or sixth flower stage "for row varieties". When they are almost fully ripe, they are plucked and laid out in the sun. They are then hand-picked. They retain their germinative power for four years; left in the pod, they keep for almost twice as long. peas, harmful animals. - Peas, especially the early varieties, are attacked by an insect of the beetle order called bruchus (Bruchus pisi), 5 millimeters long, which penetrates the grain and gnaws away the starchy part; their destruction becomes impossible. There are also two very small caterpillars (4 millimeters), which wreak havoc on young peas: Sitones lineatus and Sitones sulcifrons; they wreak havoc in full sun; when it rains, they hide at the foot of the plants. To destroy them, we recommend dusting the plants with insecticide powder, quicklime, soot, unleached ashes, etc. Snails and slugs also destroy young seedlings, especially spring ones. USES. - Peas are eaten when the seed is half-formed, when they are an excellent dish and considered very healthy and highly prized; they are served alone in a stew, or with game or other meat. Considerable quantities are canned and shipped all over the world. In some parts of the West, farmers eat them raw. Cicer arietinum L. Legumes. ORIGIN. - Southern Caucasus and Caspian Sea. CULTIVATION. - The chickpea is highly prized in Spain, where it is widely cultivated; in some regions, it is the staple food of the poor. In France, it is grown very little; only in the Pyrenees do a few farmers sow it. In the Midi region, chickpeas can be sown in February and March, but in the Nord and Centre regions, it's best to wait until April or May, when the soil is sufficiently warmed; they are planted in rows 40 or 50 centimetres apart, in pairs, 20 or 25 centimetres apart. Other cultivation care is the same as for dwarf beans, with the difference that watering need not be copious, as this plant does not fear drought. The chickpea, which grows to a height of 50 or 60 centimetres, doesn't need to be raked; the stem, being rough and consistent, holds itself up. VARIETIES. - Only the white chickpea is known in France, but there are two other varieties: one with a black grain, and the other with a red grain, which are highly esteemed, it is said, in the English Indies, where they are grown in large quantities. SEEDS. - Harvested like dwarf beans. USES. - Chickpeas are eaten in the same way as broad beans: they are used to make purées and soups. When young, the whole plant makes excellent fodder. POTATO Solanum tuberosum L. Solanaceae. ORIGIN. - Tuberous perennial. Native to Chile and Peru, cultivated there before the discovery of America, it was imported into Europe between 1580 and 1585, first by the Spaniards, then by the English, during the voyages of Raleigh, in Virginia, and propagated in France by the good care and disinterestedness of Parmentier, towards the end of the 18th century. OUTDOOR CULTIVATION. - The potato is not very fussy about the choice of soil, and thrives in any good soil, not too compact, well fertilized with energetic fertilizers. In the north, tubers are planted in early April, and the closer you get to the south, the earlier you plant. In the south and south-west, planting starts in January, but the best time is the second half of February. Plant in rows spaced 70 to 90 centimetres apart, depending on development, and 40 to 60 centimetres apart. Medium-sized, whole tubers are preferable. Cover with 10 or 12 centimetres of crumbly soil. Once the stems have emerged from the soil by about 15 centimetres, we hoe them for the first time, and a few weeks later, we hoe them a second time, ridging them fairly heavily. Although not essential, this hoeing operation is nevertheless useful, as it keeps the stalks cool and prevents the tubers from spreading too much, making them easier to pull out. Potatoes can also be propagated from seed, which is sown in layers. In January and February, the plant is transplanted to another layer, preferably in pots; planting is easier and recovery is assured. This method of propagation is not widely used, but is employed by sowers seeking to obtain new varieties. Potatoes can also be propagated by smothering cuttings in cloches or on layers; once rooted, the seedlings are placed in pots, and when the roots have lined the sides of the vase, they are planted permanently. This procedure is only applicable when you want to propagate rare varieties; we tried it with the Early rose variety, and the results were quite satisfactory. Potatoes are harvested when the tops are yellow and even dry. When they are uprooted, they are laid on the ground for a few hours to dry out, then brought in to protect them from bad weather, especially frost. In vegetable growing, you don't wait until the potatoes are ripe to dig them up; you take them to market as soon as they're big enough to sell. Only a few rows are kept, which are left to ripen on the ground to obtain good seed. CULTIVATION OF EARLY POTATOES. - Growing early potatoes is a great source of profit for the grower. It can be done in several ways. The best system is to prepare a layer 40 to 50 centimetres thick in January, even in December, and surround it with good stoves. Load it with 20 centimetres of good soil, then mark out four rows per box of 1.33 and plant the tubers at 35 centimetres on the E line. BERGER, Vegetable plants. 21 in a chessboard pattern. Cover with straw mats on cold nights, and give them air during the day, weather permitting; in this way, you can harvest in the first fortnight of March. If, instead of building up the layer with manure, a 50-centimeter layer of previously used tan is placed in the trunk, the tubers can be planted directly into it, with good results. Alternatively, if you have a flowerbed or square with good southern exposure, you can place boxes directly on the ground and surround them with stoves. Drain the interior well, and plant the tubers as described above. Put up the panels, water if necessary, and cover during cold spells. The result is good potatoes for harvesting in April. You can also put tubers in six-inch pots and bury them on a layer, among other crops; being transportable, these pots can be placed on other, warmer layers, when they become a nuisance or the layer no longer provides enough heat. This type of cultivation used to be widely practiced in the Paris area. Under the bench of a greenhouse, tubers can also be buried in sand or potting soil; they will produce in a short time and without much care. The varieties best suited to these different growing systems are: Marjolin, - Early rose, - Reine des hâtives, etc. The Marjolin variety, to give good results, must be sufficiently germinated before being planted; to do this, it is placed upside down in wicker baskets, which must be placed in a warm place. VARIETIES. - Potato varieties are extremely numerous. America, England and Germany supply us with many. M. Vilmorin has classified them into : 1° Round with yellow flesh. - 2° Long with yellow flesh. - 3° Long with variegated flesh. - 4° Bright red skin. - 5° Pink or flattened red. - 6° Red, long, smooth. - 7° Red, long, notched. - 8° Violet or variegated violet. We will mention a few good varieties belonging to each genus. Potato thistle. - White horn. - White elephant. - Snowflake. - Belle de Fontenay, - Early rose (fig. 55). - Imperator. - Institute of FIG. 55. - Early rose potato. Beauvais. - Joseph Rigault. - Magnum bonum. - Marjolin. - Marjolin Tétard. - Prince of Wales. - Wonder of America. - Pasteur. - Quarantaine de la Halle. - Royale (fig. 56). - Saint-Jean or Segonzac. - Van der Veer, Victor, very early. - Flourball blanc. - Gloire de Lyon. - Jaune du Poitou. - Reine des hâtives. - Souvenir du Congrès. - Junon. - Souvenir of the 1889 Exhibition, etc. SEEDS. - Potato seeds are fairly easy to harvest; not all varieties produce them. The fruit, which resembles an alkékenge, is harvested when the tops are yellow or dry. They are left to dry for a few days, then the seed is scooped out; they keep well for two years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Stems, as well as tubers, are affected by the disease that plagues solanaceous plants in general, and tomatoes in particular. The MIIIIR FIG. 56 - Royal potato. material Coulet et Chausse, which is used in the vineyards of Bordeaux and is a compound of sulfur, iron and copper sulfate powder, attenuates the disease without destroying it. Bordeaux mixture has been recommended by M. Prillieux. An insect of the Coleoptera order, the Colorado Doryphora (Doryphora decemlineata), about 1 centimeter long, gnaws leaves down to the core and prevents them from developing. The larva is as voracious as the perfect insect; multiplication of this insect is extraordinarily rapid; in the second generation, one hundred females can give birth to 50 million, and by the third, they can be counted in the billions. In 1877, Europe was threatened by an invasion of Doryphora; fortunately, it was stopped in time. Silpha opaca is another small beetle that causes much the same damage as Doryphora. According to M. Grosjean, the best remedy for destroying these two insects is copper arsenite (Scheele green or Paris green) or London purple (lime arsenate, colored with rosaniline, and mixed with powdered plaster, flour or wood ash). This treatment can be applied dry or as a spray. These various mixtures are violent poisons. White grubs and cutworms are very fond of potatoes, which they partially gnaw. In soils where they are abundant, they are a real scourge, as the most beautiful tubers are eaten away. Let's hope that Botrytis tenella will destroy these enemies of our crops. USES. - The potato is widely used in the diet, and is of great service to the working classes. It is a healthy food, but a little difficult to digest. It is used to make starch and alcohol. Fed to certain animals, it rapidly fattens them. PERPET Portulaca oleracea L. Portulaceae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to the entire region stretching from the western Himalayas to southern Russia and Greece (D. C.). CULTIVATION. - Purslane is very sensitive to frost, so it should not be sown until all danger of cold has passed. Sow from May to August, in broadcast beds, without covering, lightly with a fork or rake, and tread, spread a light mulch, then water lightly and often, until the seeds are well established. Weed. For early purslane, sow in layers from January to March. Cover with panels and, after emergence, give it plenty of air. VARIETIES. - Broad-leaved golden purslane. - The best and most appreciated. Golden purslane. - Green purslane. - Very common in gardens, where it reseeds itself. SEEDS. - The first full-ground seedlings, sown in May, should be chosen as seedbeds. The seed matures during the summer. The first capsules are collected as they ripen; don't wait until they are yellow, as they will then fall off very easily. Once dry, they are cleaned and placed in bags. They keep for seven or eight years. DISEASES AND PESTS. - In dry soils, flea beetles can puncture leaves. USES. - Can be used in salads, either cooked or raw. Mix with sorrel and spinach for lean soups. EVERY MONTH RADISH Raphanus sativus L. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - Annual plant of temperate western Asia (D. C.). CULTIVATION. - This breed can be sown all year round in the open ground, among other crops; in winter, a good exposure is chosen, and it is sheltered during cold spells. However, it is from February to October that the most seedlings are sown. Sow broadcast, in beds or rows. In summer, choose a cool exposure and, to make sure you don't run out, repeat sowing every twelve or fifteen days. Copious watering is necessary to keep the plants tender and firm. In the North, during the coldest months of the year, we sow under frames or cloches, or on beds made outside and simply covered with 10 cm of terracotta, which we shelter with windbreakers or wooden panels during the night, or on upstands. Given the short time it takes for this plant to reach maturity, it should be combined with other crops; the main thing is not to sow too thickly and to pull up the plants when they are ready to harvest. VARIETIES. - Round scarlet forcing radish, extra-early. - Round, pink, white-tipped forcing radish. - Round, pink, há̂tif forcing radish. - Three new varieties of great merit, extreme earliness. Round, pink or salmon-colored radish. - Round, pink, FIO-tipped radish. 57. - Round radish, pink, early. early. (fig. 57). - Round radish, oxblood red. - Radish, half-long, scarlet. - Radish, half-long, pink. - Radish, half-long, pink with white tip, the most widely grown of all varieties. - Radish, half-long, scarlet, early. - Radish, half-long, white, to be forced, early. - Radish, round, purple with white tip. - Round radish, yellow, extra early. - Radish, round, white. - Long, pink radish - Long or salmon radish, etc. SEEDS. - Radishes intended for seed production should be sown in autumn and stored over winter for spring planting. Or better still, sow in February, in warm beds, giving as much air as possible, to avoid wilting. Transplant in 12 to 15-centimeter beds in all directions. Seeds are good for harvesting in July-August; they keep well for four or five years. USES. - Small radishes of any month are served as hors-d'oeuvres; in some regions, they are eaten in salads with their leaves. SUMMER, AUTUMN AND WINTER RADISHES This series includes all the larger varieties that grow more slowly than all-month radishes. They are sown from March to August, in rows or beds, in good, well-tilled soil.

smoked. Water during the summer, weed, hoe and thin out to leave 10 to 15 centimetres or more between them, depending on the species. We had Gournay winter violet radishes, weighing 3 kilograms. In the Midi, most varieties survive the winter fairly well without suffering. But in the North, they need to be covered or placed in the vegetable greenhouse, buried up to the collar in river sand; they keep fresh for part of the winter. Outside, they are covered with litter or, better still, earth, like carrots. VARIETIES. - White, round, summer radish. - Yellow or red summer radish. - Giant white Stuttgart radish. - Half-long white Strasbourg radish. - Summer long black radish (fig. 58). - Black radish, large round, winter. - Large white radish, Augsburg. - Grey winter radish FIG. 58. - Long black radish, horseradish. de Laon. - Purple winter radish, Gournay. - Radish, early pink. - Vienne radish. - Radish, white-tipped. - Radish, white with green collar. - Pink winter radish, Chinese. This last breed is excellent for winter cultivation, but unfortunately is not widespread enough. 21. SEEDS. - The seeds of winter radishes are harvested in much the same way as those of all-month radishes, with the difference that they must be sown in autumn. Seedlings, stored in the cellar or vegetable greenhouse, should be replanted in March. DISEASES AND PESTS. - We are not aware of any disease affecting this plant. Flea beetles gnaw holes in the leaves, but this does not prevent them from growing. To keep them away, sprinkle the seedlings with plaster or powdered quicklime. Slugs are also keen on young seedlings, which they devour whole. In dry or chalky soils, especially if there is a lack of arro- sements, they are affected by small white worms that hold onto one of the sides. These products are very inferior and should not be eaten. USES. - Black radishes have the same uses as those of all months. RAIPONCE Campanula Rapunculus L. Campanulaceae. ORIGIN. - Native biennial. GROWING. - Rapunculus is sown from June to August, either in rays or broadcast in beds. The seed, which is extremely fine, is mixed with sand or sifted earth: without this precaution, sowing would be too thick. We don't cover; we just tread the ground with the beater, then spread a light mulch over the entire sown surface, and lightly baste until emergence is achieved; once this has taken place, we can water with an apple. As the young plants are very susceptible, to protect them a little from the sun's rays, sow radishes or spinach beforehand and fork them in. Harvesting begins in January and February. Harvesting continues right up to seed set. SEEDS. - Seeds are harvested from the previous year's seedlings. They are ripe towards the end of June and July. They keep well for five years. One gram contains 25,000 seeds, the smallest of all vegetable seeds. DISEASES, PESTS. - In rainy years, raiponce is sometimes affected by rust, which renders the plant unusable. Slugs and snails are fond of it, especially when it is just emerging. USES. - Rapunzel is eaten in salads, like lamb's lettuce; the root, which is shaped like a long radish, is eaten like the leaves. RHUBARBE HVBRIDE Rheum hybridum Ait. Polygonaceae. ORIGIN. - Mongolian perennial. CULTIVATION. - Vigorous plant (fig. 59), requiring deep, rich soil that is compact rather than light. It is propagated by splitting stumps, selecting the plants with the longest, thickest petioles. Plant out at the end of winter, towards the end of March or the first fortnight of April, in rows 80 cm or 1 m apart in all directions. Water immediately after planting, and hoe from time to time to keep the soil surface very clean. Harvesting does not begin until the second year. A plantation can last seven or eight years. Every year, at the end of winter, before sprouting, we give the plant a good ploughing and smoke it copiously, and when the flower stalks start to grow, we cut them as soon as they appear to give the leaves strength. Rhubarb can be propagated from seed, which is sown FIG. 59. - Hybrid rhubarb. as soon as mature, in July-August, in the open ground, or in February-March on warm beds, to be planted in the course of the summer. This type of propagation by sowing is seldom used, as the plants that come from it are never fully grown. In England, where rhubarb is widely grown, it is strengthened during the winter. To do this, the best clumps are pulled out whole, with their rootballs, and placed in greenhouses, buried in tan or under thermosiphon-heated tarpaulins. This practice is not widely used in France, as it would be very difficult for the grower, since confectioners generally obtain their supplies from foreign markets. It has always seemed to us that by cultivating a large area of this plant, in the open ground, we could make a fairly good profit, by interspersing it with other crops, which would not harm it. VARIETY. - There are several breeds. The best varieties are derived from Rheum hybridum: FIG. 60: Young rhubarb leaves. Tobolsk early red rhubarb. - Rhubarb Victoria (Myatts). - Rhubarb Mitchells Royal Albert. - Monarch rhubarb, etc. Gooseberry rhubarb (Rheum ribes) and Nepaul rhubarb (Rheum australe). - Very good for vegetable gardening. SEEDS. - During the summer, select a few of the best plants, at least three years old. Preference is given to those with the longest, widest petioles. By July-August, the seed is ripe and carefully harvested. Keeps for three years. USES - The very tender young leaves (fig. 60) can be used like spinach; the panicles, before the flowers have blossomed, can be used like cauliflower; the main use is for the petioles and ribs, which make excellent jams and cakes. They are also used daily in pastry-making. ROSEMARY Rosmarinus officinalis L. Labiatae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, indigenous, very common in limestone hillsides bordering the Ocean and the Mediterranean, especially in Spain. GROWING. - Rosemary is sown in April-May, in rows, in recently ploughed and smoked soil. Water to encourage germination. Once the seedling is strong enough, transplant it to a secluded spot at the foot of a wall or on an embankment: this is where the plant does best. Prune and remove dead wood. Rosemary treated in this way can live for a very long time. SEEDS. - Rosemary doesn't produce seeds until the second year after sowing. They keep well for four years. USES. - The leaves are used as a condiment and seasoning in sauces. ROQUETTE CULTIVATION Brassica Eruca E. Eruca sativa Lamk. Cruciferous. ORIGIN. - Native annual. CULTIVATION. - Sow from March or April to August, in rows or florets, in beds like salsify. Water abundantly during hot spells. Seedlings sown from March to June go to seed quickly, so they need to be renewed often. Other care consists of light hoeing and weeding. SEEDS. - Seeds harvested from overwintered plants are preferable, as they are better nourished. For this reason, you should choose plants sown at the end of summer, in August. The germination period is four years. USES. - The tender young leaves are eaten in salads, with a flavor similar to that of wild horseradish. SALSIFIS Tragopogon porrifolius L. Composites. ORIGIN. - Native biennial plant, found in the wild almost everywhere in ancient meadows. It is also spontaneous in Greece, Dalmatia, Italy and even Algeria (D. C.). CULTIVATION. - Salsify (fig. 61) thrives best in deep, light, well-fertilized soil. Sow in spring, from February to June, in rows spaced 25 to 30 cm apart; cover with the loosest soil. If the soil is firm, the seeds should be covered with other light, sifted earth or potting soil, otherwise, as they are very capricious, they will fail. If the plant is too thick, thin it out. FIO. 61. - White salsify. Weed and hoe several times during the summer, and give copious watering. Harvesting begins in late September, and continues throughout the winter and into spring. The first seedlings planted in February-March can be harvested from June onwards. SEEDS. - Seeds are harvested from the previous year's seedlings. It is important to cut off the downy part of the seed before it opens, otherwise it will be difficult to harvest and many seeds may be lost. They keep for a year. DISEASES, PESTS. - Rust sometimes appears on the leaves, especially in wet years; plaster and Bordeaux mixture seem to mitigate the effects of this disease, but it must be treated right from the start. In some oily soils, seedlings sown early in the spring are affected by two myriapods, the long-antenned geophilus and the flattened polydesmia, which enter the seed as the seedling begins to emerge and completely gnaw the interior of the seed, resulting in complete failure to emerge. We've had our first seedlings completely destroyed many times, and we know of no remedy for this. There's only one thing to do, and that's to sow again, but you have to wait until it's warm enough. USES. - Young salsify shoots are eaten in salads, either green or blanched; the root is frequently used in sauces and stews of all kinds. The juice is used to mark linen, producing a color similar to that of rust. Satureia hortensis. Labiate. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to our mountains. CULTIVATION. - Savory (fig. 62) is a very hardy plant, adaptable to all soils, but prefers a sunny exposure. It is broadcast in April among other crops. It can also be sown alone, in shallow rows, and transplanted if too thick, preferably in borders. When some plants have produced seeds, some always fall and sprout the following year. SEEDS. - Seeds are easy to harvest; spring seedlings come up during the summer, are pulled up and spread out on cloths exposed to the sun. They can be detached from their husks by tapping them with a stick. Their ability to germinate lasts three years. USES. - Savory, which is very fragrant, has the same uses as thyme. SARRIET VIVACE OR MOUNTAIN SARRIET Satureia montana L. Labiate. ORIGIN. - Perennial, native. CULTIVATION. - This plant is grown like hyssop. It is sown in spring or August, preferably in hard borFIG. 62. - Common savory. It tolerates transplanting very well and is not affected by cold. Hoe from time to time. Each year, in spring, cut back the old stems fairly close to the ground. A well-tended plantation can last a very long time. USES. - Same uses as annual savory. Salvia officinalis L. Labiatae. Native, perennial. Propagates by seed, sown in spring or autumn, preferably in rows, in borders, or by rooting fragments at the end of winter. Same cultivation and uses as thyme. Clary sage (Salvia sclarea) can be grown in the same way and is used for the same purposes. SPANISH SCOLYMUS Scolymus hispanicus L. Compositae. ORIGIN. - Native plant, biennial, well known in the South of France, in Provence where the inhabitants call it Cardouille. CULTIVATION. - Sow in rows in spring, in May; do not sow before this time, as the plant sets seed in the same year, which prevents the roots from growing. Preferably choose good, well-smoked, deeply-tilled soil. Growing care is the same as for salsify or scorzonera. Roots can be pulled up in October and successively throughout the winter. SEEDS. - Seeds should be harvested from the previous year's seedlings. They are difficult to collect because of the thorns. They keep for three years. USES. - The root, once the tough axis has been removed, can be used like salsify. It is excellent and has a very fine taste; it is regrettable that it is not more widely grown, as it is a delicious vegetable. SCORSONERA D'ESPAGNE or BLACK SALSIFIS Scorzonera Hispanica. Composites. ORIGIN. - Spontaneous perennial in Europe, from Spain where it is common, southern France and Germany, to the Caucasus region and perhaps as far as Siberia (D. C.). CULTIVATION. - A very hardy plant, very easy to grow. Sow in spring from February to June, as for salsify. Cultivation care is the same, with the appreciable difference that the scorsonera root can remain in the ground for several years without becoming tough; on the contrary, it only grows. They can be harvested in the first year, but it's better to wait until the second, when the produce is more beautiful. Once the seeds have been harvested, cut the uprights flush with the ground and hoe the beds. SEEDS. - Seeds should be harvested from three- or four-year-old seedlings, as they are better nourished and should be collected as they mature. They are larger and less elongated than salsify seeds. Germination lasts two to three years. USES. - Used in the same way as salsify: it is said to have a finer taste; it is an excellent vegetable, which is not sufficiently appreciated. SOJA D'ÉTAMPES Dolichos Soja L. Soja hispida Mœnch. Legumes ORIGIN. - Annual plant, found spontaneously in China, Cochinchina, Japan and Java, cultivated for over 4,000 years. CULTIVATION. - Soybeans are sown in spring, in March, April and May, depending on the region, in rows like bush beans, which are grown in the same way. VARIETIES. - In China, and especially in Japan, soya varieties are perhaps more numerous than bean varieties in Europe; there are climbing, half-dwarf and dwarf varieties. Some climbing varieties have been tried several times in France, with unsatisfactory results. Étampes soybean. - This is the best variety for our regions. Ordinary soybean. - Yellow grain, earlier than the previous variety, but less productive. SEEDS. - Harvested like bean seeds. USES. - Fresh beans are eaten in the same way as shelled beans; dried, they can be used in the same way, but must first be soaked in water for a certain time. COMESTIBLE SOW Cyperus esculentus L. Cyperaceae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, southern Europe. CULTIVATION. - Yellow nutsedge multiplies by its tubers, and by dividing clumps; in April and May, it is best placed in a cool spot, as this plant needs a lot of moisture to develop. Tubers are planted in threes 30 centimetres apart in all directions; the stump fragments should be 35 to 40 centimetres further apart. Once planted, water copiously and irrigate when the weather is hot. Then the clumps will spread enormously. The tubers are harvested in November, and keep well over winter in a closed, dry place. Tuber vegetation can be stimulated by placing them in pots and layers in February. If you want to keep old plants in place, mound them with earth and surround them with manure over winter, like artichokes. USES. - The tubers, which are as large as a hazelnut, can be eaten raw or roasted; they taste a little like almonds, and contain a certain amount of oil; orgeat is made from them. TETRAGONIA CORNUE (New Zealand spinach). Tetragonia expansa Ait. Mesembryanthemata. ORIGIN. - An annual plant from New Zealand, discovered by Cook and introduced to France in 1772 by John Banks. Since then, it has been found wild in Tasmania, southern and western Australia, Japan and southern America. It remains to be seen whether it has been naturalized in these places (D. C.). CULTIVATION. - Tetragonia is an excessively vigorous plant, which develops all the better when the heat is strong. It does well on old beds or in slightly chalky soil. Sow from the end of April and throughout May, in bunches 80 cm apart. Three or four seeds are placed in each hole, leaving only the best. It can also be sown in pots and placed in layers in March, to be planted out in May; it can be transplanted, but must be kept in the shade for a few days to ensure a good start. Other cultivation care is almost non-existent, just a little weeding and watering. It is customary to soak the seeds twenty-four hours before sowing them, to activate germination, and they should always be placed in the best possible exposure. SEEDS. - Seeds are easy to harvest in our regions. Choose a seed-bearing plant and leave it to develop, without cutting off any leaves. The seeds are harvested as they ripen, and dried in the shade; they keep well for five years. DISEASES, PESTS. - Snails are very fond of young seedlings, which they quickly devour. USES. - Used for the same purposes as spinach; gourmets agree that it is superior in taste and more nutritious. It's a pity that tetragonia isn't appreciated more than it is, as it can be a great summer spinach. The hardiness and vigor of this plant are such that a well-timed plant can grow to 1.20 m or more in diameter and provide for an entire family. ORDINARY THYME Thymus vulgaris L. Labiatae. ORIGIN. - Perennial, native to the arid mountains of southern France. CULTIVATION. - Thyme is generally planted in borders, to hold back soil and prevent it from mixing with the sand in driveways. Thyme is propagated by sowing in spring, either in the field or in a nursery. The fine seed is lightly covered. When the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted or thinned out, if sown in situ. It can also be propagated by separating clumps, from October to April. Before planting, shorten the roots and stem tips; once well established, a border can last four or five years, but it must be pruned twice a year, in March and September, to keep the borders low and narrow. We hoe and weed from time to time, to keep it clean and weed-free. VARIETIES. - Ordinary thyme or French thyme. - Small, grayish leaves, very aromatic; most widespread in the Midi region. Winter thyme or German thyme. - Taller plant than the above, with broader leaves, larger seeds and less aromatic flavor. SEEDS. - Thyme seed is best harvested from plants planted two or three years earlier; to do this, set aside a piece of bed in spring, pruned in autumn. The seed is ripe in June-July. It keeps well for five years. The winter variety produces far more than the small-leaf variety, which is why it is much more widespread than the other. THYME, NUISSIBLE ANIMALS. - Thyme is sometimes invaded by a white mould that develops on the roots and rapidly destroys them. In 1885, we had 500 meters of borders destroyed by this parasite. The remedies we tried were inconclusive. Slugs and snails seem to avoid it, probably because of its strong odor. USES. - Thyme is used as a condiment in sauces and stews of all kinds. It is also used as a fumigant to sanitize apartments contaminated by contagious or epidemic diseases. TOMATO Solanum Lycopersicum L. Lycopersicum esculentum Dun. Solanaceae. ORIGIN. - Annual plant, native to Peru. GROWN OUTDOORS. - The tomato is a plant that does well in all sufficiently fertilized soils; it needs good, energetic fertilizers. Sow in warm beds from January to the end of March. Once the young plants are strong enough, they are also transplanted onto warm beds. Water immediately after transplanting, shade the panels for a few days to help the plants take root, then give them air whenever possible to prevent them from shrivelling. Transplanting is a necessary operation for tomatoes; it produces well-branched, well-sprouted plants. In the second half of April in the south of France, and in May in the north, you plant them in recently tilled soil. They are planted in rows 60 to 80 centimetres apart, depending on the variety, and in two-row beds. The widest path should be between 80 centimetres and 1 metre, which is necessary for watering in summer. In certain regions of the south-west, plants are planted in 25-centimetre-wide holes filled with consumed manure or potting soil. When planting, reserve as many rootballs as possible, to ensure a better take-up; water copiously after planting, and again throughout the summer. Spread mulch around the plants, and about a month after planting, put a stake on each plant. Chestnut or pine stakes, 1.10 to 1.50 m high, are chosen for this purpose and inserted at the base of each tomato, where the shoots are attached as they develop. In some regions, trellises are made up of slats and stakes, laid horizontally and vertically, or with two wires; the first 30 centimetres above the ground, and the second 35 or 40 centimetres from the first; all this is complicated, and not worth a single stile placed at each foot. Tomato pruning is a necessity, and easy; you choose the first two branches that branch off, and E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 22 remove all the others. These are pinched off above the third bunch of flowers, for early varieties, and above the fourth or fifth, for late varieties. In September, to facilitate the ripening of the last fruits, we remove the leaves; the branches must be carefully tied back as they grow. If, in the course of the summer, it is possible to water several times with liquid manure or faeces in sufficient quantities, this should not be neglected, as magnificent results can be obtained with this fertilizer. GROWING EARLY TOMATOES. - Early tomato cultivation is quite lucrative, despite competition from products from Spain, Portugal and Algeria, which appear on our markets towards the end of March-April. Sow in December or in the first days of January, on warm beds, to ensure that the seeds germinate as quickly as possible. Once the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted into small 8-centimeter pots, which are then buried again in a layer. For a few days, they are deprived of air, to help them take root quickly, under the influence of background heat, and then given a little air when the weather permits. About three weeks after transplanting into pots, prepare a good layer, 60 centimetres thick, and fill it with 20 centimetres of potting soil mixed with vegetable garden soil. Five days later, when the layer has begun to burn, plant the tomatoes at a rate of five or seven plants per trunk. When the tomatoes have grown sufficiently, the two most beautiful branches are selected and all the others, present or to come, are removed. These two branches are attached to small stakes driven into the bed at some distance from the plant. When these branches are sufficiently full of flowers, we pinch off the ends; when the sun comes out, we give them air, baste them often, and water each plant carefully, without excess moisture. When the fruit is about to ripen, remove the surrounding leaves to bring them forward. You need to maintain good stoves, which often need to be reshaped; you raise the trunks when the plants come to touch the glass. Plants can be grown in pots, potted successively in larger vases, up to a maximum of 20 cm. As they are transportable, when one layer no longer warms up, they can be placed on another. Care is the same as above. Here's another excellent procedure, which we recommend and which almost always gives excellent results. Sow in September on an old bed, when the plants are strong enough, prick them out, then take cuttings from the heads, which grow very well under cover and on beds that are not too hot. Once the cuttings are rooted, they are placed in pots, which are then placed on layers and kept that way until they are ready to be planted. In this way, you obtain plants that produce a lot in spring, are very dwarfed and very early. The best varieties for these different types of cultivation are : The very dwarf, very early tomato with large fruit. - Early dwarf red tomatoes with crisp leaves, etc. VARIETIES. - There are a large number of varieties, especially in recent years. America has sent us a certain number, not all of which are of good quality. Among the most popular varieties, we would like to mention: Very early outdoor tomato. - Excellent, very early, good disease resistance; suitable for first-season planting. Large red tomato. - Very old variety, very good quality. Large, smooth red tomato (Trophy). - Beautiful smooth fruit, full flesh, very good. Early large red tomato. - Very good, old variety. Early dwarf red tomato. - Good for early cultivation. FIG. 63. - Scarlet Mikado tomato. Improved red apple tomato. - Very good and productive. Early red Chemin tomato. - New variety, very popular at Paris markets. President Garfield tomato. - Variety whose fruits become enormous, of good quality; we have exhibited some weighing 700 grams. Tomate roi Humbert. - Elongated, small fruit of fairly good quality. FIO. 64. - Champion tomato. Scarlet Mikado tomato (fig. 63). - New American variety, very large fruits. Purple Mihado tomato. - New, with huge, smooth fruits; the previous variety is preferable for quality. 22. New American tomato no. 400 - This little-known variety, marketed by Messrs Beney, Lamand and Musset, Lyon, is highly commendable from all points of view, with very regular, dark crimson fruits and fine, tasty flesh containing few seeds. Tomato perfection. - Very productive. Livingstone tomato. - Large, round, smooth fruit, early, bright scarlet (new). Champion tomato (fig. 64). - American origin; numerous, smooth, purplish-green fruits. Laye red tomato with stiff stem. - Straight stem, very consistent, supports itself without any support, not very productive, not very recommendable. Pear tomato. - Cherry tomato. - Purple apple tomato. - Round yellow tomato. - Yellow tomato, large, smooth, etc., all second-rate. SEEDS. - To harvest excellent tomato seeds, choose the most beautiful fruits, the first to form as much as possible. Let them ripen well on the vine, then pick them and place them in a warm spot, under a panel for example; arrange them side by side on boards. A few days later, the seed is removed with the blade of a knife or a wooden spatula. This seed is then placed in a sturdy cloth, or a light-colored canvas bag, with the upper part firmly attached, and, holding the whole thing in a container filled with water, they are squeezed several times in all directions, to remove the viscous part, and then laid out on boards or cloths in the shade to dry. They retain their ability to germinate for four or five years. DISEASES, PESTS. - In recent years, tomato plantations have been affected by a disease similar to that affecting potatoes, peronospora infestans. This disease generally starts towards the end of June, attacks first the leaves and then the fruits, which are stained with black spots, preventing them from growing and causing them to rot. Several remedies have been tried or advocated; so far, none has produced serious results, as far as we know. M. Prillieux recommends treating several times with Bordeaux mixture, to which a little iron sulfate should be added. The Coulet et Chausse product, a compound of copper sulfate, iron sulfate and sulfur used to combat mildew in the Bordeaux region, appears to have some effect. Soot, ash and raw plaster, mixed in equal parts and spread on leaves in a liquid or dry state, have given us the best results. USES. - Tomatoes are widely used and consumed all over the world, mainly in Europe and the Americas. They are used to make preserves, which are very popular in winter, as well as jams. In the South-West and South of France, tomatoes are eaten raw in salads, either on their own or mixed with hot peppers. Young green fruit can be preserved like gherkins. VALÉRIANE D'ALGER Fedia cornucopiæ Gærtn. Valerian. Annual plant, native to Algeria. Sow in the open ground, in rays 40 cm apart, from April to August. Thin out and water copiously during hot spells. When tender, the leaves are picked one by one and eaten as a salad. Worms Astragalus hamosus. L. Leguminosae. ORIGIN. - Native annual, growing spontaneously in deep, compact soils. CULTIVATION. - Sow in place in April, covering sufficiently. Thin the plant if it is too thick. Hoe to keep the soil permeable to water, which must be copious during hot spells. USES. - The fruit, shaped like small worms, can be placed in salads, as an innocent surprise. To be used during the twelve months of the year. January. FULL GROUND. - Break up, smoke and spade the soil, prepare the mixes to load the layers, prepare the asparagus pits, put the trunks on those you want to force into place, watch over the plantations, on ados or costiere. In warmer regions, the South-West and the Centre, sow the whole series of early cabbages and cauliflowers, spring lettuces, Romaines, leeks, turnips, pink radishes, early carrots, chervil, spinach, peas, broad beans, white onions; plant the first early potatoes in good exposure. Permanently plant Bacalan, Bonneuil, Brunswick or Tabouret cabbages, etc., various strawberry plants, virgin sorrel; prune old raspberry and redcurrant plants, plant young ones. Hoe, weed and rake peas sown in October. In the North, outdoor sowing is not very important. You can only prick out under frames. Visit vegetables stored indoors often. UNDER SIEVES. - On warm beds, sow tender and semi-hard cauliflowers, Brussels sprouts, early Savoy, York, St Denis, various lettuces and Romaine, turnips, bush beans, short carrots, leeks, full celery and celery turnips, tomatoes, peppers, melons, cucumbers, eggplants, etc. Force Strawberries, make Capuchin Beard, put Sweet Potatoes in vegetation. Plant Marjolin or Royal Potatoes, sow very dwarf Peas, renew stoves and layers, cover with mats, litter or leaves at night, give air and shade when the sun appears. February. In well-exposed areas, sow short and medium-length carrots, radishes, spinach, common and tuberous chervil, spring lettuce, Romaine, onions, leeks, early turnips, parsley, peas, broad beans, sugarloaf cabbage, Brussels sprouts, Joanet, Brunswick and the whole Milan curly series; Sow the first early beets, salsify, parsnips, salad burnet, sorrel, scorsonera, watercress, etc. Plant garlic, shallots, onions, split clumps of chives, redo sorrel and thyme borders, plant autumn-sown chives, Bacalan and Bonneuil cabbages, potatoes and asparagus, prepare mushroom wheels, etc. COUCHES-CHASSIS - Reshape stoves by adding new manure. Provide air during the hot hours. Force Asparagus and Strawberry plants into place and layers, resow Aubergines, Tomatoes, Peppers, Melons, Cucumbers, Basil, Full and White Celery, Kohlrabi, Tender and semi-hard Kale, Italian Curly Chicory, Short Leek, Dwarf Beans, Lettuce, Purslane, etc. Transplant strong plants. Carefully monitor bedding crops, on which success will depend. Cover with straw mats or bedding as soon as the weather turns cold. March. FULL GROUND. - Hurry to finish the big jobs, spade the squares, bury the fertilizers, visit the watering utensils, gutters, pipes, watering cans, pumps, merry-go-rounds. Sow peas, the last of the broad beans, spring lettuce, leaf lettuce, Romaine, radishes, leeks, wild chicory, early onions, parsley, chervil, watercress, sorrel, Turnip, Salsify, Scorsonera, Spinach, Beetroot, Poirée, Arroche, Savoy cabbage, Cauliflower, Kohlrabi, Kohlrabi, Chives, Parsnips, Savory, Burnet, Asparagus, etc. Celeriac and celeriac can be sown in good sunlight. Plant the last shallots and garlic, Bacalan cabbage and other varieties, Romaine, lettuces, potatoes, sorrel, thyme. Replace missing strawberry plants, replenish asparagus plantings, plant young shoots, replant watercress beds, plant and sow again. Weeding and hoeing. Start artichokes, smoke and spade. Plant seed-bearing roots, beets, parsnips, kohlrabi, etc. Lightly cover young seedlings or susceptible plantings. FOLDING BEDS. - Layers are very useful for transplanting peppers, eggplants, tomatoes, etc. Stoves are still used during the first fortnight, at least in the North. Sow Peppers, Tomatoes, Melons, Cucumbers, Tetragona, Beans, Celery, Basil, Curly Chicory, etc. Strawberries and the last Asparagus continue to be forced. Monitor the pruning of melons, and continue cutting potatoes and yams. Lettuce and curly chicory are being transplanted on warm soil after sowing chervil and radishes. Beware of sunburn, which is very hot at this time of year. April. IN THE GROUND. - Work in the open ground is the most important part of the year. Sow all types of vegetables in large quantities: Celery, Savoy cabbage, Head cabbage, Cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, Kohlrabi, Turnip cabbage, Carrots, all varieties, Salsify, Scoro- nera, Scolyma, Wild chicory, Dandelion, Chervis, Beet, Burnet, Artichoke, Pear, Cardoon, Baselle, Leeks, Watercress, Watercress, Landcress, Thyme, Savory, Romaine and Lettuce, Pink and Chinese Radish, Chervil, Parsley, Spinach, Asparagus, Peas, Beans, etc. Plant potatoes, apple cabbage, cauliflower, curly endive (sown in January in layers), early beet, onions, Romaine, lettuces, leeks sown in layers. If frosts are no longer a threat, plant peppers, tomatoes, eggplants, melons, cucumbers, squash and celery, depending on the climate. Silkworm artichokes, make new plantings. Weed, hoe and thin out seedlings. CHASSIS LAYERS. - Sow Chicory, Scarole, Baselle, Tetragone, Melons, Aubergines, Peppers, Tomatoes, Celery, etc. on warm beds. These same plants can be transplanted in nurseries on warm beds. Harvest Beans, Strawberries, Tomatoes or other forced vegetables, keep a close eye on these crops, baste, shade, give air and prevent Melons from getting sunburned. Multiply sweet potatoes and yams. May. FULL GROUND. - With soil sufficiently warm, sow and plant all vegetables listed in April. Also sow Florence fennel and other varieties, rocket, tuberous chervil, Spanish mallow without danger of it rising, all varieties of bush and pole beans, turnips, curly endive and Scarole. Plant the various varieties sown in March and April. Water, hoe and weed all crops, and thin out seedlings. CHASSIS LAYERS. - Only muted layers are now made for planting melons, squash, cucumbers, etc. Start harvesting melons, which should not be left to ripen too much. Remove all the layers and monitor the related crops of Beans, Tomatoes, Peas, etc. Cut sweet potatoes. June. FULL GROUND. - Copious and frequent watering. Sow all plants mentioned in April and May, adding: Black Radish, Rapunzel, Choux-Brocolis, branchu and pommé, Brocoli-Mamouth, Golden Savoy and late winter Pontoise cabbages, Scarole en cornet, Chou de Vaugirard, etc. Continue transplanting plants sown the previous month. Prune melons and tomatoes; set up open-air mushroom wheels. Harvest towards the end of the month, Garlic, Shallots, as well as seeds of Lamb's lettuce, Turnips, Cabbage, Sorrel, Chervil, etc. Remove runners from strawberry plants every month, mulch and water copiously. Hoe and weed all crops. LADIES. - Layers are no longer needed; simply harvest produce as it becomes available. Put away panels and trunks. July. FULL GROUND. - Copious watering. Hoe and weed all crops frequently, mulch delicate crops. Sow Radishes of all varieties, Scarole, Chicory, Lettuce, Carrots, Lamb's lettuce, Spinach, Chervil, Watercress, Kidney beans, to harvest green, and :. Plant Savoy cabbage, Broccoli cabbage, Vaugirard cabbage, Schweinfurth cabbage, hard cauliflower; plant strawberry plants sown in May, transplant varieties to be forced; butter full celery, thin out leaves on celery root; stuff a few cardoons, blanch chard pear, escarole and chicory. Pinch tomatoes and melons. Harvest seeds as they ripen. CHASSIS LAYERS. - Layers are no longer of any use. Remove the manure and soil used to make them. Store panels and trunks under cover. August. FULL EARTH. - We agree with some authors that August is the beginning of the horticultural year, as a whole series of new cultivation operations begin and continue without interruption until July. With the heat still high, watering takes up a good part of the time. Ploughing, smoking empty areas, replanting immediately. Mulch seedlings, hoe and weed. Sow carrots, onions, cabbage, Bacalan, Coeur-debœuf, York cabbage, etc., turnip, Chinese radish, black radish, pink radish, lettuces, winter Romaine, Scarole, bastard and round Scarole, Scorsonera, round-seeded spinach, lamb's lettuce, chervil. Plant Leeks, Scarole en cornet et ronde, Laitue merveille des quatre saisons, Céleri rave, Céleri plein, Choux de Bonncuil, Choux Brocolis, Cauliflower, etc. Multiply Watercress by cuttings, make Mushroom wheels, re-border Thyme, Hyssop. Butter Celery, Cardoon; blanch Chicory, Scarole, E. BERGER, Plantes potagères. 23 Poirée à cardes. Cut back artichoke stalks that have stopped giving; pull up onions. Harvest ripe seeds. Visit cucumber, melon, tomato and eggplant plantations frequently. LAYERS. - Layers are useless; continue to remove used manure and potting soil and pile them up. September. FULL GROUND. - As the heat is less intense, reduce watering. Thin out seedlings, hoe and weed often. You can still sow all the plants listed in the previous month. Plant long winter leeks, Scarole en cornet et bâtarde, late Savoy, Norwegian and Pontoise cabbages, winter lettuce, winter Romaine, artichokes, the last Celery-Raves, etc. Bastardise Celery and Cardoons, Poirées à cardes, blanch Chicory and Scarole. Continue harvesting Potatoes, Onions, Melons, Cucumbers, Potatoes, Cabbage, Tomatoes, Aubergines, etc. Carefully collect all ripe seeds; remove runners from large-fruited Strawberry plants, cut off all leaves and hoe deeply; pot Strawberry plants for forcing. BEDDING. - On teens, plant Lettuces, Gottes, sow Radishes towards the sin of the month. In the North, start forcing Asparagus, sow Green Beans. Stock up on manure and litter for the next crops. Mushroom stacks built indoors. October. FULL GROUND. - The days are getting shorter, the rains are abundant, so watering is not very important. Continue to hoe, weed and clean the various crops. Sow Lamb's lettuce, Radish, Spinach, Chervil, Parsley, Watercress, Winter Lettuce, Romaine, Peas, Broad Beans, etc. Plant Winter lettuce, Romaine, Scarole, Leeks, Strawberry plants Virgin sorrel, Thyme, Hyssop, Perennial savory, Lavender, Onions, Bacalan cabbage, or other cabbages. It's important to be aware of the climatic conditions of the region you're in, so as to sow and plant only those vegetables that can survive the winter without suffering too much. In soils likely to be too wet in winter, start breaking up the soil, buttering up celery and pear, and stuffing cardoons. At the end of the month, butter artichokes to protect them from frost. Cut Asparagus stems, harvest seed. LYING. - Towards the end of the month, the beds start to be used for sowing or planting green beans, short carrots, lettuces, chervil, radishes, asparagus, sorrel, peas, potatoes and so on. Start growing Capuchin Beard and Withloof. Under cloches, on ados, or on warm layers, sow or transplant Lettuces, Gottes, Romaine verte, sow Pink Radishes in the intervals. Place the boxes and their panels on the strawberry beds every month, to prolong production. Give crops under glass plenty of air and water. Pile up manure, leaves and any other fermentable matter used in couchos. November. FULL GROUND. - As cold weather begins to set in, cover susceptible vegetables to prevent frost damage. Butter artichokes or surround them with straw, litter or manure, as well as cardoons; sow peas, broad beans, lettuces, lamb's lettuce, spinach, radishes, chervil, etc. Plant Peas, Broad Beans, Lettuce, Lamb's lettuce, Spinach, Radish, Chervil, etc. Butter Celery in place, or pull it out, and place it in sand or bedding soil. Plant winter lettuces, Bacalan cabbage, sugar loafs, beef hearts, York hearts, garlic, shallots, onions, etc. Plant cabbage varieties whose seeds you want to harvest. Continue ripping. When heavy frosts are forecast, bring plants likely to suffer into the cellar or vegetable greenhouse, or cover them with litter, leaves or windbreaks, which can be removed once the temperature has risen. BEDDING. - Sow dwarf peas for transplanting, beans, lettuces for cutting and carrots, short carrots, radishes, peas, potatoes, etc. Continue forcing Asparagus either in layers or in place, as well as Parsley and Sorrel, make Capuchin Beard and Withloof; Mushroom wheels. Layers should be the object of constant care, as the temperature is highly variable. Provide air, to prevent moisture from concentrating inside; cover with mats; at night maintain good stoves or accots. December. FULL GROUND. - There are few seedlings to be sown, but at the right exposure, along a wall, you can sow Peas, Broad beans, Spinach, Early onions, Radishes, Lettuces, Cerseil. & Plant Garlic, Shallots, Onions, Lettuces, Romaine, Head cabbage, etc. Put large onions in the ground, to eat green or for seed. Rake, drain, transport soil, spade, bury fertilizers, make mats, clean seeds, watch over vegetables that have been brought in. LADIES. - Continue forcing out old asparagus claws and forcing in younger ones. Plant early potatoes, sow green beans, short carrots, melons. Cucumbers, Cauliflowers, Short leeks, Radishes, Romaines, Peas, Tomatoes, etc. Maintain and reshape stoves. These sowings or plantings must be done with care, as carelessness can result in the destruction of an entire harvest. * III END PREFACE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . PART ONE. - Establishing a market garden. CHAPTER ONE - The soil ... ... . I. Choice of soil, 1. - II. Exposure, orientation, 3. CHAPTER II. - Soil preparation . VII 1 4 4 I. Excavation, 4 - II. Layout, 6 - III. Amendments, 8 - IV. Liming, 9 - V. Drainage, 10 - Vl. Sanitation, 10. CHAPTER III. - Ploughing the land ... ... ... . 11 CHAPTER IV.  14 I. Dressing, planking, 14 - II. Harrowing, 15 - III. Weeding, 15 - IV. Hoeing, 16 - V. Leading, 16. CHAPTER V. - Fertilizers and manures ... ... . 17 I. Chemical fertilizers, 17 - II. Manures and natural fertilizers, 17 - III. Liquid fertilizers, 21 - IV. Mulch, 21 - V. Potting soil, 22. CHAPTER VI. - Means of activating plant vegetation. 22 1 Layers, 22 - II. Stoves, 25 - IIl. Accot, 25 - IV. Border, 26 - V. Ados, 26. CHAPTER VII. - Multiplication of vegetable plants 27 I. Sowing in the ground, 28 - II. Broadcast sowing, 29 - IIl. Sowing in rays or rows, 30 - IV. Sowing in clumps or bunches, 31 - V. Different ways of covering seedlings, 31. - VI. Sowing in layers, 32. CHAPTER VIII. - Planting, Transplanting... ... 35 I. Transplanting in nurseries, 33 - II. Permanent planting, 34 - III. Transplanting, 35 - IV. Plant preparation, 35 - V. Transplanting on beds, 36. CHApiTre IX. - Watering... ... . 36 I. Watering installation, 36 - II. Different qualities of water, 37 - III. Timing of watering, 38 - IV. Different ways of watering, 39 - V. Irrigation, 40. CHAPTER X. - Crop rotation and counter-planting . 41 1. crop rotation, 41 - II. Crop intensity, counter-planting, 42 - III. Prejudices, routine, 44. 23. PART TWO. - Description of crops Absinthe ... . Ache. . - Water. ... . 46 . 115 . . 115 - marsh. 115 Edible agaric. . 128 Cultivated garlic. - . . 47 47 - Spanish . 51 Oriental . 52 Aillet . Alkekenge. . Angelica officinalis . Anise . Wormwood. Arroche des jardins. Arrode. Asparagus. Asparagus. Eggplant. Aurone. Capuchin beard Belle Dame... . Beetroot. Beet. Barbary wheat - 53 56 57 61 61 61 61 64 84 . 149 Canon . 309 Baselle . Basil 48 officinal . 56 Dill . . 84 86 61 349 88 . . . 312 Spain. 312 Turkey . 312 Bonne Dame 61 Bonnet de prêtre. . 206 Turkish. ... 206 Borage . Boursette Broccoli . 94 . . 309 . 186 Bunias d'Orient . Cailli. . Calebasse . . " 95 218 . . 209 Cantaloup Caprier . 46 314, 321 96 Capucine grande. . 99 - small tuberose. Cardon . . Cardouille. ... Carrot. Blackcurrant. 100 . . 101 . . 102 . . 379 . 106 . . 269, 271 Catawissa. ... . 330 Celery, Celeriac . Chervil. - . 114 . . . 120 . 123 musk. . 127 tuberous . 125 Edible mushroom. 128 Caterpillar. Chervis, . . . . . 134 . 135 Curly chicory. 137 wild. . 148 escarole . 146 Ord. large-ribbed cabbage. 171 - - - - - - Broccoli . . . 186 Brussels sprouts . 168 cabus pommé . 162 Chinese. 334 cultivated. 156 flower . 178 sailor . . . 213 - Milan. 165 - turnip . 176 - turneps . 176 turnip. 174 forage cabbage . . 172 - non-headed . . 172 - rosettes . 168 - green. 172 Ciboule commune . 190 - scallop. 192 - perennial. . . 192 Chives . 192 Pumpkin . 206 York beef heart . 162 Coloquinte. ... . 209 Cucumber. 193 - donkey. ... . 202 - West Indian. . 201 - catch. . 202 - currant. 202 - snake. 201 Edible cockerel . 53 - officinal. 56 Squash. 202 - bottle. 209 - musk. . 210 - pepon. 206 Crambé maritime. . 213 Cresson alénois . 216 - water . . . 218. - . . 218 - ground. 217 Japanese cress . 222 Maltese cumin. 223 dolce mongette . . 291 - mitered . 291 Doucette. ... . 309 Echalotte commune . 223 - Jersey. 226 Endive. 137 Ordinary spinach . 227 - American. 84 - Chinese . 84 - prickly-seeded. 229 - round-seeded . 229 - Malabar. 84 - India . 84 - from New Zealand... ... . 382 Tarragon... ... . 232 Faséole... ... . 272 Faverolle... ... . 272 Faviole. 272 Fayaux. 272 Fayons. ... ... . 272 Florence fennel. - bitter. - 403 234 236 sweet. . . 236 Fava beans... ... . 237 - face. . 272 - sea. . . 272 Ficoïde glaciale . 242 Woodland strawberry . 243 - Alpine. 244 - pineapple. . 247 - capron . 253 - Chilean. 254 - common. . 243 - Virginia scarlet 254 - four-season. 214 Cultivated raspberry. . 258 Indian wheat . 312 Garvanche... ... . 359 Cultivated chickweed. . . 263 Giraumon.... 202 - Turban. . 206 Girolles . 135 Gombo. . . . . 264 Gourd. 209 Gooseberry. 267 - thorny . 269 - black-fruited . 269 - mackerel. 269, 271 - ordinary. . 267 Bunch bean. . . 288 - common. . . 272 - curved. 289 - cowpea . . . 291 - asparagus cowpea . 291 - Spanish. . 288 - flowering . 288 - Lablab. . . . 292 - Lima . . . 289 Dragon herb . . . 232 Hyssop. ... ... . 293 Chinese yam . 295 Lettuce, cultivated . . . 297 Head lettuce. 297 Romaine lettuce . 297, 306 Sheep's lettuce . 309 Lavender . 307 Lentils. 308 Lamb's lettuce. 309 Sweet corn . . . . . 312 Marjoram . . . 313 Marrube blanc . 313 Martynia. . . . 313 Curly mallow . . . 314 Lemon balm. . 314 ofücinale. . . 314 Melon. 314 - embroidered. . . 320 - water. Melongene. . . 322 78 Peppermint. 322 Turnip. green. . . 322 . 323 Aromatic nigella . 325 Onion. - - . 326 Egyptian. 329 Potato. 330 Virgin sorrel . 333 - spinach . 333 - common. 331 Oxalis crenata. . . 334 Pak choi... ... . 334 Parsnip. 335 Watermelon. 322 Sweet potato. . . 336 Parsley... ... . 208 Parsley. 338 Parsley. Pe tsai. . . Physalis... . . 338 " - . 340 . 56 P'iment commun. . . . 311 " Pimprenelle petite. . 344 Dandelion... ... . 344 Leek. ... . 346 Poiree. . . . 349 Peas . . . . 351 Chickpea . . . 359 Potato . . . 260 Pumpkin . 204 Purslane . 365 All-month radish . 366 - summer, autumn and winter. Rapunzel. 368 . . . . . 370 Hybrid rhubarb . 371 Rocambole (Spanish garlic). 51 - (Egyptian onion). 329 Rosemary . 374 Rocket, cultivated . 375 Rutabaga. . . . . 176 Salsify... ... . 375 - black. 379 Savory, annual. 377 - mountain. 378 - perennial. 378 Sage officinale. 378 clary. ... . 379 Spanish mallow . 379 Scorsonera. . 379 Serpentine. 232 Etampes soybean... . 380 Yellow nutsedge. 381 Tetragone cornue . 382 Ordinary thyme. 383 Tomato. " . 384 - (small) Mexican 54 Algerian valerian . 391 Worms. ... ... ... . 392 PART THREE. - Calendar of sowing and planting to be done during the dodzo months of ánnet . 393 Lyon. - Im9. PIrRAT AIé, A. R cy Successeur, 4, rue Cyntil. - 4728 TRAITÉ DE BOTANIQUE AGRICOLE ET INDUSTRIELLE By J. VESQUE Maître de Conférences à la Faculté des sciences de Paris et à l'Institut agronomique 1 vol. in-8 of xvi-976 pages, with 598 figures, hardback....... 18 fr. ÉLÉMENTS DE BOTANIQUE AGRICOLE By SCHRIBAUX and J. NANOT Professcur at the Joinville School of Agriculture! Prof. à l'École munic. d'arboriculture de Pari1 vol. in-18jésus, de xx-328 p., avec 260 fig. 2 pl. col. et une carte. . 7 fr.  4 fr. Plows, scarifiers, harrows, rollers; seeders, weeders, hoes, insecticide equipment, harvesters, mowers, tedders, rakes, threshers, tarares, choppers, presses, root cutters, equipment for dairies, wineries, distilleries, cider mills, oil mills, sawmills, hydraulic machinery, pumps, sprinklers, wheelbarrows, carts, carriers, merry-go-rounds, waterwheels, overhead motors, steam engines. LES ENGRAIS ET LEUR APPLICATION A LA FERTILISATION DU SOL By Albert LARBALETRIER Professor of Chemistry at the Pas-de-Calais School of Agriculture 1 vol. in-18 jesus, 360 pages, with 68 figs, hardback (Bibl des conn. utiles). 4 fr. The judicious application of fertilizers is one of the most important factors in ensuring high yields and remunerating agricultural labor. To obtain good results, it is necessary to take into account the nature of the soil, the time of application, the doses to be applied and the distribution in the soil. Mr. LARBALETRIER explained these concepts with remarkable clarity. He successively reviews plant nutrition, the elements of soil fertility, amendments, marning and plastering, plant fertilizers and cakes, animal fertilizers and guano, mixed fertilizers and manure, and chemical fertilizers containing nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. The book concludes with advice on the purchase and use of fertilizers. FREE SHIPPING AGAINST A POSTAL MONEY ORDER DISEASES OF THE VINE AND THE BEST FRENCH AND AMERICAN GRAPE VARIETIES CRYPTOGAMIC DISEASES OF THE VINE ACC TEETH CAUSED BY ATMOSPHERIC DISTURBANCES DISEASES CAUSED BY INSECTS, TERRAINS QUI CONVIENNENT A LA VIGNE LES MEILLEURS CÉPAGES FRANÇAIS ET AMÉRICAINS, By Jules BEL Member of the Academy of Sciences of Toulouse, of the Mycolos ique Society of France, jetc. 1 vol. in-18 jésus, 320 pages, with 111 fig, hardback (Bibl. des conn. utiles).............................. ...4 fr. LE VIN ET L'ART DE LA VINIFICATION Par V. CAMBON ngénieur des arts et manufactures, vice-président de la Société de viticulture de Lyon vol. in-18 jésus, 324 pages, avec67fig., hardback (Bibl. des conn. uiles). 4 fr - VINS ET DES VINAIGRES L'ESSAI COMMERCIAL DES By J. DUJARDIN 1 vol. in-18 jésus, 368 pages, with 66fig. cart. (Bibl. des conn. uttiles). 4 fr. - LES FLEURS A PARIS CULTURE ET COMMERCE By Ph.-L. de VILMORIN 1 vol. in-16, 324 pages, with 203 figs (Bibl. scient. contemp.)... 3 fr. 50. The prodigious development in the taste and use of flowers has brought about a veritable revolution in their cultivation and trade. Where do all these flowers come from? who grows them, ships them, receives them, distributes them? what's the best way to use them? which ones are best suited to which uses? M. de Vilmorin explores all these topical and practical questions. The author first takes the reader on a comparative tour of various countries. Then, focusing on the city of Paris, he describes the procedures and organization of sales at IIalles, flower markets, resellers and florists' stores. He then indicates the origins of the main flowers sold in Paris, reviewing both glasshouse and Midi crops. The author then lists the main plants that are the object of the grower's care and, pointing out the merits of the various species as well as their cultivation, he deals with annuals, biennials, perennials, bulbs and outdoor plants, then talks about orchids and greenhouse plants, flowering trees and shrubs, roses in particular, and finally plants special to the cultivation of the Midi, and bouquet accessories, various greens, mosses and ferns. LES ORCHIDÉES MANUEL DE L'AMATEUR Par D. ROIS Assistant au Muséum d'histoire naturelle de Paris 1 vol. in-18 jésus. de 350 p., avec 120 fig. cart. (Bibl. des conn. utiles). 4 fr LES PLANTES D'APPARTEMENT ET LES PLANTES DE FENÊTRE By D. BOIS 1 vol. in-18 jesus, 388 p., 169 figs, hardback (Bibl. des conn. utiles.). 4 fr. The modest price of this little book, the elegant form in which it is presented, and the numerous figures that accompany the text make this volume a practical guide within the reach of all those who like to grow plants in their living rooms or on their windows, but nevertheless presenting the scientific ex actitude that is too often sacrificed in works of this kind. First of all, the author introduces us to the phenomena of plant life, as they normally occur, in order to show how detrimental to their health is the environment in which they find themselves placed, when we associate them with our lives, in apartments, where light is lacking, air is scanty and vitiated, where dust impedes respiratory functions, etc. Knowing what is needed to maintain life, the reader can then strive to create the best conditions for prolonging it. Watering is an issue on which the health of plants largely depends. There are a host of considerations on this subject which show how much care needs to be taken in the practice of this operation. Potting, sowing, marcotting, cuttings, transplanting, pinching and pruning are also covered in several chapters. The second part lists, in alphabetical order, the plants that can be grown on windows and balconies. The most widespread are made recognizable by the figures that accompany their descriptions, followed by notes on use, cultivation and propagation. Each species is described by its scientific and common names. Finally, there are lists to help you choose between climbing species, those suitable for hanging vases and those that can live in the shade. The third part is devoted to apartment plants: description, uses, cultivation, arrangements in window boxes and cachepots, in aquariums; conservation of cut flowers and their arrangement in bouquets. In a word, M. Bois has sought to bring together in this little book everything of interest to the many horticultural enthusiasts whose garden is a window or terrace, and whose greenhouse is a living room. (Le Naturaliste, September 1891.) LE PETIT JARDIN CULT. RE ET ENTRETIEN, LE JARDIN D'AGRÉMENT, LE JARDIN FRUITIER LE JARDIN POTAGER LES TRAVAUX DE CHAQUE MOIS, LES MALADIES DES PLANTES ET LES ANINAUX NUISIBLES Par D. BOIS 1 vol in-18 jésus de 350 p., avec 128 fig, cart. (Bibl. des conn. utiles.). 4 fr. FRENCH DELIVERY AGAINST A MANDETPOSTAL LES ARBRES FRUITIERS L'ARBRE, LE SOL, LES OUTILS, LES PROCÉUÉS DE CULTURE, LA VIGNE, LE POIRIER LE POMMIER, LE PÊCHER, L'ABRICOTIER, LE CERISIER LA RESTAURATION DES ARBRES FRUITIERS, LA CONSERVATION DES FRUITS Par G. BELLAIR Jardinier en chef des jardins de Versailles). OUVRAGE COURONNÉ PAR LA SOCIETÉ CENTRALE D'HORTICULTURE DE FRANCE 1 vol. in-18 jésus, de 350 p., avec 150 figs, cart (Bibl. des conn. utiles) . 4 fr. This volume is indispensable, not only to garden enthusiasts, but also to professional gardeners. It's an excellent little work that brings together everything you need to know to obtain vigorous trees and manage them intelligently. Grapevines, pear trees, peach trees, apricot trees, cherry trees, etc., are successively reviewed by the author, from the point of view of planting, pruning, restoration and so on. LES INSECTES NUISIBLES AUX FORÈTS, AUX CÉRÉALES ET A LA GRANDE CULTURE, A LA VIGNE AU VERGER ET AU JARDIN FRCITIER AU POTAGER ET AU JARUIN D'ORNEMENT By L. MONTILLOT 1 vol. in-18 jésus, 350 p., with 250 figs, cardboard (Bibl. des conn. utiles) 4 fr. LES LÉGUMES ET LES FRUITS By de BREVANS 1 vol. in-18 jésus, 350 p., with 109 figs, cardboard (Bibl. des conn. utiles)... 4 fr. LA ROSE HISTOIRE ET CULTURE, 500 VARIÉTÉS DE ROSIERS By J. BEL 1891, 1 vol. in-16 of 160 p., with 21 figs (Petite bibliothèque scientifique)... . 2 fr. Among all flowers, there is none more universally appreciated than the Rose. M. J. Bel thought that those interested in the queen of flowers would be pleased to find everything relating to the rose, its history, the place it has occupied and the role it has played among peoples, ancient and modern, gathered together and condensed, followed by a description of the varieties that adorn our gardens (Roses, Tea, Bengal, Hazelnut, Ile-Bourbon, remontant and perpetual hybrids, hundred-leaf roses, climbers, Provins roses, etc.). The practical side of things was also to have its part to play. Several chapters have been set aside to summarize everything you need to know about growing, propagating, grafting, pruning and caring for roses, as well as insects and plants that are harmful to them. DELIVERY WITH POSTAL MANDAT Lyon. - Imp. Puxal Amt, A Rey Succ - 4728 NOUVELLE COLLECTION LES De volumes in-16 comprenant 400 pages, illustrés de figures intercalées dans le terte à a francs le volume cartonné ARTS ET MÉTIERS INDUSTRIE MANUFACTURIÈRE, ART DE L'INGÉNIEUR, CHIMIE, ÉLECTRICITÉ BEAUVISAGE. Les matières grasses. caractères, falsifications et essai des huiles, buturres, graisses, suifs et cires BREVANS (DE). The manufacture of liqueurs and preserves. GRAFFIGNY (H. DE). Amateur industries, paper and canvas, - earth, wax, glass and porcelain, - wood. - metals. HERAUD. Les secrets de la science et de l'industrie, recipes, formules et procédés d'une utilité générale et d'une application journalière. LACROIX-DANLIARD. La plume des ois eaux. LEFÈVRE (J.). Electricity in the home. BEL (J.). Vine diseases, and BELLAIR (G.). Fruit trees. - Houseplants and plants BUCHARD. Agricultural machinery. - Agricultural buildings and rural architecture. LEVERRIER. Metallurgy. PIESSE (S.). History of perfumes and toilet hygiene. - Perfume chemistry and soap manufacturing. RICHE (A.). The art of the assayer. - Monnaie, médailles et bijoux, essai et contrôle des ouvrages d'ot SCHŒLLER. Railroads. TASSART. Textile materials. Dyes and dyeing. - The dyeing industry. VIGNON (L.). Silk, from a scientific and industrial point of view. WITZ (AIME). The steam engine. AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, BREEDING BOIS (D.). The little garden. of windows. FERVILLE. The dairy industry, milk, butter and cheese. GOBIN (A.). Fish farming in water GOBIN (A.). Fish farming in water GUYOT. Farm animals. LARBALETRIER Fertilizers and their application to soil fertilization. MONTILLOT. The insect enthusiast, insect characters and habits, hunting, preparation and conservation of collections. Introduction by Professor LABOULBÈNE, former president of the Société entomolo- Les insectes nuisibles. RELIER. Practical guide to horse breeding. HOME ECONOMICS HYGIENE AND MEDICINE DALTON (C.). Physiology and hygiene for schools, colleges and faDONNÉ. Advice to mothers on raising newborn children. and money. RURAL ECONOMICS the best French and American grape varieties. sweet. miles. salty. gic. FERRAND (E.) and DELPECH (A.) First aid for accidents and sudden illness. HÉRAUD. Les secrets de l'alimentation. HÉRAUD. Les secrets de l'économie domestique, à la ville et à la campagne, recettes, formules et procèdés d'une utilité générale et d'une application journalière. LÉBLOND and BOUVIER. Gymnastics and physical exercise. SAINT-VINCENT (A.-C. DE). Nouvelle médecine des familles, à la ville et à la campagne. Paris, J.-P, BAILLIÈRE et FILS, rue Hautefeuille, 19, Paris AU POINT DE VUE SCIENTIFIQUE ET INDUSTRIEL By Léo VIGNON Maitre de conférences à la Faculté des sciences Gous-directeur de l'École de chimie industrielle de Lyon. 1 vol. in-16, 370 pages, with S1 figures, hardback . Á fr. The silkworm; the egg; the worm; the chrysalis; the cocoon; the butterfly; sericulture and silkworm diseases; silk; sorting and reeling cocoons; physical and chemical study of raw silk; milling; silk waste and the schappe industry; silks; testing, conditioning and titration; dyeing; weaving; fabric finishing; printing; finishes; classification of silks; art in the silk industry; statistical documents on the production of silks and silks. LES MATIÈRES COLORANTEE ET LA CHIMIE DE LA TEINTURE By L. TASSART ingenseur, répétiteur à l'Ecole centrale des arts et manufactures. Chemist with the Scciété des matières colorantes et produits chimiques de Saint-Denis (Établissements Poirrier et Daisace). 1 vol. in-16, 320 pages, with 30 figures, hardback . 4 fr. Textile materials: plant fibers, cotton, linen, hemp, jute, ramie; animal fibers, wool and silk; mineral, vegetable and animal dyestuffs; tanning materials; artif̃cielles dyestuffs; triphenyl-methane derivatives, phthaleins; nitro and azo dyestuffs, indo-phenols, safranins, alizarine, etc.; analysis of dyestuffs; mordants of dyestuffs; mordants of dyestuffs.analysis of dyestuffs; mordants of alumina, iron, chromium, tin, etc.; materials used for fabric finishing; water used in dyeing and its purification. L'INDUSTRIE DE LA TEINTURE By L. TASSART 1 vol. in-16, 360 pages, with 50 figures, hardback. . . Afr. Bleaching of cotton, linen, wool and silk; mordanting; dyeing with artificial coloring matter (coloring matter derived from triphenyl-methane, phthaleins; artificial coloring matter, safra- nine, alizarin, etc.); sampling; handling and material for dyeing textile fibers, yarns and fabrics; rinsing, wringing, drying, spprêts, cylindering, calendering, glazing, etc.; dyeing of textile fibers, yarns and fabrics; dyeing of textile fibers, yarns and fabrics; rinsing, wringing, drying, spprêts, cylindering, calendering, glazing, etc.; dyeing of textile fibers, yarns and fabrics. EMVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE ET HYGIÈNE DE LA TOILETTE POUDRES, VINAIGRES, DENTIFRICES, FARDS, TEINTURES, COSMÉTIQCES, ETC. By S. PIESSE London chemist and perfumer. French edition. PAr F. CHARDIN-HADANCOURT et H. MASSIGNON Parfumeurs à Paris et à Cannes. et G. HALPHEN Chimiste au Laboratoire du Ministère du Commerce. 1 vol. in-16, 372 pages, with 70 figures, hardback. . . 4 fr. La parfumerie à travers les siècles; histoire naturelle des parfums d'origine végétale et d'origine animale; hygiène des parfums et des cosmétiques; hygiène des cheveux et préparations épilatoires; poudres et eaux dentifrices; teintures, fards, rouges, etc. CHIMIE DES PARFUMS ET FABRICATION DES SAVONS ODEURS, ESSENCES, SACHETS, EAUX AROMATIQUES, POMMADES, ETG, By S. PIESSE London chemist and perfumer. French edition. By F. CHARDIN-HADANCOURT, H. MASSIGNON and G. HALPHEN 1 vol. in-16, 360 pages, with 80 figures, hardback. . . 4 fr. Extraction of perfumes; properties, analysis, adulteration of essences: artificial essences; applications of organic chemistry to perfumery; manufacture of soaps; studies of substances used in perfumery; formulas and recipes for essences, extracts, bouquets, compound waters, powders, etc. LA FABRICATION DES LIQUEURS ET DES CONSERVES By J. de BREVANS Principal chemist at the Paris Municipal Laboratory. 1 vol. in-16, 320 pages, with 52 figures, hardback. . . 4 fr. Alcohol; distillation of wines and industrial spirits; purification and rectification; natural liqueurs; wine and fruit brandies; rum and tafia; grain brandies; artificial liqueurs; raw materials : essences, aromatic spirits, alcoholates, tinctures, alcoholatures, distilled waters, juices, syrups, coloring matters; liqueurs by distillation and infusion; liqueurs by essences; flavored wines and meads; punches; preserves; fruit brandies and fruit preserves; analysis and adulteration of spirits and liqueurs; legislation and trade. ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE LE PAPIERET LA TOILE, LA TERRE, LACIRE, LE VERRE ET LA PORCELAINE, LE BOIS, LES MÈTAUE Par H. de GRAFFIGNY 1 vol. in-16, de 365 pages, avec 395 figures, cartonné. . 1 fr. Cartonnages; papiers de tenture; encadrements; masques; brochage et reliure: Beurs artificielles; aérostats; feux d'artifices: modelage; moulage; gravure sur verre; peinture de vitraux; mosaiques: menuiserie; tour; découpage du bois; marquetry et placage: serrurerie; gravure en taille-douce; mécanique; électricité; galvanoplastie; horlogerie. L'ART DE L'ESSAYEUR Pare. RICHE worst tester at the Monnale de Parie. And E. GÉLIS ingénieur des Arts et Manufactures. 1 vol. in-16, 384 pages, with 91 figures, hardback. . . 1 fr. Principales opérations: fourneaux: vases; connaissances théoriques générales; agents et réactifs; argent; or; platinum; palladium: plomb; mercure; cuivre; étain; antimony; arsenic; níckel; cobalt; zinc; aluminium; fer MONNAIE, MÉDAILLES ET BIJOUX ESSAIET CONTROLE DES OUVRAGES D'OR ET D'ARGENT By A. RICHE Directeur des essais à la Monnaie de Paris 1 vol. in-16, 396 pages, with 66 figures, hardback. . . 4 fr. La monnaie à travers les âges; les systèmes monétaires: l'or et l'argent; extraction; affinage; fabrication des monnales; la fausse monnaie; les médailles et les bijoux jusqu'à la fin du XVIne siècle et sous le régime actuel; la garantie et le contrôle en France et à l'étranger. L'ÉLECTRICITÉ A LA MAISON By Julien LEFÈVRE Professor at the Nantes School of Science. 1 vol. in-16, 390 pages, with 20) figures, hardback . 4 fr. Production de l'électricité; piles; accumulateurs; machines dynamos; lampes á incandescence; régulateurs; bougies; allumoirs; sonneries; avertisseurs auto- matiques; horlogeries; reveille-matin; comptteurs d'électricité; téléphones et microphones; moteurs; locomotion électri que; bijoux; récréations électriques; paratonnerres. GNVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE CARACTÈRES ET MŒURS DES INSECTES CEASSE, PREPARATION ET CONSERVATION DES COLLECTIORS Par Ph. MONTILLOT Membre de la Société entomologique de France 1 vol. in-16, de 350 pages, avec 100 figures, cartonné.. . 4 fr. Organization of insects; history, geographical distribution and classification of insects; hunting and harvesting insects; utensils, traps and methods of capture; description, habits and habitat of Coleoptera, Orthoptera, Neuroptera; Hymenoptera, Lepidoptera, Hemiptera, Diptera; collections: storage and conservation. LA PISCICULTURE EN EAUX DOUCES By A. GOBIN Professeur départemental d'agriculture du Jura. 1 vol. in-16, 360 pages, with 93 figures, hardback. . . 4 fr. Fresh waters; fish; natural production; fish farming processes; lake exploitation; brackish waters; acclimatization of sea fish in fresh waters and vice versa; fauna of French freshwater fish. Mr. A. Gobin has brought together all the notions that are indispensable to those wishing to learn the practice of this reborn fish farming industry. He successively studies fish from the point of view of anatomy and physiology, which is brief but sufficient; then he reviews the environments in which fish must live, i.e. water in general and lakes in particular. Good chapters are devoted to the enemies and parasites of fish, their vegetable and animal foods, their habits, the circumstances of their reproduction, the changes in environment they can physiologically tolerate for more economical reproduction, etc. (Revue scientifique, August 19, 1889) GUIDE PRATIQUE DE L'ÉLEVAGE DU CHEVAL By L. RÉLIER Senior veterinarian at the Pompadour National Stud. 1 vol. in-16, 388 pages, with 128 figures, hardback . 4 fr. Organization and functions, exterior (regions, legs, proportions, movements, gaits, age, coats, signs, examination of horses for sale); hygiene (individual differences, hygienic agents, farriery), reproduction and breeding (art of mating). Mr. Relier has summarized, in a very concise and clear form, all the knowledge indispensable to the horseman. This book is intended for owners, farmers and stud grooms, who will find in it the information they constantly need to accomplish their tasks. --(La France chevaline. May 1, 1880). ENVOIFVANCO AGAINST A MANDATE ON THE COSTE. RECIPES FORMULAS AND PROCEDURES OF GENERAL USE AND DAILY APPLICATION By Professor A. HÉRAUD 1 vol. in-16, 366 pages, with 165 figures, hardback. . 4 fr. Electricity; machines; metals; wood; fabrics; dyeing; chemical products; goldsmiths; ceramics; glassmaking; decorative arts; graphic arts. LES SECRETS DE L'ÉCONOMIE DOMESTIQUE A LA VILLE ET A LA CAMPAGNE RECETTES FORMULES ET PROCÉDÉS D'UNE UTILITÉ GÉNÉRALE ET D'UNE APPLICATION JOURNALIÈRE By Professor A. HÉRAUD 1 vol. in-16, 384 pages, with 241 figures, hardback. . 4 fr. L'habitation; le chauffage; les meubles; le linge; les vêtements; la toilette, l'entretien; le nettoyage et la réparation des objets domestiques; les chevaux et les voitures; les animaux et les plantes d'appartements; la serre et le jardin, la destruction des animaux nuisibles. LES SEGRETS DE L'ALIMENTATION RECIPES, FORMULAS AND PROCEDURES OF GENERAL USE AND DAILY APPLICATION By Professor A. HÉRAUD 1 vol. in-16, 360 pages, with 150 figures, hardback. . 4 fr. Bread, meat, vegetables, fruit; water, wine, beer, liqueurs; the cellar, the kitchen, the pantry, the fruit store, the dining room, etc. These three works by Professor Héraud contain a wealth of information that could only be found by consulting a large number of different works. It's a little encyclopedia that has a rightful place in the industrialist's and practitioner's library. M. Horaud uses all the sciences to draw out the practical notions that can be useful. From there. recipes. formulas, advice of all kinds and an enumeration of "all the procedures applicable to the exćcution of the various operations that one may wish to tentur soi. FREE SHIPPING AGAINST A POSTAL MONEY ORDER. By D. BOIS Alde-naturalist of the culture chair at the Muséum. 1 vol. in-16, 352 pages, with 149 figures, hardback . 4 fr. Creation and maintenance of the small garden; instruments; soil; fertilizers; water: propagation; sowing; grafting; cuttings; tree pruning; the pleasure garden; the fruit garden; the vegetable garden; work month by month; plant diseases and pests. LES PLANTES D'APPARTEMENT By D. BOIS 1 vol. in-16, 360 pages, with 150 figures, hardback. . A fr. Palms, ferns, orchids, aquatic plants; baskets and bouquets; window plants; the winter garden; growing in pots; conserving plants in winter; choosing ornamental plants and shrubs according to their purpose, etc. LES ARBRES FRUITIERS By G. BELLAIR Professor at the Horticultural Society. 1 vol. in-16, 360 puges, with 100 figures, hardback . 4 fr. Cultivation equipment and methods; special crops; vines; pear trees, apple trees, peach trees, plum trees, cherry trees, etc.; restoration of fruit trees; preservation of fruit. LES MALADIES DE LA VIGNE ET LES MEILLEURS CÉPAGES FRANÇAIS ET AMÉRICAINS By J. BEL 1 vol. in-16, with 50 figures, hardback. . . . . . . . 4 fr. This small volume will certainly be consulted with profit by many readers, who are more or less directly interested in questions relating to viticulture. Alongside the author's personal studies, they will find important remarks by highly competent scholars, results obtained in the ćcoles départementales de viticulture, as well as those of essaís made at the most eminent winegrowers in the south of France. In addition, this very substantial work contains numerous figures depicting the appearance of the main vine diseases and the main grape varieties; the latter, which are highly interesting, are exact reproductions of photographs. (Revue scientifique, December 2, 1889). - ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE Par E. GUYOT Agronome éleveur, 1 vol. in-16, de 344 pages, avec 146 figures, cartonné.. . A fr. Anatomy, physiology and functions of domestic animals; utilization; economic value; horses, cattle, sheep, pigs; breeds, feeding, breeding, improvement, diseases, housing; dogs and cats; chickens, turkeys, pigeons, ducks, geese, rabbits, bees. The aim of this book is to be of service to practitioners who are unable to engage in lengthy research due to lack of time and books, and who wish to find all the facts they need brought together and condensed. (Journal d'ayriculture, December 10, 1889) Summarizing all that is known about our different species of domestic animals and their many breeds, their anatomy, physiology, hygiene, diseases, etc., was a difficult task; the book could therefore be very usefully placed in rural libraries. (L'Élcveur, December 15, 1889) CONSTRUCTIONS AGRICOLES ET ARCHITECTURE RURALE By J. BUCHARD Agricultural engineer i vol. in-16, 392 pages, with 143 figures, hardback. . 4 fr. Building materials; preparation and use; dwellings; rural hygiene, stables, sheepfolds, pigsties, barnyards, barns, grain and fodder warehouses, dairies, vats, presses, silkworms, fountains, drinking troughs, cisterns, agricultural hydraulic pumps; drainage; general layout of buildings, alignments, common ownership and easements; estimates and cost prices. L'INDUSTRIE LAITIÈRE LE LAIT, LE BEURRE ET LE FROMAGE PArE, FERVILLE Agronomic chemist i vol. in-16, 334 pages, with 87 figures, hardback. . 1 fr. Le lait; essayage; vente: lait condensé; le beurre; la crème; système Swartz, tcrémeuses centrifuges; barattage; dèlaitage mécanique; margarine; fromages frais et affinés, fromages pressés et cuits; construction des laiteries; compta- bilité; enseignement. ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE A LA VILLE ET A LA CAMPAGNE L'USAGE DES FAMILLES, DES MAISONS D'ÉDUCATION, DES ÉCOLES COMMUNALAS, DES CURÉS, DES SŒURS HOSPITAIIÈRES, DES DAMES DE CHARITÉ ET DE TOUTES PERSONNES BIENFAISANTES QUI DÉVOUENT AU SOULAGEMENT DES MALADES By Dr. A.-C. de SAINT-VINCENT Ninth edition, revised and corrected. 1 vol. in-16, 448 pages, with 142 figures, hardback. . 4 fr. Remedies on hand; first aid before the arrival of the doctor and surgeon; art of caring for the sick and convalescents. This book is the result of fifteen years of practice in the country and the city. In writing it, the author's aim was to put it into the hands of the kind-hearted people who devote themselves to the relief of our physical miseries. who often live far from a doctor or pharmacist, and who are called upon not only to give consolation, but also advice, a completely elementary and practical work, a sure guide to the care to be given to the sick and convalescents In town as in the country, we don't always have the doctor near us, or at least as soon as we would like; often we even neglect to seek his care for a simple indisposition, in the first days of an illness. To obviate these inconveniences, the author has given a description of common illnesses; he has explained their symptoms and followed them with the appropriate treatment, carefully avoiding the complicated formulas that only doctors know how to apply. FIRST AID FOR ACCIDENTS AND SUDDEN ILLNESSES BY DRS E. FERRAND and A. DELPECH Former intern at Paris Hospitals. Member of the Académie de médecine. Third edition. 1 vol. in-16, 342 pages, with 86 figures, hardback. . . 4 fr. Les empoisonnés, les noyés, les asphyxiés, les blessés de la rue, de l'usine et de l'atelier; les maladies à invasion soudite; les premiers symptômes de maladies contagieuses. LA PRATIQUE DE L'HOMÉOPATHIE SIMPLIFIÉE By A. ESPANET Third edition. 1 vol. in-16, 440 pages, hardback. . . . . . . . . 4 fr. Signs and nature of diseases; homeopathic treatment; prophylaxis; administration of medicines; care of the sick and convalescents. DESCRIPTION OF FISH, FISHING TACKLE, LINES, BAITS AND BAITS. APPATS, PÈCHE A LA LIGNE, PÊCHES DIVERSES, NASSES, FILETS By Arnould LOCARD 1 vol. in-18, 352 p., with 174 fig. ... . INSECT PESTS HISTORY AND LEGISLATION . 4 fr. LES FORÉTS, LES CÉRÉALES ET LA GRANDE CULTURE, LA VIGNE, LE VERGER ET LE JARDIN FRDITIER, LE POTAGER, LE JARDIN D'ORNEMENT, A LA MAISON By Louis MONTILLOT Memb̀re of the Entomological Society of France. 1 vol. in-18, 306 p., with 156 fig. ... . 4 fr. LE GAZ ET SES APPLICATIONS ÉCLAIRAGE, CHAUFFAGE, FORCE MOTRICE By E. de MONTSERRAT and E. BRISAC Engineers of the Compagnie parisienne du gaz. 1 vol. in-18, 336 p., with 86 figs ... ... . 4 fr. LA MACHINE A VAPEUR MACHINES TYPES, MACHINES A GRANDE VITESSE, MACHINES LOCOMOBILES, MACHINES ROTATIVES ET TURBO-MOTEURS MACHINES COMPACTES By Aimé WITZ Ingénieur des Arts et manufactures 1 vol. in-18, 324 p., with 80 fig. . . "4 fr. ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE CARACTÉRES, FALSIFICATIONS ET ESSAIS DES HUILES, BEURRES, GRAISSES, SUIFS ET CIRES Par G. BEAUVISAGE Professeur agrégé à la Faculté de médecine de Lyon 1 vol. in-16, 350 p., avec figures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 fr. LA PRATIQUE DES ESSAIS COMMERCIAUX ET INDUSTRIELS I. MINERAL MATERIALS. - II. MATIÈRES ORGANIQUES Par G. HALPHEN Chimiste au Laboratoire du ministere du Commerce 2 vol. in-16, avec figures. Price each. 4 fr. LE MATÉRIEL AGRICOLE MACHINES, INSTRUMENTS, TOOLS EMPLOYED IN PETITE ET LA GRANDE CULTURE. By J. BUCHARD Agricultural engineer 1 vol. in-16, 384́ pages, with 112 figures... ... ... ... . 4 fr. LES ENGRAIS. ET LA FERTILISATION DU SOL Par Albert LARBALETRIER Professeur de chimie agricole et industrielle à l'École d'agriculture 1 vol. in-16, 352 pages avcc 74 figures... ... ... . 4 fr LA PLUME DES OISEAUX HISTOIRE NATURELLE ET INDUSTRIE By LACROIX-DANLIARD 1 vol. in-16. 368 p., with 94 figures ... ... ... . 4 fr. LA PISCICULTURE EN EAUX SALÉES LES EAUX SALÉES. LES POISSONS, REPRODUCTION NATURELLE POISSONS MIGRATEURS ET SÉDENTAIRES, ÉTANGS SALÉS, RESERVOIRS ET VIVIERS HOMARDS ET LANGOUSTES, MOULES ET HUITRES By A. GOBIN Professeur départemental d'agriculture du Jura 1 vol. in-18, 353 p., with 105 fig. ... ... ... ... .... 4 fr. ENVOY FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE ET DE MAGNÉTISME CONVRENART LES APPLICATIONS AUX SCIENCES, AUX ARTS ET A L'INDUSTRIE Par Julien LEFEVRE Agrégé des sciences physiques Avec la collaboration de professeurs, d'ingénieurs et d'électriciens Introduction par M. BouTy Professeur à la Faculté des sciences de Paris IIn volume grand in-8 à deux colonnes d'environ 1000 pages avec environ 1125 figures intercalées dans le le lexte . The Dictionnaire d'Electricité et de Magnétisme is a veritable. . . 25 fr. electrical encyclopedia, in which the reader will find a complete exposition of the principles accepted today, as well as descriptions of all applications. Particular attention has been paid to the many applications of electricity and magnetism to industry and railroads. The Dictionnaire d'Electricité et de Magnetisme, composed and printed in its entirety in less than eighteen months, and written immediately after the 1829 Universal Exhibition, is the only work of its kind to keep abreast of the most recent discoveries, and to describe the devices and applications that have recently been produced, both in France and abroad. NOUVEAU DICTIONNAIRE DE CHIMIE COMPRENANT Les anplications aux Sciences, aux Aris, à l'Agriculture et à l'Industrie A L'USAGE DES INDUSTRIELS, DES FABRICANTS DE PRODCITS CHIMIQUES DES AGRICULTEURS, DES MEDECINS. DES PHARMACIENS, DES LABORATOIRES MUNICIPAUX DE L'ÉCOLE CENTRALE, DE L'ÉCOLE DES MINES, DES ÉCOLES DE CHIMIE, ETC. ar Émile BOUANT Agrégé des sclences physiques, professeur au Iycée Charlemagne Avec une introduction par M. TROOST (de l'Institut) 1889, 1 volume in-8 de 116) pages, avec 650 figures. The author has confined himself to the field of practical chemistry... ... 25 fr. The preparations, properties and analysis of common compounds are described with the necessary developments. Industrial processes are described in such a way as to give a precise idea of methods and apparatus. It was necessary, while remaining scientific, to free the facts from over-specialized terms and hypothetical theories. The author has overcome both these difficulties. The style is elegantly precise and the developments are proportional to the practical importance of the subject. On every page, you'll find information on the applications of various bodies that you'd have to look for in a hundred special treatises, which are rarely to hand. This work therefore has the advantage of presenting a complete picture of the current state of science. ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE COURS DE TRAVAUX PRATIQUES Par E. JUNGFLEISCH Professeur au Conservatoire des arts et métiers à l'École supérieure de pharmacie de Paris 1 vol. in-8 de 1240 pages avec 372 figures, cart. ... ... . 25 fr. M. Jungfleisch's treatise will serve as a guide for all schools wishing to organize chemistry experiments. Here is an outline of the subjects covered: Book I. - General instruments and procedures. Book II. - Studies of chemical elements and compounds. This part is made up of the operations taught during the first year of study; these operations are preparations of mineral or organic substances and experiments designed to reveal the general properties of simple or compound bodies. They are based on facts chosen in such a way as to provide the student with the greatest possible amount of theoretical and practical knowledge. The first chapter is devoted to metalloids and the compounds they form. The second deals with metals and their combinations with metalloids and other metals. The third chapter deals with organic substances. Book III. - Analysis. The author explains in detail the practical methods usually adopted, and enables the student who has followed the series of exercises indicated to carry out regularly and accurately any of the procedures recommended in the special works. In the same spirit, second-year manipulations have been introduced. After the necessary indications for qualitative analysis, both inorganic and organic, Book III describes the procedures for quantitative analysis, either by weighing or by volumetric methods. As the examples have been chosen from among the most interesting bodies, the main subjects of analytical chemistry are examined. MANIPULATIONS DE PHYSIQUE COURS DE TRAVAUX PRATIQUES Par Henri BUIGNET Professeur de physique à l'École supcricure de pharmacie de Paris 1 vol. gr. in-8 de-783 pages, avec 265 fig. et pl. color, cart. 16 fr. ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE LE LAIT ÉTUDES CHIMIQUES ET MICROBIOLOGIQUES Par DUCLAUX Protesseur à la Faculté des sciences de París. i vol. in-16 de 336 pages, avec figures. . . . . . 3 fr. 60 LES THÉORIES ET LES NOTATIONS DE LA CHIMIE MODERNE Far Antoine de SAPORTA Introduction par C. FRIEDEL, membre de l'Institut 1 vol. in-16. . . LA COLORATION DES VINS 3 fr. 50 PAR LES COULEURS DE LA HOUILLE. MÈTHODES ANALYTIQUES ET MARCHE SYSTÉMATIQUE POUR RECONNAITRE LA NATURE DE LA COLORATION PAr P. CAZENEUVE Professeur à la Faculté de Lyon. 1 vol. in-16, with 1 plate . 3 fr. 50 FERMENTS ET FERMENTATIONS BIOLOGICAL STUDY OF FERMENTS. ROLE OF FERMENTATIONS IN NATURE AND INDUSTRY By LéOn GARNIER Professeur à la Faculté de Nancy. i vol. in-16, with 65 figures. ... . L'ALCOOL 3 fr. 50 AU POINT DE VUE CHIMIQUE, AGRICOLE, INDUSTRIEL, HYGIÉNIQUE ET FISCAL By A. LARBALETRIER Professor at the Pas-de-Calais School of Agriculture. 1 vol. in-16, with 62 figures. ... . 3 fr. 50 ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE L'HOMME ET LES ANIMAUX By A.-E. BREHM DESCRIPTIOR POPULAIRE DES RACES HUMAINES ET DU RÈGNE ANIMGAL CARACTÈRES, MŒURS, INSTINCTS, HABITUDES ET RÉGIIE CHASSES. COMBATS, CAPTIVITY, DOMESTICITY, ACCLIMATATION, USAGE AND PRODUCE 10 large in-8 volumes, each 800 pages long, with about 8,00o figures interspersed in the text and 176 plates printed outside the text on tinted paper... . . . 110 fr. Each volume sold separately Paperback... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 11 fr. Bound in half-chagrin, cloth boards, gilt edges... . 16 fr. LES RACES HUMAINES ÉDITION FRANÇAISEPAR R. VERNEAU 1 vol. gr. in-8, with 500 figures. . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 fr. LES MAMMIEÈRES FRENCH EDITION BY Z. GERBE 2 vol. gr. in-8, with 770 figures and 40 plates . . . 22 fr. - LES OISEAUX ÉDITION FRANÇAISE PAR Z. GERBE 2 vol. gr. in-8, with 500 figures and 40 plates. . . 22 fr. LES REPTILES ET LES BATRACIENS PRANÇAISE EDITION PAR E. SAUVAGE 1 vol. gr. in-8, with 600 figures and 20 plates. . . 11 fr. LES POISSONS ET LES CRUSTACÉS FRENCH EDITION, BY E. SAUVAGE ET J. KUNCKEL D'HERCULAIS 1 vol. gr. in-8 of 750 p. with 524 figures and 20 plates. 11 fr. LES INSECTES LES MYRIAPODES, LES ARACHNIDES PRANÇAISE EDITION PAR J. KUNCKEL D''HERCULAIS 2 vol. gr. in-8, with 2060 figures and 36 plates. . . 22 fr. LES VERS, LES MOLLUSQUES LES ÉCHINODERMES, LES ZOOPHYTES, LES PROTOZOAIRES ET LES ANIMAUX DES GRANDES PROFONDEURS FRENCH EDITION BY A.-T. DE ROCHEBRUNE 1 vol. gr. in-8, with 1200 figures and 20 plates. ... . 11 fr. ENV IFRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT SUR LA POSTE G. DALLET - LE MONDE VU PAR LES SAVANTS DU XIXe SIÈCLE Illustrated with 800 figures A splendid volume of 1100 pages gr. in-8 with two columns Paperback, in art cover.... . . . . . 18 fr. Hardback, gilt edges ... . . . . . . 22 fr. At a time when France has just celebrated the marvelous progress of its industry, it would be unfair not to associate with this triumph of engineers and industrialists the illustrious scientists to whose work we owe the countless conquests that science has made during the century that is drawing to a close, and which is truly the century of science. The world we live in offers us a marvellous spectacle; day by day better studied and better known, it presents itself to us with its varied tableaux which provoke our admiration and whose hitherto impenetrable secrets modern scientists have uncovered, thanks to the admirable working instruments which have unleashed their power of investigation. We thought it best to give the floor to the masters themselves, and let them explain their discoveries in their own magnificent language, which bears the stamp of their powerful individuality as well as their luminous and persuasive conviction. Le Monde vu par les sarants (The World Seen by Sarants) is aimed at all those, young and old, who are curious about things natural, who seek sweet joys and true emotions in serious reading, and at those who have no positive notion of the history of our globe; it will bring profit and pleasure, amusing instruction and instructive amusement; it will exercise the active curiosity of childhood; it will be a subject of meditation for mature age; placed within everyone's reach, it will spread the salutary lessons of science throughout the family home. The figures, sown in profusion and, so to speak, on every page, are the work of our best artists; they are the living commentary of the paintings that unfold before the reader. This encyclopaedia, in which true luxury of execution is combined with unusual affordability, constitutes both a rich album and an interesting book, which speaks to both the mind and the eyes, serious enough to instruct, original enough to charm. - SENT FRANCO AGAINST A MONEY ORDER ON THE POST Feb. i820 Lyon. - Imo PHIRAT AINÉ, A. Rey Succr. - 3195 Les variations de la personnalité, par les Dee Bourru et BuRor. 1 vol. in-16, with 15 fig......................... 3 fr. 20 La suggestion mentale, par les Dre BOURRU et BUROT. 1 vol. in-16. with fo fig......................... 3 fr. 50 Le cerveau et l'activité cérébrale, by Al. HERZEN, professor at the Lausanne Academy. 1 vol. in-16.............. 3 fr. 50 Le monde des rêves, by Max SIMON. 1 vol. in-16.. 3 fr. 50 Le génie, la raison, la folie, by L.-F. LeLur. 1 v. in-16 3 fr. 50 Fous et bouffons, by P. Moreau (de Tours). 1 v. in-16. 3 fr. 50 HYGIÈNE Le végétarisme et le régime végétarien rationnel, by De BoxNEJOY. 1 vol. n-16............... . 3 fr. 50 L'hygiène à Paris, by Dr. O. DU MESniL. 1 vol. in-16. 3 fr. 50 Les exercices du corps, by E. COUVREUR. 1 v. in-16.. 3 fr. 50 Le surmenage intellectuel et les exercices physiques, by De A. RIANT. 1 vol. in-16......................... 3 fr. 50 L'hygiène à l'école, pédagogie scientifique, by Dr. A. COLLINAU. 1 vol. in-16, with 50 fig..................... 3 fr. 50 La vie du soldat, by Dr RAVENEZ. 1 vol. in-16,40fig. 3 fr. 50 Nervosisme et névroses. Hygiène des énervés et des névropathes, by D' CULLERRE. 1 vol. in-16........... 3 fr. 50 Les nouvelles institutions de bienfaisance, by Dr. A. FOVILLE. 1 vol. in-16, with 10 pl.......................... 3 fr. 50 L'alcoolisme, by D' BERGERET. 1 vol. in-16........ 3 fr. 50 Le cuivre et le plomb, dans l'alimentation et l'industrie, by A. GAUTIER (from the Instiut). 1 vol. in-16................ 3 fr. 50 L'examen de la vision, by De BARTHÉLEMY. 1 vol. in-16, with fig. and pl. col....................................3 fr. 50 Hygiène de l'esprit, by Dr RÉVEILLÉ-PARISE. 1 v.in-16. 3 fr. 50 Hygiene des gens du monde, by Al. DONNÉ. 1 vol. in-16. 3 fr. 50 Hygiène des orateurs, hommes politiques, magistrats, prédicateurs, professeurs, by Dr RIANT. 1 vol. in-16.... 3 fr. 50 Hygiène de la vue, by Drs.

GALEZOWSKIand KOPFF. 1 vol. in-16. with fig.........................................3 fr. 50 MEDECINE Les microbes pathogènes, par Ch. Boucuanp, (de l'Institut), pro- fesseur a la Facuité de Paris. 1 vol. in-16...... 3 fr. 50 Les morphinomanes, by D' GUIMBAH.. 1 vol. in-i6.. 3 fr. 50 Le secret médical, by P. BROUARDEL. 1 vol. in-16... 3 fr. 50 Madness in Paris, by Dr. Paul Garrier. 1 vol. in-16. 3 fr. 50 Les frontières de la folie, by D' GULLERRE 1 vol. in-16. 3 fr. 50 La folie chez les enfants, by Dr Paul Moreau (de Tours) 1 vol. in-i6...........................................3 fr. 50 Les irresponsables devant la justice, by Dr A. RIANT. 1 vol. in-16........................................... 3 fr. h0 Microbes et maladies, by Dr J. SCHMIDT, professeur á la Faculté de Nancv. 1 vot in-16, with 24 figs.................. 3 fr 50 Goutte et rhumatismes, by Dr Ré VEIllé-PARISE. 1vol.in-16 3 fr. 50 Les pansements modernes, by Dr Al ph. GUÉRIN. 1 vol. in-16, with fig......................................... 3 fr. 50 ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT POSTAL 4 AER.I NOUVELLE COLLECT. OF IN-18 VOLUMES. I4) INCLUDING 400 PAGES, ILLUSTRATED WITH FIGURES AND CARDBOARDS 50 VOLUMES ARE ON SALE AND TRADES MANUPACTURING INDUSTRY, ENGINEERING ART, CH-MIE, ELECTRICITY The Practice of Commercial and Industrial Trials, by G. HaIPHEN. 2 vols. in-18, each 350 p., with fig. Each vol. 4 fr. Le gaz et ses applications, éclairage, chauffage, force motrice, by B. de MoNT-StRRAT and E. BRISAC. 1 vol. in-18, 86 figs. cart. A fr. La machine à vapeur, by A. WIrz. 1 vol. in-18, with 80 fig. 3 cart. ... ..............................4 fr. Les matières grasses, by G. BEAUVISACE. 1 vol. in-18, with 50 figs, cart. .......................4ff. Bird feathers, by LACROIX-DANLIARD. 1 vol. in-18, with 100 dg., cart. Le poil des anímaux et les fourrures, by LACROIX-DANLIARD. 1 vol. in-18 with 100 figs. cart . ............ À fr. ......................4 fr. La fabrication des liqueurs et des conserves, by De BRevaNs, from the Laboratoire municipal. 1 vol. in-18, with figs, cart..... 4 fr. La soie, au point de vue scientifique et industriel, by L. ViGNoN. 1 vol. in-13 of 370 p., with 81 figs, cart. Histoire des parfums et hygiène de la toilette, by S. PIESSE. vol. in-18 of 372 p.. with 78 figs, cart. ...... 4 fr. Chimie des parfums et fabrication des savons, by S. PIESSE. 1 vol. in-18 of 360 p., with 80 figs, cart........ . ...... á fr. Les matières colorantes et la chimie de la teinture, by C.-E. TASSART. 1 vol. in-18, with figs, cart. ............4 fr. L'industrie de la teinture, by C.-L. TASSART. 1 vol. in-18 of 328 p. with 55 figs, cart. ............... 4 fr. ...........................4 fr. Les industries d'amateurs, by H. DE GRATFIGNY. 1 vol. in-18, with 395 figs, cart Les secrets de la science et de l'industrie, recettes, formules et ........... 4 fr. procédés d'une utilité générale, et d'une application journalière, by A. HÉRAUD. 1 vol. in-18, with 163 figs, cart.....4 fr. L'électricité à la maison, by Julien LErÈVRE. 1 vol. in-18, with ...................................... 4 fr. 209 fig. cart. L'art de l'essaieur, by A. RiCHE, director of testing at the Monvaie de Paris 1 vol. in-18, with 94 figs. cart.......... 4 fr. Monnaie, médailles et hijoux, essai et contròle, by A. RICHE. 1 vol. in-18, with 200 figs, cart.............................4 fr. ÉCONOMIE RURALE AGRICBLTURE, VITICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, ÉLEVAGE Les plantes d'appartement et les plantes de fenètres, par D. Bois. aide naturaliste au Muséum, Ivol. in-18, with 150 figs, cart. 4 fr. Le petit jardin, by D. Bois. 1 vol. in-18 with 150 figs Cart. 4 fr. Les arbres fruitiers, by G. BELLAIR. 1 vol. in-18, with 100 figs. Cart.............................................4 fr. ENVOI FRARCO CONTRE UN MANDAT POSTAL 12 Le vin et la pratique de la vinification, by V. Camson. 1 vol. in-18, with 100 fig. Cart..............................4 fr. L'Essai commercial des vins, by J. DUJARDIN. 1 vol. in-18, with 100 figs. Cart......................................... 4 fr. La pêche et les poissons d'eau douce, by A. LOCARD. 1 vol. in-18, with 174 figs. Cart..................................4fr La pisciculture en eaux douce, by A. GOBIN, professor of agriculture. 1 vol. in-18, with 100 figs. Cart............4en La pisciculture en eaux salées, by A. GORIN. 1 vol. in-18, with fig. Cart............................................4 fr. Nouveau manuel de médecine vétérinaire homœopathique, by F.-A GUNTHER and J. PROST-LACUZON. 1 vol. in-18 jésus. Cart. 4 fr. Les maladies de la vigne et les meilleurs cépages, by Jules BEL. 1 vol. in-18, with 100 figs. Cart.......................4 fr. L'amateur d'insectes, by L. MoNTiLlor. 1 vol. in-18 with 130 figs. Cart............................................4fr. Les insectes nuisibles, by L. MoNTIlloT. 1 vol. in-18, fig. cart. 4 fr. Constructions agricoles et architecture rurale, by J. BUCRARD. 1 vol. in- 8. with 143 figs. Cart......................4 fr. Le matériel agricole, by J. BUCHARD. 1 vol. in-18. Cart.. 4 fr. L'industrie laitière, le lait, le heurre et le fromage, by FERVILLE. 1 vol. in-18, with 87 figs. Cart.......................4 fr. Guide pratique de l'élevage du cheval, by L. RelieR. 1 vol. in-18, with 128 figs. Cart....................................4 fr. Les animaux de la ferme, by E. GuYor. 1 vol. in-18, with 180 Hig. Cart.................................... 4 fr. Les engrais, by A. LARBALÉTRIER. 1 vol. in-18. Cart..... 4 fr. ÉCONOMIE DOMESTIQUE HYGIÈNE ET MÉDECINE USUELLES Le pain et la viande, by J. DE BREVANS. 1 vol. in-18 with 8n figs Cart......................................... 4 fr. Les légumes et les fruits, by J. DE BREVANS. 1 vol. in-18 jésus, with "O fig. Cart...........................4 fr. Les secrets de l'économie domestique, by Professor A. HÉRAUD. 1 vol. in-18, with 281 figs. Cart.......................4fr. Les secrets de l'alimentation, par le professeur A. HÉRAUD. 1 vol. in-18. with fig. Cart.................4 fr. Nouvelle médecine des familles, by Dr De SAINT-VINCENT. Ninth edition. 1 vol. in-18, with 142 figs Cart.......4 fr. La gymnastique et les exercices physiques, by Drs LEBLoND and BouvieR. 1 vol in-18, with 80 figs Cart..............4 fr. Physiologie et hygiène des écoles, by J.-C. DALTON. 1 vol. in-18, with 68 figs. Cart....................................4 fr. Conseils aux mères sur la manière d'élever les enfants, by Dr. A. DONNÉ. Seventh edition. 1 vol. in-18. Cart......... 4 fr. Premiers secours en cas d'accidents et d'indispositions subites, by E FERRAND and A. DELPECH. 1 vol. in-18, with fig. Cart. 4 fr. La pratique de l'homœopathie simplifiée, by A. EsPaner. Third edition. 1 vol. in-18. Cart..................... 4 fr. ENVOI FRANCO CONTRE UN MANDAT POSTAL 6)