potagère (petite et grande culture)/ by). Dybowski,.... 1895. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the BnF collections. Their reuse is governed by the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: -The non-commercial reuse of this content, or in the context of an academic or scientific publication, is free of charge, provided that it complies with current legislation, and in particular that the source of the content is mentioned as follows: "Source gallica.bnf.fr /Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF ". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates income: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the general code of public property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are -reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. Reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 7/ To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation. commercialeobnf.fl. K TRAITÉ Lultute Potagèze (PETITE ET GRANDE CULTURE) Avec 115 figures dans le texte DEUXIÈME EDITION REVUE ET CORRIGÉE I 1. MASSON. PUBLISHER 120. BOULEVARD SAINT-GERMAIN Source gallica.bnt.fr / Blbliothèque natlonale de France TRAITÉ DE CULTURE POTAGERE 2 8445-94. - CORBEIL. Imprimerie Ép. CRÉTÍ. CULTURE POTAGERE (PETITE ET GRANDE CULTURE) 1.M PAR DYBOWSKI PROFESSEUR A L'INSTITUT NATIONAL AGRONOMIQUE A ANCIEN MAITRE DE CONFÉRENCES D'HORTICULTURE L'ÉCOLE NATIONALE D'AGRICULTURE DE GRIGNON Avec 115 figures dans le texte. DEUXIÈME ÉDITION REVUE ET CORRIGÉE PARIS G. MASSON, ÉDITEUR 120, BOULEVARD SAINT-GERMAIN 1895 r. .. .. .. ... .. D. . . . . - ". AI . ...."  The book I am presenting to growers today grew out of the lessons I was asked to give at the École Nationale d'Agriculture in Grignon. It seems to me to fill a gap and to meet a real need; indeed, for some years now, there has been a great deal of concern about the powerful help that agriculture can find in vegetable production. A large number of brochures and special notes have been written on this important subject; vegetable horticulture, under the welcome influence of these writings and thanks to the support of Horticultural Societies and the exhibitions they organize every year, has entered an era of new prosperity. It was useful to bring together the documents published to date and to show the progress made; this is what I have tried to do. For the crop descriptions, I've adopted alphabetical order, which facilitates research. In addition, I have designated plants by their most commonly used names, so as to make this book accessible to everyone; it is aimed at the amateur as well as the professional gardener and farmer. I have endeavored to show all the practices in use, stripping them of all bias. Finally, wherever possible, I have highlighted the advantages of large-scale cultivation and commercial seed production. It remains for me to thank all those who, breaking with the blind routine that made horticultural processes a kind of mystery, have not hesitated to reveal the secrets of their cultivation for the publicity of this book. The progress to which they have thus contributed will be their best reward. Finally, I would like to express my most sincere thanks to Messrs. de Vilmorin, who have so graciously made available to us a number of their fine photographs of the best vegetable varieties. JEAN DYBOWSKI. The new edition has been completely revised. Indeed, while the general principles remain the same, the methods are being perfected and it is important to record these improvements. As commodity prices change, we have had to revise and establish them as they are today. Where appropriate, we have included notes on vegetable growing in the French colonies we visited ourselves. Finally, we have added a new crop to the already long list of plants enumerated above, that of the Epiaires à chapelets (Crosnes), which should henceforth be considered as a common vegetable. J. D. . . U . . - VEGETABLE GROWING FOREWORD Vegetable growing encompasses all forms of vegetable production, whatever their point of view. The amateur, the owner, or simply the momentary holder of the smallest piece of land, thinks, if he has a practical mind, not only of obtaining from his garden some pleasant flowers, but also vegetables which, for him, will have this inappreciable value of having come under his eyes, under his hand, by his own care. He sowed them himself, he cared for them, and it's only natural that he should appreciate the value of his efforts in producing them. The amateur is a powerful helper of horticulture as a whole. At first, he cultivates his own little patch of land, giving it assiduous but often inexperienced care. Gradually, these first attempts, in which he was partly successful, gave him a taste for a closer look at things; he picked up special publications, studied them and DYBOWSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. studies them, comments on them. He became very strong, he knew the trade; he knew that the land can produce a lot when you help it a little. As a result, not content with following the beaten path, he soon began experimenting with new methods, or even cultivating plants that had not been used much or at all until then. He studied these innovations, saw what could be gained from them, and finally formulated a clear-cut approach to their use. From now on, he has rendered the art of horticulture an immense service; for the professional grower cannot, not even the right to spend his time experimenting, he must follow a clear path and only commit his capital wisely. The amateur has prepared the way, and the grower will follow it if it proves to be the right one. From this point of view, and without even taking into account the service he renders to himself, the amateur's role is of inestimable importance. He is the researcher, the often happy introducer of new plants, which the grower will then exploit, when trials have shown them to offer some serious advantages. The amateur will find in our book precise information on what has been done; he will deduce from it what remains to be done. Professional growers, those who produce vegetables exclusively, belong to two very different categories: the market gardener on the one hand, and the actual grower on the other. The market-gardener, this artist of cultivation, cultivates a small area of land; but thanks to the powerful machinery at his disposal, the relatively considerable capital he puts at his disposal, and above all his understanding of cultivation and his constant hard work, he knows how to extract from the soil all that it can yield. It's from his garden, or factory as it were, that all those remarkable vegetables emerge which, most often produced in or near Paris, are consumed all over Europe. The annual export figure for market garden vegetables outside the frontier reaches the enormous sum of several million. For the market gardener, there is no season; activity reigns in his garden at all times, and fresh vegetables are constantly being produced. But how much care and resources he needs! Manure and water are the most active. Manure, of which he uses a few hundred cubic meters every year, is not only used as fertilizer; on the contrary, that's only its secondary role. Its primary use is to produce a certain amount of artificial heat through fermentation, which is why market gardeners use it in the construction of their beds. Placed in regular heaps, suitably packed, then watered, it ferments, and this fermentation, depending on the size of the mass, produces a variable amount of heat, which the market gardener can foresee in advance. To store this heat, he uses cloches or frames fitted with chests. No sooner has one crop been completed than another is planted in its place, and often several crops are planted simultaneously on the same plot of land. It is only under these conditions that he can make the soil produce eight or ten crops in the course of a year (fig. 1). Water is one of his most powerful aids; he waters constantly, and when the summer heat comes on, he pours it on in torrents. It must -. I . there must always be a close relationship between the quantity of manure used and the quantity of water poured into the watering= View of a market garden in Paris. -I 3 wise. Fertilizer can only be assimilated if it is soluble, so no matter how much you smoke, if you leave the soil to drought, the manure will remain inactive. Conversely, if you water the soil, you are obliged to smoke abundantly, as this would quickly exhaust the soil, rendering its nutrients soluble. It is generally thought and said that vegetables watered and then smoked abundantly lose their flavor and nutritive properties. This is an error that a simple examination of the facts will invalidate. In fact, we know that in plant tissue, made up of vessels, fibers and cells, it is almost exclusively in these latter elements that the principles useful for nutrition develop. However, whenever plants are pushed to great and rapid development, cellular production is exaggerated. The ratio of fibers to cells becomes lower, and the organoleptic properties of the plant are correspondingly enhanced. What market gardeners produce is therefore well made, and it's with good reason that their products always have a higher value on the market. In more ways than one, they are our masters in vegetable growing, and there's a lot to take from them. However, they have everything to gain by reading special books, because while it's good to follow the path laid out, we must also be wary of falling into a rut. Experimental and scientific methods are especially valuable when applied by skilled practitioners. Once again, strength lies in umon. But the market gardener, because of the environment in which he finds himself, the expensive rent he has to pay, the equipment he has to match, can only grow plants that are demanding even if they have to be, but in any case evolve rapidly. He has the right to grow early crops. But it's not enough to live on early vegetables, which are often the privilege of the rich, and you have to produce large vegetables for everyday consumption. It's the farmer's job to produce them. The farmer farms the plains around the big cities; he smokes his fields, but most of the time he doesn't water them, relying on the rains to help his crops. The expanse of land over which he cultivates makes watering by hand impossible; under certain conditions, however, he makes use of the water he distributes through canals, by means of which he irrigates his fields. This is the case of farmers who use sewage water, which has given the best results wherever it has been used. The farmer obtains a considerable yield from the soil, less than that obtained by market gardeners, but his cultivation costs are lower and his profit is still sufficient to support him and his family. Finally, there's the agrieulteur, owner or farmer, who always grows vegetables in a more or less extensive kitchen garden, to provide food for his staff. In many circumstances, he can and must go even further. These days, people complain bitterly about the difficult situation facing agri-business. Its products have to contend with those imported from abroad, which are produced more cheaply and sold more cheaply. Certainly, in many circumstances, the farmer's situation is made difficult; but isn't it also sometimes his fault? Why, where economic circumstances mean that cereal production is no longer sufficient, does he insist on growing cereals exclusively? Wouldn't it be better to know how to modify his cultivation system, adapting it to the requirements of the moment? Certainly, in the present state of affairs, industrial crops are a powerful auxiliary, and among them, vegetable crops are among those that give the most assured results. They have the invaluable advantage over tree crops of paying for themselves in the short term, and therefore only committing capital for a very limited time. With fruit trees, you have to wait and take many risks; with vegetables, you harvest a few months after sowing. People object to the difficulty of outlets and transport. This reason is of little value. Fruits are more difficult to transport than vegetables, yet huge quantities of various fruits are exported every year. What's more, vegetables come in many forms; it's simply a question of knowing how to choose them to suit the circumstances. In the vicinity of large cities, all vegetables are good to grow, as transport is short; further afield, the choice will naturally fall on those that offer greater resistance to wilting. If, finally, means of transport become difficult, value will be concentrated in a small volume, and seed production will become an important industry. There is room everywhere for industrial vegetable growing; by spreading it, we'll be showing patriotism by improving people's diet, which in many respects still leaves much to be desired. Often, a farmer's vegetable production can even become a real market garden. The main cost of a market gardener's crop is the purchase of manure, which serves more as heating than fertilizer. He buys this fresh manure, and sells it once it has lost its ability to ferment and therefore produce heat; but there's a huge difference between the purchase price and the selling price; this difference is roughly equal to a third of the total value, and simply represents the cost of the heat used. Now, the farmer is a manure producer; if, instead of grinding this manure, he used it in the beds and then returned it to the field, he would save the price of the heat, which would cost him absolutely nothing. In fact, recent experiments have clearly shown that manure used in layers remains as rich as if it had been placed in millstones, as the plants do not draw on the manure in the layer, and evaporation is reduced as a result of covering with frames. We hope that these considerations will encourage farmers to embark resolutely on the path of vegetable production, in which they will find many advantages. With this in mind, we have endeavored to show the costs involved in each crop, as well as the benefits they are likely to bring. But while it was useful to give precise information, it could be dangerous to generalize; so we have endeavored to cite particular cases and have indicated the localities where these results have been obtained. We hope to see more of these success stories, and will be happy to record any that are brought to our attention. It is a plant of great antiquity and extremely widespread use; as a result, it is hardly possible to give a precise indication of its place of origin, for the reason that, cultivated in all gardens, it may have escaped and been taken as indigenous where it was only sub-spontaneous. It has been collected in a state that is, all indications suggest, truly wild in south-west Siberia, in Soongarie. This plant, which has tunnelled bulbs branching out into numerous cloves which, in practice, are called pods, has long, narrow leaves. These have sheaths which, when joined together, form a kind of cylinder on top of the bulb. From the center of these leaves rises a spike bearing flowers enclosed in a membranous spathe when young. In cultivated garlic, these flowers are usually replaced by bulbous buds. Uses. - Garlic's fiery, highly aromatic flavor makes it a widely used condiment plant, with a large place in the cuisine of southern countries. Cultivation. - Garlic is grown in all vegetable gardens, over widely varying areas, depending on consumption needs. In Brittany, in the Bay of Mont-Saint-Michel, the plant is grown over often considerable areas; but whether in kitchen gardens or in large-scale production, cultivation methods are exactly the same. Moderately fertile clay-silica soils are particularly suitable for this plant, which fears fresh fertilizers and too much water 121 Fig. 2 - Ordinary garlic. in the soil. In Brittany, the soil to be used for this crop is ploughed; then, after harrowing and rolling, it is planted. This is done using the pods that make up the garlic bulb (fig. 2). Most often, the pods that could not be sold because of their defective condition are used for this purpose. This is a bad practice, as it leads to the use of heads that have not been well received and which only produce inferior quality products; on the contrary, it is advisable to reserve very good heads for multiplication, as the yield obtained will be more abundant. Planting is usually done in February or March; in the south of France, it can be done in autumn. Pods are transplanted either with a finger or with a planter, at Om, 10 on the rows, the rows being Om, 15 apart. In regions where this crop is grown extensively, a line of parsnips is usually sown every meter, to shelter it from the sun. During the summer, parsnips are weeded once or twice if the land is grassed. Harvesting is done by hand in July. Yields vary greatly from one year to the next, as garlic often rots, reducing the harvest by varying proportions. In good years, we harvest up to 5,000 kilograms per hectare; this yield is reduced by a third when the season has been unfavorable. The selling price also varies considerably: when demand is high and the produce is of good quality, it can fetch up to 100 francs per 100 kilograms; but it drops to 25 francs for inferior products. Diseases and insect pests. - Garlic is attacked by the garlic moth, which does not cause much damage. However, we have much more to fear from a disease which, in practice, is called grease and which consists of the rotting of the bulb. This disease seems to be bacillary in origin. It is difficult to prevent. However, by cultivating in healthy soil, by using only healthy pods for planting, and by not letting the crop return too often to the same spot, garlic can be preserved to a certain extent from the disease that ravages it ? 3 2Js-3 ARTICHAUT According to recent research, the Artichoke does not appear to be a botanical species, as Linnaeus believed, but a derivation of the wild cardoon that grows spontaneously throughout the Mediterranean region. As a result, its real name would be Cynara cardunculus, variety satira (Moris). Artichoke is a perennial plant with a large underground rhizome. Each year, it produces leaves 1 m to 1.50 m long, whitish-green on top and turning woolly-white underneath due to the abundant hairs covering them. These leaves are deeply incised in adult plants, much less so or not at all in young individuals. In the wild type, the lobes are terminated by vulnating prickles. In the center of the leaves, a robust branching system rises in spring, bearing a few lateral flower heads and one terminal one. These flower heads become very large in cultivated artichokes, and form the edible part of the plant. The flowers are azure-blue and give rise to dark-brown-striped, grey fruits (achenes). Seeds are germinative for five years. Uses. - Artichokes are eaten for their inflorescence receptacle, which becomes fleshy and highly developed in cultivated varieties. The bases of the bracts are also eaten. In some cases, the leaves are blanched and the main vein eaten, as with cardoons. Varieties. - There are many cultivated varieties of this plant, but only three or four are commonly grown: GROS VERT DE LAON. - Vigorous, hardy plant. This is the most highly regarded variety for large-scale cultivation. It is recommended for the very strong development of its apples (flower heads) and the abundance of the flesh of its receptacle. The scales (bracts) are green, pointed and divergent, giving the apples a spiky appearance (fig. 3). ARTICHAUT CAMUS DE BRETAGNE. - The apples are broad and short, with brownish-green or purplish scales that form a ball-shaped head. This variety is recommended for its earliness. Large quantities are consumed in Paris, coming from Brittany and Anjou. In the south of France, the green and vtolet de Provence varieties are particularly popular, as is the white Artichoke in Roussillon and Algeria. - Artichoke is an undemanding plant, which can be grown in any kind of soil; however, it is only in rich, moist soils that it produces good yields. In rich but insufficiently moist soils, its growth stops early, and there is no reason to count on prolonged production, which, on the contrary, always takes place when the soil has sufficient moisture. Siliceous-clay and clay-limestone soils suit it very well; but we must never lose sight of the twofold requirement of Artichoke, which sums up the whole cultivation process, and which relates to the fertilization and watering it needs for the time it needs to vegetate. However, humidity must not be too staFig. 3 - Artichoke gros vert de Laon. gnant, as this would make it extremely difficult to keep artichokes over the winter, which they would have difficulty surviving in such conditions. In practice, artichokes are rarely propagated from seed, which has the double disadvantage of giving slow and often random results. Many of the young artichokes produced from seed tend to revert to the primitive type, and need to be carefully selected. The most widely used method is to remove branches from rhizomes in spring and plant them as cuttings; this procedure gives more satisfactory results than sowing; but as, in many circumstances, we do not have a sufficient number of old plants to be able to obtain cuttings in large quantities, we are obliged to resort to sowing, which should therefore be examined. Sowing. - There are three different ways to sow seedlings, which we will describe in order of merit, if you want to establish a large plantation, or if the frosts of a harsh winter have destroyed the old plants. The best method, insofar as it gives the quickest results, consists of building a warm layer of potting soil in March, in which Artichoke seeds are sown in rays spaced Om, 08 apart. The seed is covered with a centimetre of potting soil, and the soil is drenched to hasten germination, which takes about ten days. When the plants have emerged and produced their first leaf, they are thinned out to leave a distance of a few centimetres between the rows, leaving around 250 plants per frame. Their development is encouraged by frequent watering. Towards the end of April, young Artichoke plants already have three or four well-developed leaves. We'll have got them used to the action of the outside air by lifting the trays every day, eventually removing them completely. Now that the plants have become robust, it's time to start planting them. Once the soil has been smoked, it must be ploughed deeply with a plough for large-scale planting, or with a spade for small-scale cultivation. Then, after harrowing, lines of Om, 80 apart are drawn on the surface, along which the planting will take place. Once the soil is ready, the Artichoke plants, which have been raised under a frame, are carefully removed to avoid dislodging them. However, as the plant is already equipped with a long pivot that digs deep into the soil, it should be cut to give the plant lateral roots which, by increasing its roots, will hasten the development and flowering of the Artichoke. Planting should be done after transporting the plant in baskets, taking the utmost care. Planting with a planter has the disadvantage of breaking the root ball, so it is best done by hand, at Om, 80 on the rows. After planting, watering is necessary to facilitate recovery. Another, simpler method is to sow the seeds in the ground in April. Seeds should be sown very lightly, or better still, one by one at around Om, 10 in all directions. The seeds should be sown very lightly, or even better, one by one, at about Om, 10 in all directions, with a basin to hasten emergence, which, despite this precaution, usually takes around twenty days. When the plant is sufficiently strong, it is transplanted into place, taking care, as before, to pinch the pivot and to transplant into a root ball if possible. Artichokes propagated in this way rarely flower in the first year, whereas they do in the previous system. In order to avoid transplanting, which, as we have just seen, is not without its difficulties, we sometimes sow directly in situ. This is done by sowing five or six seeds in potted soil every Om, 80. This sowing is done in April, and in May, when the plants have emerged, only the most vigorous are left and the others pulled out. The advantage of this method is that it requires little labor, but the disadvantage is that it doesn't produce any produce in the first year. Whenever possible, therefore, given the need for sowing, it is advisable to give preference to layer propagation. Whichever sowing method you choose, you will almost invariably see a certain number of seedlings covered with prickles. These plants should be rejected, as they represent degenerate plants, and the choice should always be made for plants whose leaf blades are only slightly divided and devoid of prickles. Whether or not the plants have produced flowers in autumn, they should be protected from frost when the first cold spells arrive. To do this, around November, the tips of the large leaves are cut off, the remaining ones are tied together with straw, and the plant is mounded with soil taken from around it (fig. 4). Leave things as they are until the cold sets in. When the thermometer falls to 5 or 6 degrees below zero, it becomes necessary to shelter the part of the leaves that emerges above the mound of earth. This is usually done using DYBOWSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 2 either leaves or litter spread over the artichokes. During the winter, if the weather turns milder, it's a good idea to uncover them, even if it means covering them again if the cold comes back. In February, if there's no longer a risk of severe frosts, the bedding can be removed for good, so that it can be used again the following year. If, on the other hand, leaves have been used, they should be spreadFig. 4. - Artichoke, butted. in the plantation to be buried during ploughing. It is estimated that about 12 cubic meters of either leaves or litter are needed to shelter the artichokes planted in one hectare. At the end of February, or in the first days of March, the artichokes are started, and a fertilizer is spread on the soil, consisting of slurry or half-decomposed farm or horse manure, at a rate of around 25,000 kilograms per hectare. This fertilizer is ploughed into the soil, which can be done with a plough in large-scale cultivation, on condition that the work is finished with a hoe around the artichoke vines. Eyeletting. - About a month after ploughing, when the artichokes have regained their growth and formed strong tufts of green, they should be subjected to an operation known as "œilletonnage". If you then examine what has become of an Artichoke plant, you'll see that the main stem, having ceased to lengthen, has produced offshoots from the underground rhizome; it's to these offshoots that we give the name "œilleton" in practice. If they were all left on the stump, the result would be as many aerial branches producing flower heads; but these, being in very large numbers on the same plant, would be small in volume and therefore of almost no value. The aim of "œilletonnage" is to remove all these extra branches, leaving only the two most vigorous; the result is well-developed artichoke heads. This operation, which, as we have said, is carried out in the first days of April, needs to be carried out with great care, as it determines the quality of the harvest. When the time comes to do this, uncover the Artichoke's stump with a spade; then, with the help of a wooden spatula, remove all the weaker eyelets, leaving only the two strongest; these should be chosen not only from among the best available, but also from among those which are the lowest on the rhizome. All the eyelets removed should take with them a piece of the rhizome on which they originated, but without damaging it; the operation is completed by smoothing out the wounds made on the stump, which is then covered again with soil. The detached eyelets are used to propagate the artichoke. This method of propagation offers a number of advantages over sowing: in addition to being quicker than the latter, in that it usually produces results in the first year, it faithfully reproduces previously cultivated varieties; whereas with sowing, as we have seen, there is always the risk of a certain number of plants reverting to the wild type. What's more, it's much more economical, since, as we shall see, it requires no special care. The eyelets used to propagate Artichoke will be chosen from all those, often eight or ten in number, that are removed from each strain. Those with a stub or stump fragment will be chosen, and in all cases will have a small, well-constituted stem bearing at least three or four leaves (fig. 5); the others will be rejected as too weak and offering little guarantee of recovery. The strongest plants are not the best; they are often not even used, as they have the disadvantage of flowering too early. Before planting, the eyelets should be prepared. To do this, flatten the cut part with a serpette and shorten the roots, which are often either too long or too badly damaged during uprooting. Milletons are widely available on the market. Whether you buy them from horticulturists, or find them on the market, their price generally varies from 2.50 to 4 francs a cent. They should not be too wilted, as this would make them difficult or even impossible to plant again. Carnations are planted in ploughed and smoked land. The lines are spaced at Om, 80 or 1 metre, depending on the fertility of the soil; for it is clear that when the soil is very rich, artichokes grow vigorously, and it is therefore necessary to leave a greater distance between them than in the opposite case. At the same distance as between the rows, the eyelets are planted two by two, leaving a distance of about Om.25 between them. In this way, you can be sure that the plantation will be well stocked. If possible, water each transplanted eyelet, otherwise choose a foggy day for planting. Recovery is assured when planting is done with care, using vigorous carnations which have not been allowed to wither and which have a heel already bearing a few roots. For small-scale cultivation, we recommend planting a number of carnations in pots of Om, 10 and placing them on a warm bed. In this way, the plant picks up very quickly, and when it emits new leaves, it is removed from the pot and placed in position, thus obtaining a faster product than with direct planting in place. As soon as the plants start to grow, they are hoeed twice during the summer. Around August, or early September, a few Artichoke heads appear, which can be harvested and fetch a premium price on the market at this time of year. Artichokes grown from carnations should be treated in the same way as those grown from seed in autumn. All branches with heads should be cut off flush with the ground. Winter will be spent in the conditions we have indicated, and when spring comes, we'll start and grommet. In the south of France, it's best to carry out eyeletting in autumn, as it helps the plants to recover, and produces vigorous plants the following spring, which will certainly flower during the summer. It has also been recommended (1) to use branches as seedlings, which, (1) Daurel, Bull. de la Soc. des agric. de France. having borne heads, are cut close to the ground; once in place, they are said to regrow vigorously and form a robust clump. In the Midi region, Artichokes don't need to be covered; they're simply butterflied, which means they spend the winter more easily than in the Paris climate, where they often have to choose between freezing if they're uncovered too much, or rotting if the covering is too thick. Second year of cultivation. - Regardless of the cultivation method used, and whether or not the plants have produced in the autumn following planting, the second year will produce an abundant harvest. In our climate, flower heads begin to appear in June. Each retained eyelet will usually produce one main artichoke or head and two or three secondary ones, known as fins. Each clump, as we've said, is usually made up of two feet, to which two ceilletons have been retained, which means that a similar clump is capable of producing four heads and eight fins. But it's not uncommon for one or even two of the eyelets to be missing, which can cut production in half. Harvesting takes place when the flower heads are fully developed, but well before they are ready to flower, which is indicated by the fact that the top bracts open to reveal the purplish center bracts. The fins should be harvested relatively younger than the heads, as they are usually eaten raw, and must be very tender for this purpose. When harvesting is complete, the branches are cut off at ground level and all dry leaves removed; the ground is then completely cleared and given a good hoeing to loosen the surface of the soil that has been trodden underfoot during harvesting. It doesn't take long for the leaves to grow back abundantly, and in autumn they are treated as described above. An artichoke plantation can produce abundant harvests for four years. It is therefore advisable to establish a new plantation in the third year, in order to obtain a sustained yield. Growing costs. - To estimate the cost of growing artichokes, we need to take into account the first year, when yields are usually very low, and planting costs relatively high. We'll do this by assuming that, as is generally the case, carnations have been used for planting. Their usual price, when we are obliged to buy them, is 3 to 4 francs per hundred. As mentioned above, artichokes are covered over winter either with litter or leaves. The latter is generally used when the plants are close to woods. In Chambourcy, for example, which is very close to the Saint-Germain forest, artichokes were widely cultivated, as the right to collect leaves was formerly granted for a fee of O fr. 70 centimes for a one-horse carriage, i.e. 2 cubic meters. Today, this price has risen to 8 francs for the same quantity: artichoke cultivation has therefore declined in importance in this locality. Litter is even more expensive, costing 5 francs per cubic meter; it has the advantage of not rotting completely the first year, and can be used again the following year by mixing it with half new litter. Here are the first-year cultivation costs for a plantation in the Oise region: Rent for one hectare of land........... 250 fr. Plowing and harrowing..................... Manure: 25,000 kilos at 10 p. 1000...... Plant purchase; 15,000 at 3 50 p. 100.... Planting.................... ......... Three hoeings at 30 fr..................... Bedding............................ . . . .. Ridging and covering................... Harvesting and packing..................... 100 250 175 30 90 60 50 25 Total....... 1030 fr. For the second year, costs are reduced by the purchase price of eyelets and planting, but increased by the cost of eyeletting and extra work for the harvest, which is becoming more abundant. Rent................................... 250 fr. Fertilization................................. 250 Plowing.................................. Three hoeings............................ Carnation............................ 30 90 50 Harvesting and packing..................... 100 Bedding................................... Ridging and covering................... 30 50 Total............ 850 fr. To establish the average cost of cultivation over the four years of the plantation, multiply the total cost of the second year by three, add the cost of the first year and divide by four, giving an average annual cost of 895 francs. As for the harvest, it is, as we said, low in the first year, and we can only harvest a number of heads equal to a quarter of the planted plants, i.e. around 3,700. These autumn artichokes sell well, with an average price of 15 francs per hundred. In the second year, with only two heads per plant and four fins, this constitutes a minimum which is almost always exceeded. An average price of 10 francs per hundred is accepted for heads, of which 20,000 per hectare are harvested in a plantation planted at Om, 80 in all directions. Fins are usually only worth 3 francs per cent. First-year harvest: 3,700 heads at 15 fr. per cent............. 555 fr. Second-year harvest: 20,000 heads at 10 fr. per cent............ 2,000 40,000 fins at 3 fr. per cent......... 1,200 Second-year product... 3,200 Multiplying this product by three, the number of harvest years, then adding the first year's product and dividing by four, we get an average annual income of 2,538. If we subtract the average annual costs, we're left with a sum of 1,643 francs. This income, which is still quite high, as we can see, was much higher a few years ago; for the same costs, we obtained infinitely higher selling prices. This drop in value was due to the enormous quantity of artichokes whose markets were flooded by the large areas now devoted to this crop around Paris, in Brittany, Poitou and the South of France. M. d'André, professor of agriculture in the Pyrénées-Orientales region, estimates that 4 or 5 thousand hectares of land around Perpignan are devoted to the cultivation of early artichokes. In the south of France, this crop is advantageous, as the early products obtained, as well as the late harvests that can be made in autumn, fetch a relatively high price. According to M. Daurel, the first artichokes to be harvested in the Médoc marshes and on the Gironde islands sell wholesale for 4, then 3 francs a dozen. Under these conditions, the crop becomes one of the most lucrative. For some years now, artichokes have been consumed almost continuously throughout the year in Paris and other major cities, with winter and early spring production supplied by Algeria. In the vicinity of Algiers and Philippeville, artichokes are widely grown, and under these conditions are very profitable. If growers took a little more care in harvesting and packing the produce, it would arrive fresher and sell for even higher prices. Seed carriers. - To obtain seeds that will give good results, in spring, select the plants with the most developed heads (fig. 6). Remove the fins, leaving only the main head. When flowering is over, it is a good idea to cover the heads with bells placed at the end of a stile, as we recommend for lettuces. Diseases. - Artichokes are affected by a disease caused by a parasitic fungus (Ramularia cynaræ, Sacc), which, as M. Prillieux has pointed out, causes considerable damage to crops in the south of France. The only way to combat it is to prevent propagation by burning leaves that become covered with rust spots. Asparagus (Asparagus officinalis, Linnaeus) is a plant that grows spontaneously in dunes and, in general, in siliceous soils. Its main root obliterates early on, so that a large number of tracer roots develop, most of which are adventitious in origin and grow from a short, stubby rhizome; this plant is known as a Fig. 7 - Asparagus claw. claw (fig. 7). From this claw, erect, highly branched annual branches grow each spring, bearing small scale-shaped leaves with multiple buds in their axils, which develop into cylindrical twigs, about 1 to 2 centimetres long, forming a sort of small bundle, most of which are sterile. It's these branches that, in common parlance, are improperly referred to as leaves. A number of these branches end in flowers, which are female on some plants and male on others, as asparagus being a dioecious plant. The female flowers are followed by red berries with three chambers, each containing two seeds, up to a maximum of six, but some of these seeds often abort and the number is reduced accordingly. The seed is black and shiny, and remains germinative for five years. Uses. - Branches emerging from the soil, called thurtons, are eaten either white, when the asparagus has been covered with soil, or green, in which case they are known as pea asparagus, because they are eaten cut into small, pea-like pieces. Varieties. - Among the very many varieties, most of which take their name from the locality where they are grown, only three should be singled out as truly distinct types: HOLLAND ASPARAGUS. - The shoots of this variety are large and rounded, and are tinted pink or purplish-red when exposed to light. ASPERGE HATIVE D'ARGENTEUIL. - The tips of the shoots are slightly pointed and the scales are tightly pressed together. The thurions are much larger than in the previous variety. This is the earliest of all Asparagus varieties (lig. 8). ASPERGE TARDIVE D'ARGENTEUIL. - The scales are less compressed and open slightly. This variety continues to produce when the previous one is almost exhausted. Sowing. - In practice, asparagus is propagated exclusively by seed, and sowing must be carried out with particular care to ensure the grower Fig. 8. The soil in which the seed is sown must be, as far as possible, healthy, light and rich in humus, which Asparagus is very keen on. It has been argued that it is better to sow in poor soil, on the grounds that plants placed in well-smoked soil will suddenly sprout new growth. This reasoning does not stand up to serious examination of the facts, and there is no more reason to sow Asparagus in lean soil to see it regrow later than there would be to entrust a child to a dry nursemaid, on the pretext of seeing it regrow quickly when its diet becomes better. What is gained in youth is well gained, and the effects will be constantly felt. Once the soil has been chosen, we spread a layer of decomposed manure on its surface, the thickness of which varies according to the richness of the soil. During this operation, which is usually carried out in March, any stones that may be found should be removed from the soil. The soil should be as loose and clean as possible. After ploughing, if the soil is cloddy, it is harrowed vigorously with a hooked-tine fork, and the preparation is completed with a rake to make the surface absolutely even. Once the soil has been loosened, lines are drawn on its surface, using a radiator and a chalk line, about Om, 12 to Om, 15 centimeters apart. These rays should be about Om, 03 deep; every five lines, a path should be left to allow maintenance work to be carried out without walking between the lines. Sowing takes place in the first fortnight of April, but can be extended to the end of the month if the season is poor. The seed is spread by hand, so that it is 2 or 3 centimetres apart in the radius. The seed is covered with a light raking motion, which causes the soil to fall back into the rays; the ground is now more or less level again, and the lines are barely visible on the surface. The whole area is then covered with an abundant mulch, for which we use with advantage the manure coming out of the beds or mushroom wheels; in all cases this will be highly decomposed cheyal manure. Emergence usually takes place about a month after sowing. During this time, care must be taken to ensure that the soil is not overgrown with weeds, and that it does not dry out; both these problems can be prevented by hand weeding and watering where necessary. When the young plant emerges, it appears as a small green filament that pierces the soil, covered with a few small scales from the axils of which the small sterile branches will emerge. If the seed has been a good one, the lines will soon turn green as all the young asparagus grows. About three weeks after emergence, the plants are thinned out to leave a distance of Om.08 to Om.10 between each plant. To do this, you need to take advantage of damp weather, or wet the soil beforehand. Then, armed with a small wooden spatula, you remove the plants that are too close together. This should not be done haphazardly, and only the weakest plants should be removed. As a result of this thinning, about 75 to 90 plants per square metre remain. Throughout the summer, the only care to be taken will be DYBOWSKI. - Cultivation, 2nd ed. a repeated watering and weeding, to keep the soil free of weeds. In autumn, usually towards the end of October, the stems, which have reached a height of around Om, 50 to Om, 60, turn yellow, then dry out. The time has come to cut them off with pruning shears at around Om, 05 above ground level. No care is needed throughout the winter. The plant, prepared as described above, is ready for use the following spring. It has often been suggested that only seedlings that have spent two years in the nursery should be used. This practice has the disadvantage that, by leaving the plants in place for so long, they get in each other's way and only produce weakened individuals. One-year-old seedlings will always be the best when grown with the necessary care. The so-called eighteen-month plant was also advocated, i.e. sown in July, the young asparagus plants were not put in place until the spring of the second year, but under these conditions, the individuals are too weak to survive the first winter without danger. This system has been completely abandoned by skilled growers, because, although it requires more time, it gives less good results than the one which consists in using the one-year old plant raised with care. Plant selection. - When it's time to plant, the plants raised in the nursery should be carefully removed. This is done either with a flat-tined fork, or with a flat-tined hook. There is a choice to be made between claws, not all of which are equally suitable for use. Preference should be given to those with large, vigorous buds and abundant, healthy roots. Even with severe sorting, rarely more than a tenth of a claw falls to waste in a nursery that has been well cared for. There's no harm in pulling them out a few days before planting; the claws don't suffer at all from being out of the ground, as long as they're placed in a cool, slightly damp place like a cellar, for example. Some growers even claim that recovery is better when the plant has dried out a little in the air. Choice of soil. - Asparagus is not very demanding in terms of the mineralogical nature of the soil; it is more demanding in terms of its physical qualities. The most important thing to ask of a plot of land to be planted with asparagus is that it be healthy, i.e. free of stagnant moisture. Soils of any kind in which water can be found, either permanently or only during the rainy season, at a shallow depth below the surface, should under no circumstances be used for this crop, unless drained first. Stagnant humidity should be avoided, as any soil that retains excessive moisture by its very nature is unsuitable for growing asparagus. It is for this reason that essentially clayey soils are unsuitable, unless their condition is modified by energetic amendments. With this restriction in mind, it can be said that any soil is almost equally suitable for Asparagus. The very fine crops grown at Argenteuil are grown in limestone and clay-limestone soils; around Orléans and Bordeaux, remarkable harvests are made in siliceous sands; finally, we could mention the crops grown at Pont-Chartrain in peat bogs reclaimed by drainage, which give excellent results. There is therefore no need to worry about the nature of the elements making up the soil to be used; but it is important that the layer of arable soil be of sufficient thickness. This depth needs to be at least Om, 30, because of the cultivation work the soil will have to undergo. Soil preparation. Fertilization. - Once the site has been chosen for the asparagus plantation, it's a good idea to plough the land, either by hand or with a plough, depending on the size of the plot, in the autumn before planting. This first ploughing will loosen the soil and rid it of any weeds. If the soil is stony, this first ploughing should be used to remove the stones. As soon as the hard frosts have passed, which is usually towards the end of January, the soil should be fertilized and ploughed or spaded in. It is important that this first manuring is abundant; almost all fertilizers are good for Asparagus cultivation; however, those to be given preference are either city sludge and sweepings, which are used exclusively in Argenteuil cultivation, or decomposed farmyard manure or horse manure. In all cases, manuring should be carried out at a rate of approximately 1 cubic meter per are, or 60,000 kilograms per hectare. The fertilized and ploughed land must now be prepared for planting. To do this, furrows of around Om.50 wide and Om.10 to Om.15 deep are dug into the soil, either with a spade or hoe, or with a plough if the cultivation is large. Between each small pit, a free space of around Om.70 is left, over which the soil from the digging will be thrown. As a result of this operation, the ground will present longitudinal furrows, called trenches, alternating with ados. The middle of one trench should be 1.20 m from the middle of the neighboring trench. These distances are by no means absolute, and can be varied in one direction or the other without great inconvenience. In Thourotte in the Oise department, for example, there are some very fine plantations planted with lines only 1.10 m apart; in Argenteuil, on the other hand, the space left free between each of them is 1.40 m. The most important point is not to give the trenches a false appearance. The most important thing is to ensure that the trenches are no deeper than indicated above. The bottom of each trench should be levelled with a rake if the work has been carried out with a spade or hoe; stones, roots or other foreign bodies which might interfere with planting should be removed. Planting. - Once the soil has been prepared in advance, as mentioned above, planting should be carried out in March or April, either with the seedlings removed from the nursery, or with purchased claws. In all cases, only those that are of good appearance and guaranteed to come to the right place should be used. When planting, start by drawing a line down the middle of each trench, to ensure the planting is as regular as possible. On these lines, the claws are planted at a distance of around Om.90 to 1 metre. It is not necessary to increase the distances any further, as this would excessively reduce yields per hectare; but it would be disadvantageous to reduce them much, as the plants would then get in each other's way and produce inferior products. Moreover, we must not lose sight of the fact that planting is done for a large number of years and that, as a result, the clumps, which are constantly increasing in volume, will later leave very little free space between them. From the distances indicated above, it follows that there will be around 9,000 plants per hectare; which means that, if you make your own plants under the conditions we have indicated, you will need to give the nursery a surface area of 120 square meters to be able to plant one hectare. To proceed with the planting, the soil is lightly dug at the spot where the claws are to be placed, taking care to arrange the bottom of this little hollow, which is about Om, 20 in diameter, in the shape of a small mound; the claw is placed on its top, and the roots are spread out in the hole, which, about Om, 05 deep, is filled with potting soil either from old layers, or from city sludge passed through the clay. This method of planting means that each claw placed on the soil is covered with compost, then with soil, which together form a thickness of around Om, 08. In careful plantings, it is advisable to cover the entire bottom of the trench with a layer of mulch, but this care can be neglected without great damage. Once planted, the spot occupied by each seedling should be marked with a stick, which should be driven in obliquely, avoiding touching the roots; in this way, the seedling will be protected when weeding takes place. Throughout the summer (fig. 9), the soil in the trenches is kept perfectly clean by repeated Fig. 9 - Asparagus, first year of planting. hoeing and weeding. During the first two years of planting, it is customary to use the teenagers by planting them with vegetables of all kinds, such as potatoes, beans, cabbage, etc. Quite frequently, we even plant in the trenches between the Asparagus; there is no great disadvantage to this, provided we are very sober and plant, for example, only one cabbage between each Asparagus plant in the rows. In autumn, the stems of young asparagus turn yellow and dry out; they are then cut, and the best thing to do is to burn them on the spot and spread the ashes around the plantation. By November, the ground should be completely clear, and only the fragments of stems left above ground indicate where the claws have been. At this point, it's a good idea to have some decomposed manure available, and to spread a layer of about ? or 3 centimetres over the entire surface of the trenches. This manure is only intended to act as a fertilizer, not as protection against the cold, which Asparagus do not fear. The winter thus passes without the Asparagus requiring any cultivation care. Second year of cultivation. - In the spring of the second year, the first operation to be carried out is to plant new asparagus claws where it has been noticed that those of the previous year have not grown. These locations must have been marked with a stick the previous year. At the beginning of April, or in the course of that month, young asparagus plants appear; it is then advisable to use the hoe to bring back a little soil from the ados on each plant, in order to consolidate them, and in this way cover the manure deposited the previous autumn. Intercropping will be possible again this year without any inconvenience. By May or June, Asparagus stems will have developed considerably, forming compact tufts of green. In this state, Asparagus are very susceptible to the wind, and if left to their own devices, there is a great risk that a certain number of stems will not only break off lengthwise, but more seriously, become detached from the claw, causing great damage to it. To avoid the serious inconvenience of detachment, which weakens the claws and often breaks the buds that are to develop later, it is a good idea to support the stems. In Argenteuil, we don't hesitate to use stilts, despite the expense involved, against which we tie the asparagus stems; we take care to drive the stilts obliquely at Om, 40 from the foot of the asparagus so as not to injure the roots; the stilts are driven in on the opposite side to the direction of the prevailing winds (lig. 10). With this method, Asparagus is absolutely consolidated by simple tying with a few strands of rye straw. In many localities, we are content to gather all the stems of a single clump and bind them together; this is better than leaving the asparagus to its own devices; but we must avoid binding too tightly, otherwise the branches caught in the center of the clump will turn yellow and dry out, which has the disadvantage of weakening the claws. Finally, pinching above the twentieth lateral branch has been recommended, and even practiced in some localities. In this way, asparagus is less exposed to the wind and more resistant to it, firstly because it is less elevated, and secondly because pinching makes the stem grow fatter and more resistant. The only drawback to this method, used by Mr. Parent, a grower in Rueil, is that it eliminates a certain quantity of the asparagus's green organs, thereby reducing its aerial nutrition. It has been claimed that this removal was compensated for by the number of asparagus fruits that T'on supprimait at the same time, fruits whose production always exhausts the plant that bears them. This is a mistake, which direct observation of the facts suffices to establish; in fact, fruits are only ever produced by the lower branches; by removing the top, we do not u= "M - "-- Ca -- Fig. 10. - Asparagus with a stake. reduce the number. With this restriction in mind, the pinching method should be considered advantageous wherever cultivation is carried out on a large scale, and where the expenditure on stakes would be too considerable; where cultivation is carried out with a plough, the use of stakes is made impossible, as they would hinder the free operation of ploughing implements. Stilts will continue to be used to advantage in mam cultivation. In the autumn of the second year, care is absolutely the same as in the first year. It goes without saying that throughout the summer, the soil is kept absolutely clean by repeated hoeing, more or less often, depending on how clean the asparagus is. At the end of October, the stems are cut back to a few centimetres above ground level, then incinerated, and the soil that has been brought back on top of the manure is thrown back onto the asparagus. The soil from the trenches, like that from the teens, is smoked again, either using sludge or decomposed horse manure. In the Oise region, either dried blood or guanos is used successfully, and the winter passes without any need for care. Third year. - First harvest. - Finally comes the spring of the third year, i.e. two full years have elapsed since planting. If the plant has been properly cared for, as we have indicated, and especially if fertilization has not been spared, and if the plant is of good quality, harvesting can begin at this time (1). To this end, towards the end of March, under the cli(1) A friend of ours who has followed step by step our planting instructions showed us a second-year plantation already producing thumb-sized asparagus that we were tempted to harvest. This planting was made with one-year-old seedlings. Asparagus should be buttered, generally two to three weeks before the normal harvesting time, so that when they are covered with soil and protected from light, they remain white for a certain length of time. Butting. - This operation is performed in different ways, depending on the type of cultivation adopted. In large-scale plough cultivation, asparagus is ridged using this instrument. To do this, the horse passes over the ados, and the mouldboard throws some of the earth from this ados onto the trench in which the Asparagus located to the left of the started ados are planted. At the end of the row, the plough picks up the same spur again, discharging the soil onto the right-hand trench. Two turns on the same spur are needed to load Om's asparagus trench with around 25 tonnes of soil. Once the first spur has been cleared, we move on to the next, and the end result is that each Asparagus trench is covered with a continuous mound of soil Om, 25 high. Once this work has been done with the plough, the whole is levelled out with a hoe, to break up the clods and create a perfectly loosened soil. In more carefully cultivated fields, a completely different method is used, which is infinitely preferable to the first. It only has the disadvantage of being more labor-intensive; but skilled growers, such as Mr Lesluin in Thourotte, do not hesitate to follow this procedure, even on a sixteen-hectare crop such as his. This process consists of using the hoe to bring the soil back to the spot occupied by each asparagus plant, so as to form a sort of vast molehill, Om.50 in base and Om.25 in height; this process has numerous advantages, because, in addition to avoiding the risk of injuring the asparagus roots, it will result in an advantageous change in the harvesting system. Harvesting the produce. - In the continuous line ridging system, harvesting is carried out using special instruments. The most convenient is a kind of gouge following a steel rod, which is fitted into a handle (fig. 11). As the asparagus grows and begins to appear above ground, the gouge is pushed in along the asparagus until the claw is reached, as can be felt by the opposing resistance; then, with a rocking movement, the asparagus is lifted off. This operation works well when the asparagus has grown straight; but if it is curved, it becomes impossible to follow it underground with the help of the gouge, which often cuts it at random and at varying heights. The cores thus left on the claw often end up rotting, and eventually Fig. 11. - Asparagus gouge. damaging the stump. Avoid replacing the gouge with a knife, whatever its shape, as the tip will inevitably injure the stump, or the Asparagus will not be cut in its entire length, and we have seen that it is important to remove it completely. When harvesting Asparagus using the molehill system used in Argenteuil, the soil is infinitely looser than when ploughing, so the soil is spread by hand until the stump is reached; then, weighing it down with the thumb, the stump is removed completely. This method produces asparagus of full length, without ever damaging the claw. The disadvantage of this harvesting system is that it takes much longer than the previous one. In the first year of harvest, which is, as we said, the third year of planting, you need to be sober and content yourself with cutting only two or three asparagus shoots per plant, otherwise you run the risk of tiring out the young stock and compromising the harvest in subsequent years. Bunching. - Asparagus harvested in baskets is, as soon as it is cut, taken to a cellar or storeroom, where, covered with grass and straw, it will keep for one or two days without damage. When a sufficient quantity has been harvested, the asparagus is sorted into three categories: the beautiful ones, which include all those larger than an inch, the medium-sized ones and the small ones. Sometimes deformed asparagus is also separated out; it is sold to herbalists for the preparation of diuretic medicines. To make bundles of equal size, molds are used, consisting of hollowed-out boards in the shape of the bundle, joined together by crosspieces (fig. 12). Molds for small and medium-sized Asparagus are usually Om, 12 in diameter; those for large Asparagus Om, 18, so that small bunches are set at around 2 kilogr, and large ones at 5. When making the bundle, care is taken to place the best ones around the edge and the smallest ones in the center. The bundle, once made, is tied with two wicker strands previously soaked in water (fig. 8). Autumn start-up. - In the autumn, when the dried-out stems have been cut and burned, any mounds that have been made for the sole purpose of growing white asparagus to the desired length should be removed. In plough cultivation, asparagus rows are ploughed over with the ploughing tool. The Fig. 12 - Asparagus bundling machine. mouldboard thus removes part of the soil; the rest is removed during the second round. This operation must be carried out very carefully, to avoid damaging the claw. It's better to leave too much soil, even if it means finishing the job with a hoe. In the molehill system, the soil is removed with a hoe or a hoeing tool; after this operation, smoking is carried out as in previous years. Fourth and subsequent years of cultivation. - In the spring of the fourth year, ridging is carried out as described above. The harvest is now complete. In most cases, growers remove everything that grows; on the other hand, those who are concerned about the future of their asparagus plants, take care to leave one or two beautiful asparagus plants to develop completely in the spring, in order to feed the stump from the aerial organs; this is a wise measure, the practice of which cannot be too highly recommended. In any case, harvesting should never be overly prolonged; it usually ceases towards the end of June, on St. John's Day (June 24), as growers say in their precise instructions. From now on, cultivation care will be identical every year, and can easily be summarized as follows: in spring, ridging, then harvesting until the end of June. In summer, staking or pinching of stems and maintenance hoeing. In autumn, stems are cut and incinerated, then pruned and fertilized. With proper care, the product remains strong for 15 to 18 years, more beautiful in the early years, more abundant in later years. Yields. - We have borrowed the following figures on yield and cultivation costs for one hectare of asparagus from a five-hectare ploughed crop grown by Mr. Broutin du Pavillon, a farmer in Fourneau (Loiret). Mr. Broutin estimates them as follows: Opening the row with a plow, one day of one horse and one man....... Line drawing, 2 man-days.... Purchase of 7,000 clusters at 70 francs per thousand. Planting, 10 man-days......... Miscellaneous expenses............................. 15 francs. . 490 35 53 Total............. 600 francs. According to Mr. Broutin, these expenses are for 20 years of cultivation, and the costs to be borne each year can be broken down as follows, for one hectare. Breakdown of planting costs per year. Land rent per hectare............... Six plows for relining, unlining and cleaning at 20 francs................. . . ... . ..... ... Two ways by hand at 25 francs........ One way for hand ridging..... Annual fertilization........................ Picking....................... ....... Bundling................................ Transport to the hall..................... 30 francs. 60 120 50 35 250 400 100 125 Selling expenses at 5%............... 350 Amortization of equipment.............. Miscellaneous expenses............................. 20 60 Total............... 1600 francs. Mr. Broutin's average product is half a bunch per clump, i.e. for 7,000 clumps, 3,500 bunches at 2 francs each, 7,000. After deducting costs of 1,600 francs, this leaves a sum of 5,400 francs, which represents Mr. Broutin's annual net profit from one hectare of asparagus cultivation. In the light of this information, which is not lacking in interest, because it shows the costs involved in planting with a plough, the production figure, and consequently the figure representing net profits, seems a little high to us, especially if we compare it with the following yields, which relate to a crop grown in the Oise region, and which, on the other hand, seem a little low to us. However, we didn't want to change anything, leaving the authors DYBOWSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 4 the responsibility for the production figures they accused us of. At M. Lesluin's Montmacq site, planting is carried out with extreme care and covers an area of 16 hectares. It is planted in rows spaced m 10 apart, along which the vines are only planted at Om 90. Most of the maintenance work is done by hand, and the asparagus is ridged in molehills. Harvesting takes place only in the fourth year, and every year at harvest time, a few vigorous shoots are kept to keep the vegetation in good condition. Mr. Lesluin estimates planting and maintenance costs at 4,000 francs for the first few years of non-revenue, for a one-hectare crop. He also assumes that the duration of the harvest years is only thirteen years, and that each of these years must therefore bear the amortization of the first years' costs. Hence he establishes the annual costs as follows: Amortization of initial installation costs............................... 300 francs. Rent........................ . . . . . . . . . . . . 125 Labor costs.................. 245 Fertilizers................................. 104 Harvesting and bundling..................... 352 Miscellaneous costs............................ 200 Total costs......... 1326 francs. It can be seen that the total of these costs is significantly lower than that of Mr. Broutin's crops, which might at first sight appear abnormal, since the advantage would remain with hand cultivation. The reason for this difference is that, instead of using decomposed manure, Mr. Lesluin uses guano and dried blood, with which he is very satisfied. What's more, neither transport nor sales costs are taken into account in this Oise crop, as the produce is sold locally. The savings achieved in this way amount to 622 francs, which should be deducted from the costs indicated by Mr. Broutin. Mr. Lesluin says he only harvests 2,065 bunches per hectare at the very low price of 1fr,50 to 1fr,60, which gives a total product of 3,200 francs. Deducting the cost of cultivation from this sum, a net profit of 1,874 francs remains. It can be deduced from these figures that yields can be extremely variable, depending on whether we operate in more or less fertile conditions. In any case, however, asparagus cultivation, whose cash yield has fallen significantly in recent years as the crop has become more widespread in France, is capable of producing relatively high profits, approaching 2,000 francs per hectare per year in less favorable conditions. What should encourage farmers to take up this type of production is the ease with which it can be cultivated, which for the most part can be done with a plough. Forced cultivation on site. - Market gardeners in Paris only grow asparagus for the production of early vegetables. Their cultivation is quite special, and in no way corresponds to that carried out in the open air. Asparagus is planted in a sort of trench, only a few centimeters deep (around 5 to 6) and 1.10 meters wide. In each trench, market gardeners usually plant four rows of claws, leaving a space of Om, 25 between each row. Asparagus is planted at Om, 40. Horses are fertilized abundantly with decomposed horse manure, and between the rows we grow a few vegetables that don't take up much space: lettuces or radishes, for example. In autumn, the stalks are cut and the plants are fertilized again. In autumn of the second year, i.e. around eighteen months after planting, forcing begins. Asparagus plants are rarely left to rest for another year; however, forcing them only in the third year would result in more vigorous claws. Asparagus heating begins in November, shortly after the summer stems have dried out, and continues successively until the end of January. The first step is to install the boxes on the row of asparagus to be heated. These boxes are 1.30 m wide, so each trench is completely covered. Once the rows of boxes are in place, we fill them up to Om.10 of their upper edge with soil from the ados that we've dug; we add a wheelbarrow of potting soil per frame to make the soil lighter. The result of this work is that between each row of chests there is a path of Om, 50 which has been dug to provide the soil for the Asparagus. In these paths, layers of horse manure are established, either entirely fresh, or mixed in part with annealed manure, i.e. ground during the summer. The layer is laid around the trunks, filling the paths completely and rising to the top edge of the trunks, so as to surround them on all sides. This layer needs to be watered and compacted to allow fermentation to take place. After a few days, the layer heats up and the temperature of the soil inside the coffers gradually rises. To keep the temperature at a constant maximum, every 15 to 20 days some of the manure is removed and replaced by new manure, which is mixed with the rest of the old manure. During this Fig. 13 - Forcing Asparagus on site. time, the frames, which have been placed on top of the trunks from the start, are covered with straw mats, which are double-layered overnight (fig. 13). After about three weeks of this heating, the asparagus can already be seen emerging from the soil. To give the Asparagus tips a little color, which makes them much more prized, the mats are removed for a few hours during the day if the weather is fine; otherwise, the Asparagus remains white. Once harvesting has begun, it continues for twenty to twenty-two days, during which time care is taken to keep the temperature constantly high by shuffling the layers established in the paths. The harvested asparagus is put into bunches of Om, 12 in diameter, and we reckon that we can harvest, during the whole forcing period, about three quarters of a bunch per frame. The price of these bunches varies greatly according to the season, and especially according to the mildness of the winter. It's not uncommon to see these bunches selling for 25 to 30 francs in the depths of winter. Once the harvest is over, the boxes and frames are removed from the asparagus and transferred to others, and forcing continues throughout the winter. Usually, two asparagus squares are grown at the same time, and forced alternately, one year, the other the following year, so that each square rests for a year, during which time the outdoor harvest is all that's needed. However, some market gardeners don't hesitate to force the same asparagus every year. If they take care to smoke abundantly, they can produce a fine crop for ten years. Asparagus is a costly crop, requiring large quantities of manure to be constantly replenished. Once the manure has been used up, it can no longer be used by market gardeners, who sell it on to growers as fertilizer. The farmer would therefore find it advantageous to grow forced asparagus; the manure costs him nothing in fact, since he returns it to the fields after using its heat, without it having lost any of its richness, as analyses have shown. The intercropping done in the first years of planting is continued every year during spring and autumn. Forcing out old claws. - When an asparagus plantation is exhausted and about to be destroyed, it's a good idea to extract a last product by heating the old claws. This is done by building a warm layer Om, 50 cm high over the winter, filling it with potting soil and covering it with boxes and frames. Claws are planted very close together in the potting soil, almost touching each other, and covered with Om, 15 of potting soil. Asparagus comes out of the ground after ten or twelve days, and the harvest can last for almost three weeks. But Asparagus harvested in this way are infinitely less beautiful than those produced by the first method; moreover, as the claws are lost after this type of forcing, it can only be applied to plants that no longer have any value as regular production. Harvesting the seed. - To harvest good Asparagus seed, it is essential not to use just any plant; on the contrary, they must be chosen with the greatest care. The best seedbeds are young plants, four to seven years old, producing only good Asparagus and in fairly large numbers. On the contrary, avoid harvesting asparagus from plants that produce many shoots, but of small diameter, or from those that produce good quality asparagus, but in too small numbers. Harvesting takes place in October, when the berries have turned absolutely red. The berries are removed by hand, then crushed in a bowl of water. The pulp is removed by decanting, and the result is completely clean, shiny black seeds, which are left to dry in the shade on a cloth. Asparagus seeds retain their ability to germinate for five years. Insect pests. - Asparagus is attacked almost exclusively by a single type of insect: the leaf beetle, of which there are two species, the asparagus leaf beetle and the twelve-spotted leaf beetle. These insects only wreak havoc when they are larvae, which cover themselves with their greenish excrement, no doubt to be less conspicuous. In this state, they gnaw the stems and all the small twigs. It is quite difficult to guard against their ravages, and the means of destruction available are imperfect. In Argenteuil, a wide-mouthed container of water is carried to the foot of the attacked plants, or a jug of water with a wide funnel; the branches laden with locusts are shaken off and fall into the water, which is easy to destroy. Eggplant (Solanum Melongena, Linné) is native to eastern Asia, from where it has been transported to Europe and the new continent. This plant has stiff, upright branches bearing alternate, oblong leaves, frequently with prickles on the veins. The flowers, usually solitary, are light purple. They give rise to an often very large fruit (berry), induced by the calyx, which is accentuated and frequently covered with prickles. Seeds are depressed and yellowish. They retain their germinative capacity for five or six years. Uses. - The fruit is widely consumed, especially in southern France. In northern France, on the other hand, and even in Paris, they are much less widely used. They are eaten cooked and prepared in a variety of ways. Varieties. - LONG PURPLE EGGPLANT. - This variety is characterized by black-purple fruits, often no less than Om, 18 to Om, 20 by Ou, 09 in diameter, and slightly swollen towards the tip. The flesh is firm; the seeds are not very numerous, which is an advantage from a culinary point of view. This variety is especially recommended for the South of France, where it is almost exclusively grown, as it is a late bloomer and does not do well in the Paris climate. It is very fertile; in the Midi, it bears up to twenty fruits. (fig. 14). For market gardening around Paris, Fig. 15 - Long purple eggplant. an early sub-variety is preferred, whose cultivation, by virtue of its earliness, is more successful. ROUND PURPLE EGGPLANT. - The fruit is rounded and very large, often reaching the volume of two fists combined. The plant is much less fertile than the previous one; like the latter, the fruit is purple, but a little lighter (fig. 15). This variety should not be confused with the round, purple Aubergine de Chine, which looks very much like it, but which is easy to distinguish, for the reason that the fruit remains green wherever the calyx covers it, which is not the case for the varieties mentioned above. It is important not to confuse them, as Chinese Aubergines are pungent and not recommended for use. Fig. 15 - Round purple eggplant. Cultivation in the Paris climate. - Market gardeners have been growing this crop for a long time, but they are beginning to abandon it because of the competition they face from the Midi, where this plant comes much more easily. In the provinces and in farm kitchen gardens, where supplies of produce from the Midi are often difficult to come by, this crop still has its raison d'être; here's how it should be grown. As early as the end of January, a layer of horse manure capable of giving 20 degrees of heat is built, i.e. about Om.50 high, and fitted with large stoves. The chests inside are filled with Om, 15 of potting soil, and as soon as the fire has gone out and the temperature, after having risen for a few days to its maximum, has become constant, we sow the Aubergine seeds, covering them lightly with potting soil. The frame is kept tightly closed and covered with straw mats, which are doubled if cold weather is expected. After about eight days, the seeds germinate; from then on, remove the mats during the day and leave them on the frames only at night. Three weeks to a month after sowing, the plants have five or six leaves; it's time to transplant them. A new layer is prepared, less thick than the previous one, as the weather becomes less cold, and the young Aubergines are transplanted with the planter, spacing them out by about Om, 08 to Om, 10 in all directions, which amounts to about 200 per frame. After transplanting, we water with a fine apple to encourage the plants to take root; then we close the trays and cover them with straw mats for twenty-four hours, to prevent the plants from wilting. On the following days, the mats are removed and the trays covered only at night. Five or six days after transplanting, you can see that the plants have recovered, as they start to put out new leaves. From now on, whenever the weather permits, we'll give them air by lifting the trays on wedges for a few hours during the day. This procedure produces vigorous, highly resistant plants, whereas not giving them air would have seen them wither away. Finally, about a month after transplanting, the seedling must be planted permanently. This is done either on a new layer built for the purpose, Om.30 thick, or on layers previously used for early crops. In all cases, four plants are usually planted per frame, reserving the remaining space for lettuces and radishes. The plants should be planted in rootballs and watered thoroughly. To encourage recovery, close the frames and cover them with straw mats. Once the plants have taken root, air them and get them used to being aerated as much as possible, until the frames are completely removed in mid-May. Eggplants need to be pruned; the main purpose of this pruning is to remove the twigs that develop at the base of the stem, as these would usually remain unproductive and unnecessarily exhaust the plant. Then, when the Aubergines have flowered, we pinch off the ends of the branches to encourage the development of the fruits, which we leave six to ten in number, depending on the vigour of the plant. If the plants are too weak, it's a good idea to tie them up with a stake. Harvesting usually begins towards the end of June and lasts until September. Fruits should be harvested before they are fully ripe and when they are a beautiful purple color. Their color fades as ripening approaches. Even in the Paris climate, cultivation can be carried out in a simpler way. We've found it very successful, but it produces later-ripening plants. This second method consists in sowing the seeds towards the end of March, on a warm bed, transplanting the seedlings also on a bed in April, then, as they gradually become accustomed to the air, planting them out definitively towards the end of May, simply in the ground, with good exposure if possible. To do this, the ground is abundantly smoked, and the Aubergines are planted at Om, 60 in all directions. Water well, and repeat frequently during the summer. Care should also be taken to cover the soil with thick mulch to keep it cool. Under these conditions, harvesting generally doesn't start until August, and lasts until the frosts. Growing in the Midi. - This is the region where eggplant cultivation and use are, by far, the most widespread. They are grown over very large areas, both for local consumption and for export. Sowing takes place at the beginning of March, on a bed and under a frame. When the plant has three or four leaves, it's a good idea to sow it again under a frame, as we've already indicated for cultivation in the Paris climate; But this procedure is flawed, as it leaves a weak plant with insufficiently developed roots, and a delicate plant that has not been gradually acclimatized to the action of the outside air. So we transplant it, which is easy since it can grow 200 feet in a frame, and we'll have a vigorous, well-built plant that we've had time to get used to.

make it hardy by giving it air every day by lifting the frame. Planting is definitely done around the middle of May. The soil in which this crop is to be grown must be specially prepared. Abundant manuring, consisting of farmyard manure or nitrogenous chemical fertilizers, is necessary to ensure the plant's proper development. In large-scale cultivation, ploughing is carried out in such a way as to create ados planks, one meter wide; each plank is separated from its neighbor by a sort of gutter, which is used to irrigate the crop. After ploughing, the soil is prepared by double harrowing. When the ground is well prepared, we plant, as we said, in May. A line is drawn down the middle of each bed, along which the eggplants are planted, keeping a distance of Om.10 on the line between each one. This planting must be done with great care; to facilitate recovery, the transplanted plants are lifted into a clod using a trowel, and transported to the field in flat baskets, in which they are arranged side by side. In this way, the clod of soil that accompanies the roots is not broken, and recovery is now assured. After planting, if the weather is dry, the soil is irrigated by running water into the gutters; this operation is repeated four or five times during the summer, and the soil is kept perfectly clean by hoeing, which also has the advantage of preventing the soil from drying out. Two hoeings are usually necessary. Harvesting begins in the month of Quin and continues until late summer. With this cultivation method, one plant of Aubergine is capable of producing up to twenty to twenty-five beautiful fruits. These are sometimes consumed in the vicinity of the production site, and sometimes shipped in crates or baskets to Paris or other major cities. Growing costs and yields. - Throughout the Midi region and in Algeria, where irrigation is possible, Aubergine cultivation is lucrative, although fairly labor-intensive. Expenses for a one-hectare crop can be calculated as follows: Rent for irrigable land.............. 300 francs. 40,000 kilos of manure at 5fr. per 10,000 kilos... 200 Plowing and harrowing................... 100 Raising of transplanted seedlings on bed... . 625 Planting; 30 days at 3 francs each . Two hoeing operations............................ 90 70 Irrigation costs........................ 100 Harvesting costs............... ......... 75 Total expenses........... 1560 francs. Eggplant plants being planted at Om, 40 on the rows and the rows being I meter apart, one hectare contains 25,000. Assuming an average of 10 fruits per plant, which is almost a minimum for the Midi, we obtain 250,000 fruits. These usually sold from 2 francs up to 3 francs per 100. Taking the minimum of 2 francs again, we obtain a yield of 5,000 francs, from which, after reducing cultivation costs, we are left with a net profit per hectare of 3,440 francs. To this sum should be added the yield that can be obtained by intercropping when Aubergines are not yet fully developed. These can consist of beans or lettuce, and provide an appreciable ancillary product. In the Congo, Dahomey, etc., our varieties do very well, but there are also local forms, often with yellow fruit, used by the natives, which are of very inferior quality. Seeds. - To harvest good quality seeds, as soon as the first fruits have formed, select those that appear to be the best and leave only two or three on the plant, which will be marked and will not produce any more. Fruit maturity is indicated by their paler color. They are left until they become soft, at which point they are split and the seeds extracted, dried in the shade after being washed free of the accompanying pulp. DYSOWSRI. - Culture, 2nd ed. - Beet (Betta vulgaris, Linnaeus) is a plant that has been cultivated since antiquity. It grows wild throughout the Mediterranean region. It is characterized by a fleshy root, highly variable in shape, size and color. The very short stem above this taproot bears oblong, long-stalked leaves with red tints that vary in intensity in horticultural varieties. During the second year, the beet plant bears a sturdy floral branching, 1.50 m high. The flowers are greenish, with a faint appearance; they are grouped in sessile contracted cymes. The fruits that follow them are joined together by the receptacles. As a result, what is commonly known as a beet seed is a collection of fruits; this explains why, when one of these so-called seeds is sown, several plants usually sprout. Uses. - Beets are grown in vegetable gardens, and their roots are eaten either as a salad dressing, or even as a dish. Beet is widely used in Northern Europe, where it is used in the preparation of a variety of very tasty dishes. S Varieties. - Through cultivation, beet has undergone numerous variations based on shape, root coloration, earliness and nutritional value. In vegetable growing, the preferred varieties are those with deep red roots. They are moderately sweet, firm-fleshed and very low in fibro-vascular tissue, the abundance of which would make them inedible. BEET BIG RED. - The cylindrical root measures Om.10 in diameter and Om.35 in length. The dark red flesh is of excellent quality. This is the horticultural variety with the highest yield. A large part of the root is above ground (fig. 16). BETTErave Rouge NaINE. - This is a small, dark-red variety. Its roots, which are completely buried, are of good quality; their small size enables them to be sown in very close rows. TOADSTOOL BEET. - It is characterized by its root bark, which is all chapped and therefore resembles that of a black radish. The conical root is of good quality and intensely red in color, although the leaves are almost completely green. BETTeRaVe PlaTE DE BASSaNo - The root, whose diameter reaches Om, 15 to Om, 20, is flattened like a flat turnip; it is buried only by its lower part. Its red flesh, washed with white, is generally appreciated. EGYPTIAN FLAT BEET. - The flat root of this variety lies entirely on the ground: its dimensions are small, not exceeding Om, 12 in diameter, but its sparse foliage means it can be grown very close together. It is a very early variety, Fig. 17 - Flat beet from Egypt. particularly suitable for cultivation on beds (fig. 17). Cultivation. - Beet likes deeply loosened soil with a high proportion of fertilizer; loose, loamy soil is ideal. When grown in the field, they are sown in soil that has just been smoked. Seedlings are sown in rows spaced Om, 30 to Om, 50 apart, depending on whether more or less vigorous varieties are used. Broadcast sowing is also possible, but has the disadvantage of not allowing the cultivation methods required by this plant during its growth to be carried out with equal ease. Sow from the beginning of March to the end of May. Early varieties will be sown first, and will produce their products during the summer; on the other hand, those intended to provide food during the winter are sown in April, and large-growing varieties are chosen for this sowing. When the young plants have taken on two or three leaves, the first hoeing is carried out, which consists of passing the hoe between the rows to remove weeds and loosen the soil, and also on the rows to light the plant. However, we don't remove all the excess plants from the rows; on the contrary, we leave about twice as much as should be left permanently, i.e. during this first cultivation method, we leave a space of Om.10 to Om.15 between the plants in the rows. As soon as the beets have five or six well-developed leaves, we hoe them again, and remove any plants left over for possible accidental destruction. Finally, in the course of the summer, a third hoeing is useful to keep the soil free of weeds. It has often been suggested that beet should be sown in a nursery, either on a bed or in the ground, and then transplanted in situ when the root has grown to the size of a pen pipe. In this process, great care must be taken to ensure that the end of the root is not bent when it is transplanted into the soil, and to achieve this, long planters are needed, with which deep holes can be made. It is necessary to water several times to encourage recovery. Apart from the disadvantage of being more labor-intensive than ordinary cultivation, this method also has the more serious drawback of producing inferior quality produce. As a result of transplanting, there is a lull in vegetation, during which the fibrous tissue develops very abundantly, and the roots then become hard and stringy. Harvesting begins in June for early-sown varieties, and lasts until October. At this time, all beets should be uprooted and taken down to the cay, where they can generally be stored with the greatest of ease until spring, if care has been taken when uprooting to remove the leaves along with the plant collar. Beets are sold at Paris markets after being baked, either in a bakery oven or in water; but the first of these two processes produces results far preferable to the second. If you are in a hurry to grow beets in the spring to replace those stored in the cellar, you can sow them in the months of March and April. Under these conditions, it's a good idea to sow in the nursery, then transplant into the frames, at Om, 30 in all directions. Transplanting here has no great disadvantages, as it doesn't stop vegetation, as it picks up very quickly. As soon as the cold is over, the frames are removed and the beets are left to complete their development. If you use Egyptian beet, you'll be able to harvest it after two and a half months of vegetation. Growing for seed. - To harvest good seeds, it's best to select the best-formed roots at the time of harvesting. Only the leaves are removed, but care must be taken not to damage the terminal bud that gives rise to the inflorescence. They are preserved by covering them with sand in the cellar. In April, they are planted at Om, 80 in all directions, and when the beet comes into bloom, they are staked. It's a good idea to pinch the tips of flowering shoots to hasten fruit ripening. They are harvested around September. In the Bay of Mont-Saint-Michel, we grow Egyptian flat beet and red beet for seed. This crop is grown in a special way that deserves to be mentioned. In August, 20 kilograms of beets are broadcast over an area of 40 ares. This nursery will provide the seedlings needed to plant one hectare. Planting is done in March using a planter. The rows are spaced at Om, 70 and the plants are planted at Om, 50 along the rows. During the summer, one or two hoeing operations are carried out, followed by ridging using a horse-drawn ridging machine. This last operation should be carried out when the beets start to go to seed. Harvesting is done with a sickle in August; the seeds are threshed with a threshing machine or a flail after being placed in javelins, and then passed through a tarare and a sieve. These cleaning operations are not without their difficulties. The yield is around 800 to 1000 kilos per hectare, with prices ranging from 80 to 100 francs per 100 kilos. Cardoon (Cynara cardunculus, Linnaeus) appears, as we have said, to be a single plant with artichoke, which is merely a cultivated variety. It grows wild throughout the Mediterranean region. It is characterized by large, white, tomentose, pennatipartite leaves that can reach or even exceed Im, 50 in length. The stem carrying them is short and stocky, and forms an underground rhizome which, together with the main vein of the leaf, forms the edible parts of the plant. From this rhizome rises a robust branching every year, ending in voluminous flower heads containing azure-blue flowers in an involucre of sterile bracts, which give rise to oblong, grey, dark-brown flagellated fruits (achenes). The seeds retain their germinative capacity for seven years. In its spontaneous state, the plant bears vulnating prickles at the end of its leaf lobes and on all its organs. These have disappeared with cultivation, but only in certain varieties. Uses. - The main veins of the leaves, previously whitened by deprivation of light, are consumed in various preparations, together with 73 the underground rhizomes stripped of their bark. Varieties. - They are distinguished by the presence or absence of prickles on the leaves, and by the state of the rib or main vein of the leaves, which is sometimes filled with cellular, sapid tissue, and sometimes, on the contrary, hollow throughout the central part. CARDON DE TOURS. - This is one of the varieties with the least development, but its ribs are very full, and for this reason, it is widely grown, particularly around Tours and Paris. It is furnished with very vulnating prickles. CARDON PLEIN INERME. - The name of this variety contains a double promise which the plant does not fulfill: the ribs are not absolutely full and are, on the other hand, provided with prickles, which are rare it is true, but which are enough to make the plant unwieldy. This cardoon is larger than the previous one (fig. 18). SPANISH CARDOON. - A large variety with slightly hollow ribs, but inert. Much grown in the South of France. CARDON PUVIS. - An absolutely inert variety with hollow ribs, widely grown around Lyon. Cultivation. - Although Cardon is a relatively hardy perennial that survives winters more easily than artichokes, it can only be propagated from seed. There are two different methods of sowing Cardon, both of which have been used successfully. The first is to sow Cardon in a nursery and transplant it, as is done by market gardeners near Paris; the second is to sow it in the field, which is the preferred method in the south of France. If you adopt the method of replanting R° ~~ ~ 21 Fig. 18 - Cardon plein inerme. Cardoons, which has the advantage not only of saving time - which, incidentally, is not very useful, as these plants have plenty of time to come to fruition - but above all of occupying the soil for only a short time, a warm layer is built in mid-April; it is on this layer and under a frame that the seeds are sown in small rays, which are covered with Om, 02 soil. Germination takes place after eight days, and the young plant appears with two thick, spatula-shaped cotyledons. As soon as the young plant has produced two leaves in addition to these two cotyledons, it's time to transplant it. A number of cups equal to the number of Cardoon plants to be planted are then placed on a bed which need not be new. These cups should be about Om, 09 in diameter; when they are arranged side by side on the bed, they are filled with a mixture of garden soil and potting compost. Then transplant a plant into the center of each cup, taking care not to bend the root, but to leave it straight, as the success of the plantation depends on it. Immediately after transplanting, water with apples, then replace the frames, which are covered on the first day with straw mats to prevent the plants from wilting. Towards the beginning of May, it's time to start planting; in any case, the best time to do this is when the roots, which have elongated, begin to run around the inner surface of the flowerpot rim. Cardoon should be planted in fresh, substantial, moist soil of any kind. Clay-limestone soils suit it well, but it also thrives in siliceous soils, provided these are fresh and rich in fertilizer. The soil is prepared by deep ploughing, followed by harrowing; lines are then drawn on the ground, I meter apart, and on these lines, I meter apart, a spade is used to open a pot, which is then filled with a good shovelful of used potting soil. The Cardoons are planted one by one in this potting soil, I meter apart in all directions. The young plants are unstuck by turning the bucket upside down on your hand and giving it a sharp tug with an instrument of some kind, such as a planter. The clod of earth contained in the pot then emerges whole, without breaking, and is carefully planted in the potting soil. Immediately after planting, each plant should be watered, which will help it to take root again. A simpler method, but with much less certain results, is to sow in a frame, then transplant directly into the pots. This procedure is faulty; the recovery is poor, so a certain number of plants are lost, and those that remain have difficulty recovering, even if they are watered frequently. Finally, in many cultivations, seedlings are sown on the spot in pots. These seedlings can be sown from April onwards, and in the Midi region, where this procedure is most widely used, successive sowings are carried out so that not all the produce reaches full development at the same time. When the cardoons have emerged, only one is left per planting, the most vigorous. In this region, cardoons are grown on ridged ground, which is irrigated at least once a month. Whatever the cultivation method adopted, there is one thing that is constant: vegetation is very slow during the first two or three months of planting, then quickly takes off, and the plants, which until then had been weak, grow to such a size that the soil becomes completely flat. It follows from this observation that it is useful to plant intercrops to occupy the soil during the months of May, June and July; for example, beans, lettuce or spring cabbage can be grown between the lines of cardoons, which will not be in the way, and in this way an additional harvest will be obtained from the soil, which will help to pay for the cultivation costs. Cultivation methods are of little importance, and are limited to a few hoeings in summer to rid the soil of weeds, keep it clean and prevent it from drying out. As we have said, cardoons can only be eaten once they have been blanched, i.e. etiolated by the deprivation of light. The processes used to obtain this result are varied; we'll just mention the main ones. In the Paris climate, bleaching begins towards the end of August, and continues into September. It is important, whatever the suiyi process, to blanch this vegetable only as and when it needs to be consumed, as the plant does not tolerate this condition well, and there is a risk that it will rot if it is not consumed when it is white. Market gardeners around Paris carry out this operation in September; they begin by binding the cardoons with rye straw previously soaked in water; but as most cardoons are thorny and therefore not only unpleasant, but often dangerous to handle, they are forced to resort to a stratagem. The trick is to tie two sturdy sticks together about a third of the way up, using a rope about 80cm long. The first passes the two sticks under the base of the leaves, close to the ground; the second grabs the two longer ends, crosses them over themselves, and the Cardon leaves are thus caught between the rope and the two sticks. The two men then gradually raise this sort of collar and bind the Cardoons with two or three ties, enough to hold the leaves in place. Care must be taken not to tie the leaves too tightly, as this would cause them to rot if air were prevented. Once tied, the cardoon is surrounded by half a bundle of straw, which is held in place with ties. Fifteen to twenty days after this procedure, the cardoon is ready for consumption. Many growers, instead of stuffing, simply bind with three ties, then butter strongly with soil taken from around the foot. This more economical method is less successful than the previous one. In the Centre and Midi regions of France, Cardons are blanched by tying them with straw as before, then uprooting them, leaving a clod of earth around the roots. In the driest soil possible, a gauge about Om.50 deep by Im.50 wide is opened, the Cardons are placed close together and then covered with litter. Finally, sometimes, in these same regions, the Cardoons are bedded and covered with soil. This procedure has the serious disadvantage of requiring washing later on, which damages the Cardoons. When the cardoons are to be taken to market, they are trimmed by removing useless or rotting leaves, then cutting off all the rootlets so as to leave only the pivot. By leaving them in rootballs, they can be stored for a month or two in dry cellars, and only gradually released for consumption or sale. The cultivation of cardoons, too little used up to now, nevertheless offers serious advantages. The average price of a blanched cardoon varies between O fr. 50 and 0 fr. 75, and can even reach I franc when the plants are very beautiful. Stuffing is certainly costly, but the selling price is such that labor costs cannot be neglected. Growing for seed. - To produce Cardoon seed, select the best-quality plants with full ribs at the time of autumn stuffing. These plants are left in place, untied. As the frosts approach, cut off about a third of the length of the leaves, then mound the plants as you would an artichoke. In the spring, the ground around the plant is ploughed. It won't be long before a vigorous stem rises from the center of the leaves, soon to bear a number of flower heads. Remove all the smaller ones, leaving just two or three. After flowering, it is necessary to protect the seeds from rain, which would spoil them, and from birds such as goldfinches, which are fond of them. This is achieved either by bending the stalks so as to turn them towards the ground, or by covering them with a cloche, after having united the two or three flower heads into a bundle, using the same procedure as that employed for Lettuces (see this article). The same plants can be left in place, and the seed harvested for several years in succession. Seeds retain their germinative power better when left in the flower heads than when separated from them. Carrot (Daucus carota, Linné) is a plant native to Europe, where it is still found in the wild, scattered along roadsides or in fields with damp soil. Very convincing experiments, which clearly link our cultivated carrots to the wild type, were carried out in 1830 by M. de Vilmorin. Seeds harvested from plants growing spontaneously were sown in good garden soil. After a few generations, the root became absolutely fleshy in some of the young individuals; some were white and others colored yellow and red. The carrot is a biennial plant, with the edible part mainly made up of the fleshy taproot, followed by a thickened stem with compound, sheathing leaves. In the spring of the second year, from the center of these leaves rises the aerial branching ending in umbels composed of dirty-white flowers, followed by fruits which are paired (diakenes) when young, but separate when mature. They are covered with ribs fitted with hook-shaped extensions, so that these fruits, which in practical language are called seeds, hang DYBONSKI. - Cultivation, 2nd ed. one on top of the other, forming a sort of little ball. They cannot be sown in this state, and it is essential, before entrusting them to the soil, to subject them to a preliminary preparation, which consists of rubbing them between the hands, after having mixed them with fine sand. The seed becomes smooth or marbled, and is ready for sowing. It retains its germinative capacity for four to five years, but it's a good idea not to mix seeds of different ages together, as they take longer to germinate the older they get. For early crops, where it's important not to lose time, it's best to use seeds that are two or three years old. Uses. - Carrots are eaten in a variety of ways. They are a necessary condiment in many soups, and in some regions they are used to make jam. The fruit is used to make liqueurs, thanks to its aromatic properties, which are due to the presence of scented glands. Fruits intended for this use must not be marbled. Varieties. - Taken as a whole, there are many varieties of carrot, but many of these are used as fodder, and therefore do not concern us here. Carrots come in a wide variety of colors and shapes. Red carrots, to the almost general exclusion of all others, are the only ones grown for direct consumption and, above all, for sale. CARROT GRELOT. - This variety is the only one that should be used, not only for early cultivation, but even for spring sowing. It is characterized, as its name suggests, by an almost globular root (fig. 19), whose diameter is roughly equal to its length. It is a beautiful red color and extremely early. This variety is a perfected version of the Short Dutch Carrot. HOLLAND SEMI-LONG CARROT. - This variety, generally known as the Croissy Carrot, from which Crécy has been corrupted, is widely cultivated in the Paris area, where it enjoys special favor. Its red root is Om, 10 to Om, 14 long. CARROT DEMI-LONGUE NANTAISE. - This is a very good variety, resembling the previous one on the whole, but its root is more cylindrical and produces slightly earlier. Its cultivation is to be recommended. HOLLAND LONG CARROT. - Its root, much longer than that of the Fig. 19. - Grelot carrot. preceding varieties, resembles them in shape and color. It produces produce later in the season, but is also more abundant and has a remarkable shelf life (fig. 20). In the south of France, in addition to the above varieties, the following are still grown: Longue de Toulouse (fig. 21), and several yellow carrots that are only suitable for this region because of their low resistance to cold. Outdoor cultivation. - Carrots thrive best in deep, cool, light soil; cool siliceous and silico-clay soils are ideal Fig. 20 - Long Dutch carrot. Fig. 21 - Long carrot from Toulouse. in a very special way. In order to produce good results, they must be abundantly supplied with decomposed fertilizers, without which carrot roots will only grow small. Carrots like deeply loosened soils, but not too much lifted, as they would then dry out easily; so, after deep ploughing, the soil is trodden down, either with the feet in the vegetable garden, or with a roller in the field. In healthy, well-exposed vegetable gardens, sowing can begin as early as February. They are then planted in "costières", i.e. in beds sheltered from the north by a wall or palisade. Sowing is broadcast at a rate of 50 grams per acre of marbled seed. Once the seed has been spread as evenly as possible, it is lightly buried with a rake. If you're in a hurry to harvest an abundance of carrots, it's a good idea to let them occupy the land on their own; however, in the usual practice, as soon as the soil has been covered with a thin, even layer of top soil after harrowing with a rake, you plant a few rows of lettuce, which will be harvested long before the carrots have fully developed. Sometimes, romaine is planted and covered with cloches, so that two seasons' worth of carrots can be harvested from the same bed: the first will come from the carrots sheltered by the cloches, while the second will come from the soil left in the open air. In any case, as soon as the lettuce or romaine has been harvested, it's a good idea to replenish the base of the carrots that have become a little etiolated by the lettuce leaves, by covering them with potting soil spread by hand between the plants in a layer Om, 015 thick. After these initial sowings, for which we prefer to use Carrot grelot, we successively sow others, more or less frequently as required, until the end of July. This cultivation is no longer done in costires, but in full squares, using either the variety we have just mentioned, or rather, for the latest sowings, all the half-long or even long varieties. Growers in Croissy and neighbouring areas produce carrots specifically for sale in autumn and winter. They almost exclusively use half-long varieties. Their seedlings are sown in rows Om, 20 apart, using 30 grams of seed per acre. As soon as the plants have three or four leaves, they hoe them, using a very narrow hoe between and over the rows, leaving the plants 7 to 8 centimetres apart. To produce good quality produce, carrots need to be watered, not abundantly, but often, to keep the soil in a constant state of moisture. Even the growers of Croissy, who cultivate this crop in large fields, water repeatedly; it's only at this price that they obtain the products so renowned on the Paris markets. In the south of France, particularly in the Garonne plains, where this crop is grown on a large scale, half-long carrots are frequently sown in autumn, in September; they survive the winter, and their produce is harvested early in the spring. In the climate of Paris, where, as we have said, the usual sowing ends with the month of July, it is possible, with some advantage, to cultivate late, by entrusting the seed to the soil at the end of August or the beginning of September. In this case, we use the grelot variety, which is sown in beds. The roots only take on a small volume before the cold weather, and by November, when their yellowing leaves detach from the plant, they are the size of a good walnut. At this time, we remove by hand the stalks that don't hold, and cover the carrot bed either with litter or tree leaves, which we place in a layer of Om, 15. Throughout the winter, we can harvest carrots of very appreciable value, which, if they don't have absolutely all the qualities of new carrots, at least have the appearance of them, so much so that, sometimes, they are sold as such on the markets. However, there is no possibility of confusion for buyers, as these roots have no tops, whereas really new carrots always have them. Harvesting. - For current consumption and sales in summer and autumn, carrots are harvested when they have reached about two-thirds of their full development. It would be dangerous to let the roots go beyond this point, because then, as a result of the rapid development brought about by frequently repeated watering, the carrots split lengthwise, which is a cause of depreciation on the market. Carrots can be harvested after about three and a half months, but we never pull them all at once; on the contrary, we start by harvesting only the most developed ones: this thins out the remaining ones, which we don't pull until later. Carrots are sold in bunches of 30 to 40 for the Grelot variety, and 25 to 30 for the half-lengths. Immediately after binding, which is done with wet rye straw, the bunches are immersed in water and washed with a quackgrass brush, without rubbing too vigorously, which, by removing the outer part of the bark, would diminish the intensity of the red color of the roots, and depreciate their value on the markets. Carrots keep very well throughout the winter when buried in sand in a healthy cellar. In this case, we especially recommend the half-long varieties sown in June and July. In November, we pull them up and, after either cutting off the crown or pulling off the leaves by hand, we store them as we have just described. They also winter well, stored in a silo and protected from frost. Half-long carrots yield 5 to 6 hectolitres of roots per acre, or around 300 kilos in weight. Forced cultivation. - Forced cultivation of carrots is generally practiced by Paris market gardeners, who supply the produce for consumption and export during the first four or five months of the year. These early crops have become more widespread each year, due to the foreign trade they generate. Some market gardeners grow their first crops using thermosiphon heating, i.e. by circulating hot water through the soil in the frames. To achieve this, they sow carrots in frames as early as October; then, when the carrots have two or three leaves, they transplant them into the thermosiphon-heated tarpaulins. Using this method, they harvest small bell carrots at the end of December and the beginning of January, which fetch a very high price and are sure to sell well. In agricultural factories with large steam engines, condensation water could be used to grow similar crops. For bedded cultivation, construction begins towards the end of November or the first days of December. New manure is used, half of which is mixed with annealed manure, i.e. manure that has been piled up during the summer. This annealed manure can be replaced by an equal quantity of leaves. This layer should be Om, 50 high, so as to give 20 to 25 degrees of warmth; it is covered with potting soil from old layers that have not yet been used, and placed about On, 15 high. Lightly pack the mould with the back of a rake, or with a board pricked on the tines of a pitchfork, and sow the marbled seed of Baby Carrot at a rate of one and a half grams per frame; then lightly cover the seed with half a centimetre of mould, which you spread by hand. As soon as the plant has a few leaves, we give the frame a little air if the weather is fine and it's not freezing, to prevent the carrots from withering away; on the other hand, we cover the frames with straw mats in the evening. Water lightly when necessary, and start harvesting around four months after sowing. Harvesting should be carried out gradually, first pulling out only the largest roots. Bunches of 40 to 50 carrots are made; each frame provides an average of 5 to 6 bunches. At the beginning of the year, we build new layers, which we sow with Carrots, and at the same time we plant per frame, six rows of gotte lettuce at a rate of seven feet per row. As soon as the lettuce has been harvested, which takes place 40 to 50 days after planting, the carrots are replanted with a little potting soil, spread by hand, lightly basked and the trays closed again. Carrots can be harvested towards the end of March. Finally, a third season is sown on beds built in February. The bed is sown with Carrots, then, instead of frames, the bed is covered with cloches arranged in three rows, and under each cloche is planted either a single plant of romaine, or more usually one romaine and three gotte lettuces. Once the lettuces have been harvested, they are replanted with potting soil, as described above, for cultivation under chassts. This crop yields its produce at the beginning of May, and then the open-air crops will follow these forced cultivation harvests. Seed crops. - Carrots intended for seed production should be sown from May to July, and harvested in November. At harvest time, the best-formed roots are chosen, well-colored and as smooth as possible. They are stored in a cellar, where they are buried in sand, after cutting off the leaves without damaging the central bud. It's wise to keep more carrots than you intend to plant, as it's not uncommon for some to rot over winter. In February or March, we plant the preserved Carrots in the caye, at Om, 50 in all directions, and when the flowering branch appears, we provide it with a stake, against which we tie it. When in bloom, remove all the poor-looking inflorescences, leaving only the best-developed ones. Harvesting takes place by cutting off the umbels whose fruit is ripe, and leaving them to mature in the shelter of a shed. Harvesting takes place successively, as the fruit ripen. The seeds are threshed, then bagged and labeled; as we said, the best seeds are those that are only two years old. Insect pests. - In open-ground seedlings, we often see small, black, extremely agile spiders, called theridia, feeding on the young carrot plant, causing great damage. Frequent watering will keep them at bay, but the best way to destroy them is to wash them down with a decoction of wormwood or water mixed with soot. Carrot moth caterpillars often wreak havoc on seedlings by attacking flowers and fruit, and we have no practical means of destroying them.   Celery (Apium graveolens, Linnaeus) grows wild in all the humid regions of Sweden, Algeria and Egypt, as well as in India and the Caucasus. It has been remarked (1) that Miller tried in vain, by successive sowings, to transform wild Celery into the plant of our crops. This is hardly surprising, given that cultivated Celery, which was already known in the time of Dioscorides and Pliny (2), had no doubt gone through many generations before presenting all the characteristics of a truly edible plant. Moreover, the authors we have just quoted clearly distinguished this plant into wild and cultivated celery, which leads us to presume that in their time there was not yet the difference between these two plants that separates them today, without which they would have indicated them as two distinct plants and not as derived from each other by cultivation. Celery is a biennial plant, with a very short, stubby rhizome bearing compound, pinnate leaves with a highly developed, longitudinally grooved petiole. The inflorescences, which appear in spring (1) P. Joigneaux, Le jardin potager. (2) De Candolle, Orig. des plantes cultivées. in the second year, are compound umbels giving rise to very small, longitudinally ribbed fruits (achenes). The seeds retain their germinative capacity for seven to eight years. Cultivation has led to the development of two different organs in Celery, making this single plant two distinct vegetables. In one category, the leaf stalks have developed considerably and are now full of cellular tissue, instead of remaining hollow, as is the case in the primitive type; this is what makes up the so-called ribbed Celery, or improperly branching Celery. In the second type, on the other hand, where the petioles remain hollow, we look for plants in which the rhizome, joined to the beginning of the roots, has produced a sort of tuberosity rich in different types of food. These are the Celeris raves. These are very unstable and not very old products; the characteristics of the race quickly disappear when the plant is badly cultivated. CELERI A COTES Varieties. - Several varieties of Celery are grown, differing from one another in the size of the plant and the extent of the ribs. In all ribbed varieties, the leaves are upright and close together. Every year, a few new varieties of celery come onto the market. Some disappear almost as soon as they appear. Others, on the other hand, have certain merits, but none yet replace those we have mentioned. 2 9 WHITE CELERY. - This is the variety most cultivated around Paris. Its ribs are very fleshy, and it reaches Om, 50 in height. The ribs are green, no matter what the name says, and only turn white as they ripen (fig. 22). It would be more appropriate to retain the name "white celery" for a very interesting form obtained by M. Chemin, a market gardener in Issy, in which the ribs are naturally white. This celery, which is already very popular at Les Halles, has been adopted by most growers. CÉLERI PLEIN, COURT HATIF. - This variety is a little smaller in size, but the ribs are voluminous and close together. CELERY FOR CUTTING. - A variety similar to the wild type, it has the advantage of growing all year round. Uses. - In this category of celery, the petioles or ribs are eaten blanched by shriveling, which removes their pungency and strong taste. They are used either raw in salads, or cooked and prepared in a variety of ways. Chopped celery is used as a condiment in various soups. In England, Celery fruit is used for the same purpose. Cultivation. - Celery is sown from March on a warm bed. The seed takes quite a long time to germinate, and the plant appears with very small, rounded cotyledonary leaves. When these seedlings have two or three leaves, it's a good idea to transplant them onto a bed, in a nursery, very close to each other; in this way, you'll obtain a much more vigorous plant than if you hadn't transplanted it; however, this method is often neglected, and we're content to transplant Celery directly into the soil, when it is sufficiently developed, i.e. about a month and a half after sowing. The first of the two methods is infinitely preferable. Transplanting is done using a planter, in soil rich in fertilizer. Market gardeners usually do this on old beds from which the frames have been removed. As Celery is slow-growing at first, there is no disadvantage in combining this planting with other crops, so it is often transplanted into the space occupied by half-grown lettuces. The rows in which Celery is transplanted should be Om, 25 apart, and planted at Om, 50 apart on the rows; as this planting is staggered, the plants are equally spaced in all directions. Immediately after planting, water well to promote recovery. Celery plants are very water-hungry, and it's only by watering them often, or planting them in naturally moist soil, that you'll get good results. This first season produces Celery that will be fully developed by September. To succeed this first harvest, Celery should be sown at the end of March and treated as described above. Finally, we sow in the third season, in the last days of April; but whereas the first sowings had to be done on beds, this one is done in the open air and in the ground. Sowing is done very lightly, with further thinning if necessary; for this last season, it is not necessary to send the seedling through the nursery; it can be planted directly in June without any inconvenience. Like the previous ones, this planting is done on land already occupied by salad crops in the process of developing. It is this last sowing that will provide consumption throughout the winter, so it is usually the one that is given the most importance. Once the celery has reached full development, it must be blanched, as it cannot be released for consumption without first undergoing this operation. The processes used to achieve this result are highly varied, depending on the locality and the season. Market gardeners blanch autumn celery simply by covering it in place with old straw mats or long litter. This operation is perfectly successful, because the plants, having been heavily watered, have grown and are touching each other; simply covering them with litter is enough to bleach them completely. In vegetable gardens where they are planted widely apart, they are tied together in autumn with straw, then mounded with soil taken from around them. For winter celery, the procedure is different. Towards the end of October, a trench is opened in the ground, 1.30 m wide and 1.25 m deep, and the soil from this excavation is dumped on either side of the pit. When the pit is ready, we pull out the Celery clods, after binding them with a piece of straw, and plant them in the trench, om 15 from each other, at a rate of eight per line; we plant successive rows until the pit is full. At this point, the plant is watered heavily, to encourage the Celery to recover and to prevent the leaves from wilting. After a few days, you'll see that the Celery has recovered, because it's putting out new leaves; you then bury it, filling in the gaps between the plants with potting soil. To avoid dirtying the leaves, we use two boards, 50 cm long, with a peg nailed to each end. The work is carried out with the help of two men, each of whom is positioned on one side of the pit and holds DYBONSKI. - Vegetable growing. one of the two boards by its end, and, pressing it firmly against one of the rows of Celery, between which he passes it, he fixes it by driving the stakes into the ground. The same is done on the opposite side, so that the gap between two rows is maximized, with the Celery leaves close together on the right and left. This gap is then filled with soil, and the plant is moved on to the next row. Market gardeners often do this in two stages, in order to gradually whiten the Celery; the pit is then left in this state, with litter thrown on top of the leaves to protect them from frost. This process produces white celery for most of the winter. Around Meaux, instead of putting celery in a pit, we blanch it on the spot. To do this, we alternately grow a bed of celery and a bed of lettuce. When it's time to blanch the celery, we bind it in place with straw, and since the lettuce has already been harvested, we use the soil from the beds it occupied to butter the celery. Finally, if you have large, healthy cellars or gallery silos, you can simply remove the Celery clods and store them in these premises, burying the roots in sand. In this way, it can be stored for most of the winter. This procedure is recommended wherever the soil is compact and excessively moist, making it impossible to straddle or ridge. When it comes to selling Celery, it is useful to trim it properly. For first- and second-season Celery, which has simply been blanched by a covering of litter, simply pull it out, rid the roots of the soil they carry, trimming them a little with a pruning knife, then remove the spoiled leaves and even a few of those that are not, on one side, so that on one side you can see the well-bleached heart. Thus trimmed, the Celery is tied in bunches of six, with the side that has been stripped of leaves on the outside of the bundle. For winter Celery, you must also remove the rotten leaves, then wash the feet with plenty of water to rid them of the soil that soils the ribs. Celery for cutting is sown in the field, broadcast in April; the leaves are then harvested by cutting them with a knife, and sold in bunches. This is a minor product that is only grown here and there. Cultivation for seed. - From the Celery plants that reach full development in autumn, we select those that are best formed, i.e. those with long, broad, full ribs and leaves that are upright and close together. They are removed in rootballs and planted at 6m, 50 in all directions, in a separate bed. When the cold weather arrives, they are mounded as you would an artichoke, then covered over winter with leaves or litter. Once the cold has passed, they are uncovered, and in March the mounds of earth are removed. Care should be taken to remove any leaves that are beginning to decay, which could lead to the rotting of those that are still healthy. In May, the Celery plants come into bloom, and the seeds are ready for harvesting in August. This is done by cutting the stalks, drying them on a cloth, and lightly beating them to detach the seeds, which are then sieved and bagged. CELERI-RAVE Varieties. - In these Celery varieties, where selection has focused on the development of the rhizome and root base, there are only slight variations. All have dark green leaves, whose petioles (sides) are hollow and no larger than those of wild celery; they are usually purplish-red. In current production, only two forms are grown, one of which is a perfected version of the other. ORDINARY CELERY - The leaves are semi-erect, the rhizomes are large, rough at the top and covered with roots at the base. PARIS SMOOTH CELERY. - In this variety, bred by Paris market gardeners, the leaves are more spreading and the rhizome is generally a little wider than it is high; the upper part is smoother than in the previous variety. This is the Céleri-Raye type, towards which we should aim as far as possible (fig. 23). Uses. - Céleris-Raves are sometimes eaten raw, as an appetizer, but their use is best recommended cooked. They are a very delicate dish, not yet widely used. Cultivation. - Like its congeners, the Céleri-Raye is a plant that thirsts for fertilizer, and because of this requirement, it is grown only in vegetable gardens with loose, fertile soil, and by market gardeners, who plant it in compost; it is here that it acquires its most beautiful development and, consequently, that its edible part reaches its greatest value. In Celery-Rave, as in most vegetables, organoleptic qualities are directly related to the speed and degree of development. In poor soil, Fig. 23 - Celeri-Rave lisse de Paris. rhizomes are small and hard, as the fibrous tissue then takes over. Market gardeners sow Celeri-Rave in March, on a warm bed. When the plant has two leaves, in addition to the two cotyledons, they transplant it onto a bed, very close together; immediately after transplanting, they water with apples and close the frame to facilitate recovery. Once the Celery has taken root, air is given and the plants are watered frequently. Celery remains in this state until mid-May, when planting begins, and can last until the first days of June. For planting, trim the leaves a little to facilitate recovery by reducing evaporation through the leaves. Plant using a planting frame, either in an open square or between other plants such as lettuces. Throughout the summer, we water often and a lot, which favours the development and increases the quality of this vegetable. It has often been suggested that Celery-Rayes should be thinned out from the bottom, so that all the leaves at the base are removed, to encourage the rhizomes to develop; but this is a bad operation, and market gardeners don't usually do it. Clearly, removing leaves and thus depriving the plant of its means of aerial nutrition does not encourage the development of its underground organs; on the contrary, it weakens the whole plant. Céleris-Rayes cultivated as described above can be harvested as early as September and October, which is when they can already be seen on the markets. However, many market gardeners prefer to preserve this product and only deliver it for consumption in February and March. In autumn, vegetables of all kinds compete fiercely with celery, but in spring, when preserved vegetables begin to rise in price and fall in quality, celery is sold at a much higher price, with an average wholesale price of 2 francs a dozen. To keep them until spring, they simply need to be covered with a good layer of potting soil, either on the spot or in a gauge along a wall. They are trimmed for sale by removing all the rootlets. Growing for seed. - This is done in exactly the same way as described for ribbed celery. Seed-bearing plants should be chosen from those with the most developed and smoothest rhizomes. Leaves should be few and spread out over the ground. Care should be taken to keep these seedbeds away from those of ribbed celery, to avoid cross-breeding. Diseases. - The only disease that Celery suffers from is Rust, which seems to be due to the presence of a parasitic fungus. There is no known way to prevent it, or to treat affected plants. The best way to avoid the inconvenience it causes is therefore to deliver any affected plants for consumption immediately. ...... . . . :. . .  "e 1 : CHERFEUIL Chervil (Scandix cerefolium, Linnaeus) has long been considered a native plant, based on the fact that it is frequently found in village streets or on piles of rubble. It's hardly surprising that this plant has spread to the vicinity of the places where it's cultivated, as its cultivation is very old and dates back to before the beginning of the Christian era. But precisely this constant proximity to cultivated areas raised doubts as to whether it was really indigenous to Europe. Based on precise observations, it seems that this plant should be considered to have had its cradle in temperate western Asia and southeastern Russia, where it was collected as a truly spontaneous plant (1). Chervil, which we grow sometimes as an annual and sometimes as a biennial, has decomposed leaves with very thin blades. Its flower stalks, Om.50 high, end in umbels of small white flowers, followed by long, pointed fruits in pairs. Carrying only one seed each inside (1) De Candolle, Orig. des plantes cultivées. they do not open, and it is for this reason, no doubt, that these fruits are referred to in everyday language as seeds. Varieties. - As we have seen, although this plant has been cultivated for a very long time, it has varied very little, and only two different forms are grown. COMMON CHERVIL. - It corresponds to the type we have just discussed, and is the most commonly cultivated form. CERFETII, CURLY. - This variety, with its frizzy leaves, looks like moss. It has a much greater ornamental effect than the common variety, and its leaves can be used to decorate dishes. They are criticized for being less hardy. Uses. - The leaves of this plant are used to season salads and sometimes other dishes. It should be noted that the use of this plant is virtually unknown in Poland and Russia. It has often been claimed that Chervil should not be confused with Little Hemlock (ÆEthusa cynaptum, Linnaeus). We fail to see how this confusion can be made, since, apart from the difference in appearance, the fetid odor of the hemlock is nothing like the fine, aromatic scent of the Chervil. Cultivation. - Chervil can be sown almost all year round, but it is necessary to repeat sowing frequently if you want fresh, abundant produce. A rich soil, a shady location and frequent watering are all necessary for this plant. The market gardeners of Paris sow chervil over vast areas, because although its price is low on the markets, its rapid growth and abundant produce mean that it is profitable. Sowing is done either in rows spaced Om, 20 apart when the plant is grown on its own, or broadcast when combined with other crops such as cauliflower. About 500 grams of seed are used per acre. Sown in autumn, chervil overwinters and gives several successive harvests. On the other hand, chervil sown in spring and summer can only be harvested once, because it flowers so easily. To ensure a constant supply at this time of year, it is necessary to sow the plants every fortnight or so. Chervil is sold in bunches or handfuls, as large as the hand can hold. Its price, which is only 5 centimes in summer, rises to 25 or 30 centimes in winter. During the summer, one square meter yields ten to twelve. For seed, preference is given to plants which, sown in autumn, have survived the winter, which they also support with ease. Market gardeners, in order to obtain very fine products, transplant Chervil in spring, choosing only plants with ample, abundant leaves in the common variety, and on the contrary, well-curled leaves in the curly variety. Chervil seeds only keep their germinative capacity for two years, and even then, same-year seed is preferable and gives more certain results. TUBEROUS CHERFEUIL This chervil (Chærophyllum bulbosum, Linné) is characterized by decomposed leaves with very fine divisions and covered, as well as the petioles which have a purplish tinge, with rounded hairs which give it a hairy appearance. The root is swollen and fleshy, resembling a half-long carrot in shape, but brown in color (fig. 24). In the spring of the second year, the plant produces a stem about 1.50 m long, swollen above the point of attachment of the leaves, which branches and bears numerous inflorescences in compound umbels. The fruits (achenes) are raised by five longitudinal ribs; they are considered seeds and are sown as such. Fig. 24 - Chervil Use. - The roots are eaten, and their firm, white, tuberous flesh takes on a delicate taste after cooking, making them a much sought-after delicacy. Cultivation. - Tuberous chervil multiplies by seed, but as these lose their germinative capacity very soon after maturity, it is necessary either to sow them immediately, in autumn, in very healthy soil, or better still, to keep them until spring by stratifying them. This involves placing a layer of fine sand in a flowerpot, followed by a layer of seeds, which are then covered again with sand, and so on until the pot is full. It is then covered either with a sheet of glass, or an absolutely flat tile, so that the seal is sufficiently airtight to prevent insects or rodents from entering; for the same reason, the opening at the bottom of the pot is sealed. The pot, thus prepared, is buried close to a wall, to the north, at a depth of Om.30 or so. There is a great advantage in following this practice rather than sowing in autumn, as the soil is not uselessly occupied by gramineae that may be destroyed by insects during the winter. In any case, the soil in which Chervil is sown must be well loosened, rich in decomposed fertilizer and suitably harrowed with a rake. Sowing is broadcast, at a rate of 300 grams per acre. The seed is covered with a rake, then an even layer of mulch is spread over the soil. During the summer, all that's needed is to keep the soil moist with a few waterings and to keep it clean by weeding; this is the only cultural care that needs to be given to this plant. Around July, the leaves turn yellow and dry up, and the plant is ready to be harvested. Once the roots have been pulled out, they are left to dry out for a few hours, then lowered into a cellar or storeroom, where they can be stored until spring with the greatest of ease. The harvest is around 200 kilograms per acre. D. . To harvest seed, the best-formed and most developed roots should be selected in autumn, and carefully stored in the cellar, piled with sand. In the greyhound season, they are planted in planks at Om, 75 in all directions; they go to seed, and it is not usually necessary to stake them, because of the rigidity of the stems. As soon as the stems, which have flowered and set fruit, begin to yellow, they are cut off and the seed is treated as described above. - ." :." . . . . 7 .. "(Agaricus campestris, Linnaeus), grows spontaneously in moderately damp meadows, where it can be found from summer to the first cold days of winter. In vegetable crops, where horse manure is used, it appears on the edges of manure layers or millstones; often, under these conditions, the successive appearance lasts for a very long time. But these are merely accidental occurrences. L'ou has succeeded, through intelligent observation, in determining the conditions under which this vegetation can occur, and in repeating them artificially. Without insisting, in a special way, on the mode of vegetation and reproduction of Mushrooms, which would not fit within the framework we have assigned to this book, we must nevertheless take a quick look at the phases of development of the plant we are dealing with, in order to show what relationship exists between these and cultivation practices. The adult Agaric (fig. 25) is composed, as everyone knows, of two easily distinguishable parts: one called the foot, which represents a kind of cylinder slightly swollen into a rounded mass at its lower end, where it touches the ground; this foot supports a kind of upper disk, to which we give the name of cap. A close look at the hat reveals a spongy mass to which a considerable number of blades adhere at the bottom, radiating out from the point where the hat is attached to the foot. These blades are very unequal in size, some extending from the point where the cap is attached to the foot to its outer edge, while others are only part of this length. These blades, which are not visible when the fungus first appears, because the edges of the cap are folded in on themselves and envelop them completely, are a pale, fleshy pink when they become visible. Gradually, as the cap opens, they take on a darker hue, finally reaching a dark brown color. If, at this point, a mushroom is gently shaken over a sheet of white paper, a sort of blackish dust falls from the surface of the blades. Collecting some of this dust on the paper and examining it under the microscope, we see that each of these grains consists of a small central mass surrounded by an envelope. It is to these very small grains, which make up the black dust on the slides, that we give the name spores, which are the true seeds of the Mushroom. In fact, if these microscopic seeds are placed in a conyenable environment of heat and humidity, they germinate and produce a sort of long filament that can only be seen with magnifying instruments. This filament, at first a single one, soon branches out, and finally forms small white clusters that adhere to the bodies they encounter; in botany, this is called mycelium, and in practice, mushroom spawn. As we follow the development of this spawn, we'll see that it soon forms small clumps or felts in places, known as stroma. On top of this stroma, granulations will soon appear, at first very small, but rapidly growing. As they grow, they differentiate into two distinct parts, the foot and the cap. A new mushroom is born, and the cycle of vegetation is closed. As a result of these considerations, we can consider the spores as the seed, the mycelium or spawn as the organs of vegetation, and finally the Mushroom proper, composed of the foot and cap, as representing the organs of fruiting. We have seen that piles of horse manure often produce Agaries champêtres without intentional cultivation; so it is almost always horse manure that is used as the support, the substratum, on which this cultivation will be carried out. We'll now look at how this manure should be chosen and prepared for this type of production, but first we need to determine the environment in which the crop can be grown. In their spontaneous state, Agarics are always found in the open air, in meadows, or near piles of manure; as a result, they only grow when the state of the atmosphere is suitable for their vegetation, and it is particularly the low, damp heat of autumn that favors their development. In artificial cultivation, mushrooms are obtained either in the open air, with the help of special precautions, or in closed premises such as cellars, quarries, silos, etc., usually from one end of the year to the other. Quarry cultivation. - Of all the premises suitable for growing Agaricum, the ones that are preferred to all others, and which lend themselves best to production from a commercial point of view, are the quarries used for stone extraction. There are a great many of these throughout the Paris basin, which are no longer quarried, but are used for the crops we're interested in here (fig. 26). Rarely do these quarries have mouths, i.e. entrances at ground level, which are therefore easy to access even with cars; more often, on the contrary, they have shafts, fitted with parrot ladders, with disDYBOWSRI rungs. - Vegetable growing. 8 tancés de Om, 50. It is through these wells that the materials needed for cultivation are transported. These mouths, or shafts, communicate with galleries drilled into the ground at widely varying depths. Some are only ten or so meters below ground level, but most are much deeper, and it's not uncommon to see mushroom cultivation taking place 20 or 30 meters below ground. Often there are several levels of galleries, one above the other, separated only by layers of earth a few meters deep. All these varying arrangements have little influence on cultivation. However, the deepest quarries are naturally the warmest, and the most suitable temperature for good cultivation is around 12 to 15 degrees Celsius, so it's best to get as close to this point as possible. The degree of humidity is of little importance, provided that when the quarry is dry, sufficient water is available for timely watering. It's not uncommon to find a spring in the quarry itself, or to be able to divert water from a nearby well. If these resources are lacking, the water has to be brought down from above. In this case, mushroom growers employ a simple but ingenious process, which consists in suspending a string in the shaft, and letting the water flow along this string, to which it adheres by capillary action, thus descending, without deviating from the conductive string, to the bottom of the shaft, where it is collected in a container of some kind. The size of the quarries used around Paris varies greatly; some are no less than several kilometers long, while others are only a few hundred meters long. The height and width of underground galleries can vary greatly within the same quarry, depending on the original use of the site for stone extraction. The height, which in some places is two or three meters, becomes so low in others that it is difficult to stand or even bend in half. These variations in height or width have little effect on cultivation, especially if there is some ventilation, without which the temperature would become uneven and higher in the lower part. Ventilation is necessary in quarries, but it must not be too considerable, so it's useful to be able to regulate it. This is achieved by means of small-diameter shafts, topped by a kind of chimney, usually made of planks, which can be opened or closed at will. Quarries are most often rented for the running mềtre of galleries, regardless of their width or height. The usual price in the Paris basin, at Arcueil, Montrouge, Vanves, Malakoff, etc., is O fr. 15 per running meter, rented by the year. Choice of manure. - The essential point in mushroom cultivation is the judicious choice of the substrate on which they are to live. Horse manure is almost exclusively suitable; however, it seems that donkey, mule or even sheep manure has sometimes been used successfully. But it's best to use only horse manure, and it's not indifferent to use any kind of horse manure. Indeed, manure from luxury horse stables, and in general from all those where straw is lavished too abundantly, is unsuitable. For manure to be good, it must necessarily come from stables where horses are stalled for some time on straw provided relatively sparingly. Experience has shown us that manure can be considered suitable for growing Agaricum, when the manure equals the weight of straw. Manures from vigorous, impatient horses, such as stallions, which break up straw well when trampled, are rightly preferred. If the farmer wishes to use this type of manure, he should leave it under his horses for six to eight days, adding only a little new bedding on top each day to keep the horses clean. Farmers only use manure made from wheat straw. Generally speaking, they are right to do so, as it is with such manure that the produce is most assured; however, we have obtained a good harvest by using manure made from oat straw in an experimental crop at the Ecole d'agriculture de Grignon. Mushroom growers buy manure from car and trucking companies, or from private individuals. Purchases are usually made by the month, at a rate of 4.50 to 6 francs per cheyal per month, bringing the price per cubic meter to around 5 francs. Sometimes manure is bought in bulk, for example in cavalry barracks; it is then sold by the cubic meter, or by the car, taking the above price as the market basis. Manure preparation. - As and when manure is received, it is piled up, until such time as the quantity is deemed suitable, when it is prepared for cultivation. The first step in preparing the manure for cultivation is to build what is known as a floor; this is a sort of rectangular millstone, with sides that vary in size according to the quantity of manure available, but which is always raised to a height of around 1.10 m. To build the floor properly, the manure should be shaken well when picked up, to make it homogeneous, and beaten with the back of the fork, so that the millstone is evenly packed. The millstone is built with a border to determine its width, which varies according to the size of the crop. In industrial production, these floors are rarely less than 4 meters square. Once the edge of the millstone has been made, the manure continues to be deposited, stirring it vigorously with a fork until it reaches the height indicated. This process continues until the entire floor has been raised. Care is taken during assembly to remove any foreign bodies that may have been present. Once the millstone is in place, it is watered to moisten the manure and allow it to ferment. As soon as fermentation begins, the temperature of the mass rises significantly, reaching around 70 degrees after five or six days. About eight days after the floor has been built, it is demolished and a new one built, similar in every respect. To do this, the manure is removed from one side of the old floor and, using a fork to stir it vigorously, the construction of the second floor is begun alongside it. Continue in this way, giving this heap the same height as the previous one and taking care to place all the manure from the periphery in the center of the floor; pack with a fork and water as before. Eight days after this second operation, we demolish again to build a third and final floor. All the precautions indicated earlier are taken here, and it is not uncommon to have to water again, as fermentation raises the temperature of the millstone, resulting in constant evaporation. Through these successive manipulations, the manure has noticeably decreased in volume, and the millstones, which were about 1.10 m high, are finally reduced, if the same surface is kept, to Om, 80 or Om, 85, i.e. by about a quarter in volume. The aim of these successive operations is to rot the manure, so as to obtain a mass that is as homogeneous as possible, moist to the touch, and uniformly brown in color. The temperature of the manure thus prepared by triple manipulation has dropped significantly, to around 30 to 40 degrees. Three or four days after the last floor has been built, the manure is usually ready for use. All these preliminary operations usually take about twenty days; but these rules are not absolute, and must be modified according to circumstances. When the manure is very dry, or when the temperature is low and the weather rainy, preparation can be extended by a few days. Practice, aided by these general principles, is the only way to guide the operator when conditions are no longer normal. Mushroom growers usually build the floors in August, so that they can use the manure in September. Building millstones. - Now that the manure has been prepared using all the operations described above, it's time to start using it. This is done by throwing the manure down through the opening in the shaft, picking it up with wheelbarrows, narrow at the base to allow it to pass easily along the quarry paths, and driving it to the place where it is to be used. It is deposited in successive barrowfuls, forming what are known as chains, whose location corresponds to that which will be permanently occupied by the millstones. These millstones for Agaric cultivation will be about Om, 50 to Om, 60 at the base and as much in height, the top being arranged in a dome, so that one of these millstones represents very roughly in cross-section the figure of a regular ogive. The length of the millstones depends on the size of the crop. Depending on the width of the underground galleries, two or more rows are placed parallel to each other, with only a path of about thirty centimetres between them. Often, along the gallery walls, the millstones are supported by one of the sides, which slightly modifies their shape; this arrangement is adopted in areas of narrow width. For the grinding wheel to be built properly, the worker must take the manure deposited in a chain by hand and place it on the spot where the wheel is to be placed. As the millstone rises, the worker kneels over the manure, tamping it down constantly with his hands and knees, laying it out with absolute regularity. The top and sides are combed with the fingers, then tapped, so as to obtain a surface absolutely free of asperities. To be fit for use, they need to be at around 12 or 14°, which happens seven to fifteen days after construction. If the temperature is higher, because the manure has not been sufficiently consumed, we lift the millstone by passing a wooden stake through it from place to place; in this way, the temperature is rapidly lowered to the desired point. The manure is compacted where it has been lifted. Spawning the millstones. - When the millstone is judged to be in good condition, it should be seeded, or, to put it more accurately, planted with mushrooms. To do this, we use small plates of manure, about Om.05 by Om.07, invaded by the vegetative organs of the Agaric, the mycelium or mushroom spawn. The result is a veritable cuttings operation, known as larding. This mycelium has the property, common to that of most mushrooms, of preserving itself in a dry state almost indefinitely, but resuming its life and growth as soon as it is placed in a warm, humid environment. When dry spawn is available, it's a good idea to put it in the quarry where the millstones are located a few days before use, so that it has time to regain its lost moisture and is ready to grow as soon as it's placed in the millstone. To plant a millstone, we use white plates, or "mises", and, opening a small cavity in the millstone with the hand, we place the "mise" inside. This is placed in two parallel rows, approximately Om, 25 to Om, 30 or Om, 40 apart on each row. Once the stake has been placed, the manure is pressed down by hand to fix it in place. After a few days, eight to twelve, if you look at the bets, you can see that the white has increased, that it has spun and that the grinding stone is beginning to be invaded; the bet has become mnutile, and you remove it to throw it away. Twenty to twenty-five days later, if all has gone well, it's easy to see that the spawn has spread throughout the mass of manure, especially near the surface. At this point, the millstone is lightly beaten to make it smooth and to completely remove any irregularities caused by the larding and removal of the bets. All that's left to do is a final operation, which consists in covering the whole wheel with a uniform layer of specially prepared earth; this work is called goptage. The material used for gopting is usually the debris from the stones quarried. This is not, however, an absolute prerequisite for success, and mushroom growers often use stone waste without soil. We've had good results gopting with falun or shell sand. To be used, the soil to be gopted must be very slightly moistened, to facilitate its adhesion with the manure. Once the soil has been prepared, it is spread on the grinding wheel in an even layer, about 2 centimetres thick, and then beaten lightly with the back of a wooden spade. This operation must be carried out with the utmost regularity, so that the grinding wheel is covered everywhere with the same thickness of soil, and the mushrooms are not hindered in their emergence. All you have to do then is wait for the mushrooms to appear, and maintain sufficient humidity in the galleries by watering the paths. Usually, the first Mushrooms appear twenty to thirty-five days after goptage; however, in exceptional cases, they may take longer to appear. Great care must always be taken during the many operations described above. If you follow the conditions described exactly, you can be sure of harvesting an abundance of mushrooms; on the other hand, deviating from them rarely produces satisfactory results. Cultivation as it is done today has precise rules from which it is dangerous, on pain of setbacks, to deviate even momentarily; but if this production has great demands, on the other hand it presents very serious advantages by the enormous quantity of products it is capable of providing in well-managed operations. Mushroom harvesting. - As we have just seen, the Mushrooms appear about a month after the goptage operation, which means that the time elapsing from receipt of the manure to the moment when harvesting begins is about two and a half months. From then on, the only work consists of picking, which is usually done every day. The approach of the moment so longed for by the grower is heralded by small granulations which, if all has gone well, first appear towards the bottom of the millstones, then gradually invade them completely. These are the very young mushrooms, born on the stroma of the mycelium, which in a few days will grow and acquire sufficient development to be delivered for consumption. The grower must therefore visit his crops frequently, so as not to let the Mushrooms overshoot their time of maturity. Mushrooms can be harvested when the cap, which has become quite distinct from the stem, has not yet half-opened to reveal the blades underneath; open mushrooms suffer a marked depreciation from a sales point of view. Agarics are born on millstones, sometimes isolated, sometimes and most often in small clusters to which we give the name of rocks. Harvesting is done by taking a basket with a handle under the left arm, capable of containing around 5 kilos of mushrooms, and detaching with the right hand, by a slight twisting movement, all the Agarics whose development is judged sufficient. Care is taken to cover with gopter soil all the small cavities made where the Mushrooms have been harvested, especially where a rock has been picked. Once begun, harvesting continues for a variable length of time, depending on how successful the cultivation has been, but usually lasts at least two months, and can last up to four or five, in the best conditions. Yields. - Taking as a basis a cultivation of 1,200 meters of millstones carried out by Mr. Duvillard, a horticulturist in Arcueil, we were able to estimate the yield as being very roughly equal to 3 kilos per running meter of millstone for the entire harvest period. These mushrooms, picked as they develop, are usually sorted into first and second choice. Each portion is carefully packed in baskets lined with paper or linen, and kept away from air and light, which would cause the mushrooms to darken. When sold at the Halles de Paris, the first choice is delivered at around 1 fr. 50 per kilo, and the second at O fr. 75; this represents an average selling price of 1 fr. 10 per kilo, with each quality being roughly equal in weight. Growing costs and profit. - The costs involved in this type of cultivation are easy to estimate, and include the cost of manure, labor and quarry rental. As we have seen, manure is reduced in volume by a quarter in successive manipulations; its initial price being 5 francs, the price of prepared manure will be 6 fr. 25 per cubic metre. With one cubic meter of this manure, we can build 12 to 14 running meters of grinding wheels, which gives each meter an average price of 0 fr. 50. Labor costs, consisting of manure handling, millstone construction, tapping and gopting, performed by day laborers or task workers, come to a total of 1 franc per meter of millstone. As we said, quarry rental is paid at the rate of 0.15 francs per running meter of gallery, in which at least two parallel rows of millstones are set up. All this adds up to 1 running meter of manure: Price of manure....................... Ofr,50 Labor........................ 1, 00 Quarry rental............... O ,07 Total.......... 1fr,57 It is difficult to include in these costs the cost of purchasing the spawn, which, as we shall see later, is usually prepared by the farmer himself. The yield is, as we said, 3 kilos of Mushrooms at I fr. 10, i.e. 3 fr. 30; but to this sum must be added the price of the manure from the exhausted millstones, which is sold or used directly for cultivating the fields. This manure, when the harvest is exhausted, is significantly reduced in volume, this reduction being equivalent to two-fifths of the original mass; so that some twenty meters of millstones are needed to make up one cubic meter, which is sold for 5 to 6 francs, or 25 to 30 centimes per running meter of millstone. The product per meter is therefore: Mushroom product.............. 3fr,30 Manure from the demolition of the grinding stone............................. 0 25 Total product......... 3r,55 If we subtract from this sum the cultivation costs amounting to 1 fr. 57, we are left with a sum of 2 francs, representing the net profit that this crop can give per running meter of grinding stone. This type of cultivation is not always a sure-fire success, but it is rare for failures to be frequent when conditions are as indicated. Cellar culture. - In small-scale cultivation, quarries are seldom used; on the contrary, cellars or basements of all kinds, and sometimes silos dug into covered galleries, are particularly popular. Almost all cays are suitable for this purpose; however, the best are those that are deep, where the temperature is more constant. All air vents are usually sealed, to be opened only if the temperature becomes too high. If the cellar is dry, it's a good idea, before using it, to water the soil abundantly, level it and clear it of all foreign matter, so as to make the area perfectly clean. The preparation of the manure is identical to that described above, but the floor is naturally reduced in size. However, there is a limit to this reduction, and no less than 2 to 3 cubic meters of manure can be used, otherwise fermentation will not take place. Once the manure has been prepared according to the rules indicated, the millstones are built. These can be placed anywhere: along the walls or in the middle of the cellar, on the planks or shelves if there are any; on either side of the staircase wall if the latter is wide enough; and sometimes even in flat tubs, so as to make them mobile. Stones should not be larger than the dimensions indicated for quarry cultivation, otherwise the manure could heat up too much and dry out inside the stone, preventing the spawn from growing. Larding, goptage and harvesting are carried out under ordinary conditions, taking care never to let the mushrooms develop too much, even if they are not needed immediately. They can be kept fresh for several days if left in the cellar after harvesting. To ensure constant production, manure is prepared every two months; however, it should not be forgotten that the most successful crops are those started in autumn, so that they can be harvested in winter and spring. Open-air cultivation. - This type of cultivation, much used in the past, has been partly abandoned today. It yields less reliable products, since in addition to the usual causes of failure, there are also climatic influences to contend with. Smoking is selected and prepared exactly as described above. This usually takes place in September. Once the manure is ready, a suitable site for building the millstones is chosen. The site is prepared by simply levelling the ground if it is of a permeable nature, but if it is on the other side of the wall, the millstones are built.

If the soil doesn't retain enough moisture, it's a good idea to cover it with a uniform layer of rubble or clinker to let the water run off, or to dig a gutter in front of the bed where the millstone is to be placed. Some market gardeners build these millstones in full squares, arranged in parallel rather than along a wall, so as to extend the cultivation area. These millstones are built in the same way as those used in quarries, but once completed, they need to be protected from the elements. To do this, they are completely covered either with straw mats or, more usually, with a 5 to 6 centimetre layer of litter. In rainy autumns, it's a good idea to change this cover every time water penetrates it. During the winter, the thickness of the cover is increased if the weather becomes too cold, but care must be taken to ensure that excess litter does not lead to new fermentation in the mass, which would destroy all hope of harvesting. Mushrooms are harvested by removing the protective cover and covering them as soon as they are harvested. All in all, this crop, which in exceptionally mild winters can produce excellent results, must generally be regarded as fraught with difficulties and hazards. It succeeds in the hands of growers who know it well, but it becomes lucky in the hands of the inexperienced. Making the white. - As we have seen, Mushrooms multiply by means of mycelium adhering to a foreign body, most often consumed horse manure. In practice, the word "spawn" is used to designate both the mycelium itself and the manure impregnated with it, which is used to line the layers. In nature, as we said at the beginning of our study of this crop, mushrooms often grow spontaneously, either in meadows or on piles of manure or waste of any kind. The spores were brought there by DYBOWSRI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 9 the wind, and, finding a suitable environment for their growth, have developed there. We take advantage of this spontaneous development to obtain spawn for use in cultivation. To do this, we remove from the manure pile any part which, on close examination, is covered with the white filaments of the mycelium; we place this manure on racks and dry it in the shade. The dried white mycelium retains its ability to develop when placed in a suitable environment, and this for many years, at least ten. We place it in an attic, so that it remains absolutely dry and does not blacken. This spontaneous white is called virgin white. Mushroom growers harvest it wherever they can find it: on manure, on piles of leaves or shavings exposed to humidity. This mycelium should not, however, be confused with that of other mushrooms; only practice can teach you to make this distinction. Another procedure, commonly used to get rid of spawn, is to demolish part of a millstone just as it begins to be covered with products, and to select all the spawn-laden manure, which can be used immediately or dried for later use. In this practice, care is taken to demolish the part of the layer that shows itself to be the best, both in terms of quantity and product quality. Mushroom growers also produce spawn for three or four successive layers, after which they usually resort to using virgin spawn again, because after this time, the spawn seems exhausted and only produces less beautiful and less certain products. There are several other processes for obtaining white, but they have the double disadvantage of being complicated and not very successful; for these reasons, we feel we must ignore them. Varieties. - Depending on whether virgin spawn of this or that proyenance is used, or spawn of that layer, and also on the various circumstances inherent in the manure, the location, its temperature or the prevailing humidity, the shape and size of the Agaricum often change markedly. Generally speaking, cultivated Agaric is less voluminous and less colorful than that which grows spontaneously; however, very large Agaric is sometimes harvested from layers, particularly those larded with virgin white. Lon wanted to use these different forms to create different varieties. This is how we come to indicate the varieties: petit blanc, gros blanc, blond and gris. But, in our opinion, these determinations have little reason to exist, as they are more a manifestation of variation in external conditions than in the plant itself. Moreover, one of the reasons why there is no point in sticking to them is that, after three or four successive crops, we are obliged to return to virgin white, which will give a product that is not determined in advance, and which may belong indiscriminately to one variety or another. Using the manure from the millstones. - As we have seen, manure from mushroom millstones is usually sold by professional cultivators as fertilizer for large and small-scale farming. 117 It is indeed a fallacy to believe that mushroom cultivation deprives manure of its value as fertilizer, and farmers who buy it for 5 or 6 francs from mushroom growers don't pay too much for it. The analyses we have carried out have given us the following figures: Water and carbonic acid............... 43.6 Dry matter........................ 56.4 Total............... 100.0 The proportion of dry matter is greater than in normal manure, because a certain amount of gopter soil is always carried away. The dry matter of this manure is composed of: Mineral matter...................... 31.05 Organic matter..................... 68.95 Total................. 100.0 The significant proportion of mineral matter is due to the presence of gopter soil. Taking into account this disproportion and evaluating the nitrogen content in relation to 1000 of dry organic matter, we have the following: Nitrogen in one kilo of dry organic matter of ordinary manure....... 3,gr16 Nitrogen in one kilo of dry organic matter of manure after mushroom cultivation....................... 38r, 13 Difference........ Ogr,03 These figures show that the effective nitrogen content has not changed significantly. Animal and insect pests. - In the cellars, quarries or silos where they are built, millstones are subject to the ravages of mice, rats and sometimes moles. It's essential to wage fierce war on these animals, using traps; but it's even wiser to guard against them by having doors that close hermetically, at least at the bottom. These animals, by making their galleries in the millstones, completely devastate them and prevent the arrival of mushrooms. Grey slugs are common in crops, where they feed at the expense of mushrooms. They should be carefully destroyed whenever they are encountered. It's easy to catch a large number of them by placing a few cabbage leaves here and there, on which they are very fond and on which they can be found. Sowbugs, habitual inhabitants of damp places, always accompany the mushroom crops they attack. Most of the time, their ravages are minor; but if the number of these insects becomes too great, they can easily be destroyed by placing large potatoes on the stacks, which Ton cuts in half and hollows out to form two bells, under which the woodlice accumulate and are easily crushed. In the quarries, there is usually a large number of small black flies, which in certain circumstances become so numerous that the light with which we are obliged to descend into the crops is sometimes extinguished by the appalling number of flies which, attracted by its brightness, rush towards it. Mushroom growers attach little importance to this tipulian which, according to M. Maurice Girard's determination, belongs to the Sciara genus. They attach much more importance to a kind of small worm that attacks the young mushrooms it gnaws on; they call it the mushroom moth. As it happens, there is an intimate connection between these two beings, one of which is the perfect insect and the other the larva of a single species. Mushroom growers only cultivate Agaricum once a year in the same quarry, claiming that since the air is stale, cultivation fails if repeated. The real reason for this failure, which is real in the cultures we follow, is the presence of sciara eggs, which fill the cracks in the walls and soon hatch and spread over the millstones they ravage. If the cellar is left to rest for six or eight months, the laryes die and disappear completely. This means of destruction, which growers unconsciously apply under the pretext of letting the cellar rest, as they put it, is therefore quite successful, but has the serious disadvantage of interrupting cultivation. It seems, however, that cultivation could be renewed indefinitely without any danger of failure, provided the cellar is filled with sulfurous acid vapors, burning sulfur from place to place and only returning to the cellar a few days later to avoid any danger of asphyxiation. Carbon sulphide could also be poured into the galleries; but this product is dangerous to handle, because of the ease with which it ignites. It is certain that, by either process, the sciara, whether winged, egg or larva, will be completely destroyed. Plant parasites. - Agarics cultivated in quarries are frequently attacked by parasitic fungi which live at the expense of the plant whose cultivation interests us here. The results of these attacks are so-called rert on the one hand, and mole on the other. There is probably a relationship between these two manifestations, perhaps due to one and the same cause. Mole, which occurs in crops previously affected by green rot, leads to swelling of the Agaricum and later to its decomposition, which is accompanied by a putrid odor, similar to that of rotting fish. The only way to reduce the frequency of these attacks is to methodically remove all Agaries invaded by the disease, as leaving them in the quarry facilitates the spread of its germs. In a note published in 1892, M. Prillieux, who studied the Agaric mole and recognized that it was due to the presence of a parasitic fungus, Mycogone rosea, indicates the removal of all affected Agarics as the only remedy against the spread of the disease. 1 CHICORÉE ENDIVE Chicory, so widely used in its various forms in vegetable growing, is a plant whose origin has been the subject of the most varied hypotheses. The plant, as we know it, has not been found in a spontaneous state, but several botanists, by comparing it with an annual species known as Chicortum pumitum, which grows spontaneously in the Mediterranean region, have thought it could be assimilated to the latter. M. de Candolle, whose competence in such matters cannot be disputed, agrees. As a result, the name Chicortum endivia, by Linnaeus, should be retained for reasons of antiquity for the plant which, as we have just said, is found in the Mediterranean region, in Morocco, Algeria, etc. Chicory endive has produced, through cultivation, two types that are sufficiently different from each other in terms of form, use and cultivation, for them to be studied separately, retaining the names by which they are referred to in practice. SCAROLE CHICORICE Escarole has broad leaves, variously cut along the edges and forming a large rosette on the ground. Its leaves are attached to a very short stem that extends into an abundant branching, bearing blue flowers in sessile heads. The fruits, which follow the flowers, are angular, gray achenes topped by a small, membranous collar. These fruits, which are used as seeds, retain their germinative capacity for five to six years. 2 1 y ~ Fig. 27 - Chicory. Uses. - This plant is widely used for salads. Varieties. - Chicory has produced a number of varieties that differ little from one another. Vegetable gardens and market-gardeners grow almost exclusively green and blond scarole maraîchères, but these types are more or less perfected. To produce good quality products, they must bear abundant, ample leaves, so as to form a clump, often no less than Om.45 in diameter, which must above all be compact and dense (fig. 27). Cultivation. - Scarole is grown in vegetable gardens as an autumn salad, as this is the only time of year when it can develop fully without flowering. Scarole is rarely sown before the beginning of June. However, for some years now, we have been applying the same cultivation methods to Scarole as to Chicory (yoy. page 142), so that we can obtain summer produce. The seed should be sown on a bed and covered with a frame; it is essential that emergence takes place quickly, if we are to have a plant that produces good products. The seed should be spread very lightly, as the plant is not usually transplanted in the nursery, but waited until it has developed sufficiently to be planted directly. The seedling should be watered frequently, to activate the development of the young plant. As soon as the first leaves appear, air should be supplied to accustom the young plants to the action of external agents, and to prevent the leaves from being burned by excessive heat. Three weeks to a month at the latest after sowing, the Scarole plants, which by then have at least three leaves, should be put into position. Some time before this operation, you'll need to completely enley the frames. The seedling is pulled out by lifting the soil with a trowel. Once uprooted, it is placed in handfuls, and a knife is used to remove about a third of the root length, to prevent the plant from pivoting and forcing it to multiply its hair. To compensate for this mutilation, we also shorten the leaves, which reduces the causes of evaporation and promotes recovery. In all cases, it is useful to cover the soil with a good layer of mulch to retain water from watering. Transplanting is carried out with a planter, in rows spaced Om,30 apart, on which the Scarole plants are planted Ou,60 apart, in staggered rows. Care should be taken to press only the hairy part of the root into the soil, as planting too deeply will cause the lettuce to develop poorly. As soon as the plants are planted, they need to be watered frequently. After this first sowing, others can be made, which will now simply be done in the open air and in the ground. They should be treated in the same way as those described above. The last seedlings are sown at the end of July, and put into the ground in the last days of August. After this time, in years with a mild climate, the seedlings can produce for part of the winter; but more often than not, they don't have time to develop and rot during the bad season. When Scarole plants have reached full development, about two months after transplanting, it is necessary to bleach the leaves before releasing them for consumption. This is achieved by lifting the leaves with a strand of rye straw previously soaked in water, and tying them tightly so as to deprive them completely of the action of light (fig. 28). When the plants are well-developed, eight to ten days before tying, the grower lifts the leaves halfway up and holds them in this position with a tie. In this way, the lettuces continue to grow without getting in each other's way. The time needed for Scarole to blanch varies greatly according to the temperature, Fig. 28. - Scarole tied with a piece of straw. It can take from eight days to three weeks, depending on the season and outdoor conditions. When Scarole plants are half-bound in autumn, as described above, they can be lifted into rootballs and planted in trays towards the end of October. They are watered and mats are placed over the windows at night. In this way, you can keep Scarole plants for almost the whole winter. Market-gardeners sell Scarole plants as they have been harvested, with only the binding and spoiled leaves removed. They are sold by the dozen at a price that varies between 1 and 1 fr. 50 for this quantity. Seed production. - To harvest seed, in autumn, from among the late sowings, select the best-looking plants and winter them under a frame. In spring, they are lifted and planted at Om, 60 in all directions. Pinch off the inflorescences to obtain beautiful seeds, which are harvested when the stems begin to yellow. Curly Chicory differs from Scarolea in that its leaves are very deeply and finely cut, often taking on the appearance of a tuft of moss. Their vegetative characteristics are identical to those of Scarole. Their cultivation differs from that of Scarole in that it lends itself better to the production of early crops. Uses. - Chicory, like Scarole, is eaten as a salad, with a slightly more bitter taste. It can also be cooked, making it a very healthy, if not very tasty, food. Varieties. - They differ from one another mainly in the condition of their leaf blades, which are more or less finely cut, and in the ease with which they withstand forced cultivation. ROUEN CHICORY. - A fast-growing variety, with rosettes of leaves often up to Om.40 in diameter. Leaves with relatively wide divisions. It is widely cultivated by Paris market gardeners, who use it for their open-ground plantations. ITALIAN CHICORY. - Very sharply divided, crenulated leaves. Smaller than the previous variety, it is particularly suited to forced cultivation. Not suitable for full-ground 2 2 * * Fig. 29 - Italian chicory. especially for autumn planting, as it rots easily when the heat becomes insufficient (fig. 29). Growing in the ground. - The first Chicory seedlings for outdoor cultivation are sown at the beginning of March. It is necessary to use a warm layer giving at least 20 to 25 degrees to make this first sowing. As soon as the shot is fired, the seed is spread on the potting soil, barely covered, then the frame is closed and covered with a double layer of straw mats. If this is not done, experience shows that plants grown from seeds that have taken a long time to germinate will almost certainly go to seed before they have fully developed. To facilitate germination, it's a good idea to lightly baste the soil. As soon as the young plants have emerged, remove the mats and leave them overnight. Around two weeks after sowing, the plants already have four to five leaves, not including cotyledons. The time has come to transplant them. A new warm layer of potting soil is prepared, and the young Chicory plants are transplanted at around Om, 08 in all directions, equivalent to 250 per frame. Before transplanting, the plant is prepared by trimming the root and leaf tips. Immediately after transplanting, the plant is watered, then the frame is replaced and covered with straw mats for two days, to encourage growth. After this time, the frame is uncovered and, weather permitting, air is given to prevent the plant from wilting. At the beginning of April, the frames are removed to accustom the Chicory to the action of the outside air; about eight days later, the plant can be put in place. After ploughing the soil and covering it with a good layer of mulch, plant the Chicory, watering it beforehand, keeping a distance between rows of Oi, 25 to (1m 40). As with Scarolea, avoid transplanting Chicory too deep into the soil. Frequent watering is necessary throughout the growing season, if many of the Chicory plants are not to flower. About two months after planting, this lettuce has reached full development; then, after a good watering, it can be tied up, taking care, however, not to tie it up until the leaves are no longer moist, otherwise it will rot. To bind this salad, as the leaves are shorter than those of Scarole, it is necessary to make two turns at different heights with the rye straw, so as to retain all the leaves. Bleaching takes place quickly, and the crop can be harvested eight or ten days after binding. It is important not to water bound chicory any more, as this would cause it to rot. These spring crops, started under the precautions we have just described, will continue, but with infinitely greater simplicity, from April to July. May and June seedlings will be sown on a warm bed, from which the glazing will be removed, as soon as the plant has fully emerged; June and July seedlings will be sown in the open air, on an old bed, or even in the ground exposed to full sun. In both cases, seedlings should be sown in the open air, on an old bed, or even in the ground in full sun. Transplant, leaving a spacing of Om, 45 between the plants in all directions, as this is the time when the plants will develop most strongly. Rouen chicory and semi-fine varieties are usually used for this purpose. The last seedling can be used at two different times, by first taking part of the plant from the seedling and leaving the rest, which is light, for another three weeks or a month. In fact, Chicory can be transplanted without suffering, even though it is already well developed and half grown. Chicory requires three to three and a half months of vegetation to reach full development when grown in the open ground, and as this plant is notoriously frost-resistant, the last seedlings should be sown by the beginning of August at the latest. When the plants are fully developed, they must be tied up without delay, otherwise they may start to climb. If, however, you only want to consume them little by little, you should only lift the leaves halfway, then bind them completely a fortnight or so before releasing them for consumption. If frosts are to be feared, when the lettuces have reached full growth, it is useful to throw a little straw over them, which will protect them from the cold; 5 to 6 degrees below zero are enough to damage Chicory. Harvesting can be prolonged by removing the clods and planting them under a frame, where they keep well, provided they are kept a little dry to avoid rotting. Forced cultivation. - For early crops, we start sowing in December and January with Chicory from Italy or Rouen. Layers of new manure are planted in great thickness to ensure a temperature of 30 to 35 degrees Celsius, at least in the first few days. We cover this layer with compost, and sow as soon as the temperature has reached the point we have just indicated. DYBOWSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 10 1 2 1, The seed is spread evenly over the potting soil; the seed is left on the surface, uncovered, and watered with a fine-headed watering can. Close the frame and line it with straw mats. Germination must take place within thirty hours, otherwise the plant will be worthless. At the end of this time, we check whether germination has taken place, and if not, we cover the germinated seed with about a centimetre of potting soil, which we spread by hand. After a fortnight, the plants, which have taken three or four leaves, are ready to be transplanted on a new layer giving 25 degrees of heat. Transplanting is done in the same way as for seedlings destined for potting. Three weeks later, the young Chicory plants are ready to be planted out, which is done by transplanting them onto a third warm layer covered with Om, 20 of potting soil. Six rows of five Chicory plants each are planted in each frame. Water when necessary, but not too much to avoid rotting. Often, when the chicory is half grown, you transplant a second season of the same lettuce, using seedlings you've prepared for the purpose, following the rules we've just described. In this way, successive crops of Chicory can be grown until the time comes to deliver it to the soil. On average, early-growing chicory requires three months of vegetation, from sowing to harvesting. Growing for seed. - When it comes to obtaining chicory seed, one of the best methods is to keep the plants that best correspond to the type of variety you're growing under a frame over winter, without removing them, and to plant these plants in the spring in Om, 60 in all directions. This procedure gives very good results, but is fraught with difficulties, as Chicory often rots during the winter; so, in the practice of large-scale seed production, we follow a completely different method, which is as follows: The seed is sown on a hot bed in a feyrier; then the plant is transplanted to a nursery under a frame, as described above; finally, in April, it is planted out. It goes without saying that Chicory is not bound, but allowed to set seed freely, and often not even watered, in order to hasten flowering; but this lack of watering has the disadvantage of producing only poorly developed plants. To obtain good seed, it's a good idea to pinch off the tips of flowering shoots; this produces less seed, but it's more beautiful. Harvesting takes place when the plants begin to dry out, which is usually in September. The stems are threshed, and the sifted seeds are put into bags, which are then labeled, so that when sowing in layers, preference should always be given to young seeds, which germinate more quickly, and consequently produce plants less prone to bolting. Harmful insects. - In dry soils, aphids (Aphis sonchi) attack the roots and often cause great damage. It is combated by frequent watering. 6- WILD CHICORY. WILD CHICORY Wild chicory (Chicortum intybus) grows wild in France. The leaves are dark green, often with russet spots, sinuous and sharply lobed. The leaf blade and petiole are covered with abundant hairs. From the middle of the leaves, which form a sort of spreading rosette on the ground, rises a flowering stem with abundant, spreading branches. The inflorescence is a cyme of variously arranged sessile flower heads. The ligulate flowers are a beautiful azure blue. The fruit (achene) is shiny brown. Uses. - Taken up by cultivation, this plant has singularly modified its way of being. As the leaves have expanded, they have become less hairy and less bitter. Thus modified, it lends itself to a variety of culinary uses. Sometimes, in fact, it is eaten as it is, young, in salads; at other times, it is covered with earth to be blanched on the spot. But its main consumption is in the form of etiolate, made in the cellar, to which we give the vulgar name of Capuchin Beard (fig. 30). Varieties. - In addition to the primitive type, several distinct varieties are grown. VARIEGATED WILD CHICORY. - The leaves of this variety are profusely spotted with red. It is used to make Capucin's Beard, and some of the stains persist despite the wilting process. IMPROVED WILD CHICORY. - A variety with very large, wavy, blistered leaves, giving it the appearance of a lettuce. CHICORÉE SAUVAGE A GROSSE RACINE OU CHICORÉE A CArÉ. - This variety, whose taproots are very well developed, is used, as its name suggests, to make Chicory coffee, which is so widely used. The leaves are used to conL2 Fig. 30. - Chicorée Barbe-de-Capucin. fection of the Beard. There are two main types. BRUSSELS ROOT CHICORY OR WITLOOF. - This plant, which resembles Magdeburg chicory, has the particularity that its leaves are grouped together to form a kind of apple resembling a small romaine. The cultivation of this variety is described below. Chicory production. - Wild Chicory is grown almost exclusively near Paris, in the communes of Montreuil-sur-Seine, Rosny and Bobigny. Growers who indulge in this type of production rarely grow Chicory on their own land. The reason for this is that they often don't have the space to sulphurize the soil, that the crop is exhausting, and that it's impossible to grow it successfully two years in a row on the same plot. Land is rented for the duration of a crop, i.e. from spring to late autumn. The land is delivered to the grower in April, smoked, ploughed and harrowed; it is returned in November or December. The price of this rental varies little, as the land used for this crop is always of good quality; it is usually 750 fr. per hectare. Sowing. - Once the land has been suitably prepared, sowing takes place at the end of April or beginning of May. Sowing is done in rows, to facilitate cleaning up during the summer. The rows are spaced Om, 30 apart, and the quantity of seed needed to sow one hectare is around 150 liters, at an average price of I franc per liter. Hand seeding requires no more than ten man-days; in large-scale cultivation, it would be advantageous to use a seeder. Hoeing. - Shortly after emergence of the seedling, which usually takes place eight to ten days after sowing, hoeing should be carried out between the rows with a rake; this work requires twelve man-days. A month or so after this first operation, weeding must be carried out by hand, to remove any weeds that may be found either between the rows, or on the rows themselves, between the feet of the young Chicory. This is a time-consuming operation, requiring around fifty man-days to be carried out properly. Throughout the summer, no care is taken; the leaves, once they have developed strongly, are harvested either by hand and sold as young salad chicory, or with a scythe and fed to livestock. This is an additional product that is sometimes not to be scorned. Harvesting. - Finally comes the time of weeding, which will require constant care throughout. The first job in this order of operations is uprooting. This is done either with a spade or a flat-tined fork; by lifting the plant with the tool, it is easy to pull the roots out of the ground by the few remaining leaves. This removal can be done either as and when required for consumption, or completely, in which case the roots are placed in gauges close to where they are to be used. In any case, it's a time-consuming and consequently expensive job; a man can only pull up an acre of Chicory in a day and a half, as he has to bind the roots with wicker, so as to form bunches of Om, 50 in diameter. This yields around 1,350 bunches per hectare, which are transported to the forcing site as soon as they have been dug up. In Montreuil, farmers who don't have horses have them transported by a contractor, who is paid 12 francs for the transport of 50 bunches. The bunches are then delivered to the grower's home, or to the place where the chicory is to be etiolated. Now it's time to clean the roots, which involves taking the Chicory one by one, by hand, and removing with a fingernail all the leaves, either dead or still green, attached to them. Using a knife would be inconvenient, as it would cut off the heart or central bud along with the useless leaves, thus delaying leaf growth. This peeling, usually done by women, is paid for at the rate of 1 franc per bunch, which, once cleaned, is tied again with wicker so that all the tops of the plants are at the same height. Forcing. - At this point, a layer is laid in a perfectly enclosed caye or cellar, with all openings sealed off, to cover all or part of the surface, depending on the importance of the operation. The layer should be made with fresh stable manure, and be about Om, 30 to Oin, 35 high. When the layer, which has been treaded and watered, has been fired and the temperature has become fixed at around 20 to 25°, all the bunches of Chicory are placed on its surface, side by side and as close together as possible, so as not to lose any space. Some growers even make little "bottillons", which they insert into the spaces left between the bunches. Rarely are the entire layers covered on the same day; on the contrary, we start on one side and continue on the following days, so that the produce doesn't all arrive at the right moment at the same time. When Chicory is layered, doors should be tightly closed, and the smallest exits caulked to prevent light rays from reaching the Chicory, which would turn the leaves green and allow chlorophyll to develop. 2 Fig. 31 - Basket for packaging Capucine Beard. As soon as the Chicory is placed on the bed, it begins to grow so rapidly that you can, so to speak, follow its progress by eye. After ten to twelve days, if the bed is warm enough, the etiolated leaves have reached a length of about Om, 30. During the entire forcing period, water once or twice a day, depending on the warmth of the bed, taking care to use absolutely pure water; the slightest impurity will stain the leaves with rot. Preparation for sale. - When the leaves have reached a length of 0.30 m, forcing is complete. The bunches are then taken out of the cellar with great care, so as not to break the leaves, and the bundle is detached; it is untied, and taking a small handful, it is placed on the table; a pad of moist clay half the size of your fist is placed on the roots, and this is covered with a new handful of Chicory. The bottilton is then formed, tied to the root with a thin piece of wicker, and placed in large baskets that can hold around two hundred (fig. 31). The basket is lined with linen and covered to prevent the leaves from being crumpled and light from reaching them, as they would easily turn green. Baskets prepared in this way are sent to the market. Farmers without horses are obliged to hire contractors, who charge 5 francs to transport four or five baskets in Montreuil. To this price must be added that of a half-day's man-hire to make the sale, i.e. 3 francs, bringing to 8 francs the cost of delivering 800 to 1000 bundles. Product per hectare. - Such are the operations and costs of cultivation, forcing and delivery. It will be easy for us to establish the yield per hectare. In fact, this surface area provides, as we said, in an average year. 1,350 bunches, which, after forcing, yield 50 bunches per bunch, i.e. a total of 67,500 bunches. These are delivered to the Halles de Paris at prices that vary from simple to double, depending on the severity of the winter and the degree of competition from open-ground salads of all kinds. In years when Chicory sales are low, we sell 8 to 12 francs a hundred bottillons. In years when Chicory is in high demand, the price doubles. From these figures we can deduce that a minimum price of 12 francs per 100 bottillons can be established. Expenses to be incurred. - For an area of one hectare, the price of a day's work is 6 francs in Montreuil: Renting one hectare of ploughed and smoked land.............................. 150 liters of seed at I fr. per liter........ Sowing: 10 man-days at 6 fr. per day............................ Hoeing, 12 days at 6 fr............... Weeding, 50 days.................... Weeding, 150 days................. Transport of bundles at 12 fr. per 50 bundles, i.e., for 1350 bundles....... 750 fr. 150 60 72 300 900 324 Cleaning at 1 fr. per bundle................ 1350 16 meters of manure for forcing, at 5 fr. Wicker for binding bundles and boots. 4 cubic meters of clay, 5 fr..... Transport to hall, 1 fr. per 100 bundles 80 40 20 670 Total expenses.......... 4716 fr. Profits from this crop. - Gross production is 1,350 bunches per hectare, each yielding 50 bundles, for a total of 67,500 bundles, which at 12 francs per 100 gives 8,100 francs. If we deduct expenses from this figure, we end up with a net profit per hectare of 3,384 francs. These are the profits that can be made from the production of etiolated wild chicory, details of which were supplied to us by Mr. Clément Guyot, farmer at Montreuil-sous-Bois (Seine). These figures can vary greatly according to whether the work is carried out with more or less somn, so that in other conditions the total production figures, and consequently the profit to be made, can be significantly reduced. Another farmer in the same area yields only 36,000 bottillons per hectare; it's true to say that his cultivation costs are much lower, totalling only 3,270 francs. As a result, under similar conditions, the profit is only 1050 francs, based on the same average price of 12 francs per 100 bunches. In Paris alone, around 80,000 bundles of 50 botillons are consumed every day throughout the winter. In addition to wild chicory, large-root chicory is used for this crop. Growing chicory for cutting. - A fairly common practice in farm vegetable gardens, as well as by growers for sale, is to sow Chicory in March, either in rays spaced from Om, 25, to Om, 30, or broadcast. Weed and hoe during the summer, cutting the leaves for consumption; then, in winter, clean up by removing the dead leaves. In February and March, we cover the Chicory, either with potting soil, or more simply with the soil of the square, if the sowing has been done in rows. The covering should be at least 5 to 8 centimetres thick; after two or three weeks, the chicory will have broken through the ridge of earth, and it's time to harvest. To do this, unshovel the plant, cut off the leaves, taking care not to remove the heart, and cover again. Lon can easily make two or three harvests in the spring, of a salad that's fairly bitter, but generally pleasing. The same operation can be repeated the second year on the same plants, after which they must be pulled out. The same varieties that are used to make Beard can be used for this crop, but the improved Chicory must be added. Growing Witloof chicory. - This vegetable is very popular in Belgium, and is now beginning to be widely grown here too. Its cultivation presents some difficulties, not in the way it is grown, but because of the difficulty of obtaining seed that is absolutely pure and carefully selected. As a result, growing Witloof Chicory with bad seed only produces a product resembling Capuchin Beard, this variety being eminently unstable and tending to revert to the primitive type. So far, the products obtained in France are less beautiful than those from Belgium. Seedlings are sown in the same way as wild chicory; in autumn, the roots are pulled out using the familiar procedure, and all those with a diameter of at least 3 or 4 centimetres at the top are selected; all others are discarded, as are those with several central buds instead of one. These roots are cleaned as for the Beard, and then treated in two different ways. One is to apply the ordinary forcing of the Beard, as described above. In the other procedure, we begin by making all the roots the same length by cutting off the thinned end; they are then Om,20 to Om, 25 in length. Once this has been done, a trench Om, 40 deep is opened, and the roots are placed upright, side by side, filling the gaps with soil; then the trench is filled up again. The plant is thus covered with a layer of soil of about Om, 20. If you're in a hurry to produce, a warm layer of horse manure can be laid over the surface of the pit, the thickness of which will vary according to how quickly you want to get the job done. With a layer Om.50 high, it takes an average of one month of forcing in February to obtain consumable products. Once the roots have been removed from the pit, the leaves are detached with the collar, forming a sort of elongated apple that can be eaten either raw in salads or cooked (fig. 32). Cultivation on beds. - Wild chicory or its variegated variety is sometimes sown on a bed under a frame. Sowing takes place from January to March. A layer of Om, 40 cm thick is laid, filled with compost and covered with a frame. Sow the seed in full panels, without making any rays; water lightly and cover with W lassons mulch. The seed germinates after two or three days, and fifteen days later the young Chicory is already ready to be cut and eaten as a salad. Two or three successive cuts can be made, after which the roots are removed and discarded. After this first crop, you can plant a second on the same layer, rearranging the stoves to restore heat. It's better to sow two plants in succession than to harvest the same plants for too long, because as the plants age, the leaves become increasingly bitter and hard. Wild chicory seed retains its germinative capacity for six to seven years. It is harvested from plants sown in spring and overwintered in the open ground. For improved varieties and W'itloof Chicory, the best plants should be selected and replanted at Om, 30 in the spring of the second year. 1.. ...... The age of cabbage cultivation (Brassica oleracea, Linné), whose use seems to have been known as far back as antiquity, makes it impossible to state with absolute certainty where it originated. However, indications from various documents suggest that the species originated in Europe, where it is still found spontaneously on the coasts of France. The plant is perennial, with a thick, rather unbranched stem, bearing broad, rounded lobed leaves, glabrous on both sides and covered with a glaucous, waxy efflorescence. When the stems become established and bear flowers, the shape of the leaves becomes more moderate; the petiole, originally a few centimetres long, gradually becomes shorter until it becomes non-existent. Leaves are then sessile, embracing and with entire margins. They are cruciform in shape, yellow to whitish in some varieties. The fruits that follow are long siliques, from Om,04 to Om,06, containing round, russet seeds whose volume varies considerably according to variety. The cultivation of wild cabbage since time immemorial has singularly altered its primitive appearance; its uses are therefore extremely varied. In most cabbages, the aim of cultivation has been to develop the terminal bud, which has gradually grown out of all proportion and formed what, in technical language, is known as an apple. This apple is the assembly of leaves into a voluminous bud whose shape, color and size vary infinitely according to variety; there are almost a hundred different types. This first category is known as cabbage. The terminal bud is not the only one that develops into an apple. In Brussels sprouts, for example, all the lateral buds in the leaf axils also develop into apples, which are often very hard and eaten. There are a large number of varieties in which the apples never form; the leaves remain isolated instead of interlocking and pressing together. They then grow very large. These cabbages are known as green cabbages, as opposed to head cabbages, in which the leaves that form the head, removed from the action of light, become absolutely white. In other races of cabbage, cultivation has developed the inflorescence's ramifications, whose cellular tissue, considerably increased, constitutes a sought-after foodstuff, such as broccoli and cauliflower, whose inflorescence is eaten whole. In other cabbages, the cellular tissue of the DYBOWSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 11 which has hypertrophied, to the point of making the stems grow very large. The beginning of this stem growth occurs in the variety of green cabbage known as Moellier cabbage. But this cellular production of the stem is much more accentuated in Kohlrabi and Turnip cabbage or Rutabagas, between which there is the difference that in the former, the stem bulges above ground, while in the latter, this bulge occurs underground at the expense of the base of the stem and the root. These very different types of cabbage, considered as a whole, correspond to cultivation methods specific to each category. From our purely practical and cultural point of view, we will therefore subdivide cabbages into series corresponding to the uses to which they are put. The first group includes cabbages grown for the use we make of their leaves; we'll distinguish between the head cabbage series, the Brussels sprouts series and the green cabbage series. In the second group, we'll place cabbages whose stems have been developed by cultivation: these are the Savoy cabbages on the one hand, and the Turnip cabbages or Rutabagas on the other. Finally, a third group is made up of cabbages whose inflorescences have been cultivated in order to develop into edible organs, and here we place cauliflowers and broccoli. Admitting this classification, it is useful to draw up a sort of synoptic table, because of the considerable number of forms provided by cultivation of this important vegetable plant: GROUP 1. Cabbage, the leaves of which are consumed. 2nd GROUP. Cabbages. whose 3° GRoupe. in- 1st series. Head cabbage. 2nd series. Brussels sprouts. the stems are consumed. Cabbage 3rd series. (York cabbage.......... (Beef heart cabbage.. Joanet cabbage.......... Ch. de Saint-Denis.. des choux (Ch. quintal.........) - de Pontoise (Ch. à grosses côtés. (Ch. cavalier. 1st series. (Ch.-Rave blanc. - violet. 2nd series. (White turnip. Turnips. 1st series. Ch.-Flowers. Race Ch. de Vaugirard... ( leafy ¡Ch. rouge.......... (Ch. de Schweinfurth Ch. milan de Paris... des Vertus. Ch. verts. (Ch. moellier. Ch.-Raves. ( 1 - smooth. Breed of cabbage with blistered leaves. - (Ch.-Fleur de Paris. Lenormand. - from Holland. 2nd series. (Ordinary white broccoli. florescences. Ch. broccoli. ( - - hâtif de Roscoff. Cabbages, taken as a whole, are most successful in temperate climates. In general, they have little resistance to heavy frosts, and high temperatures are detrimental to their development. As a result, in northern Europe, cabbages cannot be expected to survive the winter without shelter. On the other hand, in the South of France, summer cultivation is not very successful, unless there is a lot of irrigation water available; so cabbages are left to vegetate over winter, sown in the autumn. In equatorial climates, cabbages hardly pump at all, despite the humidity of the soil and air. However, spring and summer varieties still provide a bud which, although it is not pomaceous, is nonetheless highly prized by Europeans. For this reason, soils in which clay is a constituent element are well suited to this crop. However, clay acts more through its hygroscopicity than through the element it supplies to the soil, as peaty soils are also very well suited to cabbage cultivation. All cabbages are very fertilizer-hungry, and their success depends largely on the richness of the soil. Nitrogenous materials are particularly suitable for this crop. Slightly decomposed farmyard manure, sludge, fertilizing sewage, guanos, dried blood or flesh, all give very satisfactory results, provided they are supplied in abundance. CABUS Varieties. - Among the many varieties of cabbage grown in gardens and fields, we will only mention those that correspond to different uses or types of cultivation. YORR KALE. - This is one of the earliest-growing cabbages, and for this reason it is widely cultivated, particularly by Paris market gardeners. The head is conical and fairly tightly packed, with as few leaves as possible that do not contribute to its formation. They are smooth, full-edged and slightly glaucous. There are two forms of this variety: the early York cabbage and the large York cabbage, whose size varies with earliness. HEART OF OX. - In all its characteristics, this cabbage resembles the previous one, but its conical head is swollen towards its middle part in the shape of a heart, which earned it its name. As with the previous variety, there is an early, small form and a later, large-headed form (fig. 33). CHOU JOANET or NaNTaIS. - Very early variety, characterized by a flat head and very short stalk. It has the disadvantage of being very hardy in harsh winters, which in the Paris climate means it cannot be grown in the same way as the two preceding varieties. It is widely grown in Brittany and Anjou, whose mild temperatures mean that they can be sown in autumn to get them through the winter. CHOU DE SAINT-DENIS. - This variety produces a flattened head, colored wine-red; the leaves are ample, dark green with full edges. This cabbage is widely grown around Paris during the summer, for consumption in late autumn (fig. 34). Fig. 34 - Saint-Denis cabbage. VAUGIRARD CABBAGE. - This cabbage resembles the previous one in the shape of its head and its wine-red coloring. It is even hardier than the Chou de Saint-Denis and over-winters quite easily, provided the head is not yet fully formed. CHOU ROUGE. - The leaves of this variety are purplish-red, forming a flattened head of varying size. In fact, two different types are grown: the large red cabbage and the small red cabbage, which is less developed but earlier maturing. CABBAGE QUINTALOU CHOUD'ALSACE. - The head of this cabbage is very broad and flattened. The thin leaves are tightly packed together. It is a hardy variety, of very good quality, but late (fig. 35). SCHWEINFURT CABBAGE. - Unlike the previous variety, this one is very early. Its head is very large, reaching or even exceeding the diameter of Fig. 35 - Chou quintal d'Alsace. that of Chou quintal; but its weight is low, as the leaves are widely spaced. The leaves are pale green, cut at the edges and slightly blistered. This variety thus forms the transition between the smooth-leaf cabbages and the Savoy cabbages. CABBAGE MILAN DE PARIS. - Of all the blistered-leaf cabbages, this is almost the earliest. The head is small and moderately tight. CHOU MILAN DES VERTUS. - This variety produces a large head and is one of the largest of the blistered cabbages. It bears a large number of leaves, which are not part of the head. This variety is widely grown around Paris, where it is eaten in autumn and part of winter (fig. 36). MILAN CABBAGE FROM PONTOISE. - This late-growing cabbage is quite similar to the previous one, differing only in its smaller size and later maturity. It is fairly cold-resistant and is eaten in winter. Uses of cabbage. - Cabbages have many culinary uses, which vary slightly from country to country, but are widespread everywhere. E Mete Fig. 36 - Vertus kale. Smooth-leafed cabbages are mainly used to prepare dishes; blistered-leafed cabbages are more particularly used in soups, although there is nothing absolute in this respect. The leaves, cut into strips and then fermented, are used to make sauerkraut, for which smooth-leafed cabbages are almost exclusively used. The red-leaf varieties are often eaten raw, either in salads or preserved in vinegar as a condiment. Growing spring cabbage. - To harvest early in the spring, we mainly use York cabbage, cœur de boeuf, and also Saint-Denis cabbage, which is grown in the same way as the previous two varieties, but yields its produce later. Sowing. - Hâtils cabbages are sown in the last days of August; market gardeners, in their great precision, say at Saint-Fiacre (August 30); in reality, these sowings can extend into the first days of September, but for the climate of the center, they should not be sown later than the 10th of that month. If you sow too early, all the plants, or at least most of them, will flower instead of peeling; if you sow too late, the plants will not stand up well to the cold of winter, and you'll end up with produce that's too late. It is therefore advisable to stick as closely as possible to the indications we have just given. Once you've prepared a patch of good soil in the garden, sow the seeds broadcast. Sowing should be done relatively lightly, to avoid the young plants getting in each other's way, leading to etiolation and overdevelopment of the young cabbage stem, which could then become bent, producing defective plants. We sow about 100 grams per are; given that one gram contains about 320 seeds, and that 50 per 100 of the seeds will give good plants, this will make about 16,000 plants. Once the seed has been spread on the soil, it is lightly harrowed with a rake, then covered with an even, thin layer of decomposed mulch. The soil is then covered with a thin, even layer of decomposed mulch, and the plants are given a few basins to hasten emergence, which takes place after a week or so. Transplanting in the nursery. - As soon as the young plants have two or three leaves, not including the two cotyledons, they should be transplanted. To do this, prepare the ground to be occupied by the planting, and cover it with a layer of Oin, 02 of top soil; draw lines on the surface spaced Om, (0 along which the transplanting will take place, observing the same distance between the lines as between them. The plant is then uprooted, lifting the soil with a spade to avoid breaking the roots. We select all the plants that look good, are sufficiently vigorous and have not aborted their terminal bud. When this bud is missing, the plant is said to be one-eyed, and must be rejected, as it cannot produce apples. Transplanting is done with a planting peg. First, a hole is made in the ground using this instrument; the young plant is placed in it, and the soil is pressed against the roots, leaving another, shallower hole next to the plant, to be filled by watering. Once the plant has been transplanted, the soil is watered a few times to encourage it to take root. Setting out. - Final planting should be done before winter, usually towards the end of November or the beginning of December, in fine weather if possible. The soil for this crop should be south-facing, so as to produce early crops. Cabbages are often planted in "costières", i.e. in beds along a wall, to gain a few days in earliness. Whichever soil you choose, it must be well loosened and contain a significant proportion of fertilizer. After ploughing, rays are traced on the surface, either with a trowel or, as market gardeners do in their loose soils, with a foot. These rays should be about Om, 08 deep, with a distance between them that will vary according to the variety used, but which on average will be 0m, 25 for very early varieties and Om, 35 for those which, being later, should develop more strongly. The purpose of these furrows is to shelter the young cabbage plant. Any snow that falls, blown away by the wind, accumulates in the rays, protecting the plants from the cold. Whatever the soil preparation, the plants are raised in the nursery, lifting the soil with a spade and removing as little as possible. They are planted at Om, 40 or so in the rows, at the bottom of the furrows, with a strong border. In spring, hoe the soil back into the gullies. For all cabbages sown in autumn, which are to overwinter, it is essential to send the plants through the nursery, if you don't want to risk seeing a significant proportion of them flowering instead of pollinating. Repeated transplanting delays vegetation, while multiplying the rootlets, which, injured during replanting, branch out considerably and emit adventitious roots. Harvesting. - Harvesting begins in April for early cabbages planted in costières, and continues in May and June for those planted in beds. For sale, cabbages are harvested as soon as the head is roughly formed, by grasping them with both hands and turning them on themselves, thus detaching the rootlets. The stem and pivot are usually left attached to the head, which is then trimmed by rolling up the useless leaves on one side and holding them in place with a piece of straw. The selling price of these new cabbages varies greatly according to the mildness of the winter, and especially according to the season in which they are sold. Growing summer and autumn cabbages. - Cabbages intended for summer and autumn consumption are sown at the end of winter and the beginning of spring. For example, Joanet and Saint-Denis cabbages are sown in February, under cloche, to produce in June and July. In March and April, we sow a new season of Choux de Saint-Denis, Milans de Paris and des Vertus, and Schweinfurt, to produce in August and September. Whatever the chosen season, which varies, as we've just seen, either with the variety or, for the same variety, with the time of harvest, sowing is always done in the same way as for spring cabbages. Prepare the soil well and broadcast the seeds, covering them with potting soil or mulch. Moisture is maintained with a few drenches. For the first seedlings to be sown under a bell, the procedure is slightly different. Once the soil has been prepared, it is suitably levelled, then a bell is placed on the ground to leave an imprint of the space it will occupy. In this way, you mark out the location of all the bells under which you will sow, and arrange them in staggered rows, following three parallel lines. For this first sowing, choose a warm, sheltered spot. Summer cabbages are not usually transplanted in a nursery; however, a much better seedling can be obtained by transplanting the one sown under a bell. If you want to hasten harvest time, you can even do the transplanting under a bell, planting about thirty cabbages per bell. The soil is ploughed and abundantly fertilized for planting, which takes place about a month and a half after planting. It is not necessary to make furrows; simply mark the lines with a chalk line if planting in the kitchen garden, and simply follow the harrowing lines in the field. Once the plant has been lifted with some care, it is placed in a manna so as not to shake it too much when it is carried to the planting site. The plant is then placed in position, with a strong border. In the vegetable garden, we water to facilitate recovery; in the field, we choose a rainy day if possible, and to facilitate recovery, we soak the root in a mixture of cow dung and soil. The distance varies according to the size of the varieties to be planted. Smaller varieties are planted at Om, 55 in all directions; larger ones, such as Schweinfurt cabbages, are planted at Om, 70 or even Ou, 80 in all directions. These cabbages are harvested by cutting the head off the stalk, but leaving it surrounded by green leaves which do not help to shape it. Prices vary according to season and variety. The most common range is between 12 and 25 franes per cent. Autumn and winter cabbage cultivation. - For this third harvest season, we need to separate naturally late-ripening cabbages from those which, although less so, are nevertheless grown to produce winter produce, because of their resistance to cold. Among those that are really late, we should mention the quintal cabbage, which, sown very early, does not produce until November. The second category includes Vaugirard cabbage and Milan des Vertus and Pontoise blister cabbage, which are sown in May, and produce from November or December onwards throughout the winter, until February and March. As an example of one of these late-growing cabbages, we'll take the Alsace quintal cabbage, which is grown extensively in this region. Growing cabbage for sauerkraut. - Cabbage grown specifically for sauerkraut is widespread in Alsace. There are huge fields of it in all the beautiful Rhine valleys, but it is especially in the vicinity of Iannemarie and Altkirch that this crop occupies the largest area. Cabbage is grown mainly in strong, moist soils; clay and marl soils are particularly suited to it, and it is here that it reaches its most beautiful dimensions. The varieties used to make sauerkraut are particularly those with flat leaves, at the head of which is the Alsace cabbage quintal, and its derivatives such as the Melsbach cabbage. In all cases, whatever the variety used, the better the cabbage, the flatter, tighter and finer the leaves; in other words, not all varieties with embossed leaves are suitable for this purpose. In some parts of Alsace, the gros Chou rouge is used; it is considered hardier than the Chou quintal, but produces much less fine sauerkraut, which is less appreciated and less expensive. Sowing. - To sow cabbage, it's best to prepare a patch of land in the vegetable garden or in a field. The soil must be thoroughly fertilized, then carefully ploughed with a spade and levelled with a rake. Sowing is broadcast from the end of February, and to protect the seed from drought, it's a good idea to cover the soil with a layer of mulch made from decomposed manure. If spring is dry, you can hasten the plant's emergence and growth by giving it a few waterings. At the beginning of April, the plant is lifted from the nursery and planted in the field it is to occupy. At the time of uprooting, all underdeveloped plants are sorted out to ensure that only those showing signs of vigor and good growth are used. Soil preparation. Planting. - Before planting, it is important to prepare the soil in which the cabbages will be grown. This preparation begins with abundant manuring, equal to about 50 cubic meters of manure per hectare, which is ploughed in, followed by vigorous harrowing. When you know in advance what kind of land the plantation will occupy, it's a good idea to plough in the autumn before planting, to rid the soil of any weeds that might require repeated hoeing in the spring. Once the soil has been ploughed and harrowed, rows of Om, 70 to Om, 80 are drawn on the surface, depending on the variety grown. The cabbages are transplanted along these lines, keeping the same distance in all directions. The men in charge of this work plant three to four thousand plants a day. If possible, a misty day or one following a period of rain should be chosen to ensure a good start. During the summer, Fon gives the cabbages two or three hoeings to remove weeds and keep the soil fresh, by creating a thin layer of earth on top of the soil, which insulates the underlying soil and prevents it from drying out. Hoeing can be carried out either by hand, using a hoe, or with a cheyal hoe, which is infinitely cheaper. This is all the maintenance work that needs to be done during the summer. Harvesting and selling. - Harvesting takes place towards the end of October and the beginning of November. Cabbages are harvested by grasping the head with both hands and twisting the stem so as to break off all the small roots. As soon as they are removed from the ground, the cabbages are placed in a heap; then a man armed with a billhook cuts off the head, leaving only the white leaves that make up the head. The removed leaves are sorted, and those that are absolutely green are fed to livestock; on the other hand, those that are half-white are kept separately to make a kind of household sauerkraut (Coumpich) much prized in Alsace. White apples are piled into cars, and taken either directly home to make sauerkraut, or to market. The selling price varies according to whether the year has been more or less favorable to this crop. In years of abundance, one hundred apples are sold for 15 to 20 francs; but this price can rise to 30 francs when the harvest has been poor and cabbages are scarce on the market. Yield per hectare. - Assuming an average price of 18 francs, and that the cabbages have been planted at Om, 80 in all directions, we can estimate the yield that a similar crop can provide. Growing costs consist of. Seed and plant preparation........ 50 fr. Rent for one hectare................... 150 50 cubic meters of fertilizer at 5 fr. each........................... Plowing and harrowing................. Transplanting, 5 days at 3 fr.......... Three hoeing sessions at 25 fr. each......... Uprooting: 10 days at 3 fr......... 250 100 15 75 30 For a total expenditure of........ 670 fr. Given that 15,000 cabbages are harvested at 15 francs per hundred, we obtain a sum of 2,255 francs, representing the price of the harvest. Deducting cultivation and labor costs amounting to 670 francs, a sum of 1,585 francs remains, representing the profit from one hectare of sauerkraut cabbage. DVBOWSKI. - Cultivation 2nd ed. 12 * Sauerkraut production. - In Alsace, every careful housewife makes sauerkraut at home, either because the house has a piece of land where cabbage is grown, or because, less well shared, one has Fig. 37. - Auger for having to buy apples in autumn. In every household, once cabbages have been procured in sufficient quantity, special workers are brought in, who in autumn scour the region and do no more than prepare sauerkraut. They bring with them their own tools, which consist firstly of a kind of auger with a cutting edge, and a blade rolled into a truncated cone, about 6 centimeters in diameter at its widest point, on the edge of which a rod with a handle is inserted (fig. 37). This auger is used to remove the cores from the cabbage, keeping them whole. preparation of sauerkraut cabbage. A second tool, used by the cutters, is a kind of large plane, with four or five blades, fixed transversely in a thick piece of wood, no less than Om,50 wide, 1m,50 long, and Om,08 thick. This piece is made of good quality wood, such as pear, mountain ash or, failing these, beech. The blades are movable, and can be moved closer together or further apart, by means of wedges, depending on how fine the sauerkraut is to be obtained. They are fixed in an opening in the piece of wood, just as an iron blade would be in an ordinary plane. These blades must be kept perfectly sharp by frequent ironing. A bottomless box-shaped frame, the sides of which are equal to the width of the workpiece, slides over the plane. v a Fig. 38 - Shredding sauerkraut cabbage. When it comes to cutting sauerkraut, the first step is to obtain a broken-down barrel (usually a 225-litre Bordeaux piece), and place the planer over its opening. The cutting operation is carried out by two men, one of whom prepares the cabbages by removing the cores with the auger, and the defective leaves with a sharp knife; the other places the prepared cabbages in the mobile frame, pressing them tightly together. When the frame is full, he gives it a brisk translation movement, holding it with both hands and holding the cabbages at the same time. The cabbages grate on the blades and fall in thin strips into the barrel (fig. 38). Cutting is hard work, because you need to work fast if you want well-made sauerkraut. It's paid for at the rate of 1 fr. 25 per 100 cabbages cut, the tools being supplied by the workers. On average, 125 cabbages are needed to produce 100 kilograms of sauerkraut. As far as the business is concerned, sauerkraut is mainly produced in Strasbourg. In good houses, where this product is made with care, its price can reach 60 to 70 francs for 100 kilograms of dry sauerkraut, i.e. from which all the water supplied by the cabbage is expressed at the time of fermentation. When fermentation begins, the cut cabbage is loaded with a few cleanly washed stones. Gradually, the mass decreases, and the water contained in the cabbage floats to the surface; this explains the enormous reduction in weight that the cabbage undergoes when it is transformed into sauerkraut. In the retail trade, sauerkraut sold dry is reconstituted in a certain quantity of water, which doubles its weight and enables it to be retailed at 40 centimes per kilogram. Cabbage preservation. - Smooth-headed cabbages don't take well to the cold of winter, and if they were simply left in the fields, or in the garden squares they occupied during their growth, they would deteriorate rapidly. To prolong their life, we use various methods of preservation, which are generally quite successful. One of the most commonly used methods, and one which usually gives good results, is to uproot cabbages in November. Choosing a northern location, along a wall for example, you begin by digging a small ditch perpendicular to the wall, about half a spade's breadth deep, and throwing back the earth as you go. In this ditch, Ton places the cabbage roots, giving the apple a north-facing mnclination. As this first ditch is occupied by a row of Cabbages placed side by side, it is partly filled with the soil removed from a second similar ditch, which is made immediately behind the first; a new row of Cabbages is then placed in it, and so on. As a result, the soil of each successive gauge will cover the roots of the row of Cabbages placed in front of it, and the ground will thus be uniformly covered with Cabbage apples. As the cold approaches, the apples are covered with a little straw, which is removed as soon as the frost is over; in this way, the Cabbages are easily preserved until February. In very sandy, dry soils, cabbages keep well if you bury the head in the soil and place the root in the air. Growing cabbages for seed. - Cabbages, like most crucifers, hybridize with the greatest ease; they play, as gardeners say, and the seeds no longer faithfully reproduce the variety from which they were harvested. We must not lose sight of this notion when we want to let cabbages go to seed. The only way to prevent these plants from interbreeding is to grow only one variety for seed in your garden, or at least to keep the varieties as far apart as possible. Cultivation methods vary according to variety, and especially according to whether the crop is grown on a large scale or simply in the kitchen garden. In all cases, it is important to take into account the ease with which cabbages not only cross-breed, but also vary greatly, so that, whatever the method used, only plants that correspond exactly to the type you have in mind should ever be chosen as seed-bearers. For example, if you're growing beef cabbage for seed, you'll need to choose plants with apples elongated into a cone and bulging towards the center, those with firm apples and with as many leaves as possible to help form them, in other words, those with few useless leaves around the apple, etc. Growing for seed in gardens. - To obtain good seed, spring cabbages, the process consists in marking the purest plants of the type when the apple is formed. When the apple is fully developed, it is cut for consumption, leaving only the stalk, or core, with three or four leaves. Shortly after removal, a number of buds develop into leafy twigs, which are left to grow freely until the end of August. At this point, they are about Om, 15 in length; they are detached from the plant, by removing a portion of the plant adjacent to the shoot, which is treated as a cutting, i.e. stripped of its leaves at the base, then transplanted with a planter, in a place sheltered from the sun. These cuttings are left in place until spring, when they are lifted with a spade, taking care not to break the roots that have developed, and planted permanently, leaving a distance of Om.75 between each foot. Each plant will be fitted with a stake, against which it will be tied when the branches begin to develop. Fruits begin to ripen in July, recognizable by the yellow tint they take on; they are then harvested before full ripening has caused them to split open, and stored in a dry, shady place, where they finish ripening. When the siliques are dry, the seed is removed by threshing, bagged and stored for five to six years, during which time cabbage seeds retain their germinative capacity. For summer cabbages, we cut the apples as we recommended for spring cabbages; we don't usually take cuttings, but transplant the cores to a wall for the winter, then stake them in the spring. Finally, for winter cabbages, we leave the apples on instead of removing them, and in spring, we take care to incise them with a few strokes of a serpette, to encourage the emergence of flowering shoots. It is essential to remove the leaves from the apples as they turn yellow, to avoid rotting which would compromise the seed harvest. Large-scale cultivation of seed cabbage. - In the Bay of Mont-Saint-Michel, cabbage is grown mainly for seed. According to Mr. Lelasseux, a distinguished farmer in this region, this cultivation is carried out over very large areas. A large number of cabbage varieties are grown for seed production, the main ones being Tourlaville, Saint-Brieuc, coeur de bœuf, etc. There are two different methods for growing cabbage, which correspond to those we have indicated should be used in the kitchen garden. In the first method, cabbage is sown in August, at a rate of 5 kilograms per are; one are of seedling sown under these conditions will suffice to plant one hectare. When the plant has three or four leaves, you can, and it's even a good idea, to transplant it in the nursery; but most of the time, you don't need to do this. If you've transplanted from a nursery, you'll set the plant in walnut, while if you've done without, you'll set it in September. Leave a space of Om.60 between rows, and plant at Om.40 between rows. In spring, two hoeings are necessary, followed by ridging with a horse hoe. It often happens that, instead of flowering, cabbages start to peel; in these conditions, it is useful to cut off the young head during the winter. As a result, the lateral buds develop, and it is from these that the seed is harvested. Harvesting takes place at the end of July, using a f'aucille. In all cases, you must cut while the yellow siliques are not yet open, to allow the seed to escape. Cabbages are placed in bunches, with the help of which hubettes comprising thirty to forty bunches are built. After ten days, they are beaten with a lléau, then winnowed to obtain clean seed, which is then bagged. This is the most commonly used method, but many growers prefer to harvest the apple and then use the lateral buds, which are transplanted as cuttings and are sure to set seed in the spring. These cuttings, known as jetains in the Bay of Mont-Saint-Michel, are transplanted in November, and the cultivation and harvesting procedures are the same as those described above. In Brittany, cultivation costs are as follows for one hectare: Preparing the plant in the nursery........ 60 fr. Soil rental......................... 175 Fertilization................................. 160 Two plowings.......................... . llersage................................. Rolling................................. Transplanting................. .......... . ... Two hoeing operations........................... Butting.............................. . Etôtage.................................. Harvesting and threshing....................... 60 2 2 40 60 10 80 Total............ 664 fr. As for yield, this varies enormously from year to year, and can be estimated at between 18 and 30 hectolitres per hectare. When you want to produce seed, it's a good idea to make prior arrangements with the company that is to buy it, which will supply the seed needed to make the plant and will usually reserve the right to inspect the plantation and reform any plants that don't seem to correspond to the variety grown. BRUSSELS KALE Two slightly different types of this cabbage breed are grown: the ordinary Brussels sprout and the dwarf Brussels sprout. The first of these two types (fig. 39), which is by far the most widespread in cultivation, is a vigorous plant bearing long-stalked leaves on a stem up to a meter high, with a spoon-shaped blade. These leaves come together at the top of the stem to form a kind of poorly formed apple. In the axils of all stem petioles, buds form small apples the size of walnuts. In this variety, these apples are tightly packed and very well formed. In the dwarf variety, instead of being smooth, the leaves are slightly blistered and very close together on the stem, which acquires smaller proportions than in the previous variety. As a result of the close-knit leaves, the small apples are tightly packed together; they are, moreover, less well formed than in ordinary Brussels sprouts and therefore less prized for sale. Uses. - We eat the lateral buds or small apples, which must be firm and have the average volume of a small walnut. Cultivation. - This cabbage is sown at two different times. The first in February or March, and the second in March or April, to prolong the harvest. Sowing is done in the nursery by broadcasting, taking the same care as indicated above; then, after four to six weeks, transplanting is done directly in situ. For this type of cultivation, in contrast to the other types, it is advisable to choose relatively thin soil, otherwise there is a high risk that the small apples will not form, but that the cabbage will grow all leafy, without producing the expected product. For this reason, this crop is much more successful in open fields than in gardens, where the soil is usually too rich. Brussel sprouts are planted at Om,60, in all directions, Fig. 39 - Ordinary brussel sprouts. and bound tightly. When the stem has reached about Om,50, the terminal bud is pinched off, to encourage the development of the lateral buds. We also hasten the development of the latter by cutting off the base leaves. This cabbage does not fear frost, so harvesting, which can start as early as October for the first sowings, lasts until March for second-season sowings. Yields vary greatly according to the soil in which the crop is grown, but are usually around 350 liters per acre. Seed crops. - As seed-bearing plants, we choose those with well-shaped, hard apples close together on the stem; we mark the plants early and do not harvest small apples from them. In April, we plant them at Om, 75, giving them a stake; we cut off the head of the cabbage if this operation has not been done previously and remove the small apples at the bottom, which are poorly made, as well as those at the top whose development is incomplete, leaving only those in the middle to flower. Harvesting care is the same as above. CHIOUX VERTS Varieties. - Non-pollinating cabbages have given rise to a considerable number of cultivated varieties, most of which we won't go into, since they are part of agricultural crops and are most often grown as fodder. We will only mention those varieties that are suitable for human consumption. CABBAGE WITH LARGE RIBS. - This cabbage is just starting to apple, and could be considered as the transition from cabbage to green cabbage. It is characterized by curly leaves with well-developed veins. It is grown in vegetable gardens because of its resistance to cold. MOEILLIER CABBAGE. - This variety, which reaches a height of 1.50 m when fully developed, has ample leaves which, like those of all its congeners, are sometimes used; but we mention it mainly for the reason that its stem bulges towards the middle, as a result of the development of its cellular tissue. In this way, it is the gateway to the cabbages whose stems we eat. Cultivation. - There is nothing special to say about the cultivation of these cabbages, which are grown in the same way as the previous ones. CHIOUX-RAVES Varieties. - Choux-Raves are characterized by the often very voluminous swelling of their stems above ground level. The varieties most commonly grown in vegetable gardens are the following two: WHITE HATIF KOHLRABI. - This variety has a small number of sparsely-developed leaves. The bulge forms quickly (fig. 40). HATIF VIOLET KOHLRABI. - This kohlrabi differs from the previous one in that its stem and leaf petioles are colored light purple. Uses. - The swollen stem is eaten cooked. The cellular tissue contained within has a pleasant taste; it is widely used throughout eastern France, particularly in Alsace. Cultivation. - Kohlrabi is sown in spring, from March to June, in good soil. When the plant has three or four leaves, it is transplanted in place, spaced Om, 25 apart in all directions. Water several times during vegetation, and two months or so after planting, these cabbages can be delivered for consumption. They can be kept for a long time, provided they are pulled up and taken down to the cellar. CHOUX-NAVETS Varieties. - Turnip cabbages, or Rutabagas, whose edible part is formed by the lower part of the stem, and by the root which has gorged itself with cellular tissue, vary from one another in the coloring of the leaves and stems. The most common variety grown in vegetable gardens is the following: WHITE, SMOOTH KOHLRABI. - The fleshy part is shorter than it is wide. The flesh is white (fig. 41). Uses. - Kohlrabi is eaten cooked and prepared in a variety of ways. Cultivation. - Kohlrabi can be sown either in rows Fig. 41 - White, smooth Kohlrabi, or broadcast in spring; after emergence, thin out to leave a space of Om, 40 between plants in all directions. During the summer, we water and hoe. Harvesting takes place in autumn and early winter. CAULIFLOWER Varieties. - Cauliflowers, in which the inflorescence has developed into a globular mass while still young, are classified as tender, semi-hard and hard cauliflowers, according to their greater or lesser hardiness and the time they require to reach full development. LNI9 A Fig. 42. - Lenormand short-stalked cauliflower. CAULIFLOWER SMALL, SALOMON. - This variety, which is still known as Chou-Fleur tendre de Paris, is early and is used particularly in forced cultivation; its head is not very large, but it is quite white and takes little time to form. LARGE CAULIFLOWER, SALOMON. - This demidure variety is more developed than the previous one, without however acquiring a very large volume; its head is tight and of good quality, CHOU-FLEUR LENORMAND A PIED COURT. - This is certainly the most widely grown variety. It is very well suited to growing in pleme terre, and its head develops well (fig. 42). PARIS HARD CAULIFLOWER. - This variety is characterized by the fact that its head, which is slow to form, remains hard and tight for a long time. This variety is mainly used for autumn produce grown in the open ground. Uses. - The inflorescence is cooked and eaten in a variety of ways. Field-grown. - Cauliflower production has become very widespread throughout France, but mainly in the vicinity of large cities. Near Paris, as we'll show later, this large-scale crop is generally very profitable. Cauliflowers like a permeable soil, but one that is not free from a certain coolness, especially when the crop is grown in summer. Soils in which silica is a dominant element are particularly suitable. They require abundant fertilization, using, if possible, fertilizers that have already decomposed and are in a state that allows them to be intimately mixed with the soil. City sludge and manure from the soil, either from early crops or from mushroom quarries, are the preferred fertilizers, which, as we can see, correspond to rapidly assimilable nitrogenous matter. Water is necessary for this crop, but in very variable proportions, depending on the environment in theDYRONSRI. - Vegetable growing. 13 in which it is grown. For example, while irrigation is necessary in the South of France and Algeria, in the climate of Paris this plant can do without watering. However, when watering is possible, it can only produce good results. In the Gennevilliers plain, for example, which is irrigated with sewage water, good results are obtained. In our Parisian climate, we generally grow three crops in the open air during the course of the year, so as to obtain, if not an absolutely consistent product throughout the summer, at least harvests that are very close together. It is therefore necessary to study these three different methods of cultivation, which we classify as spring, summer and autumn crops. Spring cultivation. - To grow cauliflowers in spring, they need to be sown in the autumn of the previous year. Market gardeners usually sow their seeds between September 15 and 20, in the open air on old potting soil, or simply in well loosened soil covered with compost. As soon as the seeds have been sown and covered with a little soil, they are lightly basked and watered repeatedly to keep the soil constantly moist. Seed emergence takes about ten days. If the year is cold, it's a good idea to follow the example of market gardeners, who cover their seedlings with cloches; but this precaution isn't essential and, as we've just said, you can simply sow in the open air. In any case, when the seedlings have grown two leaves in addition to their two cotyledons, it's time to transplant them. There are two ways to do this

One is to use cloches, the other is to transplant under frames; both give satisfactory results, so the choice will depend on the equipment available. To transplant under cloches, the soil is laid out in ados, i.e. in a sort of sloping plank on the south side, so that, starting from ground level, the highest side facing north is about Om, 20. The width of these ados is such that three rows of cloches can be laid out in staggered rows. In this way, a series of ados can be laid out, one behind the other. The soil used to build them must be of very good quality, and must be topped up and covered with potting soil. Once the "ados" have been built, a bell is placed on each of them to indicate where each one should be planted. Nineteen feet are planted per bell. When frames are used instead of bells, they are placed at a slight angle and the inside is lined with potting soil up to Om, 12 of the glass. Transplant at Om, 08 in all directions, equivalent to planting 200 per frame. After transplanting, water. Throughout the winter, care will consist of providing air whenever it doesn't freeze. If, on the other hand, the cold should become intense, not only should doormats be placed over the bells and frames, but the trunks of the latter should also be covered with a bundle of old manure or leaves, so as to prevent frost from penetrating through the boards. If it freezes during the day, the mats should remain on the windows for the duration of the cold, and when the thaw comes, the plants should not be made to pass through sudden transitions, i.e. air should only be uncovered and given gradually. Towards the end of March, we'll uproot the plants kept in trays and plant them out. Care should be taken to reform any plants that are blind, i.e. whose heart has been destroyed. If you want to plant early, choose a bed of earth sheltered by a wall; but you can also plant in a square, provided you get later-ripening plants. As we have said, the soil should be abundantly fertilized and well prepared by ploughing, if the land is free, as transplanting is often carried out in half-planted crops such as carrots or lettuce. Plant at about Om. 70 in all directions and in staggered rows; increase this distance if you have intercrops to manage. If the weather is dry, water again the following day. Watering should be continued throughout the vegetation period, as this crop is mainly grown in the vegetable garden, not in the fields. As soon as the intercrops have risen, we hoe them, cover the soil with mulch and water. Apples start to appear towards the end of April. As soon as they begin to free themselves from the surrounding leaves, they must be protected from the action of air and light, which would make them yellow, hard and unmarketable. They are protected by breaking off the lower leaves and placing them on this apple. Every two or three days, we go back between the rows and cover the apples with new leaves, always taken from the bottom of the plant. The fresh leaves are placed on top of the apple, and the wilted ones on top of these; this constitutes an absolute covering that will leave the apple white and tightly grained. Before the inflorescence branches begin to drop off, i.e. when the cauliflower is at its most valuable, it is harvested by cutting off the head and some of the central leaves that protect it. Harvesting begins towards the end of May for plants planted on a ridge, and continues through June for those grown in a square. Summer cultivation. - For this crop, which is the most difficult to grow, you need to sow seeds of semi-hard cauliflower on a bed under glass at the beginning of April. This sowing must be done fairly lightly, as the young plant will not be transplanted in the nursery. This would cause the apples to appear too early, and result in insufficient volume of produce. Once the seedling has emerged, the frame is lifted and the plant is gradually acclimatized to the outside air. About five weeks after sowing, the plant has taken on four or five leaves, and it's time to put it in place. A fresh, rich soil is absolutely essential; this planting will require frequent watering to give good results, so it should only be done in vegetable gardens where a large quantity of water is available. Transplant at Om, 80 in all directions, taking care to press the plant down to the first leaves. After sowing radishes, the soil is firmly bound and mulched. We can't stress enough that throughout the summer you must water heavily and often: market gardeners water every day; this is the only way to get good apples, which otherwise fall apart and don't produce anything. Care must be taken to ensure that the cauliflowers are well covered when the flower begins to show; the slightest ray of sunlight hitting them for just a few hours will damage them completely. Harvesting begins at the end of July and throughout August. As soon as the apples are good, they must be cut, otherwise they would deteriorate in a few days. In insufficiently watered crops, we have to put up with the ravages of flea beetles, which cause great damage and often destroy the entire crop. Autumn cultivation. - Autumn cultivation of cauliflower is one of the most widespread, for the dual reason that it requires relatively little care and yet gives assured results. Although it is grown by market gardeners and in vegetable gardens, it is mainly a large-scale crop. This type of production is recommended wherever the soil is rich and fresh, and where the expense of abundant manuring is not an obstacle. It is grown extensively in the Paris area, and to give an accurate idea, we can do no better than to describe the details of this cultivation as it is practiced in Chambourcy. The cultivation of this plant, to which other vegetables have gradually been added, has been the source of this locality's wealth. Chambourcy cultivation. - In this locality, where cauliflower production is one of the dominant crops, the soil admirably meets the requirements of the vegetable we are dealing with. Rich, moderately compact and cool even in summer, the soil slopes gently to the north. The plant we use comes from seedlings sown in May. The seeds are sown along a wall to protect them from the midday sun. Sowing is done in the open, as the plant will not be transplanted in the nursery, and care is taken to cover it with mulch so that it can be watered repeatedly without gullying or beating the soil. This daily watering is the best way to prevent flea beetles, which would otherwise wreak havoc. Sowing begins in May and continues until mid-June, to stagger the harvest. This result can be accentuated by using half-hard cauliflowers, then hard cauliflowers at the end of the season. Many growers don't grow the plants themselves, but buy them from market gardeners in Paris at 10 francs a thousand. The land to be planted must be abundantly smoked, as we said. At Chambourcy, slurry is used at a rate of 1 cubic meter per are; the price of this fertilizer delivered to the field is 6 francs per meter. The fertilizer is ploughed in well, followed by two harrows to make the soil perfectly loose. Following ploughing, planting takes place from June 15 to July 25. It is carried out with a planter, spacing the plants by Om, 80 in all directions. The recovery of this plant would be very poor if it were not watered, so growers do not fail to take this precaution. They carry the water on foot, using barrels placed on carts, and watering is done with a watering can without apples. Watering is done very sparingly; one lane of water is enough to water a hundred plants. If the weather's fine, the next day we repeat the operation, and that's all the water these plants will receive for the duration of their vegetation. This watering can be done fairly quickly, at no great expense, whatever the size of the crop. There are growers who plant no less than 60 or 80,000 cauliflowers, sometimes more, and who still do it, and it is estimated that two men, with a horse-drawn cart at their service, can wet a hectare's plantation in a single day. During vegetation, the soil needs to be hoeed twice, to loosen it and prevent it from drying out, while at the same time ridding it of weeds. In the past, these hoeings were done by hand, and were very expensive; today, they are done with a cheyal hoe, and it's easy to get them done for 12 to 15 francs. The hoe is passed between the rows, then a man completes the work using a hand hoe, in the immediate vicinity of the cauliflowers. When the apple appears, it is covered; a woman is employed for this work, who can easily oversee a hectare of cultivation. Harvesting begins in October, for semi-hard cauliflowers sown early, and lasts until late November. The timing and quality of this harvest varies enormously. In general, cauliflowers produce rather poor quality products if the summer is rainy, as they develop as soon as they are planted and without the plant having had time to develop an abundant root system. On the contrary, if dry weather prevails for a month or so after planting and after the seedling has taken root, the seedlings, far from suffering, take advantage of it, as the natural humidity of the soil is more than sufficient to multiply the foliage. If, after this drought, rainfall favors the development of the leaves, and a few days of mild weather in October help the apples to form, the harvest will take place in the best possible conditions, and the produce will fetch a very high price on the markets. As a result of this inevitable subordination of the value of this vegetable to the climatic conditions that govern its development, if its cultivation is remunerative even in average years, it can, in exceptionally favorable conditions, become very profitable. As we are fully aware of all cultivation costs, we can calculate the total as follows, for an area of one hectare: Soil rent............................ Manuring; 100 cubic meters at 6 fr........ Plowing and harrowing...................... Plant purchase at 10 fr. per thousand........... Planting; 10 days at 3 fr........... Watering............................ .... Two hoeing sessions at 15 fr. each............... Covering care: 15 days at 2 fr. 250 fr. 600 100 160 30 20 30 30 Total expenses............ 1220 fr. -1 As for products, they are, as we have said, extremely variable, depending on whether the year has been good or bad. When the season has been totally unsatisfactory, cauliflowers are sold for 15 francs per 100, but rarely less; if, on the other hand, everything has gone well, the price rises to 50 francs. Assuming a price of 30 francs, which is more or less the average, the gross revenue from 15,600 plants per hectare is 4,680 francs. Lowering the price to 25 francs would still yield 3900 francs, giving a net profit of 3460 francs in the first case, and 2680 francs in the second. As you can see, this is still a very respectable figure, which should encourage the grower to further extend this production, all work on which can be carried out using the tools at his disposal. Forced cultivation of cauliflower. - Only the earliest, most tender varieties of cauliflower are usually used for early crops. In this case, we use seedlings obtained by exactly the same procedure as that described above for spring cauliflowers, i.e. the seedling sown in September is transplanted into a nursery under a bell, or in a frame, where it is left until the time comes to plant it on a bed. Around New Year's Eve, we start building the beds that will receive the first cauliflower season. This layer is built with a mixture of annealed manure and new manure, to which leaves can also be added in varying proportions. This layer should be about Om, 50 high, to obtain 20 degrees of heat. Once the layer is built up, place the chests in which you will load Om 18 with compost. When the shot is fired, the cauliflower plant is carefully removed and planted by hand in the potting soil of the bed. Plant in two rows, two or three to a frame, depending on whether you're dealing with a variety with stronger or weaker development. As cauliflowers develop quite slowly in the early stages, the space left between the plants is usually used to grow either radishes or lettuce, or sometimes both at the same time. This is not a great disadvantage, as they will be harvested before the cauliflowers are fully developed. Cauliflower requires some watering as it grows. This crop should be given air whenever the weather permits. When the leaves have developed sufficiently to touch the glass, the boxes should be lifted with screw jacks, and the base secured with manure. Apples begin to form in April, and as soon as they appear, the same care as that described above for outdoor cultivation should be applied. Harvesting takes place towards the end of the same month. This harvest, provided by cultivation under a frame, can be prolonged by renewing the plantations, spacing them fortnightly, until they can be planted in the open air; in this way, sustained produce can be obtained throughout the spring. Market gardeners use the beds they build in November and December for growing lettuces, reworking them at the end of January or in February, and mixing a certain proportion of new manure with the old manure to bring back fermentation and produce renewed heat. In April, the carrots are harvested, and as the cauliflowers begin to touch the glass, the frames are removed, vegetation is completed in the open air, and the harvest takes place in May or June, depending on the variety and the time of planting. Growing for seed. - Producing cauliflower seed is not always a successful operation, which explains why it fetches such a high price on the market. Whatever the variety, cauliflowers for seed should always come from seedlings sown in September and kept in a greenhouse. When the apples appear in spring, choose the plants that will give the best results, i.e. those with a firm, tight texture. Avoid choosing apples that are mossy or have insufficient development. Once the selection has been made, only one leaf should be left on each apple to prevent it from hardening under the action of the sun; this leaf should be removed once the inflorescence has developed. Once flowering has taken place, it's a good idea to pinch off the tips of flowering shoots, to ensure the formation of the siliques placed at the base of the inflorescence. As soon as the fruits turn yellow, harvest them and leave them to mature under cover. Insects and parasites affecting cauliflowers are the same as those affecting cabbages and broccoli. BROCOLLI cabbages Broccolis are very similar to cauliflowers, but differ in a number of vegetative characteristics that make them easy to distinguish. They are grown as biennial plants, meaning that, sown in the course of one year, they only produce in the spring of the following Fig. 43 - Early white broccoli. year. Broccoli leaves are narrower and more numerous than those of Cauliflower; the petioles bearing them are usually bare for a long length. The stems are long, so that the apple is often more than 50 centimetres above the ground. The apples are fine-grained, white and of very good quality in the advanced varieties. Uses. - Same as for cauliflower. Varieties. - Broccoli varieties are relatively few in number; a few with colored apples are known, but the most sought-after are those with fine grain and which are as close as possible to our cauliflowers proper, whose ancestors, according to some authors, they are. WHITE BROCCOLI HATIF. - This variety vegetates quickly, with abundant leaves and very wavy edges. The apples are white and of good quality (fig. 43). ROSCOFF BROCCOLI. - Not very distinctive variety, grown mainly throughout Brittany, where it performs well in winter, supplying markets throughout the season. MAMMOTH BROCCOLI. - A late variety producing very good quality apples. Introduced to the market by English growers, it quickly spread to crops around Paris. Cultivation. - Broccoli cultivation has expanded considerably in recent years. Indeed, it has the great advantage of being able to supply produce when cauliflower is in short supply; it supplies the big city markets throughout the winter and part of the spring. Considerable quantities are sold at the Paris market halls; Aveyron, Poitou and a large part of Brittany supply this consumption in the big cities. Produce from the Paris region only arrives later, succeeding that from the regions just mentioned. Cultivation in the Bay of Mont Saint-Michel. - The following information, which we owe to Mr. Lelasseux, a farmer in Saint-Broladre, relates to procedures followed throughout the temperate region of France, which provides winter supplies. Starting in April, an area of variable size is prepared by deep ploughing and harrowing with a rake, depending on the size of the crop, and on the basis that one hectare needs to be sown in order to plant one hectare. Once the soil has been prepared, the seed is broadcast at a rate of 5 kilograms per are. Immediately afterwards, the seed is raked in and, if possible, covered with a light mulch. Watering is usually unnecessary, as germination is easy thanks to the natural humidity of the soil at this time of year. By May, plants with three to four leaves are ready for planting. The soil for this crop must be rich and loose, but it is useful if the richness does not come from fresh fertilizers, but from manuring done the previous year. Fresh fertilizers, especially those coming from cowsheds, would have the serious disadvantage of making Broccoli grow in leaves, while the apple would only take on a small volume. The soil is made loose by double ploughing followed by harrowing. Broccoli is planted in rows, using a planter, with a strong border. It is advisable to leave one meter between the rows on which the Broccolis are planted at Om, 60, thus obtaining a plantation of about 15,000 plants per hectare. During the vegetation period, two or three hoeing operations are necessary; these can be carried out using a horse hoe, which simplifies the operation and reduces its cost. In autumn, it's a good idea to use the spade to bring the soil down to the base of the Broccoli, to protect it from frost. In November, the apples start to appear. To keep them very white, we cover them with leaves taken from the base, as we said when talking about Cauliflower; but here this operation is less essential, for the reason that Broccoli, being amply covered with leaves, and the sun rarely appearing at the time when the apples are forming, they run little risk of yellowing. However, by covering them, we obtain more beautiful and therefore more saleable products. Harvesting begins as early as December, in any case before the seeds have spread. The apples are snipped, leaving a sufficient number of leaves to wrap them, which facilitates packing; this is done by placing the Broccolis in a sort of large open-worked cages, about Im, 20 square, which are covered with straw held in place by strings. Selling prices vary according to the beauty of the produce, and also according to the year; they range from 10 to 25 francs per hundred. Growing around Paris. - In this region, seedlings are sown in the second half of April. To hasten vegetation, it's a good idea to sow the seeds either on an old bed, or in a northern exposure, in garden soil, which is covered with compost. The seeds are buried with a rake, and the soil mulched after being lightly trodden. As soon as the plant has produced three leaves, not including cotyledons, it is transplanted into the nursery, in troughs spaced Om, 15 cm apart. Care must be taken to press the plant down to the first leaves, and to water after transplanting. Planting out, which usually takes place in June, is done by removing the rootball plant with a spade and replanting it in a square at a distance of Om, 80 in all directions. The soil should be rich in decomposed fertilizers such as old topsoil. During the autumn, the soil is hoeed several times, taking care to bring the soil back onto the plant, to make a light ridge. Broccoli plantings are often intercropped. To protect the plants, not from the cold, to which they are not very sensitive, when these do not exceed about 8 degrees below zero, but rather to avoid the sudden alternations of freezing and thawing, it is customary in November to spade a hole next to each plant, on the north side. Pressing down on the plant, we then incline it in this sort of small pit, and if very heavy frosts occur, we throw a layer of long litter over the plant, enough to shelter it from the frosts. This is how growers in the Oise region do it. We have grown Broccoli in the Paris climate, in DYBOWSRI. - Vegetable growing. 14 by planting them in troughs to a depth of about Om, 15. A little leaf sprinkling in the troughs goes a long way towards protecting the plants from frost. The buds appear in March and April. It is a good idea to cover them and harvest them as soon as they have reached full development, otherwise they will quickly lose their value. Insect pests and parasites. - All cabbages have numerous enemies, which attack the various organs of the plant. From a young age, and often as soon as the two cotyledons appear, cabbages and cauliflowers are often attacked, especially in dry, south-facing soils, by a beetle called Altica brassicer, known in gardens as the tiquet or earth flea. This insect often wreaks such havoc that part or even all of the young plant may perish. Preventive treatment consists in sowing in summer, especially with a northern exposure, and keeping the soil moist by frequent watering, which benefits the cabbage. Curative treatment, on the other hand, involves spreading fresh horse manure, or soot, wood ash or sawdust, soaked in heavy oil. Later, the cutworm or larye of the harvest moth (Agrostis segetum) gnaws at the roots of young cabbages; there's no other way to get rid of it than to look for it and crush it. The Cabbage White (Pieris brassteæ) and the Cabbage Moth (Hadina brassicæ) lay eggs on cabbages, giving rise to larvae whose ravages are very fearsome. In some years, the entire leaf parenchyma is completely devoured by these caterpillars, which also attack cauliflower apples, sometimes so badly damaged that they cannot be eaten. If the number of caterpillars is small, the best thing to do is to collect them by hand; this is what the market gardeners and growers of Chambourcy do. If, on the other hand, their numbers are very large, a good method is to syringe them with water, in which carbon sulfide is emulsified at a rate of around 10%. Cabbages, particularly cauliflower and broccoli, are attacked by a parasitic fungus that manifests itself as a sort of white efflorescence, which practitioners call white, mennter or plaster. This fungus, which goes by the name of Cystopus candidus, is unfortunately impossible to combat, because it lives inside the plant's tissues. It manifests itself externally when cabbages and cauliflowers are going to seed; it also wreaks havoc on seedbeds, often absolutely destroying inflorescences. Plants affected by this disease must be burned to destroy the germs. This plant, to which Linnaeus gave the Latin name Cucumis sativus, seems, as de Candolle predicted and as herbal botanists have confirmed, to have originated in north-west India. It grows abundantly and spontaneously at the foot of the Himalayas. It does not appear there with all the vegetative characteristics we know, but the age of its cultivation, which was already known to the Greeks and Romans, may well have modified them. There's every reason to believe that the cucumbers found in the Himalayas, although referred to by some botanists under different names, are closely related to our own Cucumis satieus, whose ancestors they are. The Cucumber is an annual plant whose recumbent stems bear alternate, large, palmate leaves, cordate at the base and forming five rounded lobes, sometimes toothed. These stems bear tendrils, which are the terminations of aborted axes. The inflorescence is monoecious. Male flowers appear first. After fertilization, the ovary develops into a fruit of variable length, size and color. These fruits are sometimes smooth, sometimes covered with a kind of small protuberance ending in prickles, which are found on all plant organs. The seeds are inside the fruit, embedded in a kind of pulp that is the result of the disintegrated placentas. These seeds look a little like a pear seed; they are white. They retain their germinative capacity for seven to eight years. Uses. - Cucumbers are used in a wide variety of culinary preparations. They are eaten cooked and stuffed, or raw in salads when fully developed. They are often eaten when only half-developed. They can be marinated either in vinegar, which is what gherkins are made of, or in water with aromatic herbs, as is common practice in northern Europe. Varieties. - Cucumbers have been cultivated for a very long time, so their fruit shapes and sizes have varied greatly. In practice, they are divided into two classes, some with white fruit, others that remain green. BONNEUIL WHITE CUCUMBER. - Large fruit, swollen in the middle. The plant that bears them is hardy and very well suited to outdoor cultivation (fig. 44). HATIF WHITE CUCUMBER. - Differs from the preceding cucumber only in that its fruit is long and cylindrical rather than bulging. Green when young, turning white as it develops. GREEN GHERKIN CUCUMBER. - Fruit covered with warts, green, becoming yellowish when ripe. This highly fertile variety is specially cultivated for harvesting as soon as the fruit reaches finger size and length. ROLLINSON GREEN CUCUMBER. - Very long, stalkless green fruit with longitudinal grooves. Clearly distinguishable from previous varieties in that it is strangled near the stalk into a 6 Fig. 44. - White cucumber Fig. 45. - Green cucumber. de Bonneuil. Rollinson. sort of narrow neck (fig. 45). It is particularly suited to forced cultivation, for which it is almost exclusively used. Open-ground cultivation. - Cucumbers multiply by means of the seed, which always germinates with the greatest ease. The varieties most commonly used for outdoor cultivation are the green gherkin cucumber and the early white cucumber. Although hardy, cucumbers are very sensitive to frost, and a drop in temperature to zero is enough to kill them. For this reason, seedlings can only be sown late, or shelters must be used to protect them until the time when white frosts are no longer feared, which in our climate is the second half of May. Given the need to avoid a drop in temperature, there are two possible methods: one involves sowing in situ and sheltering the young plant under cloches, the other involves sowing in a frame and replanting in situ. On-site sowing is done by opening trenches in the soil, Om, 10 deep and Om, 50 wide, which Ton fills either with manure from old layers, or with leaves, and then covers with the soil removed from the trench. The length of these trenches varies according to the size of the crop. Between each trench, leave about 1.20 m. Once the soil has been prepared, sow cucumber seedpots in the middle of the trench, Om.60 apart, place five or six seeds and cover them with a bell. When emergence has occurred, leave two or three plants under each bell, and pull out the others, which can be used to make a new plantation. As soon as the seedling takes its first leaves, it should be given some air to gradually get used to its action, so that the cloches can be removed at the beginning of June. If sowing under a frame, this should be done in the first few days of May on a warm bed. When the plant has two cotyledons, it is transplanted one by one into cups of Om, 10, and placed in a terrau prepared as above, towards the end of May. In the Midi region, seed is simply sown in a square, without the use of trenches or bells. Whichever method is used, once the plant has two leaves, it is pruned to encourage rapid branching. After this initial pruning, the plant is usually left to its own devices. Fruits appear at the end of June; we leave whatever the plant is willing to produce if these fruits are destined for making gherkins, in which case they are harvested as soon as they are the size of a finger. Harvesting should take place every two days. If, on the other hand, you want large cucumbers, you should leave only about ten per plant. In dry soils, cucumbers should be watered frequently; in cool soils, on the other hand, water should only be given if the drought becomes persistent. Gherkins, which are produced in large quantities around Massy, Palaiseau and Verrières, are sold by weight at the Halles. The price is usually O fr. 30 to O fr. 50 per kilogram. As for cucumbers, they are sold by the dozen, and their price varies greatly according to the season and the development they have acquired. In Paris, white cucumbers are sold by the dozen for between 2 fr. 50 and 3 francs during the summer. For seed, we choose the best-formed fruit and let it mature on the vine. When the fruit is judged to be completely ripe, which can be recognized by its lighter color, we open it and remove the seeds inside. Wash with plenty of water, then dry in the shade. Cucumber cultivation is very successful throughout the intertropical zone, making it a valuable resource for vegetable growing in our colonies in this region. Here, seedlings are sown in situ, without the use of soil or compost. Cultivation on a bed. - Paris market gardeners frequently grow cucumbers as early crops. They have succeeded in perfecting their cultivation methods to such an extent that their produce appears at the halles in the early months of the year. We owe the following information to M. Curé, one of the most expert market gardeners in this type of cultivation. Sowing begins in the first fortnight of December. The seeds are sown on a very hot bed equipped with heaters; one by one, they are pushed into the soil with the tip of the finger. Emergence takes place after a few days, and as soon as the two cotyledons are fully developed and the first leaf begins to appear, the plant is transplanted. For this purpose, Om10 diameter cups are placed on a new bed, at a rate of 100 per frame. In the middle of each of these cups, placed on the layer and filled with potting soil, we transplant a cucumber seedling using a finger or a planter, taking care to press it in up to the cotyledons. Water lightly, then close the trays and cover with straw mats overnight. If it freezes very hard, it's often necessary to leave the mats on for part or all of the day. But it's important to remember that this occlusion is detrimental to young plants, which quickly wither, so avoid prolonging it. As soon as the young plant has two well-developed leaves, the stem above them is cut. As a result, the buds in the axils of the two leaves develop into two shoots, and the plant is ready for planting. Before this happens, if winter is severe, it is often useful during the vegetation period either to reshuffle the layer's warmers, or even to build a new layer on which the seedlings or cups are transported. A month and a half after sowing, the seedling is ready for planting. A new, warm layer is prepared and filled with potting soil, half-mixed with garden soil. As the layer warms up, a longitudinal line is drawn across the potting soil, dividing its height in two. The young cucumber plants are planted along this line. Two or three are placed per panel; this is done by removing the cups and pushing the seedlings down to the cotyledons. When recovery is assured and the two branches - the result of pruning - begin to elongate, cover the soil with a light mulch and maintain adequate humidity with watering. As the two branches lengthen rapidly, they are directed so that one moves towards the top of the frame, the other towards the bottom. These two branches are not allowed to elongate indefinitely, and are pruned above the fourth or fifth leaf. The result of this operation is the production of as many new branches as leaves have been left. Each of these new productions will bear, in the axil of each leaf, flowers, some of which will be male, others female, and it is not uncommon for there to be several female flowers in the axil of each leaf, giving rise to as many young cucumbers. From then on, pruning consists of pinching off each extension as soon as it has a single leaf. Pruning in this early crop can therefore be summarized as follows: first pruning to two leaves, then pruning to four leaves, and finally repeated pruning to one leaf. As soon as the fruits appear, they are, as we've just said, often grouped in pairs in the leaf axils. Immediately after flowering, the best one is chosen to cut off the second. This leaves three or four, then a few more, so that each plant produces a total of eight or ten fruits throughout its life. Fertilization of the female flowers is not usually a concern, as it takes care of itself; however, in early cultivation, it is sometimes useful to transport the pollen with a brush. When the fruits begin to grow, we help them to develop by placing each one in a lamp glass, which has the advantage of making them grow straight and giving them uniform coloring. The 1 green varieties are the only ones used for this early crop. For very early production, the Rollinson variety is generally used, but the market gardeners of Paris prefer to use it in their bedding crops for a breed they have bred themselves, which is similar to the Green Gherkin Cucumber. Each time the fruit is harvested, which takes place a fortnight or so after the flower that produced it has bloomed, all the leaves that are beginning to turn a little yellow are removed, to make room for the new leaves, which are carefully not crumpled or foxed. The old leaves are set aside and used for packaging. These cucumbers are sold by the dozen: they are wrapped six at a time, first in a few leaves, then in white paper, so that only the ends are visible. At the beginning of the season, these fruits sell for up to 20 and 25 francs a dozen, but the price drops rapidly to just 3 to 6 francs in May. There is a large export trade in the first fruits to the capitals of northern Europe, particularly St. Petersburg. Enemies. - Cucumbers are often attacked by aphids. This can be seen when the plants stop growing and the leaves wrinkle irregularly. This parasite can be eliminated with a few syringes of water in which dried tobacco leaves have been cooked. Cucumbers are also attacked by a parasite to which practitioners give the name "gray" because of its color, and which invades the leaves and stems with such intensity that the plant quickly perishes. No effective remedy is yet known, so in certain regions where this disease occurs abundantly, it is impossible to grow cucumbers in the open air, while those grown in frames are usually spared. Squashes, which for many years have been plunged into deep chaos, have now been neatly and precisely classified by M. Naudin. According to this author's remarkable work, all the diverse forms of squash found in gardens can be related to three main species: Cueurbita maxima Michaux, Cucurbita pepo Linné and Cucurbita moschata Michaux. It follows that all the countless so-called species that have been created over and over again should be considered as nothing more than varieties of the types we have just listed. Uses. - Despite being of different types, all gourds are used for the same purposes, which consist in their use in the preparation of either special dishes or various soups. However, their qualities differ greatly from one variety to another. The fleshy part of the pericarp is very poor in fibrous tissue, so the flesh disintegrates completely when cooked. These fruits contain mucilage, starch and sugar in their tissues, in highly variable proportions; the predominance of one or other of these substances results in different properties and uses. The sweetest of these fruits can be used to make a variety of jams. They are also used to make resins. Some of them, reduced to marmalades and flavored, make excellent jams whose color is reminiscent of that of apricots. Squash fruit is frequently used to adulterate commercial apricot pastes. In general, all gourds are not very delicate plants; they are grown in the same way, whatever their species. It is worth indicating the distinctive characteristics of each of the three species that have provided the varieties for our crops. I. - Cucurbita maxima. This species includes all varieties with very large fruits, and in particular all those commonly known as pumpkins. The vegetative characteristics of this species consist in the shape of the leaves, which are always large, kidney-shaped and with shallow margins; in the numerous hairs that cover all the organs of the plant; these hairs are not very hard and never take on the consistency of prickles. Fruit stalks are smooth and often swollen. The shape of the fruit varies markedly from one race to another, but in general the fruit is raised with more or less pronounced ribs, and more often than not its diameter exceeds its length. According to research carried out, M. de Candolle considers this species to have originated in the warmer parts of the Old World, from where Europeans brought it to America. In support of this opinion, we should mention the fact that the species was discovered in a spontaneous state in Guinea, on the banks of the Niger. Varieties. - There are a considerable number of varieties of this species, differing in color, shape and size. The most widely cultivated are POTIRON GRIS DE BOULOGNE. - A vigorous variety whose very large fruit often reaches almost a meter in size ( Fig. 46. - Bright red pumpkin from Étampes. diameter. Its name comes from the fact that the rind is covered with embroidery, giving it a gray appearance. The flesh is mealy, yellow and very thick. It keeps well. POTIRON ROUGE VIF D'ÉTAMPES. - Fruit with large ribs and smooth, bright orange-red skin. Average size, usually not reaching that of the previous variety (fig. 46). GREEN SPANISH PUMPKIN. - The fruit of this variety is smaller, scarcely more than Om,50 to Om, 60 in diamè̂tre. Its flesh, which keeps for a long time without spoiling, is bright yellow. This variety is highly prized at the market. GIRAUMON SQUASH. - This variety, whose fruit is relatively small, has a very distinctive shape due to Fig. 47 - Giraumon squash. the hypertrphia of the fruit's eye. The flesh is of good quality (fig. 47). II. - Cucurbita Pepo. This species, which seems to have originated in America, is distinguished from the previous one by a number of characteristics derived from the organs of vegetation, which are found in the innumerable varieties found in cultivation. The leaves are lobed, sometimes even fidate, and bear numerous indentations; they are covered with epidermal productions that often become hard and form true prickles found on petioles and stems. DYBOWSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 15 Fruits are usually longer than they are wide, with the exception of a few irregular-fruited varieties in which the diameter exceeds the height of the fruit in length. Fruit rind is generally hard, which increases shelf life. Varieties. - These are very numerous, but only a small number are commonly grown; among the main ones, we should mention: COURGE DES PATAGONS. - A vigorous, hardy variety, producing cylindrical fruit up to Om.50 long by Om.20 in diameter, with five longitudinal ribs, forming rounded, protruding cords on the surface. Very dark green in color. The yellow flesh is of average quality and keeps for a long timeFig. 48. - Pa- temps squash (fig. 48). tagons. TOURAINE PUMPKIN SQUASH. - A variety with very large fruit, generally considered to be a forage crop. ITALIAN LONG SQUASH. - Non-running plant, whose very short stem forms a large tuft of leaves on the spot. Fruits long Om, 60 by Om, 10 in diameter. Flesh not very abundant. This variety is mainly cultivated to harvest the young fruit, the size of a small cucumber, which is eaten stuffed like eggplant. MARROW GOURD. - Cultivated for the same uses as the previous variety, particularly in England. The fruit is similar in shape to the Patagonian squash, but much smaller in size. Two sub-varieties are widely cultivated in England, one with a white rind, the other with green mottling. III. - Cucurbita moschata. Although not absolutely certain, this species is thought to originate in the Far East. The reason for this is that, of the many varieties of squash whose seeds we received from Japan, all those representing races formerly cultivated in the country were related to this species. The stems of this species are usually elongated. The rounded-lobed leaves have white spots in many varieties. The fruits, with very good-quality flesh, have a thin rind and poor keeping qualities. MELON-SHAPED SQUASH. - This variety, whose seeds first came to us from Japan in 1877, has fruits that absolutely resemble a strong, dark-green cantaloupe melon. The flesh is of excellent quality and is ideal for jams and pastes. COURGE PLEINE DE NAPLES. - A vigorous variety with vigorously developing stems. Fruits about 50 cm long, with the distinctive feature that the entire upper part, narrower than the tip, is completely full; the seed-bearing placentas are found only in the swollen part. This is a good variety, which unfortunately has the disadvantage of not always ripening well in the Paris climate, due to its late flowering. CARABACETTE SQUASH. - A new variety of excellent quality. Characterized by very long fruits with a diameter of Om.10 to Om.15. The fruits are full for most of their length. Flesh is orange-red, sweet and suitable for dishes and jams. Cultivation. - Squashes multiply exelusively by means of the seed, and, although these plants easily produce adventitious roots, this property is not used in practice to propagate by marcotting or cutting. Seed germination is always very easy, and we sometimes take advantage of this to sow seeds on the spot, but this is a defective procedure which has the double disadvantage of occupying the soil for too long and producing products which often mature only imperfectly. For these reasons, preference should be given to seedlings sown on a bed or under a frame. Until recently, squash was part of market garden production, but since pumpkins have fallen significantly in price as a result of the expansion of this crop, these plants have been abandoned by market gardeners, and today can only be found on the plains around large cities. Despite having passed through different hands, cultivation has remained as it was in the past. Seedlings must, as we have said, be sown under a frame; for this purpose, a warm layer is built up at the beginning of April, or an old layer that has already been used to grow other vegetables is used. Finger-sow the seeds in the bed, i.e. make a hole with your finger and place a single seed in it. These seeds are pricked out at about Om, 07 in all directions, sowing around 300 seeds per frame. Lightly basked, then covered with a frame, these seeds germinate rapidly. As soon as the young plants, in addition to two cotyledons, have shown a leaf, they should be transplanted. Transplanting must be done by hand, and the squash plant is replanted again under a frame, at a rate of one hundred plants per panel. Care must be taken when planting to press the young plants down to the level of the two cotyledons, which has the advantage of producing adventitious roots in the entire buried part, thus increasing the vigor of the plant. In garden cultivation, seedlings are usually planted in Om-10 diameter pots, which makes them easier to transplant. Sometimes, we even go so far as to sow the seeds directly into the cups and leave them there until they are ready for planting. This is a faulty procedure, as squash tolerate transplanting very well, which has the undeniable advantage of producing stocky, vigorous plants by pressing the seedlings down to the cotyledons, which is not the case with direct sowing. For the reasons given above, direct sowing is not to be recommended. However, if you do wish to sow in the field, it would be useful to arrange the soil in a sort of trough, into which the seeds are sown; this procedure provides a sort of ridging, while leaving a small basin around the plant for watering. With plants prepared under a frame, planting usually takes place in the second half of May. If you plant earlier, you will need to use cloches to protect the plant from spring frosts, to which it is very sensitive. Before planting, the soil must be prepared. This preparation consists in drawing lines on the field to be used for this crop, leaving a distance between them which varies according to the breed being grown, but which in general should not be less than 2 meters and, in the case of pumpkins, should be as much as 3 meters. On the rows thus laid out, small pits of Om, 40 on a side and of roughly equal depth are made every Im, 50. These pits are filled with decomposed manure, leaves or any other material capable of providing the nitrogen fertilizer needed for the rapid development of squash, along with a little heat from fermentation. Once these materials have been deposited in the pits, they are trodden down and watered, then covered with soil from the excavation to form a conical mound in the shape of a vast molehill, ending at the top in a sort of small basin in which to plant a squash plant. When setting up, use flat baskets or trays to transport the plants to the site, whether they have been grown in a full frame and raised into a clod, or with the cups into which they have been transplanted and from which they will be extracted. When planting, care should be taken to spread out the roots of the young plant, which should be buried up to the cotyledons. Immediately after planting, give the seedlings copious watering; it is useful to shelter them for the first few days, by covering them with a bell, an upturned pot or simply a cabbage leaf, which is removed as soon as, after a few days, recovery is judged to have taken place. Young plants are quick to grow; it is useful, though not always done, to cut the stem above the first two leaves, not including the cotyledons. This pruning results in the development of two branches, which can be stopped when they have produced five or six leaves. Flowers appear on the third-generation branches, the first of which are male; later, female flowers are produced, recognizable by the round, inferior ovary beneath the flower. We must be careful not to remove the male flowers, as we have sometimes seen done, on the pretext that they never bear fruit, and not to forget that their presence is essential for fertilization, as the female flowers usually bear no trace of fertile stamens. As soon as the young fruits are about the size of an apple, it's time to decide which ones to leave. In large-fruited varieties, such as Pumpkins, only one fruit is left per plant, and all the others are removed as they appear; this is the only way to obtain a well-developed Pumpkin. In small-fruited varieties, the number of fruits left can vary from three to five. Finally, for varieties where these fruits are eaten young, leave as many as the plant is willing to produce, removing them only when their volume is deemed sufficient. To increase fruit size, growers take care to bury the stems at certain points along their course; in this way, as adventitious roots develop in the buried areas, fruit nutrition is increased accordingly, and there is a noticeable increase in volume. Once you've decided which fruits to keep, you prune the branches carrying them, two or three leaves above their point of attachment. At the same time, cut off the tips of all branches not bearing fruit. Squashes are greedy for water and fertilizer; so, although watering can be dispensed with, their development can be significantly exaggerated by giving them a few sprinklings of water, either simple or with a solution of some kind of fertilizer, while they are growing. We sometimes use piles of manure or compost, which must remain unused during the summer, by planting a few squash vines on them, whose fruits then develop considerably. Fruit should be harvested at the latest as soon as the white frosts begin to set in. Cut the fruit off, removing with it a fragment of the branch that bore it. They should be stored in a shed to protect them from rain, which could cause them to rot, and from frost, which could damage them. The sale takes place in autumn. The Pottrons are then taken to the market, where they are sold by the piece; the price varies according to size. Prices vary according to size, from 1.50 francs for small fruits to 5 francs for large ones. Given that they are planted 3 meters apart in one direction and Im, 50 in the other, and that only one is left per plant for the large-fruited varieties, one hectare can produce around 2, 200 fruits. Seeds should always be harvested from the largest, best-formed fruits that correspond as closely as possible to the type of variety, as these plants are very prone to degeneration as a result of hybridization between varieties grown in close proximity to one another. These seeds retain their germination capacity for five to six years. 2 . 4 Crambe or Sea cabbage (Crambe maritima Linné) is native to temperate western Europe. The plant is characterized by broad, thick leaves with variously cut margins, glaucous on both sides; the thick, fleshy petioles are purplish-brown at their base; this color is evenly distributed on the leaf blades of young leaves. The inflorescence is a compound cluster, bearing white cruciform flowers followed by siliques containing a single seed. Fertilization does not always occur, and the flowers are very often sterile. The seeds retain their germinative powers for only a short time. Uses. - Crambé is widely eaten in England. In France, it has been little cultivated to date, so we are dependent on England, which sends us fairly large quantities every year. We eat the petioles, which have been blanched by the deprivation of light. They are eaten in the same way as asparagus or cardoons, and make a very fine, highly sought-after vegetable. Sowing. - Crambé is difficult to propagate by sowing, due to the short germination period of the seeds. To give it some chance of success, it's best to obtain seed as soon as it ripens, in the course of the summer, and place it in stratification in fine sand. For best results, the best procedure is to sow the stratified seeds on a bed in spring, and then transplant them into the ground. Sowing in the open air has little chance of success, unless done in May, sheltered by a north-facing wall. Flea beetles are fond of young plants, and must be removed by spraying in the morning, before the dew disappears. Multiplication by cuttings. - If you already have Crambé plants, it's a good idea to use a cutting procedure described by Mr. Berthaut in the Bulletin de la Société centrale d'horticulture de France. Here's how it should be done: Towards the end of April, the old plants are pulled out, and all the roots cut into sections of Om, 10 to Om, 12 in length. These sections are divided into two categories, one consisting of all roots at least Om, 008 in diameter, the other of all the smaller rootlets. The small roots of the second batch are nursed at Om, 10 in all directions, to be used only the following year. The larger roots, on the other hand, are used directly. Whether you have at your disposal seedlings raised by sowing, sections of large roots or small roots that have spent a year in the nursery, you will use them indiscriminately, when it's time to put them in place; however, sections of roots are infinitely better than seedlings raised by sowing; the product they will provide will be more abundant than that of plants raised from seed. It is important to know that only roots are suitable for making cuttings; underground stem fragments, which we are often tempted to use, do not give any good results. This is because roots easily produce adventitious buds, whereas stems only produce roots with difficulty. Planting. - To grow Crambé, you need well-smoked, loose soil. It is prepared by deep ploughing; then the soil is divided into 1.20 m planks, leaving paths of Om.50 between each one. On each plank, five rays are traced with the hoe, giving them a depth of about Om.10, and the Crambés are transplanted into the rays at Om.20 intervals. Watering is necessary to help the cuttings take root. Their recovery is assured, and by June, the square is covered with thick greenery. The water from the sprinklers washes away the soil, filling in the furrows and burying the Crambés plants a few centimetres deep. Shrinking. - Things are left in this state until March, when the plants are hoeed, the soil is brought back to the Crambés rows, and each plant is covered with a large upside-down pot. The leaves soon start to grow, forming one to three rosettes on each plant, which are removed with a knife when the petioles have reached a length of about Om, 12 (fig. 49). Forced cultivation. - Instead of thinning at the time of natural growth, it is usually done by forced cultivation, using two different methods: either forcing the Crambés on the spot, or putting them on a bed. In the second of these two methods, we start by building a layer in December or January with horse manure, giving it a thickness of Om, 60, with well-established stoves. The Om, 20 layer is filled with potting soil inside the trunks, and 50 plants per frame are planted. Panels, either glazed or simply planked, are placed over the whole; these panels are covered with a double layer of doormats or simply a thick layer of leaves. Harvesting can be done about three weeks after forcing begins. Forcing on site produces more beautiful products, but the operation takes a little longer. It consists of placing boxes fitted with plank panels over the Crambés crops. Then, digging out the paths, a layer of hot manure is laid on top of Fig. 49 - Crambé maritime. the boards, which is then reworked if the temperature drops below the frames. The panels are covered with mats or manure, and forcing is similar in every way to that used for Asparagus (fig. 13). After a month of forcing, the crop can be harvested. Yield. - Treated as described above, Crambé yields around 2,500 kilos per frame. This English vegetable sells in Paris for around 4 francs a kilogram in December and January, and for 1.50 in March. Although these prices will undoubtedly fall rapidly, Crambé cultivation will nonetheless remain worthwhile, either for sale or for direct consumption. There's a long way to go from the methods used in the past to the one recommended by Mr. Berthaut; we've tried it out and obtained the best results. In general, therefore, we should abandon the seedling system, which is not very advantageous, in that it is very uncertain, especially as it is easy to obtain as many root cuttings as you want, since all the plants that have been forced once are now cut after heating in April, to make new cuttings, which in turn will produce the following year. This system therefore requires only one year, whereas previous planting methods required two or three. Watercress (Nasturtium officinale, R. Bronn) grows wild in all streams and ponds in temperate Europe and Asia. For a long time, it was simply harvested where it grew spontaneously, but the ever-increasing need for it soon led to its regulated cultivation, which is now as widespread as it is lucrative. Cress (fig. 50) is characterized by succulent, fleshy twigs bearing alternate pinnate leaves with rounded segments, the terminal one always larger than those on the sides. These branches terminate in a bractless, clustered inflorescence. The white, cruciform flowers are small and give rise to long fruits (siliques) containing small, flattened, orange-yellow seeds. Uses. - In addition to the medicinal uses of watercress, due to the high proportion of iodine (1) in its tissue, watercress makes very tasty and widely used salads and seasonings. Its reputation as a powerful depurative has earned it the nickname Santé du corps (1) Chatin, le Cresson. Varieties. - Strictly speaking, these don't exist, and it's more or less the wild watercress that's grown on every farm. However, a few skilled growers have, through well-managed selection, formed breeds for cultivation that are more advantageous than the standard plant, in that the leaves become wider and form more compact rosettes with -c-f..-...-.AA... Fig. 50. - Watercress. the tips of the branches, give a higher yield. At the same time, the dark green to reddish-brown color of its leaves and stems gives it a vigorous appearance that makes it highly sought-after. On the other hand, there are types degenerated by poor cultivation, in which the leaves become narrow and frizzy, giving low yields. Cultivation. - As we have said, watercress grows spontaneously on the banks of small streams of running water, and sometimes also on the edges of ponds. But there is a considerable difference in the products obtained in either case, and watercress from flowing water is infinitely preferable to that which grows in stagnant water, for the reason that the latter usually takes on a muddy taste which robs it of much of its quality. Choice of water. - When growing cress, it's important to choose the best conditions. A watercress bed can therefore only be established if a certain quality of running water is available. But it doesn't matter what kind of water you use. Water from a small river or open stream, while sufficient for watercress cultivation, would be totally unsuitable for industrial production. As we shall see, for a watercress farm to become truly lucrative, it is first and foremost necessary to be able to harvest watercress during the winter. Water from a stream would have the disadvantage of being at an inconsistent temperature and subject to variations in ambient air temperature. For these reasons, the only water that can be used is that supplied by springs and reaching the watercress bed in a covered canal. It is also necessary for this water to come from deep strata, which, by regulating its temperature and making it constant, will have the added advantage of providing a flow rate that will not be influenced by external conditions, so that it will remain uniform during the hiyer as well as during the summer. DVBONSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 16 The composition of the water is also important. Water loaded with gypsum or carbonate of lime has the disadvantage of forming deposits on the leaves, making them dirty and reducing their value. Water from peaty soils, which is laden with organic matter, gives watercress a very unpleasant muddy odor. The best waters, therefore, are those that can be used for human consumption, in other words, those that are drinkable. Watercress pits. - When you have access to water that meets the conditions we have just described, you can think about setting up watercress pits, but you mustn't lose sight of the fact that under different conditions, it would be risky to engage in this type of production, at least for commercial purposes. In order to regulate the water supply and the quantity of water to be supplied to the plants, pits are dug in the ground of varying dimensions, depending on the importance of the crop and the quantity of water available. In industrial cultivation, the most common dimensions are 60 to 80 meters in length. It would be a disadvantage to exceed this length, as the end of the pit receiving water that has been in contact with the air for a long time would behave badly, for the reasons we have already set out. It is important not to give these pits too great a width, as we must not lose sight of the fact that the water supplied by the inlet canals will lose all the more of its speed the greater the surface area, so that by exaggerating this width the current could become almost nil, or in any case insufluously sensitive; the water would then become croupy, and the Cress would take on a bad taste. The most suitable width is around three meters. However, this width will vary according to the strength of the water flowing into the pit. A water flow of 25 liters per minute is required for a width of one metre, i.e. 75 liters for the same time and a pit three metres wide. This is the only way to obtain sufficient current. A single pit is not sufficient for continuous watering. You need to set up several so that the produce from one alternates with that from the other. There are watercress cultivations in the départements around Paris, with no less than a hundred pits, and sometimes more. It doesn't matter how these pits are arranged in the field. Understandably, it would be unwise to use the water from one pit to feed a second, as the water would then be in temperature equilibrium with the outside air, and would freeze during the winter. Pits should be placed parallel to each other, with a 1-meter-wide bank between them. In the past, the banks or embankments were given over to vegetable cultivation, and for this purpose they were given a greater width, but this practice is more or less abandoned nowadays. It follows from the layout of the pits that the water must flow in the direction of their length, then divide into a transverse channel with as many arms as there are pits to be served (fig. 51). Each arm is controlled by a valve that regulates the water flow to each pit. It doesn't matter if the pits are set up in any type of soil. Siliceous soils would have the disadvantage of producing insufficiently watertight pits8 N 3 -3 4 2 21 4 F. 8 18 E 4 al 2 ~~~ ~ a CS 6 6~ 3. R * 4 2 E Mna Fig. 51 - Plan of a three-pit cressonnière. ches. Clay or clay-limestone soils are best suited to their construction. The depth of the pits is not in itself very important, but they must be at least Om, 40 in this sense, although it is understandable that this height should be increased at one end of the pit if it is built on sloping ground. In fact, the bottom of the pit should only have a very slight slope equal to about 2 millimeters per meter, i.e. Om, 16 for a pit 80 meters long. The bottom of the ditch can be ploughed and smoked if it is of very poor quality, but more often than not it is simply flooded a few days before planting. As the bottom is softened by the water, it is left to drain before planting. Multiplying watercress. - Cress produces seeds that germinate easily, but this method of propagation is rarely used. The reason for this is that we grow plants whose leaves are as broad as possible; by using the seed we would often be exposing ourselves to degeneration, or at the very least we wouldn't obtain as uniform a product as by planting, which is done using twigs that, as soon as they come into contact with the soil, rapidly emit adventitious roots. If, however, it is necessary to sow seeds, as may be the case when establishing new watercress beds, the water should be removed from the pits by closing the sluice valves in spring or summer, and the seeds sown on the mud. Once the seedlings have grown well, the water is gradually released. Planting, which, as we've just said, is the most common method of propagation, is usually done in August. To do this, we take branches of watercress from a pit in full development, simply by pulling on them. The planting starts at the head of the pit, i.e. on the side from which the water comes, and usually the watercress is deposited in small clumps on the mud of the pit. Keep Om, 10 between the feet on and between the rows, and lay the watercress in such a way that the leafy end of its branches faces the head of the pit. It would be advantageous not just to throw the watercress on the ground in this way, but to transplant it, so that it picks up better and the harvest is a few days earlier. Four to five days after planting, the watercress has taken possession of the soil and the ends of its branches have straightened out. At this point, let enough water run off to cover the soil with 3 to 4 centimetres of water. It's now time to give the watercress its first fertilizer application. This consists of half-decomposed stable manure, which is thrown in handfuls over the watercress to cover it partially. To prevent the manure from being carried away by the water, it is applied to the soil with a light bat consisting of a board attached to a long handle. A few days after applying the manure, the watercress reappears vigorously above the layer of fertilizer. From then on, the pit is given all the water it needs, and a few days later the harvest can begin. Replanting should be done every year; after the pit has been cleaned and the silt removed, replant as described above. Harvesting watercress. - As we have just seen, harvesting begins soon after planting and can last all year, provided the necessary precautions are taken. In regions too far from Paris, watercress is only harvested during the winter, when the produce reaches its maximum value. In the Oise region, for example, harvesting only takes place from November to May, as the summer produce is too low in value to bear the cost of transport. For a watercress farm to produce abundant and remunerative products, it is therefore very important, as we have said, that the water does not get cold in winter, and that it does not freeze in the pits. It is also essential, in order to obtain good harvests, to smoke after each cut, following the procedure indicated above. To make the cut, a board is placed across the pits, on which the cutter stands. He kneels down and bends forward; with his left hand he grasps the watercress, lifts it up and cuts it with a serpette held in his right hand. As soon as enough cress has been harvested to make a handful, he binds it with wicker, a small bundle of which he wears on his belt. The lower end of the bundle is smoothed with a serpette, then the handle is thrown into the water on the shady side. When the worker is skilled, he cuts a hundred handles an hour. Each one weighs around 300 grams. In the evening, the bunches are packed into large conical baskets, in which they are placed so that the leaves are in the center, with the other end resting against the wall of the basket. As a result, a central cavity remains unoccupied in the pamer. The bundles are consolidated by covering them with a little straw and tying them with string. Each basket contains around 18 to 20 dozen bundles. The whole lot is then shipped by high-speed train or transported by car to the market. Winter prices generally range from 1 franc to 1.50 francs per dozen. In summer, the price is reduced by three-quarters. The yield from a watercress farm varies greatly according to the situation, the quantity of water used and the care taken. In any case, growers admit that the benefits are often considerable. Although watercress does not produce products similar to those we harvest in France, it does provide good harvests in our equatorial colonies, where we recommend its cultivation. Cress is attacked by a number of insects, notably the flea beetle (Altica sisymbrii), which can be removed by temporarily submerging the pits. It is also important to prevent the pits from being invaded by aquatic plants, which would hinder the watercress's development. CESSON ALÉNOIS Cress alénois (Lepidium sativum, Linné) is a small cruciferous plant that seems to have originated in Persia. This annual plant produces a rosette of deeply dissected leaves, from the center of which a branched stem rises after a few months of vegetation, giving rise to clusters of small, white, cruciform flowers followed by fruits (siliques) containing a small number of oblong, orange seeds. They remain germinative for five years. Uses. - The leaves are used as a condiment or to make salads. Varieties. - In addition to the primitive type, which is by far the most widespread, we also grow varieties with broad leaves and curly leaves. Cultivation. - To prevent the plant from going to seed too quickly, it's a good idea to sow in the shade during the summer, so as to obtain a longer harvest. Cresson alénois can be useful for large-scale cultivation. In a short space of time, it produces seeds that can be sold commercially. In this circumstance, sowing is broadcast in April at a rate of 5 kilograms per hectare. For watercress to grow well, the soil must be fine, i.e. made uniform by harrowing and rolling. This crop requires no care until harvest time. This takes place in August and September. The watercress is mown, then left to dry in javelins. Finally, it is flailed and winnowed. The yield is four to five hundred francs per hectare. Crosnes see Épiaire. . ... .. 1 4 - SHALLOT Shallot, which Linnaeus named botanically Allium ascalonicum, based on Pliny's belief that the plant originated in Ascalon in Judea, is not considered a species by the most authoritative modern botanists. On the contrary, they tend (1) to regard it as a simple variety of the common onion. Indeed, while the characteristics derived from taste are different, all those derived from the vegetative organs and the flower are unmistakably similar. What's more, although the regions where it has been claimed to grow spontaneously have been explored, it has not been found in the wild. Finally, it very rarely produces seeds, which again indicates a kind of degeneration due to long cultivation and a profound change in its primitive state. The plant resembles the onion in its fistulous leaves and swollen, hollow stem; it differs in that its bulb branches early, forming a variable number of cloves that spread apart. - The bulbs are used as a condiment, either cooked or preserved in vinegar. (1) De Candolle, Orig, des plantes cultivées. Varieties. - There are two slightly different types, one the ordinary shallot (fig. 52), the other with more rounded, less branched bulbs, known as the Jersey shallot; plus a few local sub-varieties. Cultivation. - Shallots are grown in multiple stages, using bulbs that are planted in the same way as garlic. The soil must be deeply tilled. Avoid using freshly smoked soil, which could cause all or part of the plants to rot. Lines are drawn Om, 20 apart, along which the cloves are transplanted, keeping the same distance between plants. This planting is done in February and March, but for the Jersey Shallot it is preferable to do it in autumn, as this plant does not fear frosts. It takes early possession of the soil and provides bulbs which, reaching full maturity very early, keep much better than if planted in spring. Harvesting takes place when the leaves begin to turn yellow. Leaving bulbs too long in the ground can cause them to rot. This serious disadvantage, which frequently occurs in shallot plantations, can be remedied by removing any plants that seem to be affected by this rot. In Brittany, where this crop is grown on a large scale, the leaves are braided after they have dried, to form a sort of string of bulbs that young Bretons sell in the streets of Paris, along with garlic and bay leaves. The insects that attack shallots are the same as those that cause damage to leek and garlic crops. This newly-introduced vegetable is now widespread everywhere, and deserves to be. Rosary is native to Japan, where it has long been cultivated as a food plant. It is also used in China. It is a perennial plant with numerous underground, tuberous rhizomes formed by a succession of nodules resembling the swollen root collars of rosary oats. The simple or stalked stem, usually erect, bears opposite, rough, cordate-based leaves that are toothed and accuminate. The sessile flowers form false whorls or contracted cymes in the leaf axils. The flower, which is that of a labiate, bears a purplish corolla. Uses. - The swollen roots, no bigger than a finger and 5 to 6 centimeters long, are eaten cooked in water, then prepared in the same way as salsify, but with more finesse and a less firm consistency. They can also be made into pickles or used in vegetable salads. This new vegetable has been introduced and spread in France by the devoted care of a good man, Mr. Paillieux, who for many years has devoted his time to researching new vegetables, which he then spreads among the public. It is remarkable how quickly this vegetable spread, for it was only in 1882 that Mr. Paillieux received fresh rhizomes of the plant for the first time, enabling him to start cultivating it. No effort was spared to make it known, and today it is an almost popular vegetable. It would have been normal to give it the name Rosary, which is its real name. Instead, it was given the name Crosnes, the name of the village inhabited by Mr. Paillieux. Let's accept it as a tribute to the researcher's dedication. The following information is based on his observations, which we summarize below. Cultivation. - Epiaire grows in all types of soil, but compact clay soils make uprooting difficult if not impossible. It is therefore preferable to choose sandy or very loose soils. Plant in February or March in holes (mm 15 to Om, 20 deep) spaced Om, 40 apart in all directions, with three or four tubers per hole. The only cultivation care required is to keep the soil surface clean and loose by hoeing. Harvesting begins around December 1st in the Paris climate. Before this time, the tubers have not finished growing. As they don't start growing again until March, they can be left in the ground until then, and only pulled as and when they are needed for consumption, as frosts are not to be feared. Avoid leaving tubers exposed to the air for several days, as they will wilt and lose their value. Yields can be around 12,000 kilograms per hectare, but this is mainly a small-crop plant. One kilogram contains around 600 tubers. Its only enemy is the white grub. In cultivations with a large number of varieties, there are two types of Spinach, which some authors have claimed to be two species, based on the fact that one bears fruit with spines formed by the enlarged calyx, while the other has smooth fruit. This separation does not seem justified, and everything leads us to believe that round-fruited spinach is a product of cultivation (1) where, for a long time, only the spiny varieties were known. The cultivated species has not been found in a spontaneous state; however, following the indications given by ancient authors, there is every reason to believe that the species originated in Persia. Without making any distinction between the various cultivated types, they should be linked to the species designated by Linné as Spinacia oleracea. Spinach has long-stalked leaves with sagittate blades often over 2 decimeters long. The plant is grown as an annual or biennial. When Spinach flowers, it's easy to see that some plants have male flowers, while others have (1) De Candolle, Orig, des plantes cultivées. female ones. Spinach is therefore dioecious. The flowers, which are arranged in spikes of sessile cymes, are followed by the fruits (achenes), covered by the enlarged pieces of the calyx; these end, as we have said, in a point, in the varieties that are close to the type, while all those that are highly perfected by cultivation have smooth fruits. These seeds retain their germinative capacity for five years. Uses. - The cooked leaves of this widely used vegetable are eaten, with the undeniable advantage of providing green food even in the depths of winter. Varieties. - In addition to ordinary spinach, which is fairly close to the supposed primitive type of this plant, and whose cultivation is no longer practiced today, there are several varieties whose distinction is based on the size of the leaves, and the earliness or lateness of the plants of which they are composed. ANGLETERRE SPINACH. - This variety is widely grown by market gardeners, as it doesn't flower until very late in the spring. Its leaves are broad and erect. The seed is thorny. SPINACH SLOW TO BOLT. - Although it has a round seed, this variety is similar to the previous one in that it doesn't flower until very late in the spring. The ample leaves are sagittate, but blistered instead of noticeably smooth. HOLLAND SPINACH. - This is a good, cold-resistant variety, which makes it particularly sought-after for winter cultivation, as opposed to its predecessor, which is mainly reserved for spring. DYBONSRI. - Vegetable crop. 17 A fairly widespread sub-variety is the Spinach of Viroflay (fig. 53), whose leaves are very ample and provide an abundant harvest. Cultivation. - Spinach is grown at two times of the year, corresponding to two slightly different forms of production. On the one hand, there are autumn seedlings, which produce in autumn, winter and early spring; on the other hand, there are spring seedlings, which produce in spring and summer. Fig. 53 - Viroflay spinach. Autumn sowing begins on August 15th, and is repeated every fortnight until mid-October. The first sowings produce a first harvest towards the end of September. Those sown in September can be harvested during the winter; and finally, those sown in October do not produce until after the heavy rains. Spinach likes a fertile soil, which it is useful to fertilize especially, and which must be, above all, healthy and free from too much humidity during the winter, which would lead to rotting at the base and destruction of the seedling. The soil on which the seedlings are to be sown should be ploughed, then trodden and raked. Spinach is usually broadcast, spreading about 250 grams of seed per acre. The seed is then harrowed with a rake, after which a light layer of loam or straw is spread. Spinach emerges after about ten days, bearing two elongated cotyledonar leaves. For spinach sown in August, it's a good idea to harvest at the end of September or the beginning of October, otherwise the leaves will develop too much and risk spoiling in winter. Harvesting is done by cutting the leaves one by one with the fingernail; avoid harvesting by cutting the leaves with a knife, which would compromise subsequent harvests. This first harvest is used as an opportunity for thinning, if necessary, to leave an interval of at least Om, 10 to Om, 15 between plants. After this initial harvest, harvesting continues throughout the winter, until around May. In order to be able to harvest during very cold spells, it is advisable to place straw mats on top of the spinach beds, which are removed as soon as the frost has dropped to two or three degrees. These mats can be replaced by straw and long bedding. When May comes, spinach tends to come up, and a final harvest is made by cutting off the whole plant. To succeed this winter crop, which is by far the most advisable, spinach is sown in spring, from February to May. Spinach is sown either broadcast or in rows, but as it sets seed quickly at this time of year, it should be sown more tightly to obtain a higher yield, which is all the more justified as the plants only occupy the soil for a relatively short time. At this time of year, we sow at a rate of 400 grams per are, and most of the time only two harvests are made, sometimes even just one, when the plants tend to develop their stems and flower. It is essential to water this spring crop abundantly, if you want to obtain high quality products. Large-scale cultivation. - Spinach is grown in open fields in the suburbs of Paris, particularly around the towns of Versailles and Saint-Germain, exclusively in autumn. Spinach is broadcast in August, in the proportions we have indicated. Don't forget that this plant is greedy for fertilizer, and that it's useful to give the soil a fertilizer that can be buried by ploughing before sowing. One harrow stroke after sowing is enough to bury the seed. A similar crop yields three harvests: one in autumn, a second in December or January, and a third by cutting off the entire plant around April or May. The first and last harvests produce an abundant crop, with each cut yielding around 100 kilograms of leaves. For the winter harvest, the weight of the leaves is about half that. These leaves are sold in large quantities to commission agents, who then cook them and sell them in this state to fruit growers. The price of spinach leaves varies greatly according to the season. It is 15 to 20 francs for 100 kilograms of leaves in autumn, rising to 30 or even 40 francs in winter, before falling back to 10 francs in spring. This gives a total average price of 20 francs per 100 kilograms, and for the three harvests, a net product of 50 francs per acre. When cooked, Spinach diminishes significantly in weight, so that one kilogram of green leaves yields only 670 grams of cooked Spinach. The price of cooked spinach averages 40 centimes per kilogramme, which means that growers who are far from the centers of consumption would be well advised to cook and send them in this form. This would have the double advantage of reducing the volume and weight of shipments, while increasing their value. For the same quantity of sheets, T'are would obtain a sum of 66 francs, which would only be burdened by the low cost of baking. Seed carriers. - When it comes to harvesting seeds, spinach should be treated as a biennial plant, i.e. only those sown in August or September that have survived the winter should be harvested. Market gardeners harvest the leaves of the plants that will supply them with seed in the spring. It's best not to do this, but to leave the seed-bearing plants untouched, simply thinning them out and removing plants whose leaves don't correspond to the type you have in mind. Spinach flowers in June. As soon as flowering is over, we pull out all the male plants, which are no longer needed, and wait for the moment of maturity, which occurs at the end of July, to cut the seed-bearing plants. Let them finish

They are then threshed. The seeds are bagged and can be used for sowing for up to five years. The origins of broad bean cultivation (Vicia Faba, Linné) are lost in the mists of time, dating back to prehistoric times. The plant has never been found in a spontaneous state, and it is highly probable that it would have disappeared a long time ago due to the size of its seeds, which prevents any natural dissemination and makes it a target for animals of all kinds, if cultivation had not taken hold of it at a very early date and enabled it to reach us. The plant's vegetative organs are characterized by a robust stem with a few branches at the base. These stems are raised by four protruding angles, giving them a square appearance. The leaves are compound, pinnate and not odd. Papilionaceous flowers are white with a black spot in the center of the petals. They are borne in pauciflorous clusters in the leaf axils. The fruits are pods, sometimes erect, sometimes curving towards the ground. They contain a variable number of seeds, rarely more than eight. The seeds are large, flattened, kidney-shaped and have an easily detachable aril. They retain their germinative capacity for six years. Uses. - Broad beans are eaten as grains, either fresh or dried. The latter have the disadvantage of being covered with very thick husks that must be removed, as they cannot be eaten. Varieties. - Although it has been cultivated for a very long time, the broad bean has generally not varied much, and the number of different types of cultivation is relatively small. Here are two of the most commonly grown varieties. MARSH BEAN. - Plant about Om 80 high, pods in twos or threes, containing two to four very large seeds. WINDSOR BEAN. - Plant often taller than the previous one. Numerous pods, often solitary, containing one to three well-developed seeds. Grown in the Paris climate. - Fèves are hardy plants, but fear heavy frosts. In our climate, they are sown as soon as the temperature eases after the winter. Sowing takes place in February or March at the latest. They can be sown in any soil, but rich, moderately compact soils are best suited to broad beans. Seeds are planted in rows Om, 30 apart, spaced Om, 15 apart along the rows, and buried Om, 05 apart. To hasten plant development, it's a good idea to water when the weather turns dry. Fava beans are fast-growing, so they are fully developed by May. As soon as flowering begins, we pinch off the ends of the stems above about the tenth inflorescence. This has the dual effect of hastening the development of the preserved pods, and preventing the black aphid that attacks the herbaceous parts of the plant from wreaking havoc. Harvesting takes place either when the beans are two-thirds developed, or when dry. Cultivation in the Midi. - In the Midi region, seedlings should be sown in autumn, starting in September for the orange region and in October for the olive region. Sowing is carried out exactly as described above. These autumn sowings produce early-flowering Fava beans, whose pods can be harvested in March, April and May. Under these conditions, Fèves are capable of producing an advantageous product, as the pods sell in the spring for up to 30 francs per 100 kilogr. at the Paris halles. They belong to several botanical species, some indigenous, others, on the contrary, native to the temperate regions of South America. Sowing and selection on the one hand, and hybridization on the other, have produced a very considerable number of varieties and hybrids, which are widespread in gardens today. In practice, all these different types form two categories corresponding to different cultivation methods and requirements; on the one hand, they form the group of small-fruited strawberries or strawberries of the four satsons; on the other, large-fruited strawberries. All strawberry plants are perennials, their rhizomes producing two types of rameanx, some sterile and of indefinite elongation, bearing scale-like leaves from whose axils buds produce normal leaves, which are trifoliolate and stipular. These twigs root at the level of the buds they produce, and are known as runners or stolons (lig. 54). These rooted stolons can be used to propagate strawberry plants. The plant also produces other self-determining branches. The flowers are arranged in uniparous cymes, bearing a calicule, a calyx and a corolla, which is white and composed of five parts. After bearing numerous stamens, the flower's receptacle elongates into a kind of elevation, bearing an indefinite number of carpels that transform into small, indehiscent dried fruits (achenes). The edible part of the Strawberry is therefore not the fruit, as is often claimed, but the hypertrophied receptacle, whose tissue is gorged with adibles; it is nevertheless true that, in practice, U Fig. 54. - Stolon or strawberry runner. This is the part of the fruit that has retained its name, and we will refer to it as such. The fruit is surrounded by the calyx and calicule, which are persistent and form an induvie. Fruits vary infinitely in size, shape and color, but all contain sweet, mucilaginous substances mixed with essences that make them a pleasant-tasting food. The fact that they ripen in spring, when few other fruits are available, also contributes to their popularity. Finally, Strawberries have the advantage of being easy to force-feed. Uses. - Strawberries are eaten either raw or cooked. In the latter case, they are used to make highly prized jams and syrups. PETITES FRAISES. Small Strawberries seem to recognize a single botanical species as their ancestor: Linnaeus' Fragaria vesca, which grows wild in all the woods of the northern hemisphere. In practical terms, it differs 2 29 from all other strawberry plants in that both the type and the cultivated varieties are generally elongated, with white flesh and protruding seeds. All cultivated varieties have the advantage of sustained flowering throughout the fine season, when given the necessary care, which is why Fig. 55. -Fraisiers des quatre saisons (fig. 55). Varieties. - Varieties are generally less important than for large-fruited strawberries, for the reason that, as we shall see, the most common method of propagation is by sowing, and characteristics do not always reproduce with great fixity. However, there are certain types that we should aim for, because they correspond either to genuine qualities or to commercial requirements. At present, the most sought-after varieties are those whose fruits are bright red and whose elongated shape gives them the appearance of a small gherkin. IMPROVED DURU STRAWBERRY. - The fruit is long and bright red. This is one of the most widely grown varieties for the Paris market. It is very similar to an older variety with dark red fruit called Fratse Janus. STRAWBERRY WITHOUT NET. - This is an old variety whose cultivation has been rather neglected, as it does not produce sufficiently beautiful fruit. It has the particularity of not needing a net, which makes it ideal for edging vegetable gardens. Two different forms are grown, one with red fruit and the other with white. Sowing. - Sowing is a method of propagation that gives very good results, provided special care is taken and, above all, great care is taken in selecting the fruit to be sown. Four Seasons Strawberries are sown in March and April. They should be sown on beds with an average temperature of 15 to 18 degrees. The soil placed on the bed consists of a mixture of equal parts of potting soil and sandy soil or heather. It is placed in the trunk so that it comes to within 6 to 7 centimetres of the frame glass. After levelling the soil with a rake, it is lightly beaten with a planchette to make the surface absolutely even. The seeds are then scattered to form a tight seedbed, and covered with a thin layer of sandy soil. Water lightly with a fine-headed watering can, then replace the frame and cover with a mat until the seedling appears. Emergence takes place after about ten days, when the young plants appear with two very small cotyledonary leaves. From this point onwards, air should be supplied during the day, taking care to lift the frame on the side facing away from the wind to avoid drying out, and humidity maintained by frequent watering. In this way, you obtain healthy seedlings, and take advantage of a foggy day to remove the frames and leave them exposed to the direct action of the air. Seedlings can also be sown in the open air during May and June. In this case, it's best to choose a sunny location and keep the soil moist with constant watering. Seedlings sown in the open air are less attractive than those sown in beds or trays. As soon as the plants have four or five leaves, they can be transplanted. After watering the seedling, remove all the best seedlings, and after preparing the soil by ploughing and raking, draw lines Om, 15 apart, along which the strawberry plants will be transplanted. Two plants are often placed together, to produce larger clumps. When transplanting, which is done with a large planting tool, care must be taken not to bend the roots, but to press them in perpendicularly. Water immediately after transplanting, and repeat the watering frequently. If you want to obtain beautiful plants, it's a good idea to replant in August, which will multiply the plant's hair and make it more vigorous. Replanting is carried out using a trowel, removing the rootballs and keeping a distance of about Om.25 between the rows. If these plants produce either sterile or fruit-bearing shoots, they are removed and vigorous plants are obtained which can be used for planting. Another procedure consists, when the plants are strong enough to undergo the first transplanting, in planting them in rows Om, 50 apart, and covering the soil with a good layer of straw. Leave any nets that the plants are willing to produce. As soon as they are sufficiently rooted, they are removed and transplanted into beds in a nursery, to be used as seedlings the following year. This is the best method for obtaining strawberry plants that produce good quality fruit; however, it is the least followed, because of the time and labor required to do it properly. In either case, planting can be done early in the autumn, or in March. Strawberry plants planted in autumn will produce a full crop the following spring, and a smaller additional crop in autumn; they should be left to occupy the soil for three years, i.e. they should be uprooted when they have produced their third spring crop. On the other hand, Traisiers planted in spring will produce a full crop in autumn. They will remain in the ground for three years, which means that they will only be uprooted at the onset of winter in the third year of planting. This procedure will produce a steady crop, provided that new plantings are made every year at the times indicated. The soil chosen for planting should be fresh and substantial, if possible. Strawberry plants Fig. 56 - Basket used to pack small strawberries. also do well in sandy soil, provided they do not lack moisture, though this should not be too great. The plants are planted in four rows spaced Om, 35 apart, staggered Om, 45 apart. Once planted, the soil is covered with a layer of straw and watered. Frequent watering will be necessary throughout the fruiting period, and it will be useful to remove all netting as it occurs. Harvesting. - Harvesting begins around June 15th and continues until the end of September, provided that we take care to baste morning and evening. Production slows noticeably in July and early August, especially when watering is lacking. Harvesting takes place in the morning or evening; only the reddest strawberries are picked, and the stalks are removed by cutting them with a fingernail. The 4 Fig. 57. - Packing strawberries in Provence. Harvested strawberries are placed in pots or small baskets lined with vine leaves or strawberry plants. For sale, they are packed in lidded baskets (Fig. 56), containing one kilog. of fruit, as is done around Paris; these baskets are lined with a few leaves. In Provence, small stoneware pots (fig. 57) are used, in which the small strawberries are placed, then placed on top and held in place with a paper cone. DYBOWSKI. - Vegetable cultivation. 18 Harvesting the seed. - It's important to choose carefully the fruit that will provide the seed. Only well-colored fruit from fertile plants should be taken, from which all netting and poorly-formed fruit have been removed. Fruits from late August or early September are taken as seed, because they are the most ripe. When they are fully ripe and have taken on a beautiful vermilion-red color, we crush them in water, then pass the pulp through a fine cloth to separate the seed, which we dry in the shade and then bag. These seeds can only be used for two or three years, after they have lost their ability to germinate. LARGE-FRUITED STRAWBERRIES Most large-fruited strawberry plants are the result of hybridization between various botanical species. These include the Virginia strawberry (Fragarta rtrginiana, Ehrahrt), native to Canada, and the Chilean strawberry (Fragaria Chiloensis, Duchesne), which grows wild in southern Chile. To these should be added the Capron strawberry (Fragarta elattor, Ehrarht), of which only one or two varieties are grown, and these are not very widespread because of their distinctive, slightly musky taste. Varieties. - The number of varieties or hybrids cultivated today is extremely considerable, and many of these are of little value. The most widely cultivated varieties are STRAWBERRY MARGUERITE LEBRETON. - Robust and relatively fertile variety, with large, conical fruit, 3 Fig. 58. - Strawberry Marguerite Lebreton. Fig. 59. - Héricart de Thury strawberry. It is widely used in forced cultivation, to which it lends itself remarkably well because of its earliness (fig. 58). STRAWBERRY VICOMTESSE HÉRICART DE THURY. - Plant widely cultivated around Paris. Medium-sized, unevenly rounded fruit with juicy, fragrant flesh. An early variety suitable for forced cultivation (fig. 59). FRAISE Dr MORÈRE. - A vigorous variety with very large fruit and pink, sweet flesh; highly sought-after in the trade. Later than the two preceding varieties, it succeeds them in the order of maturity (fig. 60). JUCUNDA STRAWBERRY. - Late variety with large, dark-red fruit. Still a widely cultivated plant. Grown in the open air. - Seedlings do not faithfully reproduce the various large-fruited strawberry varieties. Fig. 60. - Strawberry Dr Morère. fruit, so this method of propagation is only used in the search for new varieties. When, on the other hand, the aim is to reproduce existing varieties, we use either nets or splinters that can be detached from the mother plants. If you want to propagate a variety of which you have only a limited number, you need to take special care of the plants that will provide the nets. Having obtained a few seedlings of the variety to be propagated during the summer, they are planted at a good exposure in the nursery, and when the cold comes, they are covered either with cloches or frames. Around March, the clodded plants are lifted and transplanted to a ploughed and smoked bed, spaced at Om, 40 apart in all directions. Mulch the soil, and if inflorescences appear, cut them out. It doesn't take long for the vines to produce numerous, vigorous threads, which are left to hang out on the ground. In July, we remove all the rooted nets, rid them of any yellow leaves they may bear, and plant them in a nursery at Om, 15 in each direction. Mulching and watering are necessary to obtain vigorous plants. Often, to obtain well-formed clumps, they are planted in- Fig. 61. - Strawberry Jucunda. seems to be two plants of equal strength; this procedure is always followed when a very large quantity of nets is available. If the aim is to propagate a common variety of which there are already many plants, there is no need to plant them in special beds beforehand; simply detach the most vigorous nets in the growing beds. In all cases, care must be taken to ensure that nursery plants do not produce new nets, which would be carefully removed if they did. Around mid-September, the strawberry plants should be planted. To do this, we need to prepare a plot of land that has not been used for strawberry planting for several years, as experience has shown that new plantings do not do well under these conditions. Strawberry rows should be spaced at Om, 35 apart, with plants spaced at Om, 50 to Om, 60 apart, depending on the vigor of the variety. Early-bearing varieties should be planted with a southern exposure, while late-bearing varieties should be planted with a northern exposure, so as to extend harvesting time as much as possible. Strawberries should be transplanted in rootballs and watered immediately after planting. The following spring, hoe the plants, taking care not to bury them, and cover the soil with mulch. Flowering takes place in May, and the fruits of the early varieties begin to ripen at the end of May. With the late varieties, harvesting lasts until July. Harvesting is carried out with the same equipment as for the Four Seasons Strawberry. According to M. Baltet, one hectare of strawberries in Brittany yields an average of 15,750 kilograms of fruit, at a price of O fr. 20 per kilogram, or 3,150 francs. Forced cultivation. - The most popular varieties for this type of cultivation are Marguerite Lebreton, Héricart de Thury and Dr. Morère; Fraisiers des quatre saisons are also used, but less frequently. Strawberry plants can be forced, either on the spot, or by transporting them on a bed; both methods give good results, but the second is the one most generally used. To do this, we use plants that we have nursed in July, and in September we put them in pots of Om, 16 to Om, 20 in diameter. In each of these pots, we place a clump made up, as we said, of two plants planted at the same time in the nursery. Potting should be done in pre-prepared soil. It should be made up of one-third free-range soil, or soil from lawns previously piled up and suitably rotted; to this should be added one-third potting soil which has not yet been used, and an equal proportion of sandy heather soil. After repotting, we bury the pots in the soil, water them and, when October comes, cover them with boxes and frames to which we give air until it freezes outside. At night, they are covered with straw mats. In January, or later if you like, build up a layer of new manure, half of which is mixed with annealed manure or leaves. Refill the layer with sandy soil or light potting compost, in which to bury the pots, at a rate of twenty-four per frame, as soon as the layer reaches a temperature of 12°. It's important not to overheat and not to exceed the temperature indicated above, so a thermometer should be placed in the bed. In February and March, when the strawberry plants are in full bloom, the temperature can be allowed to rise to around 16°. Water when the soil dries out a little, but avoid giving too much water, especially during flowering, as this could cause the flowers to rot or leak. Before flowering, the soil is covered with mulch to prevent the fruit from getting dirty; often, inflorescences are even supported with small wooden forks. It's very important in this crop not to set the temperature too high, and to reduce watering to what's strictly necessary to avoid excess humidity; with this dual aim in mind, air is given whenever the outside temperature permits. Harvesting usually begins after two and a half months of forcing. Harvesting can continue for around three weeks. Another procedure, still using the seedling prepared in the nursery, consists in planting in September in plots Imn, 30 wide, in which four rows of strawberry plants are placed at Om, 30 on the rows. A path of Om 50 is left between each bed. In October, the boxes and frames are placed, and when January comes, the paths are dug and stoves are set up to the height of the windows. The same care is taken with maintenance, and the harvest takes about two and a half months. Finally, we can simply cover strawberry beds, specially planted as we have just indicated, with boxes and frames, without establishing layers in the paths. This method produces fruit in great abundance from the beginning of May. As in the previous case, care must be taken to provide air in order to avoid too great a rise in temperature. With this cultivation method, yields are more or less equal to those obtained with open-ground cultivation. Animal and insect pests. - Strawberries are very fond of ferrets and rals. They often wreak considerable havoc in forced cultivation. Traps should be set for them. Slugs of all kinds frequently attack strawberries. The only way to destroy them is to place a layer of rancid butter on each slab. If you visit these boards early in the morning, you'll find the slugs attracted by the smell of butter, which are easy to destroy. The strawberry plant's most fearsome enemy is undoubtedly the larva of the chafer (Melalonta vulgaris) or white grub, which cuts all the roots, destroying the plant at fruiting time. The only way to destroy them is to pull up the strawberry plants as soon as you see them wilting, and look for the beetle larva, which is usually easy to find because of its size. Finally, the larvae of the Julius fragarium tipula attack the fruit, devouring its entire interior. There is no practical way to defend against the ravages of this insect. Taken as a whole, beans, grown all over the world, refer to several different botanical species. On the contrary, all the countless varieties grown in our climate originate from a single species, the common bean (Phaseolus vulgarts, Linnaeus). Beans are cultivated in our climate as annuals, but they can last longer if the temperature conditions are right. Its stems are long and voluble, and all varieties with this character are said to have oars, because of the need to provide them with supports; often its stems remain short and not voluble, which constitutes the so-called dwarf varieties. It seems that these two categories have existed for as long as beans have been cultivated; however, these characteristics are not always absolutely fixed, and it is not uncommon to see dwarf varieties producing here and there a few plants of beans with voluble stems. Beans have pinnate leaves, composed of three slightly cordiform, acuminate leaflets; the leaves are arranged in alternating order. The flowers, generally white, are arranged in single clusters, averaging three to ten flowers. They have a papilionaceous corolla with a spiral-shaped carina. The single-located ovary is followed by a fruit (pod), usually called a husk, which contains seeds of different shapes, colors and numbers, depending on the variety. Bean fruits have an endocarp which is sometimes hard and parchment-like; sometimes, on the contrary, this part of the fruit becomes fleshy. This makes up, on the one hand, Beans with parchment or for shelling, and on the other, Beans without parchment or mange-tout, so called because the whole pod is eaten. Bean seeds are either white or colored, and the husks that cover them are more or less thick, giving them very different organoleptic qualities. In all cases, these seeds are a first-rate foodstuff, as the seed coats contain a significant proportion of a nitrogenous substance, known as tegumine, associated with the starch. Numerous hypotheses have been put forward as to the origin of the bean, but nothing to date allows us to settle the question definitively, for the reason that nowhere has the plant been found in a spontaneous state. It is nevertheless true that the presence of its cultivation could not be authentically established, as having been made at a time prior to the discovery of America, that, in any case, from that time, this culture took a great extension, and that the varieties multiplied from that day; that finally, among the seeds found in Peruvian tombs, it was possible to link some of them to the Beans proper. All these clues together allow us to assume, if not establish definitively, that this plant originated in South America. - Beans are eaten as young pods, when they are known as green Hartcots. The mange-tout are used for the same purpose, with the advantage that they can still be used while the beans are still formed. The seeds are used either green or dry. Varieties. - There are innumerable varieties of bean; we will limit ourselves to indicating those most commonly used in both small and large-scale farming. But all these varieties should be separated into two groups, depending on whether they are dwarf or climbing, as they correspond to two different growing methods. Dwarf beans are most commonly grown in gardens, and are the only ones used for early production. They have the great advantage over those in the second category of being able to develop rapidly and not requiring stakes, which are often costly. I. - DWARF STRING BEANS. A. - Varieties with white seeds. HOLLAND FLAGEOLET BEAN. - Flageolets are the most widely known and esteemed of the shelling beans. The bean is small, depressed, and has a greenish tint which gives it a pleasant appearance and makes it sought after for consumption as a green or dry bean. FLAGEOLET BEAN WITH EMBOSSED LEAVES. - A small variety which, for this very reason, is much sought-after in forced cultivation. It is also sown in the open, where it produces abundant, early yields. It is characterized by its unevenly blistered leaves. It is grown for green consumption (fig. 62). Haricor rlageoler D'ÉTaMpEs. - Ample, abundant foliage; very early flowering, giving rise to Fig. 62 - Flageolet bean with embossed leaves. numerous pods. Like its predecessor, this variety is mainly grown for green consumption, either of the pods or the beans. Haricor FlageolEr CHEVRiER. - In recent years, a number of varieties have been sown whose beans remain almost green after drying. The Chevrier bean is one of the first varieties of this type. Apart from the advantage of coloring, this variety has the disadvantage of being delicate in many circumstances. The green color of the bean is partly due to the variety and partly to the fact that it is harvested before full maturity. B. - Varieties with colored beans. VAVIN CHOCOLATE BEAN. - Variety similar to Flageolets in shape and size of beans, Fig. 63. - Haricot de Bagnolet. but these are of a brown color which has earned them their name. It is especially used for the large-scale cultivation of early vegetables in southern France and Algeria. BELGIAN BLACK BEAN. - Small variety, well suited to forced cultivation. Green pods, sometimes variegated with purple, containing small, black seeds when ripe. Grown exclusively for green beans. HARICOT DE BAGNOLET. - This variety is larger than the previous one. The pod is straight and fruiting is abundant. The beans are purple, blackish. This is one of the most widely grown varieties around Paris for the production of green beans (fig. 63). 11. - DWARF BEANS WITHOUT PARCHMENT. HARICOT NOIR D'ALGER. - This variety, with its black beans, is widely cultivated, as its pods retain the property of being able to be eaten green for a long time. III. - STRING BEANS WITH PARCHMENT. A. - White-grain varieties. SOISSONS BEAN. - This is the most commonly used variety in this category. The voluble branches can grow to a height of around 2 meters; its flowering is prolonged and produces an abundant crop. The pods are long, curved and contain the largest seeds of the genus, highly sought-after for everyday consumption (fig. 64). B. - Varieties with colored beans. HARICOT ROUGE DE CHARTRES. - This bean belongs almost exclusively to large-scale cultivation; it is eaten only as beans. These are dark wine-red. It is a productive variety. IV. - STRING BEANS WITHOUT PARCHMENT. WHITE PRAGUE BEAN. - Productive variety but 8 ~ 2 * Fig. 64. - Late Soissons bean. Used mainly in large-scale cultivation. White, almost rounded grain. Grown in the open air, in the Paris climate. - Beans thrive in loose, deeply tilled soil containing decomposed fertilizers. Sloping, south-facing soils are ideal for early sowing. The earliest you can start sowing is towards the end of April, if you don't want to use shelters, as beans are very sensitive to cold. You can bring them forward by about a fortnight, taking care to cover them every evening with straw mats laid on top of the bean beds. Sowing can continue until the end of June, if the beans are to be harvested as beans, and until the end of August if they are to be harvested green. Seedlings are sown either in bunches or in rows. The first of these two systems is used almost exclusively for dwarf varieties. In rows spaced Om, 40 to Om, 50 apart, pocks are opened at equal distances, either with a hoe or a spade, and five or six seeds are placed in them, spaced slightly apart, and covered with about Qu 05 of soil. In large-scale cultivation, we often sow in rays, on which the beans are spaced 09, 10 apart, but it is always preferable to sow in bunches - these sowings are generally done with a seed drill - this is how they are practiced around Paris, When we grow beans, it is necessary, whether we adopt rays or bunches, to leave a space between the rowsDYBONSKI. - Vegetable growing. 19 of about Om, 80. One and a half liters per are are sown in rays, and 2 liters in bunches. Beans germinate after ten or fifteen days. When they have emerged from the soil and are bearing their first leaves, the first hoeing is carried out to fill in the hollows left by sowing and to remove weeds. After hoeing, it's time to give the varieties that need it the support it requires. This can be done either by hoeing, or by cutting branches from the coppice. If beans are planted in bunches, place a single twig in the center of the clump. If the seedlings are planted in rays, the reams are inserted every two or three feet, taking care to incline them so that the ends of the reams of two neighboring rays meet at their apexes. This arrangement, by leaving the passage free every two rows, facilitates harvesting. After the reams have been laid, or in any case when the beans begin to show their first flowers, the ground is hoeed a second time, and the soil is raked over the bean stalks, making them slightly ridged. Harvesting begins around July for early beans eaten green, and in August for beans. Beans continue to produce until frost. Beans for green consumption should be harvested as soon as the pod has reached at most half of its full development. E4 EST Beans intended to provide dry grains should be harvested in fine weather, when the pods, having turned yellow, begin to dry out completely. Flageolet beans whose green color is to be preserved should be harvested before the pods have completely dried out. Once harvested, the beans are tied in bunches, left to dry out on the ground if the weather is fine, then taken into a shed or attic, where they are hung to dry out completely. Only when drying is complete can the seeds in the pods be extracted by flail threshing, but they can be kept fresher by extracting them from the pods only as and when needed. Bean yields vary greatly from year to year, and are generally higher the hotter and wetter the summer. In years of drought, however, yield is very low if Ton has not been able to water the crop. If the same beans are harvested green, then in fresh beans and finally dry, a maximum of 45 kilograms of green beans, 8 liters of fresh beans and 4 liters of dry beans can be obtained per acre. If harvested exclusively dry, they can yield over 20 liters per acre. Green beans can be preserved very easily, provided they are stored in stoneware jars, in which a bed of beans and a layer of gray salt are placed alternately. They should be washed with plenty of water before cooking. - Beans are grown in Algeria, Spain and, to a lesser extent, in the Mediterranean region, with a view to producing early products that are shipped to Paris and England. In recent years, this type of production has become so important that forced cultivation in the North of France has been greatly reduced. Mr. José Congiu provided us with the following information on the very important crops grown in the province of Malaga. They have the advantage of relating exactly to the procedures followed in Algeria. In the Malaga area alone, around 300 hectares of beans are grown annually, with the produce destined exclusively to supply the Paris markets during the winter. Bean growers bring in the seeds they need from Paris, usually the variety known as Vayin chocolate. Growers are well advised to bring their seeds from more northerly countries than their own, as experience has shown that this produces earlier yields than seeds harvested locally. For export crops, sowing takes place at two different times: in August on the one hand, and in December on the other. In both cases, seed is sown in bunches in well-prepared soil, with four or five seeds per bunch. The lines are drawn at Om, 45, and the clumps are spaced Om, 25 apart. This arrangement facilitates the hoeing essential to this crop. If the weather is dry, it is urgent to water, which is done by irrigating every four or five days. Ilaricots begin to produce about forty days after sowing, so that those sown in December produce from January onwards, and the harvest continues until April. Those sown in August produce their pods from October to December; this double sowing makes it easy to obtain a continuous product throughout the winter months. Yields. - Harvesting is entirely green, so we pick everything the plants produce. The yield varies from year to year, and also according to the land planted. It reaches its peak when the beans are sown in good exposure and frequently irrigated. Under these conditions, between 3,000 and 3,500 kilograms of green beans are produced per hectare. Sales prices are extremely variable, depending on when the crop is harvested: from December to February, beans sell for no less than 1.50 to 1.80 francs per kilogram. But this price falls rapidly, to O fr. 30 and even O fr. 20 per kilo in April and May, the prices obtained for sale on the spot. Forced cultivation. - Early bean production has greatly diminished since the produce is imported during the winter from southern regions. As a result, the cultivation of beans on beds, which used to be practiced by market gardeners, has now been completely abandoned by these growers. However, it is still a useful crop for vegetable gardens in rural areas, where communications with major centers are difficult. We cannot recommend this type of production from a commercial point of view. Beans are grown as early as possible, either with the help of heat produced by thermosiphons, or on layers. Only the second of these two methods needs to be considered here, as thermosiphon cultivation is beyond the scope of this book. Beans are sown on hot beds, starting in January, using early varieties of flageolet. The seeds are broadcast and covered with a small layer of potting soil. As soon as the plants have sprouted, which takes about three days, they are transplanted either to a nursery under a different frame, to be planted ten days later, or directly into the ground, which is a less efficient procedure, as the plants are less stocky. In all cases, the plants must be sunk right down to the cotyledons, and to do this, the layer is covered with about Om, 20 of potting soil. The plants are placed in three rows per frame, and transplanted, two by two, leaving a space of Om, 12 between each clump thus formed. Do not over-water, as this will rot the plants. Harvesting takes place two and a half months after sowing, and should be repeated every two or three days. To obtain a continuous yield, two or three seedlings are sown on a bed, and from April onwards, they are sown in the open ground covered with a frame. Finally, to achieve the same yield as in the open ground, you can sow in April under a frame and transplant at the beginning of May, provided you cover the plants overnight with straw mats. Harvesting seeds. - Beans destined for seed can simply be harvested from plants sown in beds, taking care not to harvest green. This procedure is sufficient for all common varieties, but for very advanced and early breeds, better results are obtained by harvesting the seeds only from plants that have been transplanted. Although theoretically beans retain their germinative capacity almost indefinitely, since seeds extracted from Tournefort's herbarium have germinated after more than eighty years, in practice preference should be given to seeds from the previous year, which germinate faster and give more robust plants than old seeds. This plant, of which many species and varieties are known today, is represented in our cultivation only by the Chinese yam (Dioscorea batatas, Decaisne), which was introduced to France in 1848 by M. de Montigny, French consul in Chang-Haï. Yam is a perennial plant with an underground rhizome. Its stems, which can reach 3 to 4 meters in length and are voluble, bear alternate leaves that frequently become opposed by training; these are sagittate, cordiform at the base and with pinnate-pedal venation; at their axils are born bulbils whose size varies from that of a pea to that of a hazelnut. The flowers are dioecious and arranged in variously composed clusters. The most interesting organ, the one for which the plant is cultivated, is that peculiar kind of fleshy rhizome, which in reality is no more than a disproportionately enlarged bud or bulblet. This is an annual organ; the previous year's rhizome is replaced the following year by a larger one. In its second year, it reaches a length of no less than Om, 60 to Om, 90. Its shape is very special: very small near the surface of the ground, it gradually increases in diameter, only to decrease again and end in a mossy point (fig. 65). At its widest, its diameter is often equal to Om, 06 or Om, 10. A gray envelope covered with small rootlets conceals a very white flesh which, when broken, exudes a slightly viscous substance. The rhizome of the yam is devoid of any special flavor, which is good for spreading its use, and is very rich in a starch vaguely reminiscent in shape of the potato, but with grains of a much more even size. Uses. - Rhizomes are eaten in the same way as potatoes, which they resemble; but their taste is much finer and lacks the unpleasant flavor found in many poor-quality potatoes. Cultivation. - Sowing is not used for multipli- Fig. 65. - Chinese yam. cation, as it would produce results too slowly. Moreover, yams do not ripen in our climate, and it is only in the Midi or in Algeria that we can hope to obtain fertile seeds. It would be in our interest to plant seedlings which, through intelligent selection, would perhaps lead to an RF type of yam whose rhizomes, being shorter and stubbier, would be easier to pull up. Were it not for the serious drawback of extracting yams from the soil, it is certain that the plant would long ago have taken its place in vegetable gardens and even in large-scale farming. There are various ways of propagating yams. The one that gives the quickest results is to use the upper, tapering part of the rhizomes removed for consumption, as well as the entire rhizome, when its length is only about Olil, 15. This method of propagation has only one drawback, which is the difficulty of obtaining a sufficient number of organs for planting each year. So, if we were to grow this plant on a large scale, we would have to resort to one of the following two methods. The first, and simplest, is to collect all the little bulblets that have developed in the leaf axils during the summer, in the autumn, when the half-dried plants have let them fall to the ground. These bulblets are stored over winter in a cellar, where they are stratified in sand. In March, they are pricked out at Om, 10 in each direction, in a bed in the vegetable garden, and in autumn, they form small rhizomes, Om, 15 in length, to be used for planting the following year. Another method is to take cuttings in May or June, and give them a length of Om, 10 or so. These cuttings are transplanted close together, under cloches, along a north-facing wall. When they have taken root, the cloches are removed. They are watered several times during the summer, and at the end of autumn as many small bulbils are produced as cuttings. Kept over winter, these bulblets can be used in spring to form plants exactly like those that have developed spontaneously in the axils of aerial leaves. Any soil is suitable for this crop, provided it is rich in fertilizer and sufficiently moist; in dry soils, harvesting is always poor. The soil is ploughed deeply, then levelled and the prepared seedlings, stored in the cellar, are transplanted using a planter sunk deep enough so that the rhizome ending at the top is Om 05 below ground level. A spacing of Om, 30 to Om, 40 is maintained in all directions between the plants. M. de Villepin, director of the Pilletière farm-school, who has been involved with yam since its introduction to France, cultivates it in a slightly different way, with the best results, it seems. Around February, he builds a bed covered with his frames, under which flower pots are arranged close together. In each of these pots, filled with potting soil, he plants either a fragment of a large rhizome or an aerial bulb. It doesn't take long for the yams to develop well. At the beginning of May, when frosts are no longer to be feared, he digs a deep hole in the soil intended for them. Then, from Om, 50 to Om, 50 in all directions, a hole is dug in the ground with a stake, which is driven in as far as the hole will allow. This hole is filled with potting soil, and one of the pots prepared under the frames is planted in it. As soon as the plant has risen to Om.40, it is given a stake against which it wraps, then irrigated during the summer and given one or two hoeings. Harvesting takes place in autumn, and M. de Villepin obtains 40,000 kilograms of yams per hectare using this method. This method has the advantage of yielding an abundant product, thanks to the use of beds in spring; it only has the disadvantage of requiring a lot of labor and raw material, consisting of potting soil and bedding manure. In ordinary cultivation, the crop is harvested either in autumn of the first year, when only rhizomes 0u30 to Om, 40 long are obtained, or only in the second year, so as to produce twice the size, and therefore twice the yield, without the need for additional expense. This biennial cultivation is very successful, as Yams have little fear of the cold and can withstand a frost of 15 degrees if a few leaves or large litter are thrown on the ground. However, the great drawback that makes the cultivation of this excellent plant so infrequent is the difficulty of uprooting it. The rhizomes sink vertically into the soil, and to extract them, it is necessary to open a gauge Om, 80 deep at one end of the cultivated field, and then gradually break up the soil in front of you with a hook, taking great care not to damage the extremely fragile yams. This method is costly, and has the added disadvantage of mixing in poor subsoil when the soil is not deep. A patient experimenter, Mr. Chapellier, has tried to breed a variety with shorter roots, but his results have not yet been completely successful. To prevent the roots from sinking, he advises planting them in pots, but the result is a twisted, poorly formed root. Yams uprooted in November and placed in cays keep very well until March or April. They are not attacked by any insect, nor are they known to suffer from any parasitic disease. .-. .. ".. HTAF.P. The very many varieties of cultivated lettuce found in vegetable gardens all seem to recognize as their origin the plant designated by Linnaeus as Lactuca scartola, found in a spontaneous state in almost all of the ancient world, and particularly throughout temperate Europe and northern Africa. The Greeks and Romans already cullivated it, but varieties were few and far between at the time. Today, the number has increased considerably. Lettuces are characterized by leaves that are more or less ample and elongated, depending on the variety; together, they form a large terminal bud, sometimes globular and pressed against the ground, which constitutes the lettuce proper, or head lettuce. At other times, the bud elongates into a rounded cylinder at the top, which characterizes the category of Roman lettuces. Lettuces are sometimes annuals, sometimes biennials; when the time comes to flower, a numerous-branched stem rises from the center of the leaves, ending in flower-head cymes. These bear only a small number of light yellow flowers, followed by flattened elliptical fruits (achenes), sometimes white, sometimes black, which are improperly called seeds; they retain their germinative powers for four to five years. APPLE LETTUCE Varieties. - These lettuces, all of which form more or less globular apples, have leaves of infinitely varying size, color and degree of division of the leaf blades. They constitute varieties whose hardiness and consequently cultivation requirements differ greatly. They are subdivided into spring, summer and winter lettuces, but this classification is by no means absolute, and almost all varieties can be moved from one category to another, provided they are cultivated appropriately. The most commonly used varieties are as follows: Spring varieties. These varieties have the characteristic of developing rapidly, making them particularly suitable for either forced cultivation or cultivation in the open ground, in a sheltered situation. Because of the short time they take to develop, they are unsuitable for summer cultivation, as they quickly flower under the influence of high heat. GOTTE LETTUCE WITH WHITE SEEDS. - Low-growth variety. Leaves are soft green, turning yellowish in parts exposed to direct sunlight. The plant is stocky, forming a small apple on the ground. Despite its small size, this variety is widely used, especially in forced cultivation, where it is particularly useful for its rapid development. It is hardy and, in a sheltered location, can withstand the cold of winter. GoTte A GRaINE NOIRE. - Differs from Y - 4 Fig. 66. - Black-seeded gotte lettuce. by the color of its seeds and its even greater earliness. It is widely used in market gardening, although its head never becomes hard (fig. 66). CREPE LETTUCE WITH BLACK SEEDS. - Light foliage, slightly more developed than in the preceding varieties; widely used for early vegetables. GEORGE LUEE. - This variety, which is still more or less confined to market gardens around Paris, is taking on a greater growth habit than all those mentioned above; despite this, it lends itself very well to forced second-season cultivation. It is the most suitable lettuce for the first spring planting. Summer and autumn varieties. All the varieties included in this second category are characterized by the fact that they flower less quickly than the preceding ones, and are therefore more resistant to the heat of the summer season. LAZY BROWN LETTUCE. - A vigorous plant with ample, dark-green foliage marked with reddish-brown, forming a hard head. Its name comes from the fact that it is slow to bolt; its seeds are black. PALATINE LETTUCE. - This variety, also known as L. rousse, forms a head with numerous leaves colored reddish-brown on the outside. Its seeds are black. These two varieties are the most widely grown around Paris, and are easy to sell at market stalls. LAITTE BATAVIA BLONDE. - Batavia lettuce forms a bulky, medium-hard head. Its leaves are embossed and toothed at the edges. The Batavia breed of lettuce has given rise to numerous variations, some of which are very similar to Romaine; they therefore represent a sort of transition between the two types, Lettuce and Romaine. Winter varieties. This group is made up of hardy plants that can easily overwinter in the open air in the Paris climate. The product they produce is of a less delicate quality than that produced by the two preceding categories, but their ease of cultivation, and the early spring produce they produce, make them much sought-after, particularly in rural potasers. PASSION LETTUCE. - This plant has dark green leaves with red spots. The head is medium-sized and rounded. The seed is white. All DYBOWSRI. - Vegetable cultivation. 20 varieties, this is certainly the hardiest. It is only suitable for winter cultivation (fig. 67.). LArue MoriNe. - Variety with weaker development than the preceding ones, bearing very ample green leaves. Hard, full apple. White seed. Uses. - Lettuces are all used in salads: they are all the more sought-after as their leaves are softer; for this reason, those supplied by forced cultivation are generally more highly esteemed than those grown in the open air. Fig. 67. - Passion lettuce. They are also eaten cooked and variously seasoned. Growing in the open air. - To be able to plant lettuces early in the spring, they should be sown in the autumn and overwintered under cover. Pancake, gottes and Georges lettuces, which are usually used in this way, should be sown in the second half of October. Sowing is done broadcast, on top of an old layer of potting soil; lightly baste, and emergence takes place after four to five days. As soon as the cotyledons are well developed and the first leaves begin to appear, it's time to transplant. This can be done under cloches or under a frame. In the former case, the soil is laid out in "ados", covered with a few centimetres of potting soil. Each bed receives three rows of cloches (fig. 68), under each of which 24 to 30 young lettuce plants are transplanted. When transplanting is to be done under a frame, the soil should be placed in the trunk so that it reaches approximately Om, 08 of the glass, and a distance of Om, 06 should be maintained between the plants. After transplanting, lightly baste the plants, then, when they have recovered, give them air until the day when the cold begins to set in, it becomes necessary not only to keep the cloches and frames closed, but even to surround them with litter or leaves and cover them with straw mats at night. Once the frosts have passed, air is gradually introduced to accustom the young plants to its action. Finally, in February, later or later depending on the severity of the year, we completely remove the shelters, leaving the young plant, which by then has three or four leaves, exposed to the air for a week or so, after which it can be definitively planted out in the open air. The first plantings are made in a well-sheltered hillside; then, from the first days of March, you can plant in a square. The soil should be well loosened and rich in potting soil. Transplanting is done in staggered rows Om, 20 or Om, 25 apart, depending on the variety. A few radish seeds are often sown before transplanting. A few waterings are useful; they are given in the morning so that the excess water has time to evaporate before the cold weather that is to be feared during the night sets in. The plant thus preserved under glass can be used for successive plantings until April. This method of cultivation produces lettuces that develop rapidly and give hard, well-shaped apples. To follow on from this first season, Gcorges lettuces are sown either in the open air or under cloches at the beginning of March. The resulting seedlings are planted directly in a full square. Finally, in March, we start sowing Palatine and Lazy Lettuces, which we renew every two or three weeks to ensure sustained production. The last seedlings are sown in July and August, when other lettuces take over from the lettuces. Throughout the summer months, lettuces are easy to grow: they are sown in good soil and watered frequently, then transplanted into ploughed, smoked beds. At this time of year, however, lettuce plants need to be watered frequently if they are to give good results. For this reason, it is useful to cover the soil with a mulch to retain water and prevent it from drying out too quickly. In market gardens, lettuces are watered abundantly every day. Some lettuces, as we have said, can withstand the cold of winter, such as the Passion variety. This variety should be sown in the second half of September, in the open ground, with enough light to prevent the plant from withering. As soon as the plant has four or five leaves, it is transplanted to a good exposure, leaving a distance of about Om, 40 between the plants. After transplanting, watering is carried out to help the plant take root. In normal winters, there's no need to protect the lettuce plant, which will get through the bad season without a hitch; but if the thermometer falls to more than 8 or 10 degrees below zero, and if the plant is not protected by snow, it's a good idea to cover it with a bit of litter, which can be removed as soon as the cold has passed. At the end of winter, lettuce develops rapidly and can be harvested towards the end of March or in April. Sometimes, young lettuces are delivered for consumption when they have five or six leaves, either by using the remains of unused plants for this purpose, or by sowing them specially for this particular purpose. In these conditions, we use early varieties whose seeds are scattered either singly in a bed specially set aside for this purpose, or between other vegetables such as cabbages, beans, etc. This process produces what is known as "cutting lettuce", because it is harvested by cutting above the root; no special variety is assigned to this crop, but all can be used, provided they are fast-growing. Forced cultivation. - Lettuces, and in particular all fast-growing varieties, do very well with forced cultivation. As a result, this method of production has been very popular for many years now. Paris market gardeners produce large quantities of lettuces throughout the winter, some of which are sold at market halls, and a large proportion of which are exported abroad, where they command premium prices at this time of year. The varieties most frequently used are Laitues gottes, crêpes and Georges, the latter being reserved for the last crops grown under chassis. Market gardeners in Paris build the first beds for their lettuces around the middle of October. These layers are made by mixing equal parts of dry manure, preserved in millstones and known as annealed manure, with fresh manure. These piles are given a height of about Qu 40 and covered with potting soil to a thickness of Qm. !5. When the layer is ready for use, seven rows of gotte lettuces are planted, with seven plants per row, making a total of forty-nine lettuces per frame. The plant used for this purpose was sown at the end of August or the beginning of September, then transplanted under cloche as soon as the first leaf appeared. The same plant can be used for subsequent crops. These lettuces are harvested at the beginning of December, when the central leaves have begun to form a small head. As soon as the lettuce has been delivered for consumption, the frames and boxes are removed, the layer of potting soil is removed, and the manure is reworked by adding about half the original quantity of new manure. Care must be taken in this operation to mix the new manure thoroughly with the old to allow the mass to heat up again. When the layer is ready for use, forty-nine plants of lettuce from the autumn sowing are planted in the same way as before. At the beginning of February, or by the middle of the month at the latest, the lettuces are harvested, and the soil in the frame becomes free again, so a third generation of lettuce is planted, without the need to reshuffle the bed this time. Lettuces are usually sold by the hundred. The packaging consists of large conical handles, which market gardeners use to transport most of their vegetables. Many early lettuces are shipped abroad, usually by commission agents who come to the growers' premises to buy the lettuces on the spot. Selling prices are extremely variable, depending on the season. During the winter, lettuces are sold for 10 to 12 francs per cent, but this price is halved in the spring. ROMAN LETTUCE Although some botanists have thought it useful to separate the Romaine variety from the Lactuca sativa variety, making it the Lactuca romana variety, we see no reason for this separation. In the latter, the head, instead of remaining short and often almost globular as in the Lettuces, elongates into a kind of cylinder of varying height; but this characteristic alone is insufficient to make the Romaine a separate species, especially as it is not, as we have said, absolutely fixed. Uses. - Like head lettuces, Romaines are used to make salads. They differ in that the leaves are firmer and crunchier. Varieties. - The Romaines that are widely grown are not very different in appearance; however, each variety corresponds to a distinct cultivation method, so it's worth mentioning them here. They are distinguished less by their shape than by the coloring of the leaves. ROMAINE VERTE MARAICHERE. - A variety with dark green leaves. Used especially for forced cultivation. It has produced a form used by market gardeners, known as Romaine plate, because during the first period of vegetation the leaves form a sort of flat cup, then gradually rise to form a very large head. ROMAINE BLONDE MARAICHÈRE. - Light green leaves. This variety is used for outdoor cultivation (fig. 69). ROMAINE ROUGE D'HIVER. - Dark red leaves. This variety is used for outdoor winter cultivation because of its resistance to cold. Open-air cultivation. - As with lettuces, Romaine must be sown in autumn towards the end of September or beginning of October, so that it can be planted early in the spring. As soon as the plant takes its first leaf, it is transplanted, preferably under cloches, as we have indicated for Lettuces. Green Romaine and sometimes blond Romaine are used for sowing. Whenever the weather permits, i.e. when it is not freezing, it is advisable to give the plants some air by sowing Fig. 69. - Romaine blonde maraîchère. vant les cloches sur des crémaillères, sinon le plantait étioler. In mild winters, despite all precautions, the plant may grow too vigorously. In such cases, it is necessary to delay the growth of the plant by uprooting it and replanting it in the same place; this replanting causes a salutary delay in vegetation. Frames are rarely used to protect Romaine plants over winter; the use of cloches is infinitely preferable. In February, Romaine plants sown in autumn can already be used for costiere planting. In March, they can be planted in the open air in a square. For these plantings, the soil should be prepared by ploughing and covered either with a layer of compost or decomposed mulch. Romaines are planted at Om, 35 in all directions. Red Romaines are planted in autumn, like those just mentioned; but as they are hardy and resist cold well, as long as it doesn't exceed 12 to 14 degrees, they are planted directly in autumn. It's a good idea to plant them not in a square, but in a sheltered hillside. As soon as the days become warm and sunny in March, it's a good idea to water the plants, but this should be done in the morning, so that the excess water has time to evaporate during the day, and any frosts that may still occur at this time of year are not to be feared. When the Romaine apple is well formed, it is tied with a strand of rye straw, soaked in water beforehand, and pieced to make it completely supple. This binding must be done in dry weather, as it has the effect of hastening and increasing the whitening of the leaves making up the apple. Romames sown in autumn can be harvested towards the end of April or in May. To succeed this first season, Romaine blonde seedlings should be sown at the beginning of March. It's a good idea to shelter the seedling with a frame, and even use a bed if you're in a hurry to harvest. As soon as the plant has acquired four or five leaves, it can be transplanted directly into a well-smoked, mulched square. Watering must be as frequent as it is copious, if you want to obtain well-developed Romaines that don't flower until they have formed their buds. Sowing can continue throughout the summer months, without the need for a bed or even a frame from April onwards; but Romaine crops grown during the summer months do not do very well, so Romaine is usually not sown until the end of May. Later crops will only succeed if they are watered copiously. Watering should only be done in the evening or morning, and never during the day, as this could cause the Romaine leaves to stain. Forced cultivation. - Romaines do well in forced cultivation, provided they are placed under a bell and not under a frame, as is the case for lettuces. As a result of this requirement, this early crop cannot be grown in the dead of winter, as cloches provide less protection against frost than frames. The seedling to be used for bedding is sown in the first days of October, under a bell or under a lightly shaded frame, if the weather is fine. A fortnight or so after sowing, the seedlings are transplanted under a bell as described above. The seedlings are then kept on the bedding until the time is right to plant them out on the bed. Layers for Romaine cultivation are built up from the end of December to the end of February; they are given a thickness of about Om, 45 for the first ones and Om, 35 for the last ones. Equal parts of annealed and new manure are used. The layer is topped up with about Om, 18 of potting soil, then bells are placed on top of the layer, staggered in three rows. On these layers we plant either a single Romaine plate, or a Romaine verte and three Laitues gottes; but for some years now this second arrangement has been abandoned, as experience has shown that these lettuces harm each other. When planting, take care to make a sort of hole in the soil with the planting tool, so as to form an opening beneath the Romaine plant. This procedure ensures that the roots are not burned by excessive heat. In addition, at the edge of each bell, we push in a little of the compost to form a small opening in the soil, allowing the air trapped under the bell to communicate with the outside atmosphere. These aeration conditions are essential to obtain fully developed lettuces. For Romaine grown on beds in February, we plant one plant under each bell and another between the bells, exposed to the open air. As soon as the Romaine planted under a bell has been harvested, it is replaced on the feet planted in the open air. This process can produce two or even three successive seasons of Romaine in a single layer. Romaines are sold in bunches of four. At the height of the season, they are sold in bundles of thirty-two. Romaines de primeur usually fetch 2 francs to 2 fr. 50 per four in February and early March. But this price drops rapidly, and in spring the thirty-two plants are sold for only 6 to 7 francs, sometimes even less. Growing for seed. - To obtain good lettuce or Romaine seed, it's best to use either plants sown in autumn and planted in spring, or those sown early on the bed. In all cases, when the Lettuce or Romaine plants have reached full head, choose those with the best apples; remove them in rootballs and replant them at Om, 50 in all directions. As soon as the flowering stem rises from the center of the leaves, it should be staked, and it is often useful to remove the leaves at the base, which could rot and destroy the whole stem. When these lettuces have flowered, the seeds are protected by placing a bell (fig. 70) at the top of the stile supporting the plant, to protect them from rain and from birds, which are fond of them. These seeds retain their germination capacity for four to five years. Diseases and pests. - Apart from slugs, which are very fond of young lettuce plants, these lettuces also have to contend with aphids, some of which (Aphis Sonchi) attack the roots, while others attack the inflorescences, causing great damage. The former are controlled by frequent watering, the latter by spraying with tobacco water... Fig. 70 - Lettuce plant in seed, sheltered by a bell. Lettuce also suffers from another plant pest, which in recent years has wreaked considerable havoc on lettuce crops. This parasite is known as the Lettuce whitefly (Peronospera gangliïformis). Mr. Max. Cornu (I), in a comprehensive study he made of this parasite, found that the only way to preserve oneself from this parasitic fungus was to carefully avoid the spread of its spores. To do this, firstly, all lettuces in which the disease manifests itself intensely should be dried out and then burned, and secondly, the same soil should not be used for growing lettuces for several years in succession, as the germs may remain in the soil and produce a blight on the lettuces which (1) M. Max. Cornu, Etude des Péronosporées (Mémoures de l'Acad. des sciences, 1882). more or less accentuated spots of disease. No treatment applied to the lettuces themselves would be successful, for the reason that the fungus grows inside the plant, and the parasite cannot be destroyed without killing the lettuce carrying it. The symptoms of this disease are white spots on the underside of the leaves. Affected plants develop poorly and, in all cases, all diseased parts end up rotting. These ravages are most noticeable when lettuces have to be packed for a few days, as is the case when they are shipped abroad. It is not uncommon for seemingly healthy lettuces to rot completely after two or three days' packing. Gardeners can't afford to take too much care to get rid of this pest. Lamb's lettuce (Valertanella olitoria, Linnaeus) is a biennial plant, meaning that when sown in autumn, it doesn't bear fruit until the following year. This plant, generally indicated as indigenous, seems to be widespread in France only in the subspontaneous state. It has escaped from cultivation and become naturalized in our fields, particularly in clay and clay-limestone soils. According to de Candolle (1), its true home is Sicily and Sardinia, where it is found in pastures. From there, it would have been imported into our crops. In any case, as the same author points out, its use seems to be absolutely modern, as there is no mention of it in cultivation works published in the seventeenth century. Lamb's lettuce has opposite, spatulate leaves. Pairs of leaves are close together on the stem, forming a more or less compact rosette on the ground, depending on the variety. In the spring of the second year, the stems lengthen and branch dichotomously to form inflo(1) Origins of cultivated plants. 4 , FE. tas *- resences in biparous cymes. The purplish, cmq-parted flowers give rise to fruits which, containing only one seed, do not open. It is these achenes that are commonly referred to as seeds; they are gray and small in volume, to the point that one gram contains around a thousand of them. They retain their ability to germinate for five years. Uses. - The whole plant is eaten as a salad. It is a very useful crop in the countryside, providing produce throughout the winter. Varieties. - Lamb's lettuce has formed a small number of varieties, of which one in particular is widely cultivated and deserves to be so: it is the one used by market gardeners. ROUND MOSHE. - The leaves of this variety are shorter than those of the type; the spatula shape is more accentuated. It is often referred to as M. double, which is due to the fact that the buds in the leaf axils all develop early, forming a rosette that becomes more and more branched, resulting in a fuller plant (fig. 71). This variety is the most productive, due to the volume it acquires, and should therefore be sown clear in the field. We have produced a few breeds with thick, blistered leaves, which have the advantage of wilting less easily and therefore lend themselves to long-distance transport. These qualities make them particularly suitable for market sales. Cultivation. - Lamb's lettuce is always sown directly on site. The soil in which this DYBONSKI. - Cultivation, 2nd ed. 21 is prepared by ploughing, then harrowed and suitably levelled with a rake. The first seedlings are sown around the middle of August. The seed is broadcast, avoiding sowing too tightly; the most suitable proportion is around 100 grams per are. The seed is buried with a light rake, and the soil is covered either with a highly decomposed mulch, or with compost. Fig. 71 - Round lamb's lettuce. If the weather is dry, germination should be hastened by a few not too violent basinings, to avoid ravining the soil and dragging the seed along, which would concentrate in places and give uneven emergence. Eight to ten days after sowing, Lamb's lettuce appears with two small, rounded, glaucous-green cotyledonary leaves. About two months after sowing, in October, the first Lamb's lettuces are harvested. Harvesting is done by cutting lettuce stalks flush with the ground with a knife, taking care to remove the stalks where the sowing is too tight, so as to thin it out. All Lamb's lettuce sown in August must be delivered for consumption before winter, which they would otherwise be unable to withstand. To succeed this first season of lamb's lettuce, we have taken care to sow other crops. These, begun as we have just said, around the middle of August, can be continued until around October, by renewing them several times during this period to obtain successive products. In a pinch, three sowings can be enough to provide for consumption throughout the entire Lamb's lettuce season. The first, sown in August, will produce in October; the second, sown in September, will produce throughout the winter; and the Lamb's lettuce whose seeds are left in the ground at the beginning of October can only be cut at the end of the winter and part of the spring. We must be very careful not to sow the lamb's lettuce seeds too close together, otherwise they will rot, and this rot will spread from one plant to the next, creating patches of lack in the square. For the same reason, seedlings must be kept free of weeds by weeding. Chickweed is particularly harmful, as it quickly invades the whole crop. Lamb's lettuce doesn't fear frost, so it can spend the winter unprotected. However, to be able to harvest it, even in snowy weather and heavy frosts, it is useful to cover the beds either with straw or litter, or, preferably, with straw mats supported by small stakes fitted with transversely placed wooden slats. The great advantage of using straw mats is that they can easily be removed and replaced when the weather turns bad again. The result is an abundance of lettuce throughout the winter, so it's a good idea to sow a lot of it to make sure you don't run out. The market gardeners of Paris sèment la Mâche très en grand dans leurs terres, car c'est un des rares légumes parmi ceux qu'ils cultivent, qui supporte les atteintes des gelées. Seeds. - To harvest the seed of this plant, seedlings sown in September are allowed to overwinter, taking care to remove any plants that are insufficiently doubled due to the weak development of the lateral buds into a rosette of leaves, as well as any whose leaves are too long and not very fleshy. Lamb's lettuce starts to flower in May. Once flowering is over, you need to keep an eye on when the fruit begins to ripen, as it falls off with the greatest of ease. When the plant starts to turn yellow, pull it up and lay it on a tarpaulin or canvas of some kind, so that the fruit can ripen and be easily removed by light beating. It's a good idea to label the bags with the date of harvest, as experience shows that while a two- or three-year-old seed will germinate in ten or fifteen days, a one-year-old seed will often take nearly a month to germinate. ... ..." ... ... . .. .. . . . .... . . A i..4 . 1 - 4 : . i . . 15. D . 21 .. ... ". . . : -. 4. . . MELON In gardens, Melons present themselves in such a multiplicity of forms that many botanists, on the basis of the fact that the plant had been found in the wild in various forms, felt authorized to classify all cultivated Melons into a number of different species. This question was taken up again in 1859 by M. Naudin, who after studying it experimentally and cultivating no less than a thousand Melons from all parts of the world where this crop is widespread, published a remarkable memoir (1) in which he links all cultivated Melons to Linné's Cucumis Afelo, whose innumerable forms should consequently only be considered as varieties, or races that can be perpetuated by sowing. The reason why melons, which grow wild in different parts of the world, have been made into several species is that this plant, which has the property of infinite variation, can take on very different forms. It is this very property, once well studied and understood by Mr. Naudin, that enabled him to link all melons to a single primitive type. (1) Ann. des se. nat. S. 4, vol. XI. All melons have this property of extreme variation, so much so that it is often very difficult to preserve pure varieties in cultivation. Soil, climate and cultivation methods are all causes whose influences are immediately felt not only in our cultivated melons, but even in those that seem to grow spontaneously. What's more, this plant hybridizes very easily, and it is rare for several varieties grown in close proximity to each other not to exert reciprocal influences due to pollen transport by insects. Melons have been found in a truly wild state in two distinct regions: in Africa, on the banks of the Niger, and in Asia, in English India. Melons are annual plants that can, in special circumstances, become perennial. Their long, sarmentose stems sometimes crawl along the ground, and sometimes climb up whatever supports are within reach; they hold themselves in this position by means of tendrils, which are stipules or the result of transformed axes. The leaves of Melons, arranged in alternating order, are webbed and covered with abundant hairs, as are the branches. The leaf blade is divided into five rounded lobes, more or less deeply incised depending on the variety. Melons are monoecious plants. Male flowers appear first, and are yellow with five divisions. Female flowers have an infertile ovary covered with long hairs when young. The fruit to which the female flowers give rise behaves very differently, depending on the variety under consideration, and also, for the same variety, on the conditions in which the plant is placed. In all cases, it's a voluminous berry containing a considerable number of seeds arranged in its early stages on three placentas, from which they detach when the fruit is ripe, and which are then found swimming in a kind of liquid thickened by the debris of the placental part, which has become deliquescent. As we have said, the general shape of the fruit varies greatly from one variety to another, as does the state of the surface. M. Naudin, taking these characteristics into account, has classified all melons into ten different categories. For those of us who are concerned here only with varieties of general cultivation, recognized by all as being the best, we will content ourselves with indicating two of these categories, which include all the melons usually grown in gardens. I. - CANTALOUPE MELONS. Varieties. - Cantaloupe melons produce fruit that is usually large in size. These fruits are marked by deep grooves which divide them on their surface into more or less pronounced segments, or ribs. The epicarp or rind of the fruit bears wart-like asperities, varying in number and size according to variety. The flesh is red or orange-red, with a pleasant, delicate fragrance. MELON NOIR DES CARMES. - A productive and remarkably early variety, particularly suited to early fruit production. The fruit has a diameter of about Om, 15 to Om, 18; it bears few warts, its flesh is dark red and of very good quality. MELON PRESCOTT A FOND BLANC. - Vigorous plant producing fruits from Om, 25 to Om, 30 in diameter. Prominent ribs covered with large warts (fig. 72). Flesh orange-red, sweet and very Fig. 72. - Prescott cantaloupe melon with white base. fine. Unquestionably one of the best melons, if not the best of all. It is suitable for market gardening, where it is commonly used. It has a sub-variety with smaller fruit, less prominent ribs and dark green mottling. This is the prescott petit hâtif melon, which is very well suited to early cultivation. There are a great many other sub-varieties of prescott melon, which need not be described because they are local. Since melons are essentially plants subject to variation, any gardener who cultivates them over a certain number of years can create a special variety for himself through selection, once he has recognized its real qualities. II. - EMBROIDERED MELONS. Varieties. - Embroidered melons differ from the previous varieties in that the ribs on the fruit Fig. 73. - Melon sucrin de Tours. are much less prominent. Their surface has no warts, but is covered with a network of sinuous, protruding lines that give the skin a mottled, often grayish appearance. The flesh, although not as thick overall, nevertheless provides a roughly equal quantity of edible material for the diet, because the bark is not very thick. The flesh is less orange-red than in cantaloupes; it is also often white or greenish. Although sweeter than melons in the first category, it lacks the finesse of cantaloupes. These melons are less prized than those described above. They are grown mainly in the south of France, where their hardiness makes them ideal for open-air production. MARKET MELON. - Medium-sized, yellowish-green fruit with shallow ribs. Musky flesh, quite pleasant to the taste, hardy variety. SUCRIN DE TOURS MELON. - Fruit with shallow ribs, covered with conspicuous embroidery. Fruit diameter usually around Om, 15. Firm red flesh of very good quality (fig. 73). CAVAILLON MELON. - Vigorous plant producing oblong fruit covered with sparse embroidery, particularly in the grooves of the ribs, which are not very pronounced. Very sweet, fragrant green flesh. This variety is especially suited to cultivation in the south of France and Algeria, as its fruit is rarely of good quality when summer heat is low. There are several different forms of this variety, some with green flesh, others with red flesh. All are suited to southern cultivation. Cultivation. - Melons are plants that only vegetate and bear fruit if they are kept at a constantly high temperature; the slightest chill is enough to damage the vegetative organs and compromise any fruiting. For these reasons, it is only in the climate of the South of France that these plants can be grown in the open air, and even then it is necessary to let the season of white frosts pass before entrusting them to the action of the open air. In the climate of Paris, cultivation in the open air is rarely practiced, as the yield is too random. We are obliged to compensate for the lack of atmospheric heat by supplying it artificially. At any time of year, this type of cultivation can only be carried out on beds, but these will vary greatly in their construction according to the time of year at which you wish to operate. Melons lend themselves very well to forced cultivation, so they can be grown very early in the season, provided you know how to vary the circumstances according to the needs of the moment. In all cases, melons thrive in rich soil, provided it is not too light. Soil alone is therefore unsuitable, and you'll get more vigorous plants and more beautiful fruit by mixing it in equal parts with good, free-flowing soil. Bedding culture. - Although, as we have said, provided the melons are given the warmth they need to thrive, they can be cultivated at almost any time of the year, in practice the first sowings on beds are only done in the second half of January. If you sow earlier, not only would you have to provide a lot of heat to combat the rigors of the outside air, but you'd also have to worry about insufficient light, which would be detrimental to the plant's development. In January, we build a layer to a height of Om, 60. The materials used for this construction consist of fresh horse manure mixed with about a third of annealed manure, i.e. preserved in millstones since the summer. When the layer has heated up and become uniform in temperature, the melon seeds are sown into the compost, which, as we have recommended, has been mixed with clean earth. These are either placed in troughs or pricked out one by one with a finger. It is advisable to sow seeds of very early ripening varieties at the same time as those of slightly later ripening varieties. For example, sow early prescott melons and white prescott at the same time. This will extend the harvesting season. As soon as the seed has been sown, cover the frame with thick straw mats to prevent heat loss. Five or six days later, the melons emerge from the soil, and the mats are removed during the day and replaced only at night. The young plant develops rapidly if the heat is around 25 degrees, and you can see its tigelle and the two cotyledons it carries, rapidly gaining strength. When the cotyledons are well-developed and the center

starts to emerge a young leaf, the time has come to transplant them. For this purpose, a new layer similar to the first is prepared. The seedlings are then transplanted either into the ground, at a distance of Om, 15 in all directions, or into Om, 10 diameter cups previously placed in the soil covering the layer. This second method is preferable, as it allows the young plants to be transported later without the slightest delay caused by transplanting. In all cases, the seedlings should be transplanted one by one, and pushed down to the cotyledons, so that adventitious roots can be formed over the entire buried portion. After transplanting, water lightly and close the trays, which can be left covered with their mats for the first day, to help the plants take root. After a few days, the young melon plants produce their first leaves. When there are three of them, it's time for the first pruning. This is done about 1 cm above the second leaf. This operation is called "ététage", and should be carried out with a sharp penknife to obtain a clean, easy-to-heal section, and as soon as possible, since Fig. 74 - Melon plant having undergone first pruning. the section of an already large branch would heal badly (fig. 74). As soon as a new bud begins to develop in the axil of each of the two retained leaves, it's time to proceed with pruning. All these preliminary operations take between three weeks and a month at the most. Sown in mid-January, it's not until mid-February that the melons can be set. Setting out. - To proceed with planting, we build a new layer in the conditions we have indicated above. If only a small crop is to be grown, for example ten to fifteen frames, it is essential to build large stoves around the trunks, measuring around Om, 50. When, on the other hand, as in the case of Paris market gardeners, the crop is grown over a very large area, these stoves become unnecessary, as in these conditions there is no heat loss to the sides, and only the frames at the edge of the bed need to be surrounded by stoves. In all cases, the paths between the boxes should be filled with manure up to the height of the frames. Inside the chests, soil is placed, which, as we have said, must be mixed with potting soil to a height of about Om.20, so that there is only Om.15 of this soil on the surface of the glazing. Once the layer has warmed up to a temperature of 25 to 30 degrees, the plants are planted at a rate of two feet per frame. Some gardeners plant three plants, but this has its disadvantages, especially when growing vigorous, fast-growing varieties. If two plants are planted, the melons are placed along a line that divides the bed into two equal parts. If, on the other hand, three plants are planted, two are placed along a line drawn towards the upper third of the frame, and one along a line drawn towards the lower third. 1 - 4 Plants that have been raised in pots are removed from their pots and planted out, sinking them down to the cotyledons. The soil should be covered with a light layer of mulch. The buds in the axils of the two retained leaves soon elongate, forming two branches, one pointing upwards and the other downwards on the frame. Each of these arms, when sufficiently elongated, is pruned above the third or, better still, the fifth leaf. The result of this pruning is a new generation of buds; all those located in the axils of the retained leaves will deyelope, which means that the branches of this third generation will number six or ten. These branches often bear both male and female flowers. It's a good idea to fertilize these flowers, because if the fruits knot, if they develop, we'll gain time, but often they abort, so we remove them and prune again with two leaves in order to obtain fourth-generation branches which, in turn, will give abundant fertile flowers. We know that insects visiting flowers carry pollen from male flowers to the organs of female flowers, unconsciously fertilizing them. When forced cultivation takes place in the cold season, it is rare that the plants can be given air and that these insects can play their useful role. Artificial fertilization is therefore necessary. Taking male flowers from which the corolla has been removed, the pollen is shaken into the female flower (which can be recognized by the swelling below the flower, which is the ovary that will become the young melon). To proceed more methodically, you can take the pollen with a brush and place it on the stigma of the female flower. Fruit selection. - As soon as the young fruits, known as "maille" after flowering, start to swell, it's time to choose which ones to keep and remove all the others. Gardeners who want to obtain the best possible results leave only one fruit per plant; often, however, and particularly when the plants are vigorous, it is more advantageous to leave two fruits. In all cases, all others are removed at the latest when they are the size of a hen's egg. They can be pickled in vinegar, making a pleasant condiment. Preserved fruit must be chosen with the greatest care. They should be well formed and not have an overdeveloped eye, i.e. the point of insertion of the flower, which would later give them a defective shape. Fruit-bearing shoots should be pruned to one leaf above the point of fruit insertion. Later on, it will be necessary to ensure that no new fruit is produced, which can be removed as soon as they appear. For this reason, you should frequently visit the melon frames and remove any new branches that may develop. Melons like frequent watering, but this should be avoided until the meshes have been tied, as this could cause all the flowers to run off. Once the fruit is well formed, DYBONSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 22 the whole plant should be bathed frequently, avoiding pouring too much water over the base of the plant, which could cause it to rot. The water used should be at a temperature of 12 to 15 degrees. An additional harvest can sometimes be obtained by preserving a new, ripe mesh when the first fruit is almost ripe. This produces what is known as a "regain", which is more often than not a fruit of inferior quality. If, instead of keeping just one fruit, you prefer to leave two, you'll need to select them from two branches far apart to ensure that they come to the right place. Harvesting. - It takes an average of three months of cultivation before the fruit can be harvested. This may come sooner or later, depending on the warmth of the soil and the state of the season. You can tell that a fruit is approaching maturity when its color becomes lighter, and small cracks appear near the insertion of the stalk. The time has come to cut the fruit, which is done by removing a fragment of the stem that produced it. Melons should never be cut until they are absolutely yellow in color and have a strong odor, as they would then be of poor quality. Ripening generally takes place thirty to forty days after the knot is tied. Second-season cultivation. - To ensure continuous production, new melon seedlings are sown in February. These seedlings can be renewed and continued at three-week intervals until mid-June. This crop is grown under the same conditions as those described above. Melons should be given the same general care and pruning, but it should be borne in mind that as the season progresses, the temperature becomes higher, and that consequently, to provide the plants with the same degree of warmth, it is no longer necessary to make such thick layers. In April and May, a trench is dug in the ground, Om 25 to Om 30 deep and 1 m wide. The soil is thrown back to the right and left, and the trench is filled with manure. The soil is then placed back on top of the layer, where boxes and frames are placed. Finally, in May, with a similar layout, you can place bells 1.20 m apart on the trench, under each of which you plant a melon plant. As soon as the pruned branches begin to grow too long to fit inside the bell, it is lifted onto three racks and left above the plant until summer. Cultivation care is the same, i.e. straw the soil and baste frequently after fruit formation. Pruning is always the same. Growing in the Midi. - In the south of France and in Algeria, melons are easy to grow if you want to obtain fruit in the normal season. Seedlings are sown on a bed in April and prepared by transplanting into pots. From mid-May onwards, the melons are planted in the open ground on I-meter-wide tees, in the middle of which manure pots are made every 1.5 meters, on which the melon vines are planted. It is advisable to follow the same pruning methods as those described above, but in most cases only prune twice, after which the plants are left to their own devices. Under the influence of high temperatures, the vigor of the plant is much greater than in our artificial cultivations, and it is possible to leave two or three fruits on each plant without damaging the quality of the product. When growing varieties with embroidered fruit, this number is often exceeded, but it must be remembered that the size of the fruit is always inversely proportional to the number left on each plant. Choosing the seed carrier. - For seed, we choose the best-formed melon, with thick, well-colored flesh and a delicate fragrance. But if all these characteristics are of value, there is another which is perhaps of even greater importance: that the melon from which you wish to obtain seed should come from a garden where only one variety is grown. Melons are highly capable of hybridizing with each other, so if you're not careful, you may harvest seeds of perfect quality, but the following year you'll end up with nothing but degenerate plants. The influence of hybridization is of no importance when it comes to harvesting the fruit, but it is crucial when it comes to obtaining good seeds capable of perpetuating the shape and quality of the fruit that produced them. These seeds retain their germination capacity for five to seven years. Animal and plant parasites. - Melons are frequently attacked by parasitic animals that wreak havoc. On the one hand, there's the mite (Acarus cueumeris), which in practice is given the name "gray" because of the color it turns the attacked organs. It's difficult to get rid of, but the disease is alleviated by frequent drenching of the underside of the leaves with a decoction of labac or a light emulsion of black sayon and petroleum. - The same treatment can be applied against aphids, which attack young melon shoots. This plant still suffers from other diseases, the causes of which are still poorly defined and for which no effective treatment is known. These include canker, which eats away at the branches and sometimes the fruit; nail (I), or tissue rot; and powdery mildew, due to the presence of a parasitic fungus which is not very dangerous and which can be partially destroyed by applications of sulfur flower. (1) Recent work by Messrs. Prillieux and Delacroix has shown that this disease, which often causes great devastation, is due to the presence of a fungus, Scolecotrichum metophthorum. - . ... . . . .. = 1. ... tivated in Europe. It seems that the two forms that Linnaeus considered to be Brassica napus and B. campestris are simply derivatives of each other. These wild forms, with their spindly roots, would become the primitive type of turnip, whose roots have developed to a greater or lesser extent, thus constituting the numerous varieties we know today. But these are only probabilities; it would be interesting to undertake cultivation starting from types with spindly roots, in order to see whether it would be possible, by applying intelligent selection, to modify the state of this taproot. In any case, it would appear from various documents that Turnips proper, i.e. plants with fleshy roots, can be considered to have originated in temperate Europe. (1) (1) Since the publication of the first edition of this book, a very important note has appeared (Revue horticole, 1891, n° 21) concerning Observalions sur l'origine et les variations. du Navet. The author, Mr. Blanchard, head gardener at the Hôpital de la Marine in Brest, describes his patient experiments. The edible part of the plant is the fleshy taproot, which often extends several centimeters above the ground, in a sort of cone of various colors, to which, in practice, we give the name of collet. This is surmounted by a set of simple leaves, more or less abundant depending on the variety, and which are sometimes whole or lobed, sometimes, or on the contrary, fides or parts. From the center of these leaves rises, in the same year if the plant is sown in spring, or only in the second if sown in autumn, a stem bearing clusters of cruciform flowers, colored more or less intense yellow. These inflorescences have no bracts. The fruits that follow the flowers are long, irregular siliques containing spherical, reddish-brown seeds that remain germinative for five years. Uses. - The fleshy part of turnips is eaten cooked and prepared in a variety of ways. In Alsace, large turnips are cut into thin strips, then fermented to make a product similar to sauerkraut. Varieties. - Like all highly cultivated plants, he harvested Brassica napus seeds growing wild on Ouessant, where neither turnip nor Navette had been cultivated in living memory, and sowed them successively, always selecting plants for fleshy root formation. After fourteen years, these plants were already fleshy and finger-sized. These experiments are absolutely conclusive, and the fact must be taken for granted that our cultivated Turnips have their origins in the spindly-rooted plants growing spontaneously in temperate Europe. Turnips have produced a considerable number of varieties, varying in shape, size and color, as well as in quality. Among the horticultural varieties, we will limit ourselves to indicating the most important, dividing them into long-rooted turnips, and those whose root is more or less flattened. Turnip flesh does not always have the same consistency; there are soft-fleshed varieties, which are usually the most prized, and those with more or less hard flesh, which have the advantage of being easier and longer to preserve. As we have said, the color of the root varies greatly in turnips. This color has little influence on quality, and there are some very good yellow or gray turnips, but in general, especially in Paris, white-rooted turnips are preferred. When producing this vegetable for sale, this preference should be taken into account. LONG TURNIP VIRTUES. - This is one of the most widely grown varieties in the Paris region. The root is pure white and ends in a more or less sharp point. The flesh is meltingly sweet and of excellent quality. Navet Marteau is simply a form of the previous variety, in which the root bulges towards the lower part. This is the type of turnip used for vegetable and market gardening. By selection, market gardeners have created a form with few leaves and a smooth, well-shaped root, which they use especially for forced cultivation (fig. 75). MEAUX TURNIP. - This is a variety with dry flesh and very large development. Its white root, greenish at the collar, often reaches Om, 40 in length by Om, 07 in diameter. It is mainly used to supply markets in late winter, as it keeps very well (fig. 76). LONG TURNIP FROM ALSACE. - Approximately the same size as the previous turnip. But its flesh is Fig. 75. - Navet des Vertus, Fig. 76. - Navet de Meaux. Marteau race. more tender. This is the variety used for fermenting, cabbage-style. NAVET DE FRENEUSE. - This undemanding variety does well in poor soils. Its spindle-shaped, gray-white root is about Om.15 long. NAVET ROND DES VERTUS OR DE CROISSY. - Widely grown around Paris. Its root is white, its flesh fine and sweet; its diameter, equal to its length, is Om,07; this root is entirely buried (fig. 77). FLAT, WHITE TURNIP. - Its root is only Om,04 thick and Om,10 in diameter. Its flesh is not very sweet, but of good quality. All the edible partFig. 77. - Navet rond des Vertus. tible lies on the ground, or is barely buried at the base. Full-ground cultivation. - Turnips are widely grown around Paris. In some places, it is grown throughout the summer. Around Croissy, it is grown over vast areas. Turnips are never in short supply at the halles, where they are available all year round. Growers start sowing as early as March. The soil used must be rich, well prepared by deep ploughing, then trodden on the surface. Sowing is done in rows, using mainly the Marteau variety, of which 40 grams are sown per acre. Immediately after sowing, the soil is watered and kept constantly moist by repeated watering. This produces vigorous plants that don't bolt and are resistant to flea beetles, which almost inevitably attack them. As soon as the plant has two leaves in addition to the cotyledons, it should be thinned out. To do this, growers use a very small hoe, no more than Om, 05 wide, which they use to pass easily between the rows, which are Om, 15 apart, as well as over the rows, so as to leave a space of Om, 10 or so between the plants. Immediately after hoeing, the main aim of which is to thin out the plant while removing weeds, we water heavily. These spring crops require a lot of water; the farmers who practice them, less well-equipped than the market gardeners of Paris, draw water from wells, using a barrel attached bucket-style to the end of a rope that winds around a plank drum set in motion by a horse. When the barrel is mounted, a man, or even a child, tips it into a tank, which is done with the greatest of ease, its handle being fixed near the middle of the barrel, i.e. close to the center of gravity. Two to two and a half months after sowing, Turnips can be harvested; so growers sèment this plant every fortnight, to always have some to harvest. When it comes to producing Turnips for winter storage, they should only be sown from August onwards; all Turnips sown before this date will infallibly go to seed if they are not harvested as soon as their roots are more or less developed. On the other hand, turnips sown in August will keep well until late autumn, when they should be brought in from the cold. For winter storage, varieties such as Navets de Meaux, des Vertus and de Freneuse are mainly chosen; they are usually sown broadcast, on ploughed ground, then compacted by rolling. If sown at the beginning of August, watering is essential to ensure good growth of the young plants. Everything depends on rapid growth in the early stages of vegetation. Turnips that suffer from drought during this period become hard and stringy, even if they develop rapidly later on, due to exaggerated development of the fibrous tissue. For the last seedlings sown at the end of August and beginning of September, watering can be dispensed with, as the nights become cool and damp, and vegetation will proceed rapidly. When the plant has three or four leaves, we light it, leaving a distance of Om, 15 to Om, 20 between the plants. In Alsace, when turnips are half-developed, they are lightly ridged, so that the root remains white throughout. In rich soils, Navets can be obtained simply by sowing them in fields, on top of wheat stubble removed with a scarifier, or in areas where beans have just been harvested. Flat turnips are preferred for this type of cultivation. For turnips that are to be delivered for sale, as we have said, we pull them up as soon as the roots have formed. Turnips with long roots are pulled out by hand, using a hook. The turnips are placed in bunches of 12 to 15, depending on their size, tied together by the leaves, from which all yellow ones have been removed. The roots are then washed with plenty of water, before being taken to market. Avoid using quackgrass brushes, which would scratch the roots. Approximately 400 to 450 bunches are obtained per are; it is impossible to fix the price, as it varies from simple to double depending on the year, and especially on the season. In summer, for example, bunches are worth O fr. 50 to 0 fr.40, while in autumn the price is halved. If you want to keep turnips over the winter, only pull them up towards the end of October, and cut the leaves off at the neck. The roots should not be washed, but simply removed from the soil by hand, then lowered into a cellar or storeroom; they keep very well over winter. Another preservation method, no less good, is to put them in silos. Turnips are also sold by the bunch in winter, but as Fig. 78. - Navet de Meaux put in bunches. they have no leaves, they are pierced at the top with an auger, and one or two strands of rye straw are passed through the hole (fig. 78). Forced cultivation. - For a very long time, turnips were forced to be grown only at the end of winter, camamnni tutielu on warm beds, on which turnips of various varieties were sown, often mixed with radishes or carrots. In recent years, this crop has made great strides; market gardeners devote themselves to it in a special way, and we know of one grower who sold, in the space of a year, the very respectable sum of 12,000 fr. This crop is also very lucrative; but we do not recommend indulging in it without being absolutely sure of the quality of the seeds to be used, on pain of exposing oneself to serious setbacks. Market gardeners exclusively use Nayet Marteau, or rather a special form of this variety, in which they have succeeded, through selection, in having the lowest possible number of leaves, enabling them to be sown fairly tightly in frames, without however getting in the way and withering away. It is essential to have this shape to achieve the excellent results obtained by market gardeners. The first Turnip layers are built at the beginning of February, rarely before. Layers should be thick enough to give 20 to 24 degrees of warmth. They are loaded with Om, 15 to 18 of potting soil, and the frames are placed and covered with straw mats. Once the heat has died down and the temperature has become more or less constant, it's time to sow the seeds. This is done by pushing your finger into the soil to a depth of about Om, 03 and dropping one or two Turnip seeds into the soil. Sow at Om, 12 in all directions, giving around 90 turnips per frame. Immediately after sowing, the frames and mats are put in place, and the plant emerges in four or five days. As soon as the plant has taken its first leaf, it's a good idea to inspect the crop, in order to remove any duplicates, i.e. those that may have been two in the same hole. Vegetation develops rapidly, and is encouraged by watering as and when needed. A month and a half after sowing, the frames are removed and placed on new layers, which are made thinner because of the higher outside air temperature. These second layers are often made in trenches, in the form of muted layers, and when the turnips are harvested, melons are planted in them. Finally, some market gardeners use the trays placed over the second-season turnips to sow a third season, and when the turnips are well developed, the trays are transferred to the boxes where the second-season turnips were, which have already been harvested and which, as we have just said, will be replaced by melons. So, in one spring, these frames are used to produce three seasons' worth of turnips, and then to house melons. Market gardeners sometimes sow turnips under cloches, ten to a cloche; the cultivation procedures are the same as those described above. Harvesting takes place after about two months of cultivation. The roots, which by then have reached Om 10 in length and Om 03 in diameter, are harvested and placed in bunches of 12, laid flat in two rows. Most of these Navets are bought by commission agents, who export them to Germany and especially Russia. A small proportion is consumed in Paris. At the beginning of the season, the price per bunch varies between 1 and 2 francs; then it drops to 0 fr. 75. We harvest 8 bunches per frame. te 1. NAVET. Seed crops. - To harvest seed from Nayets grown in the open ground, the best-formed roots are selected in autumn and placed in gauges along a wall, taking care to cover them with litter to prevent them from freezing. In February, plant them at Om, 40 in well-prepared soil. If several varieties are grown for seed, care should be taken to keep them as far apart as possible, to avoid the cross-breeding that would inevitably occur if several varieties were grown together. When the plants have flowered and the first siliques have formed, the tips of the inflorescences are pinched off to obtain more beautiful seeds. When the siliques start to turn yellow, the stems are cut off and moved into the shade, to be threshed when dry. One plant can yield around 100 grams of good seed. For turnips grown in beds, select the best ones and replant them. Harvest in autumn of the same year. Insect pests. - Spring turnip crops are vigorously attacked by various flea beetles (Altica oleracea, A. nigripes, A. nemorum), also known as ground fleas or ticks. They can be controlled by spreading soot, lime, wood ash or horse dung on young plants, but the best way is to water abundantly whenever possible. The roots are attacked by the Anthomye larva, which burrows into them, making the turnip scabby as a result of the resulting blisters on the surface. Attacks by these larvae only occur in dry or insufficiently watered soils. The onion (Allium cepa, Linnaeus) is one of the oldest cultivated vegetable plants, making the search for its origin as difficult as it is imprecise. However, according to linguistic documents and the herborizations of exploratory botanists, its country of origin seems to be central Asia. Onion is a perennial plant, but cultivated as a biennial. Its vegetative organs consist of a bulb with a low-volume tray, bearing adventitious, white, unbranched roots; it is surrounded by fleshy tunics that represent the base of the leaves, i.e. their sheaths. The outermost sheaths terminate in an aerial, listular blade, elongated to a mossy point. These leaves are few in number; in the spring of the second year, a vigorous stem rises from their center, hollow throughout and strongly swollen towards the lower third of its length. The stem ends in a voluminous inflorescence of umbels of uniparous cymes, surrounded in their youth by a membranous spathe. The flowers are greenish, liliaceous, and their ovaries give rise, after fertilization, to trigonal capsules containing angular black seeds. He DYBONSRI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 23 not infrequently, the stems bear buds instead of flowers, which develop into bulbils; this transformation, accidental in most varieties, becomes the rule in the Rocambole onion. Uses. - Onion has been used since antiquity. Pliny reports that one variety was grown in Egypt, and was so highly esteemed that it was paid homage to as if it were a deity, much to the amusement of the Romans. The onion is considered above all as a condiment; it is so widely used that it is combined in most dishes. Varieties. - This plant, like all those widely cultivated, has given rise to a considerable number of varieties, most of which are landraces, reproducing faithfully by sowing. Variations have occurred in bulb color, shape and size, so that onions can be divided into two categories, one characterized by white bulbs, the other by colored bulbs, and which in common practice correspond to two different eras and cultivation methods, although there is nothing absolute in this respect. It is certain that most varieties would lend themselves to both combinations; the cultivation of Niort onions, as we shall see later, supports our assertion. OGNON BLANC HATIF DE PARIS. - Characterized by a silvery-white, depressed bulb with a diameter of Om, 05 to Om, 07 (fig. 79). This is the variety most commonly grown by Paris market gardeners, who produce it fresh and half-developed for consumption. This variety, which is very similar to those grown in southern Italy, seems to be a modification adapted to our climate. LARGE WHITE ONION. - This variety is characterized by the greater development of its bulbs, which are less flattened and less regular in shape. Fig. 79. - Early white onion from Paris. Fig. 80 - Yellow onion from Vertus. grown concurrently with the preceding variety, but less early. OGNON JAUNE DES VERTUS. - The bulb of this Onion reaches about Om, 08 in diameter. It is covered with dry, coppery-yellow husks. This variety is the most widely grown around Paris. Huge quantities are produced, supplying a significant part of Europe. It is certainly one of the varieties that lends the most support to the export trade (fig. 80). MULHOUSE ONION. - This variety resembles the previous one, but is slightly redder in color. It is the subject of a special trade. OGNON ROUGE PALE DE NIORT. - Widely grown in the Vendée and Poitou regions, the Niort onion is pale pink in color with a slight purplish hue; its diameter is about Om 08. Growing white onions. - White onions should be grown in all vegetable gardens, as they produce new produce in spring, whereas preserved onions begin to decline significantly in quality. Market gardeners in Paris cultivate white onions extensively; it's a crop that often occupies the most land in their marshes during the winter. Market gardeners who have exceptionally good, rich soil, which is healthy during the winter, sow white onions very early, from the beginning of August. On the contrary, when grown in the compact soil of country kitchen gardens or fields, they are only sown in the course of the same month. Experience has shown that onions sown early, and which therefore develop strongly before winter, are infinitely less resistant to the cold than those which, at this time of year, are still small. Whatever the sowing time, which will vary, as we have just said, according to the quality of the soil, sowing should be done broadcast and in a nursery. For sowing, the soil must be well prepared by ploughing and raking to level the surface and remove any stones. Once the seed has been entrusted to the soil, we lightly bury it with a rake, then spread a thin layer of highly decomposed mulch on the surface. The seedling sown in the nursery is intended for transplanting. In healthy soils, particularly in the marshes of Paris, transplanting is always done in autumn, from the end of September, to give the plant time to recover before the onset of heavy frosts. In damp, compact soils, it is preferable to wait until the end of February, or even the beginning of March in prolonged winters. Whatever the chosen time of year, the land to be planted with Onions should be well loosened by ploughing in the fertilizer needed for the crop. Fresh manure should not be used, as it will rot the onions. Sludge and manure from old layers are very suitable for this crop. The smoked and ploughed soil is trodden, either by foot or with a roller in large-scale cultivation, then harrowed with a rake to obtain a surface absolutely free of unevenness. On the prepared soil, lines are drawn at intervals of Om, 08 to Om, 10, along which the Ognon is transplanted with the planter, keeping the same distance between each line. Before transplanting, the plant must be prepared; this involves carefully pulling it out of the nursery, eliminating any plants that are too small. The uprooted plant is placed in the hand so that all the roots are on the same side; then, using a serpette, the roots are cut off about a third of their length, and the leaves are removed in the same way. The purpose and effect of this operation is to make the roots multiply and, by removing part of the leaves, to prevent too much evaporation, thus facilitating the plant's recovery. After transplanting, there is no need to give the plant any care, apart from a few waterings if the season is dry. Harvesting the produce. - White onions are rarely allowed to reach full development. More often than not, it is eaten while the bulbs are still young, with all their leaves on; it is sold under the name of Ognon nouveau. In this form, harvesting begins at the end of April for market gardeners who plant early in the autumn, and continues until June. Market gardeners gather the young onions into bunches or handfuls of six or seven, depending on size; three handfuls make up a bunch, the price of which, at the start of the season, is O fr. 35 to O fr. 50. In the vegetable garden or in the field, everything that is not harvested green is left in the soil until it is fully ripe, which happens towards the end of June. Once the leaves have just about dried out, the onions are torn off, left to dry out in the sun for a day or two, and then stored in a dry place with little light, to prevent them from turning green. These onions are easy to store for most of the summer, and make it possible to wait patiently for the harvest of colored onions. Growing colored onions. - We have said that this separation into white and colored onions corresponds to two different growing methods in the Paris climate. There are many exceptions to this delimitation, especially when, instead of looking at a given locality, we consider the cultivation of onions from the most general point of view. For example, the pale red Niort onion, widely grown in Poitou, Vendée and Brittany, is sown in autumn. It's true that the privileged climate of the regions where this crop is grown lends itself very well to this type of cultivation and that, thanks to the mildness of the winters, there's no need to fear the destruction of the plant by the cold. This type of cultivation can therefore be compared to that of the Ognon Blanc in the Paris climate, with the difference that transplanting only takes place in spring, around March. This is the same way to obtain the large onions produced in the Midi region. In the climate of Paris and throughout northern France, colored onions are grown in a different way, which needs to be described. These onions are harvested at the end of winter. Once the hard frosts have passed, and as soon as work in the fields begins again, the land for this crop is prepared. In the vegetable garden, plowing is done with a spade; in the fields, with a plow. This ploughing is used to bury a manure of completely decomposed fertilizer; it's a mistake to believe that beautiful onions can be obtained from unsmoked soil; on the other hand, the use of fresh manure should be avoided, as it could cause the bulbs to rot. Once the soil has been ploughed, it must be harrowed and rolled several times, to ensure that it is very crumbly and free of all kinds of roughness. The soil must therefore be absolutely well prepared, whether you're working in the vegetable garden or in the fields. Colored onions are usually sown directly into the soil, using a broadcast sowing technique. Transplanting is rarely used for this crop, especially when it is grown in large quantities in the field. It is essential to sow as evenly as possible, so as to obtain plants that are evenly spaced on the ground, and bulbs of uniform size. Around 100 grams are sown per are, followed by light harrowing; the soil is then rolled, or in the kitchen garden, packed evenly, either by trampling with hooves, or by beating with a board pricked on the end of the tines of a fork (fig. 81). l'el is the procedure generally followed, particularly in the Epône and Mézières areas; but it would be to the grower's advantage to modify it in the following way. The seed should be sown in rows with a seed drill, on perfectly prepared ground; then harrowed in the same direction as the seed drill. The result will be that the harrow teeth, passing through the radii of the seeder, will spread the seed while leaving it more or less in line. In this way, the Ognon will be able to occupy small strips on which it will be fairly evenly spaced. The great advantage of this method is that it's easy to weed. The biggest problem in growing large onions is weeding, which in the usual method has to be done entirely by hand, whereas when sowing in rows spaced by harrowing, weeding can be done with a hoe, provided that Om.25 is left between the rows; the work is thus considerably reduced. Ognon rises after fifteen to eighteen days, appearing above the ground with its single cotyledonary leaf curved in the shape of a small whip. It is left to grow freely for about a month, with only two or three waterings in the vegetable garden, if the soil is dry. After this time, in foggy weather if possible, the plants are thinned out with the utmost care, leaving a distance of at least Om,06 to Ou,08 between each plant in all directions. At the same time, Ton performs an initial weeding operation to remove any weeds that may have emerged along with the Onion. If emergence has been very uneven, it's a good idea to take advantage of the seedlings uprooted in the tightest areas to replant the empty spaces. Throughout the summer, the plantation will be kept in a good state of cleanliness by weeding, which in field cultivation is done by women by day. When, towards the end of the summer, the weather turns rainy, Ognon's vegetation becomes excessively prolonged: it is to be feared that the bulbs will not ripen properly and that conservation will therefore become difficult. Harvesting can be hastened by raking back any leaves that are still green, either with the back of a rake in a small crop, or with an excessively light roller, or even better, an empty barrel rolled across the field; these are broken at the point of insertion on the bulb and dry out quickly. From this point on, the crop can be harvested. Harvesting and storage. - Towards the end of August or in the course of September, the Ognon leaves dry out and the bulbs are ready to be harvested. If the soil is hard, you can pull them out with a rake. As they are pulled up, the onions are laid on the ground in long trails. If the weather is fine - and if possible, we should choose it for the harvest - we leave the bulbs to dry out on the ground for two or three days, after which they should be brought in. In many localities, particularly in the Midi and Centre regions, dry leaves are gathered together to form bundles, or by braiding the leaves together, into long rosaries, which are then hung in attics. Around Paris, on the other hand, we cut off the adherent leaves, and put the onions in a dry place, a room or an attic, to spread them out in thin layers on the threshing floor. On condition that the room chosen 2 auai Fig. 82. - Storage of onions in wheels. is dry, storage can last until May. Onions have little fear of the cold, and bulbs kept at a temperature of 3 or 4° below zero lose none of their quality. It is important not to remove the dry skins that cover the bulbs, as their presence contributes to long conservation. In the Paris area, where onions are widely grown, both to supply the city's markets and for export to neighboring countries, notably England, they are preserved so that they can be sold until spring. Ognons are preserved by placing them in millstones. These are established by laying a floor on the ground, supported by crossbeams. The sides are made of wattle and daub. These millstones are 1.20 m wide and 50 m high. To prevent the ognons from overheating, bunches of rapeseed stalks are placed here and there, forming a sort of ventilation chimney; in addition, the sides are louvered, giving free access to the air. The millstone ends in a thatched roof (fig. 82). Yield and cultivation costs. - In the large-scale cultivation around Aubervilliers and Noisy-le-Sec, production costs are generally quite low, for the reason that, as we have seen, once sown, onion is left to its own devices, so to speak; the soil is simply weeded twice to remove weeds. Here are the production costs in these areas: Soil rent....................... ..... 350 fr. Plowing and harrowing..................... 100 Manure: 25,000 kilos at 8 fr. per 1,000 kilos. 200 Seeds, 20 kilos at 6 fr.................. Two hoeings at 45 fr..................... Harvest: 20 days at 3 fr.............. 120 90 60 Total................... 920 fr. In Normandy, in the vicinity of Caen and more specifically around Luc, the cultivation of ()gnon is very extensive. The soil is simply smoked with kelp, and the Ognons pâles des Vertus grown there reach a very considerable volume under these conditions. Weeding costs are low, as there is very little weed growth on the beaches where the onion is sown. Yields vary greatly from year to year, fluctuating between 15,000 and 25,000 kilograms per hectare; but in years of great abundance, such as 1884, yields have been as high as 35,000 kilograms on good-quality land. They are sold either by the hundred kilog. or by the bag, which contains 25 kilog. and Fig. 83. - Onion bag. which has a particular shape; it is long and narrow, so that with a diameter of Om, 35 it has a length of 1m, 20 (fig. 83). The price per 100 kilog. varies, depending on the year, between 12 and 18 fr. for Ognons tout venants. Assuming a yield of 20,000 kilog. and an average price of 15 francs, we obtain a gross sum equal to 3,000 francs. There is a completely different method of cultivation which gives excellent results in many circumstances. In April or May, onions are sown very close together, on a broadcast basis. As a result, the bulbs hardly develop at all, and most remain the size of a hazelnut. As soon as they are dry, we pull them out and preserve them using the same procedures as those described above. In the spring of the following year, these onions are used as seedlings. They are planted one by one from Om to 10 in all directions. They produce very large crops in autumn. In this form, the bulbs are called Ognons grelot. They are sifted to separate the smaller ones, which are preferred. They are sold at 110 to 120 francs per 100 kilograms, which represents around 200 liters. Cultivation for seed. - If you want to grow (gnons) for seed, whatever their variety, they should be kept in a well-ventilated attic to prevent them from growing too early. In February or March, they are planted at about Om, 25 in all directions, taking care to use only the best made and best preserved; when, after flowering, the capsules begin to open, the inflorescences are cut off with a portion of the stem that bears them, and put into bunches to hang in an attic. Don't harvest them all at once, but only as they ripen. With Onion, the youngest seed is the best, but in any case their germination capacity does not exceed two years. If you have to use seeds whose age you don't know exactly, it's a good idea to try them out beforehand, by counting a certain number of seeds and germinating them in a flowerpot placed on a bed. This will reveal the proportion of seeds that will germinate, and consequently the quantity that should be sown on a given surface. Diseases and pests. - Onions are prone to rot, perhaps caused by a hitherto unknown parasitic disease. This rot, known in practice as grease rot, occurs especially when this crop is frequently grown on the same terram. It also occurs in rainy summers, when the affected plants are not scattered here and there, but are usually found in groups, forming spots in the crop. This plant is attacked by the larvae of the small chafer (Anisoplia horticola) and by those of the moth (Entomya caeparum), which attack the bulbs; there's nothing you can do to protect yourself from these insects. gi Sorrel (Rumex acetosa, Linnaeus) is a plant native to Europe and northern Asia, where it is very commonly found in woods. It is perennial with a short rhizome and taproots. Its sagittate leaves have pinnate venation and form a rosette of leaves on the ground, from the center of which rise flowering branches. Flowers are sometimes hermaphroditic, sometimes unisexual. They give rise to triangular pyramid-shaped fruits, surrounded by a persistent calyx. These fruits (achenes), commonly known as seeds, are black and shiny. The seeds retain their germinative capacity for three years. Uses. - Sorrel leaves, which contain oxalic acid in combination with lime, have a sour flavor that makes them highly prized in a variety of dishes. Varieties. - Through cultivation, we have succeeded in obtaining very broad leaves, providing a high yield. The two most recommended varieties are the following: BELLEVILLE SORREL. - Characterized by very broad leaves with a blistered surface, this is the variety most commonly grown around Paris (fig. 84). VIRGIN SORREL. - This variety is so named because of its ability to flower very little, resulting in very high yields. Some authors elevate this variety to the rank of a species, making it Rumex artfolius. Cultivation. - Sorrel can be propagated either from seed, or by dividing clumps; the latter method is usually used only to propagate virgin sorrel. To grow well, it requires deep, substantial soil; cool, shady sites produce abundant harvests in summer, but growers around Paris, who are especially keen to get a high yield in winter, when this commodity is at its most expensive, sow it on warm, south-facing slopes. In this way, they are able to supply the markets throughout the bad season, without the help of any shelter. DYBONSKI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 24 In vegetable gardens, sorrel is often sown or planted along the edges; this is not a very advisable practice, as it is impossible to give it the watering it requires during the summer; moreover, the leaves that come to rest on the sand of the paths always carry with them a few grains, which are very difficult to get rid of during cooking: growers, on the other hand, prefer to sow in rows, which facilitates the hoeing that needs to be done during vegetation. Sowing is usually done in spring, in March and April, but can be extended throughout the summer in the vegetable garden, with watering to facilitate emergence. If sowing in rows, leave a distance of Om.25 between rows, and a rake or harrow is all that's needed to bury the seed. After emergence, hoe to remove weeds. The first harvest takes place only two and a half to three months after sowing; but sorrel grows fast and harvests follow one another at short intervals. (Mn can be harvested by cutting all the leaves at once with a knife; but market gardeners rightly prefer to pick the leaves one by one, so as to spare those in the middle and obtain a higher yield. In large-scale cultivation, harvesting is done with a knife during the summer, and leaf by leaf during the winter, when this vegetable sells at a high price. In summer, one acre yields 250 kilograms of leaves per cutting; in winter, this yield is reduced by two-thirds, often even more. In summer, these leaves are sold wholesale for 10 francs per 100 kilog. At this time, they can be cooked and stored in this state in stoneware vases for most of the winter. By cooking, one kilog. of sorrel leaves is reduced to Okg, 360. Forced cultivation. - Until a few years ago, market gardeners used to grow a lot of early sorrel. This crop is now much less important, since, as we have just said, sorrel grown outdoors can be harvested during the winter in sheltered locations. In the countryside and in farm kitchen gardens, it may be worthwhile to practice this early production method, which combines great simplicity of operation with high yield. To get sorrel through the winter, simply pull up the old clumps and plant them in a warm bed. They produce two or three harvests of leaves, after which they need to be replaced by new roots, as the first ones are exhausted. Another method, which gives less rapid results but a more prolonged harvest, consists of sowing sorrel in summer in plots Im, 30 wide, and leaving paths of Om, 50 between these plots that can be occupied by other crops. When December comes, we place boxes on the sorrel planks and cover them with frames; we then dig the paths to Om, 30 deep and lay down a layer of f'umier that we reshuffle from time to time, in order to maintain a temperature of around 15 degrees in the boxes. With this forcing system, a continuous harvest can be obtained throughout the winter. Seed carriers. - Choose the plants with the thickest leaves for seed. It is harvested when the fruit husks begin to dry out, which takes place in July. Ripening is completed by spreading the inflorescences out on a cloth; when these are completely dry, the seeds are separated by gentle threshing. Insect pests. - The leaves of sorrel plants are attacked by the larvae of the sorrel fly (Pegomya acetosæ) and a leaf beetle (Gastrophysa raphani), which wreak havoc. Syringing with water containing one percent dissolved potassium sulfocarbonate completely rid sorrel of its enemies. Parsnip (Pastinaca sativa, Linnaeus) is a plant native to middle and southern Europe, where it is commonly found in the wild. The edible part is a taproot, long and slender in the wild, shortened and swollen in cultivated varieties. The leaves are sheathing and compound-pinnate. Around May, a sturdy branch rises from their center, fluted at the surface and bearing yellow, greenish flowers in compound umbels. These are followed by fruits that are winged achenes, due to the exaggerated development of the marginal ribs. They are used as seeds, but only retain their germinative capacity for two years. Uses. - The roots are eaten either as a condiment in soups, or as a dish when still young. Varieties. - Without mentioning the long parsnip, which is only a slight modification of the wild type, and which is hardly ever used in vegetable growing, we shall mention two varieties that are worth cultivating, as follows: GUERNSEY LONG PARSNIP. - Root about three times longer than large, smooth and slightly swollen. A high-yielding variety, but of inferior quality to the following (fig. 85). PAnais RoND. - This is the most common variety grown in vegetable gardens, and is earlier than the previous one. Fig. 85. - Guernsey long parsnip. Fig. 86. - Round parsnip. Its root is wider than it is long, with longitudinal furrows (Fig. 86). Cultivation. - Parsnips are undemanding when it comes to choice of soil; they do well in any soil that has been suitably cleared and abundantly supplied with decomposed fertilizer. Sowing is done either broadcast or in rows, which is more convenient for covering the seed properly. Rows are spaced by Om, 30 and sown at a rate of 30 grams per acre. Broadcast sowing requires about 50 grams for the same surface area. When the seed has been sown with good quality seed, it is useful to thin out to leave a distance of at least Om, 15 between the plants. Sowing can be done from February to July, the first ones having to provide their products before winter, the last ones on the contrary only coming to fruition the following spring. In the south of France, we sow in September and October to harvest the following year. Cultivation care is minimal, consisting of weeding and watering when the summer is too dry; when the season is rainy, parsnips do not need to be watered while they are growing. Parsnips do not fear frost, so they can be left in the ground over winter. However, digging them up is difficult when the ground is frozen, so it's a good idea to dig up at least part of them and put them in the cellar, where they keep very well. Harvesting is done with a flat-tined fork, and yields around 350 kilograms per acre. Very large quantities are produced in the Plame des Vertus, and sold at the Halles de Paris. To obtain seeds, in March we select the best-formed parsnips, either from among those kept in the cellar, or from among those left in place and belonging to the last sowing. In all cases, replant, keeping a distance of om 40 between them in all directions. As soon as the fruit begins to ripen, which happens around August, the stalks carrying them are cut off and stored in a shed, where they mature. c -. 4 The Patate or Batate (Batates edulis, Choisy) is a perennial plant that has been cultivated since ancient times throughout the intertropical zone, particularly in South America, where it is thought to originate, although it is not known for certain. Some authors have assumed an Asian origin, based on the fact that its cultivation has been practised by the Chinese and Japanese since ancient times; but, according to Dr Bretschneider, the first Chinese description dates only from the third century of the Christian era. Its cultivation was known in Spain as early as the middle of the sixteenth century; however, for a very long time it remained virtually unknown in France, where it only began to spread at the beginning of this century. The potato has creeping stems and alternate, cordate, acuminate leaves. The flowers are campanulate, but are never seen in the open air in the Paris climate. The plant produces fleshy roots, varying in size and color from one variety to another. These false tubers contain, in association with starch, non-crystallizable sugar which gives the flesh a sweet taste, more or less pronounced depending on the variety. Here, according to M. Poileux, is an analysis of the tubers of the Malaga Pink Potato: Water.................................... Starch................................. . Sugar.......................... ..... . .. .. Albuminoids.................... Fat.......................... Cellulose................................. Organic matter, pectics, salts and sllice....... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ..." 68.60 14.60 9.90 1.85 0.35 0.40- 4.30 100.00 - From the figures provided by this analysis, we can see that the potato is a vegetable of undeniable nutritional value. Uses. - The potato is eaten in the same way as potatoes, but its sweet, chestnut-like flesh makes it very popular with some people, while disliking many others. In the tropics and the hot zone, the potato is an integral part of the common diet. It is also widely used in confectionery. Varieties. - A very large number of varieties are grown in hot climates; each region can be said to have its own varieties, so we won't even attempt to describe them, contenting ourselves with indicating the main ones among those grown here. MALAGA PINK POTATO. - The fleshy roots of this variety are elongated, the skin is grayish pink and the yellow flesh is of very good quality (fig. 87). MALAGA YELLOW POTATO. - The roots are long and small in diameter, but the flesh is very fine. Unfortunately, this is a late variety and therefore does not adapt well to cultivation in the Paris climate. PATATE IGnaMe. - A variety remarkable for the strong development of its edible parts, which Fig. 87. - Malaga pink potato. weighing up to 4 kg. The skin is dirty white. Flesh of average quality. MINIME POTATO. - Whitish variety, with elongated tuberous roots, small in volume, but very numerous on the same plant, and therefore very high yielding. Flesh is sweet and slightly watery. Grown in the Paris climate. - In practice, the potato is propagated almost exclusively by cuttings. When tubers are available, the most common method is as follows. During the month of March, a warm bed is built, giving about 20 degrees of heat. The layer is covered with chests and frames, and when the heat has passed, the potato tubers are buried in potting soil, about Om, 15 high, placed on top of the manure, and covered with Om, 05 of potting soil. A few days after this operation, the tubers emit young shoots which soon break through the mould and fill the space left free under the frame. At this point, i.e. around the middle of April, we build another layer, on which we place cups of Om, 10 in diameter; we fill them with potting soil, and in each cup we transplant a cutting taken from the potato shoots. These cuttings are Om, 10 to Om, 12 long shoots from which we remove the leaves near the point of section, leaving only two or three at the top. Cuttings transplanted in this way take root after a few days, provided they are watered and the frames are hermetically sealed and covered overnight with straw mats. When new leaves appear, you can be sure that the shoots have taken root. Then, gradually, you can accustom the young plants to withstanding the action of the outside air, by raising the frames on racks during the hottest hours of the day. It has often been suggested that, instead of simply cutting twigs to make cuttings, cuttings should be taken from the tuber to which they are attached. This procedure offers no advantage, as the cuttings always root with the greatest ease, and it has the serious drawback of exhausting the tubers, which will then provide a much smaller number of cuttings, which is a disadvantage, as they continue to be cut and rooted until the middle of May. In the course of May, and up to the beginning of June, depending on whether the cuttings were taken earlier or later, we prepare the site in the vegetable garden that is to be occupied by this crop. This preparation consists in opening trenches in the ground, 1.50 m apart, which are Om.40 deep and Om.50 wide. The soil that is removed is discarded on both sides. The trench is filled with either old horse manure or new manure mixed with leaves. After treading and watering, the trench is covered with the soil removed from the trench, to which topsoil is added. When, after a few days, the dull layer thus constructed begins to warm up, a row of potato cuttings raised in cups and accustomed to the air, as we have said, is planted in its middle. These cuttings are planted at Om, 75 one from the other, then after watering them, they are covered with a bell, which is lifted a little during the day to remove it completely when frosts are no longer to be feared. This type of planting can be continued into June, a period which should not be exceeded, as otherwise only an unintegrated product will be obtained. As you can see, the time of planting can vary, but the most important factor is the condition of the cuttings: don't leave them in the cups for too long, as the tuberous roots will then run around the sides of the flowerpot, and the resulting tubers will be defective. If you want to grow early potatoes, you do the same thing in every respect, with the only difference being that you start earlier, and instead of planting on a dull bed, you plant on a warm bed under a frame. In any case, maintenance care is minimal, consisting of weeding if weeds develop, and sparing but abundant watering if the summer is dry. In all cases, watering should cease from August onwards, to give the tubers time to ripen. The first plantings can be harvested in August for direct consumption, but the entire crop should not be harvested until the first white frosts have reached the leaves. The tubers are then carefully removed to avoid injury, which would lead to rotting, and left to dry out for a while in a sheltered spot. After this, they should be placed in a room where the temperature does not fall above 5 degrees Celsius, and which is free from humidity. One of the best methods is to bury them in well-dried sand, ashes or sawdust. In all cases, preservation is difficult, and it's a good idea, especially when the tubers are not quite ripe, to hurry up and deliver them for consumption, if you don't want to see a certain number of them rot. Only as much as is needed for planting should be kept. To avoid having to preserve tubers for planting, which often presents difficulties, we use another method, which has given us the best results. At the time of uprooting, we take a certain number of old Potato plants; we prune all the branches, keeping only a length of about Om, 10 and we do the same to the roots; after which, we repot each plant in a pot of Om, 14 in diameter, we wet them, and we put them in a temperate greenhouse. The plants begin to grow again; as soon as they have put out new leaves, and consequently new roots, they can be placed in a greenhouse at a lower temperature, or even simply under a frame. In spring, the branches are cut to make cuttings, and the old plants can also be used as seedlings. Cultivation in Spain and Algeria. - In southern Spain, Algeria and Tunisia, potatoes are grown on a large scale, with excellent results. We are indebted to Mr. Poileux for the following information on several hectares of production in Spain, in the province of Malaga, where potatoes are grown in the same way as in southern Spain and Algeria. In all these regions, which benefit from high temperatures, the potato can survive the winter in the open ground; so, when the produce is uprooted at the start of winter, the old plants are kept and replanted after the branches have been shortened, in a sheltered spot along a wall, if possible. These plants recover well, and when the time comes, it will be easy to cut the cuttings needed for planting. If these old plants are lacking, or if a harsh winter has destroyed them, we can resort to tubers, which we put in the ground in January, in order to cut the shoots as cuttings. Finally, if these two resources are lacking, we are reduced to buying cuttings in the spring from a more fortunate neighbor, or having them brought in from a more southerly region. These cuttings are sold per 109 kilograms at 30 francs per kilogram. One kilogram of cuttings yields an average of 80 to 100. From March or April onwards, the ground is prepared for planting the potatoes. The soil must be heavily fertilized, using around 25,000 kilograms of farmyard manure. The manure is ploughed in, then the soil is laid out in ridges, which are made either with a plough or, better and more simply, with a ridging machine; they are given a width of around Om, 80 and kept very rounded. As soon as the soil is prepared, planting can begin, but can continue until July without any noticeable reduction in yield. For planting, cuttings are given a length of Om, 20 or so; they are placed in the ground without needing to undergo any preparation. The cuttings are planted at Om, 80 and a line is drawn across the top of each ridge. As soon as planting is complete, the cuttings are irrigated heavily; after a few days, they start to grow again. Throughout the summer, we irrigate twice a month; this operation is carried out by a man who can treat two hectares in a day. Under the influence of the watering, the potato branches soon develop and cover the soil completely. When they are uprooted, they can be used as fodder for cattle, which readily eat them. Harvesting takes place in November and December, using a two-pronged hook in the same way as for potatoes. Yields vary according to the variety used. The most productive is the Patate minime, which can often yield 20,000 kilograms per hectare. Unfortunately, its tubers are not very floury, so they are not very popular. Pink Malaga or white Castilian potatoes, which are widely used for large-scale cultivation, yield 12 to 13,000 kilograms per hectare. Throughout the southern region, as well as in Algeria, the potato is a staple food. In Spain, its regular selling price is 13 to 18 franes per 100 kilograms. However, they are beginning to be consumed in central France, particularly in Paris, and there may be some advantage in importing them. In Paris, the average selling price is 50 francs per 100 kilograms. Assuming a maximum price of 18 francs, and adding the cost of transport, which is 8 francs from Malaga to Paris, we can have potatoes that cost 26 francs per 100 kilograms when delivered. Here is the estimated cost of cultivation for one hectare: Rent for irrigable land............... 25,000 kilograms of manure at 18 francs per 1,000 kilograms. Plowing and ridging...................... Purchase of cuttings: i.e. 15,580 at 0 fr. 30 per 100...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Planting: 10 man-days at 2 fr... Irrigation: 12 operations at I fr........... Harvesting............................... 150 fr. 250 100 46 50 20 12 50 Total expenses........... 628 fr. 50 As for yield, if we sell the produce on site, it is equal to 12,000 kilogr. at an average price of 15, or 1,800 francs. This yield would double if, instead of having the products consumed locally, they were shipped to Paris or any other major city. Potato cultivation provides real services in all our colonies in the warm region, with even less care than in Spain; without irrigation, it provides high yields and to some extent replaces the potato, which does not do well there. ...: 1 :". 216; 11 . D 1. ... 11L " Ma:. 25 " pl-opine pigtaia .. DYBOWSRI. - Culture, 2nd ed. .  D. F.. 1 . . . . . : "2 25 .3. Parsley (Petroselinum sativum Monch.) grows wild throughout southern Europe. Its cultivation is relatively recent, and in ancient times parsley was known only as an officinal plant. Parsley has several compound leaves with deeply indented blades. From the center of these leaves, which form a rosette on the ground, a branch grows in the spring of the second year, bearing numerous compound umbels of greenish-yellow flowers, followed by small fruits (diakenes), flattened on one side and raised by five longitudinal ribs. They contain a single seed, which retains its germinative capacity for only two to three years. Parsley roots are taprooted, and cultivation has created varieties in which this organ develops strongly and becomes fleshy. Uses. - Parsley leaves are used as a condiment, either raw or cooked. The raw leaves of curly varieties are used to garnish dishes. The large-rooted varieties are used to flavor soups, as a substitute for parsnips, which are preferred in many places, particularly in northern Europe. Varieties. - In addition to the primitive type, which is still widely grown in gardens, we cultivate varieties with curly leaves that are much more ornamental than common parsley. It has been said that Parsley can easily be confused with a poisonous plant, Little Hemlock (Æthusa cynapium L.), but here no more than with Chervil, with which it has also been claimed that confusion is possible, we do not believe that the error is feasible, provided that we take the U * amo FV 3 N Fig. 88. - Common parsley. the slightest attention, or by invoking the sense of smell, which will be unpleasantly impressed by the nauseating odor of hemlock. COMMON PARSLEY. - Common parsley, grown in gardens, is very similar to the type, but cultivation has only increased the size of the leaves, which retain the same appearance as in their primitive state (fig. 88). CURLED PARSLEY. - The leaves of this variety are divided and the blades are curly, giving this plant a very special and elegant appearance, which makes it resemble certain cultivated ferns. Several sub-varieties have been formed, depending on the degree of cleavage of the leaf blade; all are equally recommendable and should be given preference over the common variety (fig. 89). PARSLEY WITH LARGE ROOTS. - The leaves of this variety resemble those of common parsley, but the Fig. 89. - Curly parsley. roots develop sufficiently to resemble small parsnips. They can reach Om, 04 in diameter by Om, 18 in length. Cultivation. - Parsley is sown either broadcast as market gardeners do, or in rows following the method used in large-scale cultivation. When sown in rows, leave a distance of about Om, 30 between rows. Sowing begins in February and continues through June and July, but the earliest sowing gives the best results. Parsley takes a very long time to germinate, so when you grow it in the kitchen garden, it's a good idea to hasten the germination of the seeds by frequent watering; despite this care, it's not uncommon for nothing to appear for a fortnight or more. In the vicinity of Chambourcy, where there are over fifty hectares of Persia in the commune alone, curly varieties are grown exclusively. Harvesting takes place three or four times a year in summer, but for the last few harvests in September and October, only the oldest leaves are removed, leaving all the best ones, so that they can be removed in winter, when they fetch a high price. This harvest must always be carried out by detaching the leaves one by one, so as not to damage the heart and thus increase the quantity of the product. Chambourcy's growers find the practice of this cultivation a great advantage, in that it enables them to make a good profit from the soil and keep their gardener boys busy, who would otherwise be idle for part of the winter. Parsley is sold in handfuls, made up of leaves arranged in bunches and tied with a sprig of rye straw. In summer, the price of these handfuls is very low, often no more than 0.75 francs a dozen; in winter, on the other hand, the price rises sharply, reaching up to 3 francs for the same quantity. Parsley seedlings must be renewed every year, otherwise the plant will flower in the second year and produce nothing. Parsley with a large root is grown in the same way as the one just mentioned, but the rows should be thinned out to leave a space of Om, 15 between the plants. If you want to harvest good seed, it is useful to transplant in February all the plants that seem to have the best qualities. When the fruit ripens, the stalks are cut off and placed in a shed for threshing. 1 . . . 1. ... . : . . ." 1 1 1. .. 1 D . . .. " . .. A . . . . . . 7 ?: AFTI D. ? . . . 1 .7. .. .. ?. ". " -. . ..  1. . . . . .. . . ... .... . . . ... i ~ .. 5° 1. ht.m . .;. . .1." .:. ... ... . .... .. G ie mo u de Chet. is related to Linné's Capsicum annuum, and appears to have originated in South America. Its cultivation is modern; ancient authors make no mention of it. This plant, perennial in its country of origin, is cultivated here as an annual. It is a small sub-shrub reaching Om, 50 to Om, 80 in height, with upright stems that are semi-woody at the base. It bears lanceolate, oblong leaves arranged in alternating order. The flowers have a white, rotate corolla; they are solitary and placed in the leaf axils. The fruits that follow them are berries of very different shapes, green when young and turning bright red or golden yellow when ripe. At this point, the fruit is hollow, and its flavor is sometimes strong and burning, sometimes sweet and aromatic. The seeds are discoid, yellowish and retain their germinative powers for four years. Uses. - Pimento fruits are used as seasoning; they can be used either green or ripe. It is customary to add a few to pickles in vinegar. Ground to a powder after drying, they make up red pepper or cayenne pepper, which is widely used in England and the French colonies. The sweet-fruited varieties are eaten raw or cooked, mainly in Spain. Varieties. - These are very numerous and can be divided into two categories: one comprising hot-flavored peppers, the other sweet-fruited. We will limit ourselves to mentioning one variety of chaFig. 90. - Long red pepper. Fig. 91. - Square sweet chilli pepper. cation of the two categories, all the others being not very far removed from these two types. LONG RED PEPPER. - This is the most common variety, with hanging fruits about Om 10 long, of a bright red color (fig. 90). SQUARE SWEET PEPPER. - A robust plant bearing large, obtuse fruits marked with four deep grooves. There are red-fruited and yellow-fruited sub-varieties (fig. 91). Grown in the Paris climate. - To bear fruit abundantly, Piments must be sown early, in the soil, otherwise they won't have time to ripen their fruit before the onset of autumn frosts, to which they are very sensitive. Seedlings are sown in February and March on a warm bed and under a frame; as soon as the plant has two or three leaves, it is transplanted into a nursery at Om, 10 in all directions, also under a frame. Leave it in the nursery until the beginning of May, when it should be planted out. If you want to harvest early, the best method is to build up a layer of old manure and leaves at this time, which will give off little heat. The plants are planted on this layer and under a frame, spaced out by Om, 60. The frames are only removed when frosts are no longer an issue, and when the temperature has risen so that the chillies can withstand the full force of the air; in our climate, this doesn't happen until the beginning of June. It goes without saying that, before completely removing the frames, the plants should have been accustomed to the action of the outside air, through progressive daily aeration. As soon as the plants have branched out, they should be staked to prevent the wind from blowing them over. To grow well, chillies require repeated watering, which should become frequent once the frames have been removed. This method of cultivation, which is sometimes applied to small-fruited chillies, is the only one that can be used to produce sweet chillies, which, without all these precautions, would not ripen in the Paris climate. For these varieties, it is often useful, if you want to obtain a large volume of fruit, to leave only a dozen per plant, and to prune off anything beyond this number. Small-fruited chillies can be grown more simply if you're not in a hurry to harvest them. In fact, plants that have been raised in trays can be planted in a sheltered spot in the open ground. If planted in rich soil and watered regularly, they will ripen in autumn. Growing in the Midi. - In the south of France, in Algeria and especially in the south of Spain, chillies are grown in abundance, as their fruit is widely used as a condiment or, in the case of sweet-fruited chillies, as a popular vegetable. Sown in trays, then transplanted in nurseries, chillies are planted in May in soils that can be frequently irrigated during the summer. Under these conditions, they produce abundant crops. Harvesting the seeds. - If you want to obtain good seeds, as soon as fruiting begins, select the plants bearing the best fruit, leaving them only four or five of the best, and removing all the others. When the fruit is brightly colored and ripe, open it and extract the seed, wash it and dry it in the shade before bagging. Dandelion, which grows spontaneously in most fresh meadows throughout France, has been cultivated into an improved form, with leaves that are larger and more numerous than in wild plants, forming voluminous clumps. Dandelions growing spontaneously belong to several botanical species, of which the one that appears to have provided the cultivated plant is Taraxacum officinale, Will. This plant is characterized by long, toothed, stalked leaves that form a small rosette on the ground, with several buds giving rise in spring to yellow flower heads borne on a hollow stem. The seeds (achenes) are oblong and flattened; they retain their germinative powers for only two years. Uses. - Dandelions are used in salads, either green or, more generally, after having been subjected to shrivelling. Varieties. - The wild plant has been cultivated to produce forms which differ from the primitive type in that the broader leaves, together with the more numerous buds, form a much fuller rosette than in the plant growing spontaneously. There are two main types, one known as hátif Improved Dandelion, the other as full-hearted Improved Dandelion (fig. 92); it is the latter that is most recommended for cultivation. Cultivation. - Dandelion is always propagated by sowing, but this can be done in two different ways, either in situ, or by transplanting the seedling. Both methods give good results. PS d-i5 taFig. 92. - Improved full-hearted dandelion. Sow in situ from March to the end of May. The soil must be well smoked if vigorous, high-yielding plants are to be obtained. The type of soil is of little importance, as Dandelions thrive everywhere, but moisture is necessary for them to thrive, which is why they thrive in soil containing clay. After ploughing, the soil is laid out in furrows Om.25 apart and Om.10 deep, at the bottom of which the seed is sown and covered with a little soil. Water frequently, which helps the seed to emerge after about ten days. If emergence has been good and the seedlings are too tightly packed, light them so that they are at Om 07 from each other. If transplanting is desired, seed is broadcast in the nursery, then replanted when the plant has four or five leaves. Planting is done in rows on which the plants are transplanted at Om, 10. From the onset of winter in the first year, in November-December, Dandelions can be covered to protect them from the action of light when they grow, which would cause them to turn green. When sowing in situ, simply fill in the furrows. If, on the other hand, transplanting is practised, the soil taken from the square or potting soil is used to fill in the furrows. In both cases, the dandelions need to be covered with Om, 10 to Qu, 12 of soil. Harvesting. - Dandelions can be harvested as early as the end of December, if the soil is covered early and the winter is mild. Harvesting lasts until March. You can either cut off the leaves alone, which ensures the plant's survival for two or three years, as it is a perennial, or, as is generally done, cut off the entire rosette of leaves at the plant's collar. In the latter case, it is necessary to sow seedlings every year. Dandelion can be treated in the same way as wild chicory. It then becomes a highly prized kind of capuchin beard. Harvesting seeds. - For seeds, choose the fullest, widest plants. Leave them in place, and take care to harvest the seeds as soon as they are ripe, otherwise they will be blown away by the wind. The Poireau or Porreau, which has long been considered a botanical species, is, says M. A. de Candolle, according to J. Gay's monograph, and the suspicion already conceived by earlier authors, only a form of a species growing spontaneously in the East and throughout the Mediterranean region. It should therefore be considered botanically as Linnaeus' Allium Ampeloprasum, variety Porrum. Leeks are grown as biennials. It is characterized by a bulb that is generally not very bulbous, extended in a sort of cylinder by the leaf sheaths arranged in distichous order. It is the bulb and the base of these seeds, whitened by lack of light, that are consumed in various forms. In the second year, a simple spike emerges from the center of the leaves, ending in an umbel of cymes, which is initially surrounded by a membranous spathe. The flowers are followed by three-celled capsule-shaped fruits containing flattened, black seeds. Uses. - Leeks are most often used as a condiment, in soups; however, in some areas, notably Alsace, they are eaten as variously seasoned dishes. Varieties. - There are quite a number of cultivated varieties; however, in current commercial cultivation, two in particular are used: POIREAU LONG DE PARIS. - This variety, the most widely used by market gardeners and growers around Paris, has the great advantage of having a foot, i.e. the part formed by the leaf sheaths, that is very long, about Om, 30, but with a diameter that is little more than Om, 02. The leaves are long and very glaucous (fig. 93). POIREAU COURT DE ROUEN. - The stalk is only Om, 15 to Om, 18 in length, but its size is Om, 05 to Om, 06 in diameter; it is not uncommon to see this diameter us even exceed this Fig. 93. - Poireau long de Paris. measure, notably for the sub-variety of P. monstrueux de Carentan (fig. 94). Sowing. - In localities where leeks are grown in large numbers, they are sown in nurseries from the end of February to the end of March. Care should be taken to loosen the soil by deep ploughing, and the seed should be broadcast fairly tightly, then covered with a light harrowing with a rake, and a mulch of decomposed manure. If spring is dry, water to facilitate emergence, which takes place after ten to twelve days. The plant, thus raised, Fig. 94. - Poireau court de Rouen. can be used as early as April; it must be the size of an ordinary pen pipe. Installation. Choice of soil. - Leeks like moderately compact, fresh soil, if possible, and in any case, plenty of decomposed fertilizer. It is therefore useful to fertilize the soil before planting. In the Paris region, around Epône, Falaise and Mézières, where this crop is grown on several hundred hectares, it is fertilized with either slurry or farmyard manure. In large-scale cultivation, the fertilizer is buried by ploughing; in gardens, this work is done with a spade. In all cases, the soil is then loosened by careful harrowing. Before transplanting, the plant must be prepared. This operation consists of uprooting it in the nursery, then sorting it, eliminating any plants whose dimensions are too small; on the other hand, those that are judged to be good are gathered by handfuls, and the roots are shortened by removing about a third of their length with a serpette. The leaves are cut in the same way. As the plant is prepared, it is placed in a heap and covered with a mat to prevent it drying out. For transplanting, in the crops grown at Epône, lines are drawn Om, 40 apart; then, on a foggy day, if possible, the Leeks are planted with a planter at Om, 08 to Om, 10 on the lines. Transplanting is a long and rather arduous task; it takes no less than forty man-days to plant one hectare. Transplanting begins in April and continues until June. During the summer, hoeing is necessary to keep the soil free of weeds, and also to loosen the soil and bring it back onto the leek rows, so as to create a sort of light ridge. This process produces leeks that are white over a long length. During the summer, two or three hoeing operations are carried out, depending on how clean the soil is. Some growers sow part of their leeks on a bed at the beginning of February, in order to produce early crops. This results in an earlier plant which, when transplanted in March, produces crops that can be harvested as early as September. Harvesting. - Harvesting begins as early as September for bed-raised plants; but for those that are DVBONSRI. - Cultivation, 2nd ed. 26 have been sown in the ground, it is not advisable to uproot them before October. Once uprooting has begun, it can continue throughout the winter, as and when sales require it, since Paris leeks are very hardy and frost-resistant. If the sale goes well, i.e. if prices are high, all the leeks are sold before March, at which time the rest of the leeks destined for sale are uprooted and placed in gauges. To do this, a slanting trench is opened with a spade, as far as possible along a north-facing wall or shelter, and the Leeks are placed pressed against each other; each row is covered with a small layer of earth, against which a new row of Leeks is placed, and so on, alternately, until everything is in place.

placed. This work could be done before winter, so as to clear the ground and have the leeks ready for sale. But growers don't practice this system, because if the vegetable doesn't sell well, they prefer to let it spend the hiyer on the spot, with a view to obtaining seed the following summer. Yield and cultivation costs. - Leeks are harvested and put into bunches. It is usually sold in bundles of thirteen bundles of three or four leeks, i.e. around fifty per bundle. The trend is to replace this sales method with one by the hundred, which has the advantage of being more precise. Prices vary widely, depending on size, season and year. The minimum price for Paris is 1.50 francs per hundred, but in good years this price can rise to 5 francs. In all cases, a price of 2 francs per cent for medium-sized leeks can easily be accepted as the current average. Assuming this price, it is easy to establish, on the one hand, the cultivation and selling costs, and on the other, the gross product per hectare, and consequently to deduce the net profit that such a crop is capable of producing in the Paris area. For one hectare, cultivation costs can be calculated as follows: Purchase of seed and production of plant. Land rent,......................... Manuring: 50 cubic meters at 5 fr...... . Plowing and harrowing...................... Transplanting: 40 days at 3 fr. 50......... Three hoeing sessions at 35 fr. each................ Uprooting and bundling: 20 days at 3 fr. 50....................... . ... ... Transport to the hall...................... 150 fr. 250 250 100 140 105 70 125 Selling expenses at 5%................. 310 - - - - - - 1500 francs. The gross product is equal to the sale of Leeks, which are transplanted at Om, 40 in one direction and at Om, 08 in the other, amounting to 312,000 for one hectare. At a price of 2 francs per cent, this gives a sum of 6,240 francs. If we subtract from this the sum of the expenses incurred, a net profit remains, which in these circumstances may be equal to 4,740 francs. Growing short leeks. - A distinguished farmer, Mr. Rabourdin, from Villacoublay, has been cultivating the Rouen short leek on a large scale for many years. By constantly choosing seed-bearing plants of great beauty, he has succeeded in obtaining plants of truly surprising size. Every year, at exhibitions, we can see the very fine products he brings, which frequently reach a diameter of Om, 08. Good cultivation and the richness of the soil in which they are grown certainly play a large part in this considerable development; but it's certain that the purity of the seed used and the choice of rootstocks also play an important role. To achieve this result, Leeks are sown on beds in February; when they have fully emerged, the frames are lifted to accustom them to the action of the outside air, to which they will be completely subjected by removing the frames as soon as, towards the end of March, their development is deemed sufficient. Towards the beginning of April, it is transplanted into heavily smoked, deeply tilled soil. Lon traces lines on the ground, using a spike drill, at intervals of Qu, 30 from each other, and it is in the bottom of the furrow thus formed, that the Leeks are transplanted at Om, 20 from each other. During the summer, hoeing is carried out to remove weeds and bring the soil over the leeks to fill in the furrows, and then, with the second hoeing, to make a slight ridge, which will lengthen the naturally short stalk of this breed of leek. The leeks grown by Mr. Rabourdin are very frost-resistant, so they can be delivered for consumption from autumn onwards, and harvested for almost the whole winter. Their selling price, because of the very considerable volume they are capable of acquiring, is always high and varies very little; it is 4 to 5 francs per cent. A hectare containing 166,000 of them can provide, by counting the cent at 4 francs, a gross product equal to 6,640 francs, from which it is necessary to subtract the cultivation costs, which are roughly equal to those of the system previously employed. Cultivation on the Vertus plain. - Leeks are grown in a very special way throughout the immense plain north of Paris, stretching from Pantin and Aubervilliers to beyond Noisyle-Sec. The process could not be simpler, and is worth mentioning, not because it produces high quality products, but because it is capable of producing a hidden harvest, the benefits of which are not to be scorned. Throughout this region, leeks are sown in spring as a broadcast crop in onion fields. The onion seed is mixed with a proportion varying from one-tenth to one-sixth of Paris long leek seeds. It benefits throughout the summer from the care given to the onion, and at the end of the summer, once the onions have been harvested, it remains the sole owner of the soil, which it continues to occupy throughout the autumn and a good part of the winter. Products obtained in this way are not of good quality, so their price is low, usually not exceeding 1 franc per cent. Cultivation on beds. - Market gardeners in Paris cultivate short leeks as early crops. They sow them in January, on beds, at a rate of 35 grams per frame. As soon as the weather permits, it is given air to prevent it from withering. At the beginning of March, it is transplanted, either on beds used to grow lettuces, or in pots along a wall; transplanting is done in potting soil, so we don't use a planter to go faster, but simply transplant with a finger. The plants are planted at Om, 04 in all directions, and care is taken to press them in deeply to give them a little more length. Immediately after planting, they are watered, and this watering should be repeated frequently during the vegetation period. If you have transplanted on a bed, the panels should be removed as soon as the plant is well established. Cultivated in this way, leeks can be harvested in June. Quite often, market gardeners grow this vegetable for a second season, sowing it in February and treating it in the same way. The produce is always of excellent quality, and is sold at a bargain price on the market, both for its beauty and for the time of year at which it is grown. Seed cultivation. - As we said when talking about the cultivation of Leeks in the Epône area, seed production is obtained by simply leaving in place all the plants that have not been uprooted for consumption. The result is seeds that can be harvested in August. This is the most common way to produce commercial seed, unless you leave an unused seedling sown in February in the nursery and plant it in July and August, when you have free land; this seedling also goes to seed in the spring of the following year. We do not recommend using these methods if you only want to obtain a small amount of seed for your own use. In this case, it is infinitely preferable to uproot the leeks in the spring, then to select and replant only those plants, leaving a space of Om, 40 between them in all directions, which show the highest level of the qualities sought after in the cultivated variety; it is only by this procedure that we will succeed in perfecting the breeds we cultivate. Harvesting is carried out successively, cutting only the inflorescences that bear ripe fruit, which can be recognized not by their color, which does not change appreciably, but by the fact that the first capsules to be formed open up, revealing the black seeds they contain. It's best to keep the seeds in the fruit, simply by gathering the inflorescences into bunches and hanging them in a dry place. It's a good idea to label them, as these seeds only retain their germinative powers for three years, and even then the youngest seeds are always the best. Insect pests. - The leek's most feared enemy is the alder moth, commonly known as the Guillot. It attacks the leaves, gnawing away and completely damaging them as it penetrates the seeds. There's only one way to get rid of it, and that's to cut the leeks flush with the ground and burn the leaves, which carry the moth larvae with them. If the Leeks are soaked with earth and then watered, they quickly regrow, and after a short time all traces of the damage have completely disappeared. "7 . C. .. POIRÉE Poirée, still known as Swiss chard, has the same origin as beet (Beta vulgaris, Linné). It grows wild in sands throughout the Mediterranean region. It differs from beet in that, whereas beetroot cultivation has produced voluminous, fleshy roots, the variation in beetroot has only been in the growth of the petioles, which have become very large. Their width often equals that of the open hand. Apart from this characteristic, all the others are identical to those we have indicated as belonging to Beets. Uses. - The petioles are eaten mainly, and when well prepared, make a pleasant dish. The whole leaves are also used in mixtures with sorrel to soften its acidity. Poirée leaves are still eaten like spinach. Varieties. - They differ in the color of the leaves, which are more or less tender green, and in the width of the petioles. COMMON PEAR. - This variety has abundant, yellowish-green foliage. The petioles are narrow, so this plant is used for its whole leaves, which are eaten like spinach. WHITE CHARD PEAR. - In this plant, the petioles or chards are very wide, and it is these that are eaten, with the exception of the leaf blade (fig. 95). Cultivation. - Pear cultivation is similar. Fig. 95. - Poirée à cardes blanches. much like beets, but with the difference that transplanting is not a problem here, since its influence is mainly felt only on root development, which is of little importance. Poirées can be sown as early as April or May, in the open ground, in rows spaced Om, 40 apart. When the plant is well established, light it with a hoe to leave the same distance between plants as between rows. To ensure good development, water during the summer. You can also sow this plant on a warm bed in April, then when the plant has four or five leaves, transplant it directly into place at the distance we've indicated. Under these conditions, repeated watering and mulching of the soil are essential for the plants to thrive. Poirées can be delivered for consumption as early as August and September, and the harvest lasts well into winter. The common variety is not very sensitive to cold, so it is usually not sheltered; the carded variety, being more sensitive, must be protected either by ridging and covering with leaves, or by transplanting the plants under a frame. Harvesting is carried out in two different ways, depending on whether the produce is to be consumed or sold. In the first case, the outermost leaves are removed successively, so that a single plant can be harvested for a very long time. If, on the other hand, the Poirées are to be sent to market, the whole plant is cut off and tied with a piece of straw. In some localities, however, the leaves are detached and sold in bunches. Seed production. - For seeds, we choose the plant that best presents itself in terms of purity of character, and store it under a frame over winter, to be ready for planting in spring. It will be useful to stake the plant when it flowers. - The Garden Pea (Pisum sativum, Linnaeus) has never been found in its natural state. Only ancient documents indicate its country of origin, which was probably western Asia, from where the plant gradually spread throughout the world through cultivation. But it must be admitted that these are more hypotheses than definite indications, as the Pea has nowhere been found in the wild. Peas are annual plants whose hollow, weak stems need support to keep them upright. They bear leaves arranged in an alternating order. The leaves are compound, pinnate, but only the first two or three pairs of leaflets have a normal blade; the others, on the contrary, as well as the terminal one, are reduced to the single main vein, which has the property of rolling up into a tendril. This feature enables it to bind itself to foreign bodies placed within its reach and to maintain the stem in a vertical position. The flowers, which in horticultural varieties are white, have a papilionaceous corolla and are arranged in a uniparous cyme reduced to two flowers. These are followed by green, succulent pods when young, which are dry and parchment-like when mature. They contain a variable number of seeds, usually between six and twelve, depending on the variety. These seeds are covered by envelopes, which sometimes lie tightly on the two cotyledons they cover, and sometimes, on the contrary, are larger than the surface of the cotyledons, wrinkling as the grain dries. Their shape, which is normally spherical, becomes more or less flattened on two sides when the seeds are numerous in the pod, as a result of their compression. Germination lasts for three years. Uses. - Peas are eaten in three different forms: as dried beans, stripped of their husks and known in the trade as split peas, they are used to make soups or purées. Fresh peas are used in a variety of dishes and are known as petits Pois. Lastly, certain varieties are used by employing both the seeds and the pod that contains them, which is tender and devoid of parchment; these are the mange-tout peas. Because of the starch and nitrogen they contain, Peas are a very nutritious food, especially when used dry. Varieties. - The very many varieties that this plant has provided for cultivation can be subdivided into two categories: shelling peas and snow peas. In each of these subdivisions, it is necessary to separate the dwarf varieties from those which, becoming very tall, must be supported and which for this reason are called oar varieties. i u i I. - peas to be seeded. A. - Rowed varieties. PRINCE-ALBERT PEA. - A variety reaching Om, 80, with few branches and spindly stems. It is not very productive, each inflorescence often giving only one pod containing six to seven seeds. Despite its low fertility, this variety is widely cultivated, as it produces very early crops. It is used as an early crop in southern France (fig. 96). Pois Michaux. - Several sub-varieties of this pea are grown, all of which are characterized by the vigor of the plant Fig. 96. - Prince-Albert pea. and its great hardiness. The plant's numerous pods contain seven to eight seeds. CLAMART pea. - A vigorous, fast-growing variety. It bears abundant pods containing eight to nine seeds. It is widely grown around Paris for green consumption (fig. 97). KNIGHT RIDED PEA. - This moderately productive pea is nevertheless an advantageous crop, because the seeds are very sweet and can be eaten even when they are already large. At maturity, the seeds become wrinkled. B. - Dwarf varieties. HATIF DWARF PEA. - This Pea needs stakes, as its stem is about Om, 50 high and does not support itself well. It is an early variety, good for spring cultivation in vegetable gardens. HOLLAND DWARF PEA. - It grows to no more than Om, 25, so can do without a stake; it is extremely early and therefore suitable for spring cultivation. Its yield is low, as each plant bears only about ten inflorescences. II. - SNOW PEAS. A. - Row varieties. RAM'S HORN PEA. - Fig. 97. - Clamart pea. This variety grows up to 50 cm high and produces abundantly. The pod is Om, 12 long, flattened and rounded at the tip. There are several other more or less distinct varieties, including the Giant Pea, which is characterized by pods up to Om, 15 long and containing eight to ten seeds. B. - Dwarf varieties. HATIF PEAS. - Plant of Om, 25 bearing numerous pods whose seeds are visible on the outside. The other varieties in this category are of little importance. Cultivation. - Peas thrive in all types of soil, provided they are both moist and rich in readily-assimilable fertilizers. Moisture is absolutely essential for them to thrive, so while they can be grown throughout the spring and most of the summer in northern countries, they can only be grown during the cool season in the south. We shall see that the pea's need for soil moisture leads to different cultivation methods in different regions. It's an exhausting crop, so the soil must be abundantly fertilized with farmyard manure or city sludge, if you don't want it to become impoverished. In practice, peas are only grown every three or four years on the same plot. Peas multiply exclusively by means of the seed, which germinates rapidly when entrusted to the soil. The cotyledons remain underground, and the young plant grows actively from the start. If you're growing taller varieties, it's a good idea to fit them with stakes as soon as the young plants are Om, 10 high, i.e. ten to fifteen days after emergence. The stakes most commonly used are branches, varying in height depending on the variety, with their own branches, which are pushed into the vicinity of the peas so that they can cling to them. Dwarf varieties need no support. Growing in the Paris climate. - Peas can be sown in different ways, depending on the season and the variety grown. Dwarf peas can be broadcast, but this method only has disadvantages: under these conditions, the seeds are difficult to cover, and if hoeing is necessary, it is difficult. For these reasons, this plant is usually sown in rows, sometimes in bunches. Sowing in rows offers the greatest advantage in terms of ease of cultivation, and is adopted almost everywhere. The distance to be kept between rows differs according to the period and the variety. For dwarf varieties, a spacing of Om, 30 is sufficient, but this distance must be doubled for high-growth varieties. Growers say that seedlings intended to produce the first crops in spring are sown in autumn towards the end of November, at Saite-Catherine (November 25). Pois Michaux is used for this crop. The soil should be well exposed to allow the plants to survive the winter without suffering, and to develop rapidly in the spring. Sloping ground or land along a wall with a south or southeast exposure is best. Peas are sown at a rate of about 2.5 liters per acre. Snow peas can be harvested before winter, and can easily withstand the winter without suffering. In February, they are hoeed and fitted with oars that are inserted obliquely so that the two rows closest to each other touch at the top, allowing you to pass easily through the spaces left free and harvest at your leisure. To speed up pod development, pinch off the ends of the stems as soon as they have produced eight or ten inflorescences. This operation needs to be carried out on two separate occasions, to ensure that both the main stem and any subsequent offshoots are treated. In large-scale cultivation, where it is often difficult to use stakes, this operation, to which we give the name of topping, becomes a rule, because by reducing the height of the plants, it enables them to be damaged less than if they were left to grow indefinitely. Peas sown in autumn produce early in the spring, but at a time that is difficult to specify, as it varies according to the severity of the season and the exposure of the sown land. Spring sowings, which will produce after those of plants sown in autumn, can be started early, as peas do not fear light spring frosts. They can be sown as early as the end of February and continued at regular intervals until the end of May or the beginning of June; later, under normal conditions, only a very small yield would be obtained. In naturally damp, cool soils, and in sheltered situations, sowing can be continued throughout the summer, only to be uprooted in the first days of August. Where the situation and the soil allow such late crops to be grown, serious advantages can be gained, as peas always fetch a high price in the autumn. In these successive sowings, vaDYBONSRI. - Cultivation, 2nd ed. 27 early and dwarf varieties are used first, followed by the ever-higher-yielding row varieties. Finally, for autumn cultivation, dwarf and fast-growing varieties are preferred. Around Paris, peas are widely grown for green harvesting. In the Saint-Denis plain, near Epône and Chartres, peas are grown over considerable areas. In all these large-scale crops, the peas are not harvested, but simply pollarded to stop them elongating. When dry peas are to be harvested, they are sown at the beginning of April, and harvested as soon as the stems and leaves turn yellow, which happens at the end of July. Yield is around 25 liters per acre. However, when grown in the vicinity of large cities, peas are most often harvested fresh, which gives a more advantageous yield. Harvesting takes place as soon as the pods contain half-formed seeds; it must be done successively, every eight days or so. When it's time to harvest, we pass between the rows, taking great care not to trample on any branches lying on the ground, and we pick only those pods that seem sufficiently advanced; we mustn't pull on them, as this would break the stem carrying them, but detach them with our fingers. Successive harvests of green peas yield 45 to 50 kilograms per acre, or 9 to 10 decalitres of pods, each decalitre yielding one and a half to two liters of fresh beans. Southern cultivation. - In the south of France and in Algeria, peas are increasingly being grown for green harvesting. In these regions, where winter frosts are too mild to affect pea vegetation, peas are sown in autumn around September, using early varieties. Harvesting takes place from February to April, precisely when the peas grown in our climate are not yet producing. At this time, the green pods are sold by the kilogram at a very high price, varying between 30 and 60 fr. per 100 kilograms during the first months of the year. These Midi crops have completely wiped out the under-frame production that used to be widespread. Seed crops. - For large-scale seed production, peas are sown at the beginning of April, not harvested green and pruned. For early dwarf varieties, it is preferable to sow in nurseries, then transplant as soon as the plants have two or three leaves. Enemies. - Peas are attacked by two parasitic fungi which fortunately do not cause them much damage. These are rust, which occurs in rainy years, and powdery mildew, which appears during severe drought. Both diseases are untreatable. The seeds are frequently attacked by bruchus (Bruchus pisi), which devours the cotyledons and embryos of the pea to the point of rendering them unsuitable for sowing. is native to South America; authentic documents and samples of plants growing spontaneously that have been collected there seem to prove this beyond doubt. Chile appears to be the plant's motherland, from where it spread first to neighboring countries and then to North America. The Spaniards (1) first brought it to Europe around 1580, but although the plant had already been widely cultivated in America, and despite the extreme ease of its propagation, it remained a pure curiosity for a very long time, and twenty years later, de l'Ecluse was still citing it as a rare plant. It took no less than a century for this excellent plant, which we would be hard-pressed to do without today, to gradually spread into cultivation, where it was still considered only as a fodder plant. It's difficult to pinpoint the exact date of its introduction to France, but it's certain that it was already widely grown in Belgium when it was introduced to France. That's probably where it came from, as it was first con(1) De Candolle, Or. des pl. cult. nue in the northern provinces, from where it spread, gaining ground from near and far. Olivier de Serres, in his Théâtre de l'Agriculture, and de Combes in l'École du Jardin Potager (1749), recommend its cultivation. Parmentier was instrumental in gaining its acceptance in the agricultural world. The potato is a perennial plant. If we follow the evolutionary phases of a young seedling, we see that as it produces aerial branches, it also gives rise to underground branches. These, after having lengthened by a variable amount, swell either towards their tip, which is the most common case, or sometimes also at an indeterminate point along their course. This bulge grows rapidly, becomes filled with starch and becomes what in practice is known as the potato tuber. This tuber is therefore a modified branch; indeed, everything points to it, for it bears leaves that are reduced, it's true, to a sort of scale, but which nonetheless have buds in their axils. It is these tubers that give the plant its perennial character, and serve to propagate it. The potato's aerial stems are angular and more or less robust and upright, depending on the variety. They bear alternate leaves that are so deeply indented that they resemble pinnate compound leaves. The flowers, of which many early varieties are devoid, are large, more or less purplish or pinkish, with rotate corollas; they are arranged in cymes simulating umbels. The fruits that follow these flowers are rounded, green, yellowish berries, induced by the calyx. They contain flattened, kidney-shaped seeds, which are used to produce new varieties. Uses. - Potatoes are so widely used that it's hardly necessary to insist on this point. Everyone knows that these tubers are eaten cooked, and there are countless dishes in which they can be used alone or in combination with other products. Varieties. - When the potato was first introduced into Europe, two types of tuber were already known, one yellow, the other reddish. A considerable number of varieties have since been sown. Their differentiation is based on shape, color, size, earliness and so on. M. Henry de Vilmorin (1) bases their determination on the shape and color of the sprouts produced by the tubers, because, according to him, this is one of the most stable characteristics. We won't go into the description of even the most common varieties, as such a study would be beyond the scope of this book. We are all the more authorized to do so as most of these varieties belong to the field and cannot, therefore, be considered as truly vegetable. Even among these, we have to make a choice, and we will only mention those that are most commonly grown. MARJOLIN POTATO. - Tubers of medium size, elongated, tapering slightly towards one end. Smooth, purplish sprouts. This is the variety most commonly grown in vegetable gardens. It is well suited to forced (1) Test of a meth. cat. of potato varieties. cultivation, as it is early and its tubers are very close to the base of the plant. TETARD MARJOLIN POTATO. - Tubers larger than the previous variety, with lightly colored sprouts; less early than the previous variety, but also recommendable. KIDNEY OR NETTLE-LEAVED POTATO. - Elongated tubers, slightly pointed at one end. Pink sprouts covered with white hairs, making them easily recognizable. Early variety used for early crops. ROSCOFF FLAT POTATO. - Medium-sized, elongated, flattened tubers with inconspicuous eyes. A very late variety with a remarkable shelf life, which can be eaten until June. Widely grown in Roscoff. Cultivation. - This plant is undemanding in terms of soil, and can be grown in almost any type of soil. However, there is a notable difference between the products obtained in good, rich, sandy soil and those that can be obtained in compact, clay soil. This difference concerns both the quantity and quality of the produce, and is to the detriment of cold, clayey soils, which produce only small yields of watery, unpalatable tubers. Sandy, rich, moderately humid soils with warm exposure are best suited to potato production. The fertilizers the plant craves must be supplied in a decomposed state. Farmers in the Paris region mainly use city sludge, which has previously rotted in heaps and been put on racks, or manure from mushroom mills. On farms, platform manure may be suitable, but it is preferable to use manure from vegetable garden beds. On the shores of the ocean, the fertilizer used consists of stable manure layered with kelp and seaweed. Manure can be applied in two different ways. When fertilizer is plentiful, the soil is fertilized at a rate of around 30,000 kilograms per hectare. When fertilizer is not plentiful, a small amount of manure can be applied to each potato spot. In early crops grown around Paris, both methods are used simultaneously. In the cultivation of table varieties, the only one which really depends on vegetable production and which we are concerned with here, tubers should never be planted as they are taken out of the cellars or silos in which they are kept for current needs. It is absolutely essential to prepare them, which will both hasten and increase production. At the end of summer or the beginning of autumn, when potatoes are uprooted, all medium-sized tubers should be selected which show the best characteristics of the cultivated variety. They should come from clumps that have produced abundant, early, high-quality produce. Since planting requires around 800 tubers per acre, we use this figure as a basis for keeping the quantity deemed necessary. After digging, the potatoes are left in the air for a few hours, to give them time to dry on the surface, and to remove any excess soil that may have stuck to them. Once the tubers have dried out, they are placed in flat baskets or, better still, in racks specially built for this purpose (fig. 98). These are boxes of varying dimensions, but in practice they are Om.60 long by Om.40 wide. They have a slatted bottom, made from Om,02-wide rods with Fig. 98. - Potato tray. free spaces of equal size. The perimeter of the box is made of boards Om,08 high. At the four corners are small wooden pillars, projecting a few centimeters below and forming a foot. All the racks must be built exactly to the same pattern, so that they can be stacked one on top of the other. The tubers are placed in these trays, side by side, resting on their tips, so that the larger end is in the air. As the boxes become full, they are arranged in stacks (fig. 99), either under a shed or in a well-ventilated room. The potatoes should remain in this state until the cold weather arrives, at which time the windows of the room or storeroom should be carefully closed whenever frost is expected. If the weather turns mild, take advantage of the opportunity to let in some fresh air. Taken care of in this way, the tubers will begin to produce a vigorous sprout during the first months of winter. This sprout, which Fig. 99. - Stack of apple trays Fig. 100. - Potato sprouted in a tray. remains the only one in most tubers, will gradually increase in size, and often even sprout a few roots on its surface. The tubers are now ready for planting (fig. 100). Growing in the Paris climate. - Planting with tubers prepared as described above should be done early, in order to benefit as much as possible from the advance already obtained through prior germination, and to obtain early products. It should not be forgotten that potato tuber shoots only emerge from the ground a fortnight to three weeks after they have been planted, and that consequently, although these shoots are sensitive to cold, planting can be done early, because as long as they are underground, they are safe. For our part, we plant the tubers in the course of February, at the beginning or at the end, depending on whether the cold ceases sooner or later, and we have never had to complain about this haste in planting; on the contrary, we obtain very satisfactory results in this way. Sometimes, however, the young leaves are affected by white frost, but this accident has no serious consequences, and in all cases can be easily avoided by spreading a little straw on the young shoots when the temperature drops. Planting begun at the time we have just mentioned can be continued until May and June, to obtain new products throughout the summer. Whatever the season, planting practice is always the same. Horticultural varieties produce little foliage, as most of them do not flower; they can therefore be planted at short distances. The distance kept between rows is Om, 50, and planting is done every Om, 25 to Om, 35. When it comes to placing tubers, deep pockets of Om, 15 are opened in the soil with a spade or hoe, and a little decomposed manure is deposited at the bottom. A tuberule is placed in each pot; it is laid down by hand and buried, keeping it upright. The pot is then filled in, though a sort of small basin is left at each planted spot. When the shoots are about Om, 15, or gives a hoeing intended to remove weeds and bring back a little earth to the foot of each plant; it's not a mound that needs to be made, but simply bring back the earth to a height of 5 to 6 centimeters. The disadvantage of high ridging is that it removes the tubers from the direct action of the air, preventing them from growing. However, it would be unwise not to ridge at all, as a certain number of tubers would emerge above ground level and become green and inedible. Harvesting begins in June and can continue throughout the summer. Harvesting can be carried out in two different ways: often, as soon as it is presumed that some of the tubers can be eaten, a dig is made at the base of the potato, and only the largest are removed, sparing the smaller ones, which are left in place for longer. The other method is to harvest the whole crop when most of the tubers are fully developed. When harvesting in order to preserve the tubers, either for winter consumption or to make the plant, wait until the tops have completely dried out before proceeding with the uprooting. Roscoff cultivation. - In Roscoff, Jersey and a few other places with especially favorable winter temperatures, planting is done at the beginning of January. The procedures followed are those indicated above. Harvesting begins in April, when the produce is sold at a very high price. The late variety named after Roscoff is widely grown there. It is planted in April, using a special method: the land is smoked, then ploughed and harrowed, and laid out on a flat surface, with one potato at a time. As these are late-ripening products, there's no need to germinate the tubers. The rows are spaced alternately by Om, 30, then by Om, 50, which makes like a path every two rows; on the rows a distance of Om, 30 is kept. Once the tubers have been placed on the ground in this way, they are covered with 1m, 10 of earth; later they will be buttered again. Harvesting takes place when the tops have dried out. The potato variety grown in this way has the advantage of retaining all its qualities until around June; for this reason, it is highly sought-after, and its selling price is always high. Large quantities are exported to England. To preserve its quality, it is stored in granaries and covered with a tarpaulin to prevent it from turning green. The average harvest is 75 hectoliters, each weighing 65 kilograms per hectare. We borrow the following information from a note by Mr. N. Schneider published in the Revue horticole (1891, no. 8). "On the best exposed slopes, harvesting began on May 6, and prices were quoted at 500 francs per tonne on the London market. By the end of May, the price had dropped to 433 francs per tonne. In the first days of June it was 276 francs, in mid-June 138, and at the end of June it was 85 francs." "In 1886, the export of potatoes from the island of Jersey produced a figure of 10 million francs; in 1889, it only reached 6,600,000 francs. Southern cultivation. - In the south of France and in Algeria, potatoes are planted much earlier than in France, as frosts are not to be feared and the potatoes benefit from the winter rains to develop well. Planting takes place in August, September and October, and the produce is ready for harvesting in December, January and February. They are rarely eaten locally, but are usually shipped to more northerly regions. Bedding culture. - This type of production, which used to be very advantageous, has become much less important since the railroads began transporting produce from the south of France to us. In rural vegetable gardens, where there is no communication, this type of cultivation still has its raison d'être, especially as it has to be admitted that its produce is infinitely superior to that obtained in the south of France. The first layers are built around New Year's Day. They are made of annealed manure mixed with new manure. This layer should give about 15 degrees. Twenty feet per frame is planted; when the tops touch the glass, the boxes are lifted and the height of the stoves increased. Harvesting takes place after two and a half months of cultivation. Each frame yields around 5 kilograms of tubers. To obtain a sustained product, successive plantings are made every month until March. Diseases. - The most formidable of all potato diseases is undoubtedly that produced by a parasitic fungus known as Phytophthora infestans. It invades all the plant's organs, which blacken and eventually rot. Affected tubers soon emit a strong, putrid odour. The many preventive treatments available can be summed up as follows: 1° grow early varieties that have been made precocious by prior germination, as the disease develops mainly in autumn; 2° reject as unfit for planting any tuber stained with the disease; 3° carefully burn dry tops and never put them in manure, as the fungus spores can be preserved there; 4° only return this crop to the same land every two or three years, to give the spores time to be destroyed. Fortunately, it has been found that treatment with copper salts produces the best results, and timely applications help to keep the disease under control. As soon as the leaves are covered with the characteristic spots, the plants are sprayed with the copper salt preparations used to treat vine diseases, such as Bordeaux mixture or celestial water; the parasitic fungus is thus destroyed and the tubers remain healthy. The indication for this treatment is due to the learned professor at the Institut Agronomique, Mr. E. Prillieux (1). (1) Compte rendu de l'Académie des sciences (t. CVII, 1888, p. 447). It is not clear whether the cultivated radish formed a separate species, as Linnaeus assumed and named it Raphanus sativus, or whether the plant in our gardens was simply derived from a species that grows spontaneously in Europe and is known as Raphanus Raphanistrum. Very convincing experiments, in our opinion, were carried out by M. Carrière, head gardener of the nurseries at the Paris Natural History Museum (1). He collected seeds of R. Raphanistrum, sowed them, and after the fourth generation he was fortunate enough to see a large proportion of the plants he had grown transform their spindly roots into the fleshy roots that are the hallmark of edible Radishes. Even better. As Mr. Carrière continued with his seedlings, it wasn't long before his plants began to differentiate and give rise to the various forms we know from cultivation. It has been objected (2), while recognizing the value of these experiments, that R. Raphanistrum was a European plant, and that Radish has been cultivated in China and Japan since (1) Carrière, Orig. des pl. domest. demonstrée par la culture du Radis sauvage, 1869. (2) De Candolle, Orig, des pl. cultivées. a high antiquity. But the plant could perhaps have been transported when, in the second century BC, the Chinese endowed their country with a large number of plants from our crops. What's more, couldn't the plant have once grown in Asia and now disappeared from the wild? It seems to us that theoretical considerations must give way to evidence drawn from direct experience. It has also been objected (1) that there are differences between wild and cultivated radishes, based on hardiness, flower coloring and the degree of partitioning of the fruit. But all these characteristics do not constitute specific differences, because they are essentially variable, and even more marked differences have been observed in other vegetable plants, when the plant was transferred from the wild to the cultivated state. The same differences exist between carrots, beet, cultivated cabbage and cabbage growing in the wild, yet no one has thought of making these two different states into separate species. Cultivated Radishes are characterized by fleshy taproots, covered in early life by a coleorhyze. The leaves are pinnate, with more or less serrated margins, depending on the variety. From their center, either in the first year if the plant was sown in spring, or only in the second if sown in autumn, grows a robust branching ending in clusters of cruciliform flowers. These flowers are followed by siliques which do not (1) Vilmorin, Les pl. potagères. DYBOWSRI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 28 vrent pas et qui contiennent un nombre variable de graines arrondies, roussâtres. Uses. - Radishes are eaten raw. Varieties. - The very marked differences between cultivated varieties are based on the color, shape and size of the roots. For practical purposes, Radishes should be separated into Fig. 101. - Round Radish Fig. 102. half-long Radish scarlet. with white tip. two classes, one comprising all varieties that can be grown at any season of the year, and which are therefore called all-month Radishes; the other, those eaten in autumn and winter. I. - ALL-MONTH RADISHES. We shall confine ourselves to mentioning the varieties that are most widely grown. ROUND SCARLET RADISH. - Round, slightly flattened, bright red root. Foliage not very abundant. This variety is used in forced cultivation (fig. 101). RADiS DeMi-LoNG A BOUT BLANC. - Elongated, cylindrical root, often even a little swollen towards the base. Good variety for spring and summer cultivation (fig. 102). LONG PINK RADISH. - Root long and tapering towards the base fig. 103. Long pink radish. Fig. 104. - Long black winter radish. Cultivated during spring and summer (fig. 103). II. - WINTER RADISH. black winter radish. - Black-brown, rough root, Om, 20 to Om, 30 long. White, pungent flesh. Abundant foliage: hardy plant (fig. 104). This category includes all the Japanese radishes known as Daï-Kon, which have spread to our crops in recent years. Most varieties have white roots, often very long. Growing Radishes every month. - Radishes in this category are very simple to grow. The seeds are broadcast, sometimes alone, but usually in association with other crops. About 500 grams of seed are sown per acre. It is essential to cover the seed with potting soil or mulch, so that the frequent watering required by this crop can be carried out without fear of gullying the soil and dragging the seed along with it. Radishes are fast-growing; all can be harvested when they are two-thirds developed, which is 22 to 30 days after sowing for the white-tipped pink and round scarlet varieties, when they have been sown in loose, very rich soil and watered sparingly. Harvesting too late is a disadvantage, as it causes the roots to dig in and become unfit for consumption. Radishes can be sown all year round; during winter, they are sown in beds in lettuce or carrot crops; from February onwards, they can be sown in the open ground in good exposure. Throughout spring and summer, sow every fortnight or so to obtain a steady crop. If you sow after September, it's a good idea to use straw mats that are laid out overnight over the crops, supporting them on gaulettes; in this way, you can harvest right up until the coldest weather. Growing winter radishes. - These radishes are broadcast from May to July. Market gardeners in Paris prefer to sow with their fingers, i.e. to make a small hole every Om, 15 with the finger, into which they place one or two seeds. Once the seeds have sprouted, they are thinned out if they have been broadcast, and doubled in finger sowing if there are two plants in the same hole. Some market gardeners grow black radishes on a bed in spring, producing very tender roots. In the open ground, harvesting takes place after two or three months. Radishes are pulled out for winter in October, the crown cut off, and the roots buried in sand in a cellar. Growing for seed. - Seed production is very big in the Bay of Mont Saint-Michel. One grower alone, M. Touzard, sowed up to 52 hectares of Radishes for seed in the same year. Radishes are sown around mid-April in nurseries, and three weeks to a month later are transplanted to well-disturbed soil. Rows are spaced Om 40 apart, with Om 30 between plants. We hoe in summer. When the fruit turns yellow, cut with a sickle and place in bunches, which are then arranged in "moyettes". When the stalks are dry, they are stored in the attic and the threshing is reserved for winter. The result is 8 to 10 hectoliters, priced at 90 to 100 francs. Enemies. - Radishes, when young, are, like all crucifers, ravaged by flea beetles, which can be fought by frequent watering. Horseradish (Cochlearia Armoracia, Linné) is a plant indigenous to temperate Eastern Europe, from where, in the opinion of M. A. de Candolle, it must have been introduced and spread to Germany, France and neighboring countries, where it is now cultivated. The plant's vegetative organs are characterized by very long, cylindrical roots that penetrate deep into the soil; their yellowish bark is rough and covers a white, fleshy tissue. The cellular tissue contains allyl sulfide, which gives it a strong, burning mustard-like taste. The leaves of this plant are large, measuring no less than Om, 40 long by Om, 15 wide; they are wavy and glossy green (fig. 105). From their centers, flowering branches of about Om, 60 rise each year, ending in small clusters of small, white, cruciform flowers, followed by silicate fruits, which are usually sterile; the seeds of this plant are therefore relatively rare. Uses. - The root, once stripped of its bark, is used to prepare a condiment that resembles mustard in taste, and is widely used throughout Eastern and Northern Europe. The grated root is sometimes eaten directly, with vinegar, and sometimes used in the preparation of various sauces. Propagation. - Horseradish rarely produces fertile seeds, so this is not the way to propagate it. It is propagated using Fig. 105. - Cultivated horseradish. root fragments are cut to a length of about Om.05 and transplanted into a nursery in spring. Each of these root pieces will produce adventitious buds and numerous roots. Transplanting is done at Om, 15 in all directions, during March and April. The seedling remains in the nursery for a whole year, and it's not until the following spring that it's used to put it in place for good, where it will complete its development. Choosing the site and planting. - For planting, choose loose, fresh soil; soil from land reclamation or clearing is particularly suitable; it's also a plant that thrives on fertilizer, and to help it develop rapidly, it's a good idea to fertilize the soil before planting. Before planting, the soil must be specially prepared. The seedling is pulled out of the nursery in the first few days of spring; this must be done with care, so as not to break the numerous roots that have developed on the planted section. The most convenient instrument for this is the flat-tined fork. Once removed from the ground, the plants are prepared by pruning the roots, which consists in selecting the largest and longest root and removing all the others, leaving only one pivot, which is shortened to Om, 25 or Om, 30. The small roots removed will be used to make plants for the following year. Having undergone this preparation, the roots are transplanted using a large planter, taking care to push them in as vertically as possible. Each plant is planted at a distance of Om.40 to Om.50 between the rows and between the rows. Cultivation consists simply of hoeing, which is carried out whenever the soil is invaded by weeds. Uprooting. - Roots remain in place for two years; they are usually pulled out with a flat-tine fork throughout October, or even November, weather permitting. Once the roots have been removed from the ground, the leaves are removed with a rake, along with any adventitious roots that have developed on the main pivot. If it has been growing under favorable conditions, the main pivot has developed very strongly; it usually measures from Om.05 to Om.07 in diameter at the middle part (fig. 106). Locations where this crop is grown. - Horseradish is grown extensively in eastern France. In Alsace, horseradish is grown on a large scale, particularly in the Haut-Rhin region around Colmar. Large-scale production is also found in Saxony and Baden. Moreover, it is grown in all the kitchen gardens of Germany, Austria, Poland and Russia, where it is cultivated in exactly the same Fig. 106. way as in large-scale farming. - Horseradish root. However, in some gardens, a kind of stone paving is placed under the roots in the square intended for this crop, to prevent the roots from rotating beyond a certain depth. By carefully preparing the plant as we have indicated, i.e. by cutting the main root to the required length, this paving, which is costly to set up, is rendered unnecessary. Yield. - Once the product has been removed from the soil and the leaves and lateral roots removed, it is sold either directly to the market, as is generally the case in Alsace, or exported to various consumer centers. The wholesale price varies according to the product; the minimum is 15 francs per cent, taken on the spot, while the maximum often exceeds 30 francs for large premium roots. Assuming an average price of 22 francs, it's easy to see what the yield per hectare is. Indeed, with planting at Om, 50 in all directions, we obtain 40,000 roots per hectare, which at 22 francs per cent comes to 9680 francs. But this crop occupies the soil for two years, so the gross yield is only 4840 francs per hectare per year. The costs of cultivation, fertilization, weeding and ground rent must be subtracted, adding up to a total annual expense of around 600 francs per hectare. Conservation. - Once all the rootlets have been removed, horseradish is taken down to the cellar, where it is layered in fine sand. It can be kept there for about a year, without losing many of its qualities, provided the shoots are removed as they appear. 2 1 E *: biennial plant, native to southern and temperate Europe. Its spatulate leaves are similar to those of lamb's lettuce. The root is white, fusiform and crunchy. From the center of the rosette formed by the leaves on the ground, a branched stem rises in the spring of the second year, bearing light-blue campanulate flowers that give rise to capsules induced by the calyx. These fruits have three chambers containing a large number of extremely fine seeds. Uses. - This plant (fig. 107) is eaten in the same way as lamb's lettuce, in salads, with the difference, however, that the leaves are supplemented by roots, which have a pleasant flavor. Cultivation. - Rapunzel grows best in fresh, substantial soil. The soil must be well prepared and levelled with a few strokes of the rake. However, plants sown at this time of year run a high risk of flowering in autumn, and therefore of not producing any product. This too-rapid bolting is particularly likely to occur when the soil lacks freshness, so it is wiser to sow only in June and July. Sowing is done by broadcasting, but as the seed is extremely fine, it is useful to mix it with a few handfuls of fine sand, sifted and dried beforehand; this procedure spreads the seed much more evenly. The seed is buried with a simple rake, after which the soil is compacted Fig. 107 - Cultivated Rapunzel. by pricking the tines of a fork on one end of a board, with which the soil is evenly struck and covered with a little long litter. Germination takes place after about ten days, if the soil is given a few light drenches with a fine-headed watering can. When the plants have produced a few leaves, if necessary, they are lighted and weeded to remove weeds. A few radish seeds are usually sown at the same time as the Rapunzel, to shelter the young plant in its early stages, and are removed before their foliage gets in the way. This lettuce can be harvested as early as October and November, but is usually left to spend part of the winter in the ground, and is not eaten until late January and February. It's at this time of year that large numbers arrive at the Paris market halls. Seeds. - Do not harvest seeds from plants sown in May, which will come up in the same year. These seeds would give rise to plants with the same tendency to bolt too early, so the seed should only be harvested from plants that have overwintered and flowered in spring. The seeds are extracted from their capsules by gentle threshing. They can be used for up to five years, during which time they retain their ability to germinate. -- Scorsonera (Scorzonera hispantca, Linné) grows wild in southern France, Spain and many other regions. Its cultivation dates back no more than a century, since all documents prior to that date refer to it only as a plant found in the wild. Scorsonera is perennial by its rhizome; it bears broad, Om, 04, long lanceolate leaves. From the center of these leaves, branches arise from the first year, bearing heads of yellow, ligulate flowers, giving rise to long achenes, pointed at the base and obtuse at the apex. These fruits are white; in practice, they are known as seeds. They retain their germinative capacity for only two years. The rhizome extends into a pivot which follows it; this is the edible part of the plant, with rough, black bark, and is usually unbranched throughout its upper part. Uses. - Scorsonera pivots are eaten after they have been stripped of their bark and cooked. Cultivation. - Scorsonera are grown in abundance, especially around Paris, near Pantin, Aubervilliers, Noisy-le-Sec, Epône and other towns. In the south of France, their cultivation is less widespread, but nevertheless yields very rapid results. To develop fully and quickly, Scorsonera needs soil rich in decomposed fertilizer; fresh manure has the disadvantage of making its roots branch out. Fresh siliceous soils are particularly suitable, provided they are rich in organic matter. Around Paris, this crop is smoked almost exclusively with city sludge, which seems to suit it very well. The soil must be ploughed deeply, so that the roots can grow vertically in the soil without being disturbed. Scorsonera is sown in rows, which are traced on the ground using a spike drill, which could be very advantageously replaced by a seeder. These lines should be Om, 20 apart, and the seeds sown in them should be overlapped by only Ou,02 or so. These seedlings are sown in March and April, at a rate of 100 grams per acre. When the young plants, which appear with two very elongated cotyledonary leaves, are well ley, and in addition to these they have taken two or three leaves, we give a hoeing between the lines, and if we want to obtain beautiful products, it is useful to take advantage of this work to thin out the plants on the lines so as to leave between them a space of Om, 06 approximately. A second hoeing is often necessary in summer. During the summer, a good proportion of Scorsonera plants come into flower; to prevent the roots from hardening, and at the same time increase their development, it is useful to mow these inflorescences. Some growers prefer to let these plants flower, in order to harvest the seed; but the product they obtain Fig. 108. - Scorsonera boot. from the sale of the seed does not compensate for the damage caused to the crop in this way. Harvesting begins in November, and continues until the end of the year. Scorsonera do not fear the cold, but as it would be difficult, if not impossible, to extract them from the ground when the soil is frozen, it is useful to pull them all up towards the end of November, to put them in gauges close to the house, and to cover them in case of cold. When the soil is unsuitable for this type of production, we sometimes do things a little differently, and instead of sowing in spring, we sow in August, to harvest in autumn of the following year. This procedure is not very advantageous, as the plants tend to flower in spring, and the roots become tough and difficult to eat. What's more, seedlings sown in August only grow well if watered, so this crop can only be grown in kitchen gardens, where it occupies the land for more than a year. For sale, Scorsonera are packed in bunches using a mold similar to the one used to pack asparagus, which is Om, 12 in diameter (fig. 108). All the leaves are left after these vegetables, and the roots are bound with a wicker tie, which is placed halfway down the length of the roots. Growers reckon that, on average, one hectare produces 7,000 bunches, the usual price of which at the Paris halles is 30 francs per hundred bunches, giving a gross product per hectare of 2,100 francs. As for cultivation costs, they are as follows in the areas surrounding the capital: Rent for one hectare....................... Manure: 25,000 kilogr. at 8 fr. per 1,000 kilogr........................... 300 francs. 200 To be carried forward...... 500 francs. DYBONSEI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 29 To be carried forward........... Plowing and harrowing..................... Seeding and sowing......................... Two hoeings at 35 fr...................... Uprooting and bundling.............. 500 francs. 100 50 70 100 - Total expenses........ 820 francs. The result is that, although the gross production figure is not very high, this crop is still advantageous, for the reason that cultivation costs are relatively low. Seed production. - We have already mentioned that seed can be harvested from plants that go to seed in the first year. This procedure, which is generally followed in large-scale cultivation, is not to be recommended in the kitchen garden. In this case, it is infinitely preferable to select the best and most voluminous roots in autumn, overwinter them and plant them in the spring; in this way, you can be sure of harvesting only seeds that will give birth to good plants. The seed is harvested when the flowerheads can be seen to open, so it can only be done gradually and successively. .... .. . . ... ". .1. -.4 ★24 SALSIFIS Salsify (Tragopogon porrifolium, Linnaeus) is a plant that was much more widely cultivated a century or two ago than it is today. The Scorsonera, which combines a great similarity of taste with numerous cultural and culinary advantages, seems to have largely replaced the Salsify. Individuals of the latter species are found in the wild in Greece and Algeria. In all cases, it is a southern species, which explains its sensitivity to cold. From a purely botanical point of view, they are very similar to scorsonera, differing only in the number of involucral bracts. Their leaves are narrow, somewhat resembling those of leeks in shape, but stalked and pinnately venationed. The flowers, arranged in flower heads, are purplish and give rise to elongated achenes. Seeds only retain their germinative capacity for a short time, so it's wise to use only those harvested the previous year. The edible part is the rhizome, with the main root arranged in a fleshy pivot (fig. 109). Uses. - The roots are scraped free of bark 1 and then cooked. Young leaves can be eaten in salads. Cultivation. - To grow well, this plant requires Fig. 109. - Cultivated salsify. a deep, rich and sufficiently loosened soil. It is sown in rows Om, 20 apart in March, using around 120 grams per acre. It is useful to baste the soil to hasten germination. When emergence has occurred, hoeing is carried out to remove weeds, as well as to thin out the plants on the rows and leave a few centimetres of space between them. During the summer, it's worth hoeing again to keep the soil clean. Any plants that come into flower should be removed, as their roots are hard and inedible. Harvesting takes place in autumn. All roots are pulled out with a flat-tine fork; those that are not eaten immediately should be placed in gauges. It's a good idea to cover them with straw or litter, as frost could damage them. For seeds, keep the straightest and least branched roots, which should be placed in gauges and sheltered. In spring, transplant Om, 20 in all directions. The seed must be harvested as soon as it is ripe, as many birds are very fond of it, and leaving it standing could lead to it being eaten. The leaves are attacked by a parasitic fungus (Ofdium), which can be preserved by repeated sulphur treatments. ... i PR."... plant that everything suggests is native to Peru. In fact, the tomato as we know it, with its ribbed fruits, has never been found there growing spontaneously; but one whose small, rounded fruits resemble cherries has been found there in a truly spontaneous state. Observation of the facts shows that the mamelonning of the fruit, due to the multiplication of the ovary's lodges, is an effect of cultivation, and that we are therefore entitled to consider the tomatoes of our gardens as stemming from plants whose fruit was primitively smooth and had a specific number of lodges. This fact is supported by the fact that, after three generations, the tomatoes we have grown, which originally had only two lobes, have given us fruit with multiple lobes and mamelon-shaped fruit on plants where the majority of the fruit was still normal. In France, tomato cultivation does not go back very far, and we know market gardeners who well remember that their grandfathers cultivated tomatoes as a plant that was still quite uncommon. The tomato is a sarmentous plant whose stems and leaves are covered with glandular hairs that give off a strong, worm-like odour at the slightest rustle. The inflorescences, which are clusters of cymes, are abnormally placed as a result of entrainment. Flowers are followed by fruits, which are berries colored either yellow or red in most horticultural varieties. A cross-section shows that the number of lodges varies from one fruit to another. Seeds are yellow, flattened and very numerous in each lodge; they retain their germinative powers for four years. Uses. - The berries are eaten raw in salads, or cooked, in which case they are used in the preparation of various dishes. Varieties. - This plant has a great tendency to variation, and although, as we have said, tomatoes have not been cultivated for very long, we already know of a large number of forms which differ from one another in the way the whole plant grows, in its greater or lesser precocity, and in the shape, color or size of its fruits. Preference should always be given to early varieties, as in outdoor cultivation vegetation is always halted by late frosts, which catch the last fruits before they are fully ripe. We recommend the following varieties: HATIVE RED TOMATO. - The fruits of this variety develop strongly, often weighing up to 400 grams. They are criss-crossed with deep ribs. This variety is best suited to outdoor cultivation (fig. 110). HATIVE DWARF TOMATO. - This variety resembles the previous one, but is smaller in size, making it particularly suitable for cultivation under glass. Fig. 110. - Early red tomato. LARGE SMOOTH TOMATO. - Fruits are slightly transparent red, with a smooth Fig. 111. surface. Their development is very considerable, but they have the serious disadvantage of remaining almost always green near the stalk, and moreover, of splitting transversely, which facilitates their rotting and depreciates them for sale (fig. 111). Cultivation. - Because of its southern origin, the tomato cannot develop fully in the Paris climate if grown in the open air. It is therefore necessary to hasten its growth by sheltering it under a frame while it is still young. Tomatoes for outdoor cultivation should be sown from mid-February to the end of February, or even the beginning of March. I prepare a warm bed and scatter the seeds over the soil, barely covering them. They germinate quickly, and the young plants they give birth to are endowed with active growth. Three weeks after sowing, the plants are already Om, 10 in height and have four to five leaves. At this point, they are uprooted and transplanted either onto the same bed, or onto a similar bed built from scratch. Transplanting should be done at Om, 10 in all directions, i.e. at a rate of around 200 per frame. Care should be taken when planting to press the young plant down to the cotyledons, which shortens its height a little and increases its vigor by making it take on adventitious roots along the entire length of the buried part. As soon as the tomatoes have recovered, which can be after five or six days, if you have taken care to water them and cover the frame with a mat on the first day, you should take advantage of every day of good weather to give them some air by lifting the frames. It often happens that, either because the frames have not been lifted often enough, or because the bed has been too warm, the tomato vines over-extend themselves and, after a short time, come to rest against the glass, before the time has come to expose them to the open air. This inconvenience can be avoided a " Fig. 112. - Young tomato plant. by uprooting them all, and replanting them in the same place, sinking them deeper. In this way, as well as being shortened, the plant is delayed in its growth, and will now be able to wait without inconvenience for the moment when it is time to set out. Tomatoes (fig. 112) can be planted in the open air, before the spring frosts have passed, as they are very sensitive to the slightest drop in temperature below zero. In the Paris climate, this planting is done around May 15th. It's best to choose a site with warm exposure; a hillside sheltered by a wall or building is particularly suitable. For large-scale production, tomatoes are planted in full squares, but always in a south-facing position. Tomatoes thrive in soil rich in fresh fertilizer; planting is often done in potting soil, and plants grown in this way develop rapidly. Tomatoes are planted in rows 80 cm apart, with rows spaced 50 cm apart. Tomatoes should be planted right up to the first leaves, to increase the production of adventitious roots, and a small basin should be left around the base to receive water for watering. These plants are very water-hungry, and it's a good idea to line the small basin at the base with mulch and water it as soon as the plants are planted. Pruning. - If tomatoes were left to their own devices, the branches would branch excessively, and most of the flowers produced would drop off without bearing fruit. These would not become abundant until very late in the autumn, and would not have time to ripen before the frosts. From these considerations it follows that it is absolutely necessary to prune these plants, which, by reducing their vigor and concentrating vegetation on the first inflorescences, will force them to develop well and bear fruit early. Pruning is therefore essential, as experience has shown time and again. There are several systems for carrying out this operation; we will indicate two of the most commonly used: Shortly before planting, often 77 7 2 5 2 2 2 - M FO Fig. 113. - Tomato plant fitted with a stake. before this operation, a bunch of flowers appears on young tomato plants, which are about Om.25 high at the time, at the end of the main stem. In the axils of the leaves below this inflorescence are buds which, if left to develop, will soon grow so large that they will absorb all the plant's sap, and this first inflorescence will either abort completely, or in any case give only one or two fruits. The most common pruning method consists in cutting off this first inflorescence, then selecting four of the most vigorous lateral branches, and allowing each to produce two or three bunches of flowers. Some growers prefer to keep the first inflorescence at the end of the stem; but in this case, they only use two side branches, and obtain a slightly earlier, but less abundant product. Whichever system is used, care must be taken to ensure that each branch does not branch out, and to achieve this it becomes necessary to remove all lateral branches as they develop; this is the only way to obtain fruit from preserved inflorescences. Since tomatoes are sarmentous plants, it's impossible to leave them to their own devices, otherwise the branches would drag along the ground and the fruit wouldn't ripen. Market gardeners provide each plant with a stile, against which they tie all the branches (fig. 113). This method of support can be replaced by stakes which are driven in along the lines, four meters apart, and to which two lines of wire are attached by any method. The branches are then attached to the stakes with strands of straw. When the fruit begins to turn red, which happens at the beginning of July, we remove the leaves that conceal them, so that, exposed to direct sunlight, they ripen more quickly. At the end of the season, we remove all the leaves, which hastens the ripening of the last fruit. If the first frosts arrive before all the tomatoes are ripe, we pick them as they are, and put them under a frame, on a bed of straw, so that they finish ripening. Harvesting usually begins around July and lasts until the cold season. Around Montlhéry and Lieusaint, there are very large tomato crops, all of which are shipped to Paris. On average, one plant yields three kilograms of fruit, or 750 kilograms per acre. Wholesale prices range from 15 francs to 25 francs per 100 kilograms, when these products are sold at the end of summer and in autumn; prices for early produce are, as we shall see, much higher. Cultivation in southern France. - In the south of France, and more particularly in Algeria and southern Spain, tomatoes are grown on a very large scale, to be shipped as early produce to Paris, England and the northern European states. We are indebted to Mr. Congiu, an agricultural engineer, for the following information on crops grown on an area he estimates at over 500 hectares in the province of Malaga. These data are of great interest, as tomato production in southern Spain is similar to that in Algeria. The fertile plains of Tunisia would be an advantage. In Spain, tomatoes are sown in nurseries at the beginning of September. A month or so after sowing, they are planted on land facing south, with no need for irrigation. Tomato rows are spaced Om, 80 apart, with Om, 50 between rows, equivalent to planting 25,000 tomatoes per hectare. If the weather is wet, we don't water; if, on the contrary, it's very dry, we give each plant a little water with the watering can, when planting, to encourage recovery. We don't prune these tomatoes, and more often than not we don't even give them stakes, leaving them to produce long branches that drag on the ground. We believe it would be worthwhile to change this state of affairs and adopt the cultivation practices used in the Paris area. The result would be earlier yields, and the very high price this commodity fetches would more than compensate for the additional costs involved. The reason for these reflections is that yields Fig. 114. - Tomato packaging. in these regions, which are so favorable to tomato cultivation, are only 25 to 30,000 kilograms per hectare, or about one kilogram per plant, whereas in France this yield is double or even triple. Harvesting begins towards the end of December, and continues until April and May. Prices vary greatly from year to year and from period to period; at the start of the season, for example, they can reach Ifr 80 per kilogram, but this is a maximum that is not always reached and, in any case, does not last long. Prices soon fall to Ofr, 50 per kilogram, and finally to 0fr, 20. These figures clearly show that it would be in your interest to hasten the harvest of the product by careful pruning. Nevertheless, as we can see, this crop is extremely profitable. Most of the tomatoes produced in Spain are shipped to France, while the rest are consumed in Madrid and other major cities in the country of production. These fruits are shipped in white wicker baskets lined with paper (fig. 114). Forced cultivation. - The cultivation of early tomatoes is becoming less important every year, due to competition from southern countries. However, in the countryside, where communications with major centers are difficult, it can be useful to engage in this early production, if only for personal use. Tomatoes can be sown as early as January, on a warm layer; when the plant has developed sufficiently, it is transplanted to a second layer. In March, they can be planted out permanently on a bed under a frame, at a rate of nine plants per panel. It is important to use only dwarf varieties for this production, and to raise the boxes as the plant grows and touches the glass. Pruning consists in keeping only two branches with two bunches each and removing all the rest. The retained branches are fixed to gaulettes, which are set up parallel to the glass, supported by stakes driven into the soil of the bed. Care must be taken to provide air whenever the temperature permits, especially at flowering time, as failure to do so could result in the flowers remaining infertile. A system has been proposed (1) that gives faster results and higher yields. After sowing and transplanting the tomatoes, as described above, they are planted at Ou, 25 in all directions, i.e. at a rate of thirty per frame. Pruning is carried out by removing all the lateral branches; the plant is thus reduced to a stem bearing a small number of leaves and ending in an inflorescence which, as a result of the removal of all the branches, increases so much that it is often necessary to prune it itself, to hasten the ripening of the first fruits formed. You can expect a harvest of six to eight tomatoes per plant, ripening in May and June. Seed carriers. - For seeds, always choose the largest, healthiest and best-formed fruits. They should be left to ripen completely. To extract the seed, crush the tomatoes in water, then throw the whole thing on a sieve to separate the seeds, which should be left to dry in the shade. Parasitic disease. - Tomatoes are attacked by a parasitic fungus which, towards the end of summer in wet years, wreaks considerable havoc. This disease is the same as that of the potato; it is due to Phytophthora infestans, (1) M. Berthault, Bul. de la Soc. Cent. d'Hort., A. 1884. DYBOWSRI. - Culture, 2nd ed. 30 24. As in the case of potatoes, it is now easy to get rid of this disease by applying the copper salt treatment used against vine diseases. It is to Mr. Prillieux, the learned professor at the Institut Agronomique, that we owe the propagation of this method, indicated by Mr. Jouet, which gives absolutely reliable results. END TINi FOREWORD............ Garlic.................... Uses.............. Cultivation.............. Yields........ Diseases and insect pests.......... Agaric. Voy. Mushroom 1 3 9 11 11 of layers........ 110 Artichoke............... Uses............. Varieties............ Cultivation.............. Sowing.............. Ridging...... ... .. Carnation........ Planting,.......... Second year of cultivation............ Growing costs..... Yields......... Seedstock..... ... Disease.............. Asparagus... ............. Uses.............. Varieties.............. Sowing.............. Choice of plant...... Soil selection........ Soil preparation... Fertilization............. Planting........... Second year of cultivation.......... 12 12 13 13 15 17 19 21 23 24 26 27 28 29 30 30 31 34 35 36 36 37 40 Pages. Staking..... Pinching.......... Third year of cultivation........... Ridging.............. Harvesting... ........... Bundling....... Autumn debudding. Fourth year of cultivation........... Yields...... . Forced cultivation on site.............. Forcing of old claws............. Harvesting seeds. Insect pests.... Eggplant............ . Uses............... Varieties............. Growing in the Paris climate........... Growing in the South of France. Growing costs..... Yields......... Harvesting seeds... Batate Voy. Potato.. 41 42 43 44 45 40 47 47 48 51 55 55 56 57 57 57 59 62 64 64 65 376 Chard. Voy. Pear... 408 Beetroot............... Uses.............. Varieties......... ... Open-air cultivation... Growing on a bed... Growing for seed... 66 66 67 68 69 71 Pages. Cardoon................. Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation.............. Bleaching......... Selling price........ Cultivation for seed. Carrot............. . .. Uses............... Varieties............. Cultivation in open fields. Harvest.............. Thermosiphon cultivation.............. Cultivation on bed... Cultivation for seed. Insect pests.... Celery................... Ribbed celery.......... Varieties.... . . .. . . . . . Uses............... Cultivation... ...... . . .. Bleaching......... Cultivation for seed. 72 72 73 73 77 79 79 81 82 82 83 87 89 99 90 91 92 93 93 95 95 97 99 Celeriac............ 100 Varieties......... . . .. Uses............ . Cultivation.............. Crop for seed. Diseases............ Chervil................. Varieties . . . . . . . . . .. Uses.............. Cultivation.............. Seed harvest... Tuberous chervil....... Uses............. Cultivation............. 100 100 100 103 103 104 105 105 105 106 107 107 107 Mushroom. 110 Cultivation in quarries. Choice of manure...... Manure preparation Manure construction113 116 117 Pages. Larding............. 121 Goptage............. Harvesting.............. Yield.......... Growing costs... . Cellar culture...... Growing in the open air. White wine production. Varieties............. Use of millstone manure......... Animal and insect pests........... Plant parasites... Chicory endive......... les................ 119 Chicory escarole........ Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation............. Seed production............. Curly endive......... Uses.............. Varieties............. In-ground cultivation. Forced cultivation....... Cultivation for seed. Insect pests.... 122 123 125 125 127 128 129 131 131 132 131 136 136 137 137 138 141 141 141 141 142 145 146 147 Wild chicory....... 148 Uses............... Varieties............. Production of Capuchin Beard........ Sowing............... Hoeing.... ..... ... Uprooting........... Drilling............. Preparation for sale... . .... ...... Product per hectare... Expenditure required..... Growing profits. Growing chicory for cutting........... Witloof chicory cultivation............ Cultivation on soil... 148 148 150 150 150 151 152 151 154 155 155 156 157 158 Pages. Cabbage.................... 160 Variety classification table.. 163 Cabbage............ 164 Uses.............. Spring cabbage crops......... Sowing........... .... Nursery transplanting.............. Setting out........ Harvesting.............. Summer and autumn cabbage cultivation...... Autumn and winter cabbage cultivation... Growing sauerkraut cabbage....... Sowing............... Soil preparation... Harvesting and selling..... Yield.......... Making sauerkraut... . . . . . ..... Con servation of cabbages............. Growing cabbages for seed. Growing for seed in gardens.... Large-scale cultivation for seed............. Brussels sprouts...... Uses.............. Growing,............. Growing for seed... Green cabbage........... Kohlrabi........... Kohlrabi.......... Cauliflower........... Uses.............. Field-grown. Spring crop. Summer cultivation......... Autumn cultivation... Chambour cultivation168 168 169 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 175 176 177 178 180 181 182 184 186 186 187 188 188 189 190 191 193 193 194 197 198 cy................. 198 Pages. Forced cultivation....... Cultivation for seed. Cabbage and broccoli......... Uses.............. Varieties............. Grown in the Bay of Mont Saint-Michel. Cultivation around Paris........... Insect pests and parasites.......... Chou-marin Voy. Crambé........... 202 204 205 206 206 207 208 210 234 Cucumber............. 212 Uses.............. Varieties............. Open-ground cultivation. Cultivation on soil. Enemies............ 213 213 214 217 220 Squash................222 Uses.............. Varieties related to Cucurbita maxima.............. Varieties related to Cucurbita pepo. Varieties related to Cucurbita moschata.............. Cultivation.............. Crosnes Voy. Cucumber. Crambé................. Uses......,........ Sowing........ . . . . . . .. Multiplication by cuttings,... . . . . . . . . . Installation........ Spreading out.......... Forced cultivation....... Yield.......... Watercress..... Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation.............. 222 223 225 227 228 253 234 234 234 235 236 236 236 238 239 239 240 241 Water choice....... 241 Watercress pit...... 242 Pages. Multiplication. . . .. 245 Harvest.............. 246 Cresson alénois......... Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation.............. Sweet. Voy. Lamb's lettuce. Shallot................ Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation.............. Purslane.................. History........... Uses............. Cultivation.............. Spinach....... ......... Uses............. Varieties.... ........ Cultivation......... .... Large-scale cultivation.... Seedstocks........ Beans.................... Uses.............. Varieties............. Growing in the Paris climate........... Cultivation in the South of France. Strawberry... ............. Uses.............. Small strawberries...... . Varieties...... ... .. Sowing..... ......... Harvest.............. Packing.......... Harvesting the seed. Large-fruited strawberries. Varieties............. Open-air cultivation. Forced cultivation....... Animals and insect pests.......... 248 249 249 249 320 250 250 251 251 253 253 253 254 256 257 257 258 260 261 263 264 264 265 266 268 268 268 268 269 272 273 274 274 274 276 278 281 Beans................. 282 Uses.............. 284 Pages. Dwarf beans with parchment............ 284 Dwarf beans without parchment......... String beans with parchment......... String beans without parchment........ Paris climate cultivation........... Southern cultivation. Yields......... Forced cultivation....... Seed harvest. 287 287 288 289 291 293 293 295 Iqname....... ......... 296 Uses.............. Cultivation.............. Lettuce............... . 297 297 302 Deciduous lettuces........ 303 Spring varieties. Autumn varieties. Winter varieties..... Uses.............. Open-air cultivation. Forced cultivation....... 303 304 305 306 306 310 Romaine Lettuce........ 312 Uses.............. Varieties............. Open air cultivation. Forced cultivation.... .. Cultivation for seed. Diseases and pests.......... Lamb's lettuce.................. Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation.............. Seeds. ........... Melon................... Cantaloupe melons...... Embroidered melons.......... Cultivation.............. Cultivation on bed... Setting up........ Fruit selection..... 312 313 315 317 317 320 321 321 321 321 326 328 330 321 332 335 337 Pages. Harvesting.............. 338 Second-season cultivation............. Growing in the Midi. Choice of rootstock. Animal and plant parasites.......... Turnip................... Uses.............. Varieties............. Open-ground cultivation. Forced cultivation....... Cultivation for seed. Insect pests.... Onion.................. Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation of white onions............. Harvesting products. Cultivation of coloured onions......... Harvesting and storage..... . . . . . . .

.. . Yield and cultivation costs............ Cultivation for seed . Diseases and insects 338 339 310 340 342 pests.......... 343 343 346 349 352 353 354 354 356 358 358 362 364 366 367 Sorrel.................. 368 Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation......... . . . Forced cultivation....... Seed stock......... Insect pests.... Parsnip........... Uses.............. Varieties............. Crop.............. 369 369 369 371 372 372 373 373 373 374 Potato................... 376 Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation in climate 317 317 Pages. Cultivation in Spain and Algeria......... Growing costs and yield......... Parsley................... Uses.............. Varieties........ .... Cultivation............. 382 384 386 386 387 388 Pepper.................. 391 Uses.............. Varieties............ Growing in the Paris climate........... Cultivation in the Midi. Harvesting seeds. Dandelion................ Uses............. Varieties............. Cultivation.............. Harvest products. Seed harvesting. 391 392 394 394 394 395 395 395 396 397 397 Leek................. 398 Uses.............. Varieties............. Sowing....... ....... Soil selection......... Planting........ Harvesting.............. Yields and costs 398 399 399 400 400 401 of cultivation......... 402 Short leek cultivation.............. 403 Vertus plain cultivation......... 405 Layer cultivation... Seed cultivation... Insect pests... 405 406 407 Poirée.................. 408 Usages.............. 408 Varieties............. 408 Cultivation.............. 409 Seed production............. 410 de Paris........... 378 1Pois...................... 411 Pages. Uses.............. 412 Varieties..... . . . . . .. Shelled peas....... Snow peas..... Paris climate........... Southern cultivation. Cultivation for seeds. Enemies............ Potatoes....... Uses.............. Varieties............. Cultivation............. Growing in the Paris climate........... Grown in Roscoff... Southern cultivation... Growing on a bed... Diseases............. Pumpkin. See. Squash. Radish................... Uses.............. Varieties............. Growing Radishes every month...... Winter Radish cultivation............ Cultivation for seeds. Enemies............. Horseradish................. 412 413 414 416 418 419 420 420 422 422 423 426 428 430 431 222 432 434 434 436 437 437 438 Uses............. 438 Multiplication....... 439 Choice of soil..... 4391 Pages. Uprooting........... Places where this crop is grown...... Yield.......... Conservation........ Rapunzel................ Uses.............. Cultivation.............. Seeds..... ........ Roman. Voy. Lettuce441 441 442 442 443 443 443 445 Romaine........... 312 Scarole. See also Chicory- Scarole............ 136 Scorsonère............. 440 Usage...... ........ Cultivation.............. Production de la grai1e............. . . . 446 446 450 Salsify.................. 451 Uses.............. Crop............. 451 152 Tomato.................. 454 Uses.............. Varieties............. Crop....... . . . . ... Size................ Southern cultivation........... Forced cultivation....... Seed carriers........ 455 455 457 459 462 464 465 Parasitic diseases. 465 ..: END OF CONTENTS 8445-94. - CORBEIL. Imprimerie Ép. Catré, 7 " . - . *- . . .. . .- AmpaeTu-te 11 Traité de culture fruitière, commerciale et bourgeoise, by M. Ch. BALTET, horticulturist in Troyes. 3rd edition. 1 vol. in-18 with 350 figures........................... 6 fr. " L'art de greffer les arbres, arbrisseaux et arbustes fruitiers, forestiers, etc. par M. Ch. BALTET, horticulteur à Troyes. 5me édition entièrement revue et augmentée, comprenant notamment-la restauration des arbres et le Rétablissement de la vigne par la greffe. 1 volume in-12, with 192 figures... .................................4 fr. Instruction élémentaire sur la conduite des arbres fruitiers, Greffe-taille. Restoration of trees badly pruned or exhausted by old age. Cultivation. Récolte et conservation des fruits. par A. DU BREUIL, professeur d'arboriculture de la ville de Paris, 13me édition 1 vol. in-18 avec 207 fig........ 2 fr. 50 Cours complet de viticulture par G. FOEx, directeur de l'école d'agriculture de Montpellier. 3rd revised and enlarged edition. 1 vol. in-8° with 6 chromo maps and 573 figures in the text....................... 18 fr. " Traité de chimie agricole, by P. P. DEHÉRaIN, member of the Institut, professor at the Muséum d'histoire naturelle and the École d'agriculture de Grignon. Plant development. Topsoil. Amendments and fertilizers. 1 vol. in-8° with figures in the text....................... 16 fr. " Notions de chimie agricole, by Th. SCHLOESING, fils, ingénieur des manufactures de l'État. Petit in-8° de l'Encyclopédie scientifique des Aide Mémoire.............. 2 fr. 50 Le livre de la ferme et des maisons de campagne, published by a group of agronomists under the direction of M. P. JoiGNEAUX. New, completely revised edition. 2 vol. gr. in-8° with 1829 figures in the text........... 32 fr. " Code pratique des lois rurales, suivi d'un répertoire analytique par M. Alfred Paisanr, président du tribunal civil de Versailles et M. Henri Pibancer, avocat à la cour d'Appel de Paris. 1 vol. small in-8° bound in English cloth..... 3 fr. " 8445-94. - CORREU Imprimerie CuETÉ