primary / by ). Bidault,.... 1864. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the BnF collections. Their reuse falls within the scope of the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: -The non-commercial reuse of this content or in the context of an academic or scientific publication is free of charge, provided that the legislation in force is respected, and in particular that the source of the content is mentioned as follows: "Source gallica.bnf.fr /Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF ". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates income: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the general code of public property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are -reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. Reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 7/ To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation. commercialeobnf.fl. Source gallica.bnf.fr! Blbliothèque natlonale de Franc G MINRCT 2 - - 4714 -- - 1 "IICOLIRCTLA DANS LES ÉCOLES PRIMAIRES IVRACE RÉDIGÉ CONFORMÉMENT AUX PROCRAMMMIES OFFICIELS . B PAR DAULT INSPECTEUR DE L'INSTRUCTION PRIMAIRE A GANNAT OU 4 6 LIBRAIRES-ÉDITEURS 18, RUE DES ÉCOLES NEAR DU MUSÉE DE CLUNY ET DE LA SORRONNE) G RMYAMIOMialb Iumbneen coas lo omimè, aimuto at um lon nd mu!ve l el-at loy rumad e mMeM.MIN a uu mabaemmm NEUUINII METNU muatí mei mon sull ARMAMAMNM AE REAE . . . nd nid Eu él al loy bitraG a al U mid ° Qua uemolun suun O NAMATALNATEIEE AITIET TNOA OL MSRION OESIN A MUAIOD MOROT I NOMIRe AUAVHOU HOREIVA D ROINMIRURT ENON Mme ael et mulamim dl u DAd.- voy be voluo buvruo AOMII A'O SETeNAIE'] NIU MOG SLEN= oudmamola commlo? El " Moulmalloo sl ad AOIE ENMDAI NO MMETMODEST MImemala RTICULTUR a RAIeI mmetnme e Mmommodb muigàl sl at mitavado AmiEHV.e "M. . n mad DANS MIA NI mlnnome MO G LES ÉCOLES PRIMAIRES "UII DOTE EL-G' ur ! mlmmomrges le epvs- dobilà e .. Im mnd imee G mme nM de IIMiE .med (KI. IRSUS SIIIMOHES'L Emm AACON RI COLOD AI "MU seniqe suta MOUALA altevIeH AVAT I Taq monman ob emmtormare . Mmevtot imp malla semmetmme mem . . mo nT ai lo I m OE I Mfelt.t . M et mretò cummiatiledi metons qmaat." n D OUANOTA EEMIN AL MAUIeVAA E mtoime Mtou eat ponnom . et m m--e el at Mos ! .seasi . G D D VJdo * Chimie appliquée à l'agriculture, précis des leçons professées depuis 1852 jusqu'à 1862, sur différents sujets d'agriculture, par M. F. MaLacuTI, membre correspondant de l'Institut de France, ofécier de la Légion d'honneur, doyen et professeur de chimie générale et agricole à la Faculté des sciences de Rennes. 3 fine vol. in-18 jesus. Price, br. ... ... ... ... ... . 10 " Ouvrage honoré de la souscription de S. Erc. le ministre de l'instruction publique pour les bibliothèques scolaires. Petit cours de chimie agricole, à l'usage des écoles primaires, by M. MataGUTI. 1 vol. in-18, fig. Price, br.. . . ............. ... 1 25 Hardback... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 40 Oavrage autorisé par S. Exc. M. le ministre de l'instruction publique. Chimie agricole, by M. H. FAnRE, former student at the École normale primaire de Vaucluse, Doctor of Science, chemistry teacher at the Lycée impérial and the municipal schools of Avignon. New edition; 1 vol. in-12. Pr., ca t. 1 20 Authorized by S. Exc. M. le ministre de l'instruction publique and recommended by Mgr larchevêque d'Avignon (From the collection "La Science élémentaire. ") Éléments d'agriculture, ou Leçons d'agriculture appliquées au département d'Ille-et-Vilaine et à quelques départements voisins, faites aux élèves de l'agriculture de Rennes et à ceux de l'école normale, par J. Bopix, directeur de l'école d'agriculture de Rennes, vice-président de la Société d'agriculture d'Illeet-Vilaine, chevalier de la Légion d'honneur. 3rd edition; 1 vol. in-12, figures Price, br. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 175 Crowned work by the Société impériale et centrale d'agriculture, and au orisé par l'Universi é. La Culture et la vie des champs, by J. Bopix. 1 vol. in-12. Pr.,br.. 1 " Herbier agricole, ou Liste des plantes les plus communes, by M. J. Bopix. 2nd edition, revised and enlarged; 1 vol. in-18 with 110 figures interspersed in the text. Price, cart. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " 80 Lectures et promenades agricoles, pour les enfants des écoles primaires, by M. J. BoDIN. 2nd ed. ; 1 vol. in-18. Price, cart...... . . . . . " 60 Résumé d'agriculture pratique par demandes et réponses, ou Questionnaire agricole pour les écoles primaires, rédigé d'après le vœu de la Société d'agriculture de Rennes, par M. J. BoUIN. New edition; 1 vol. in-18. Price, cart... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ." 70 Conseils aux jeunes filles qui doivent devenir fermières, by M. J. Bouin. 1 vol. in-18. Price, cart. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " 70 L'Agriculture enseignée par la Grammaire, à l'usage des écoles rurales, by M. JEAN, former schoolteacher, pupil of M. J. Bolin. 1 vol. in-12. Price, hardback... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ." 75 Les Veillées de la ferme du Tourne-Bride, ou Entretiens sur l'agriculture, l'exploitation des produits agricoles et l'arboriculture, by M. P. J. de VARENNES. 1 vol. in-12, with engravings interspersed in the text. Price, hardback. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 1 05 Work honored by the subscription of S. Exc. M. le miuistre de l'instruction publique and that of S. Exc. M. le ministre de l'agriculture et du commerce. Le Livre de la ferme et des maisons de campagne, by a group of agronomists, under the direction of M. P. Joicneaux, 2 fort vol. large in-8 jésus, printed on two columns, with figures interspersed in the text. Price, br. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 52" PARIS. IMP. SIMON RACON ET COMR, RUE D'ERFURTHI, 1. ""oilil ruu LES ÉCOLES PRIMAIRES OUURAGE RÉDIGÉ CONFORMÉMENT AUX PROCRAMMES OFFICIRLS MSLJ. PAR IDAULT HNSRECZTERRE VINCTRECTION PRIMAIRE A CANXAT A F. TANDOU ET CE, LIBRAIRES-ÉDITEURS 78, RUE DES ÉCOLES 1864 All our editions bear our signature. D 0a r 2 I11 - 2 A ministerial decree dated July 31, 1851 prescribes the teaching of agriculture and horticulture in elementary school. We were the first to applaud this welcome innovation, because it should, in time, lead rural populations out of the deplorable routine that still directs them in the cultivation of their fields and gardens. Our student teachers, trained in the right methods, according to the program adopted for agricultural and horticultural education, should be, as soon as they are placed in the communes, the intermediaries through whom sound ideas and good practices will spread throughout the countryside. In addition, they will greatly contribute to the success of the farm-schools which are tending to multiply more and more, under the happy impetus of the government, by preparing, for these useful establishments, pupils or apprentices who are intelligent and accustomed to work. In horticulture, their action should be even more direct, because they can all, or almost all, combine example with precept. But if they are to achieve such a desirable goal, they must HORT. be encouraged, even urged, by their immediate superiors to turn their gardens into model gardens in which their pupils can apply the precepts they learn in class, and from which their neighbors can draw useful lessons. It is therefore the duty of all those entrusted with the supervision of schools to propagate, with all their might, a taste for the horticultural art. A well-cultivated garden will increase the modest affluence of the teacher; it will provide useful recreation and an innocent means of influence. The decree we have just mentioned is already twelve years old, and one might think that schoolteachers, stimulated by several ministerial circulars, and encouraged by the departmental authorities and by the various horticultural societies, have cultivated their gardens with taste and put into practice the excellent lessons that are part of the normal courses. Unfortunately, this is not the case for the great majority of them, and most have not responded in this respect to the care with which they have been treated. If there are exceptions, they are few and far between. In fact, when it comes to gardening and arboriculture in particular, nothing is more neglected, and consequently less productive, than the gardens of our rural schoolteachers. If a few vegetables are harvested, they are rarely the object of a judicious choice. Cabbages, lettuce, carrots, beans, etc. are sown at random, without any idea that, depending on the nature of the soil, the needs of the household and the time of sowing, there is a choice to be made from the many vegetable species or varieties, the existence of which we don't even seem to suspect. Fruit trees are not the object of more intelligent care; however, now that railroads criss-cross the whole of France, and can take the finest produce from gardens and orchards to the first markets, vegetables and fruit can become a very important branch of rural industry. Anjou, Touraine, Normandy and Burgundy are making substantial profits from their fruit and preserves, to which everyone with intelligence and care has the right to aspire. The planting of trees in teachers' gardens is often poorly understood; the grafting, selection and care of fruit species are left to the crudest routine. Plants are planted haphazardly, with no concern for the quality and nature of the fruit, let alone espaliers or trellises; the most favorably exposed walls remain bare. In this respect, therefore, there is a whole revolution to be wrought in the habits of our schoolteachers; and it would not be the least good thing for the officials responsible for inspecting schools to force teachers, if not to become perfect gardeners, at least to become men capable of giving rural horticulture a better and more profitable direction. Horticulture in elementary school must be considered from two angles: it concerns both the well-being of the teachers and the prosperity of the schools themselves. A teacher can only do so much good in a commune if he or she stays there for a long time. When the head of a school has raised several generations in the holy practices of religion, in the wise teachings of morality and virtue, and in the sound notions of duty, he is a kind of patriarch in his commune, to whom people go to confide their sorrows and pains, and whom they consult in their embarrassments and in the direction of their difficult affairs; he exerts an influence all the more sure as he does not seek it, an influence which his upright sense and long experience always turn to the advantage of the general good. The most important thing, therefore, is to attach teachers to the communities in which they are placed, right from the start of their teaching career; and in our opinion, the best way to achieve this is to attach them to the soil. When a teacher is in possession of a garden he has created, in which he has planted trees that he has raised and directed in every direction, he will become attached to his land, where he will see his young plants take on, under his direction, all the most varied forms, and lavish their excellent produce on him every year, thanks to his intelligent care. His greatest fear will be to see himself forced to abandon a garden which will be his work, and in which he will have found his sweetest pleasures; he will therefore make every effort to ensure that a change does not disturb the peaceful life he has made for himself; he will neglect none of the duties of his profession, and his zeal and activity can be counted on; for he will have become what we call a good teacher. As proof of what we have just said here, we need only recount what we achieved in a district where we served for six years as inspectors of primary education. When we arrived in the arrondissement of D*, we found almost all the school gardens in a deplorable state. They were either planted with wheat, potatoes and a few rare vegetables, or used as playgrounds for the children. This almost general neglect struck us all the more, as we found everywhere soil admirably suited to market gardening and arboriculture. We began by advising the teachers to return the pieces of land attached to the schoolhouses to their true purpose. A few responded to our invitation, but they were few and far between. Most replied: "What's the point of making gardens and planting them, if we're changed, our time and effort will be wasted? But we'd reply: "As we're determined that the gardens of the res" sort should all be in good condition, if you leave a garden "well cultivated, you'll find, in your new post," one no less well tended!" Finally realizing that our friendly advice wasn't achieving all the results we wanted, we took an energetic stand, with the consent of M. l'inspecteur d'académie. At a meeting of all the teachers in the district, we formally declared that anyone who, in future, did not give his garden all the care it required, and did not make all the improvements in its cultivation of which it was susceptible, would be proposed for dispatch to a post without a garden. This threat had the best possible effect, and by the following year, all the grounds under the schoolhouses were stocked with all the vegetables needed for household consumption. It was already a conquest. But we didn't stop there: we designated the vegetable species that were important for everyone to cultivate, we urged them all to sow asparagus pits, and we required them to plant wild plants for grafting, telling them what they had to do to properly manage the young fruit trees they were raising. Today we can say that, thanks to the encouragement given to teachers by the Horticultural Society of De*, which has taken on board our views and looks to teachers as its intermediaries in bringing horticultural progress to the countryside, thanks to the all-powerful support we have found in M. the Prefect of Je*, who distributes horticultural and agricultural treatises to schoolteachers every year, for a fairly substantial sum, at the suggestion of the primary inspectors, the goal we set ourselves has been achieved in all the communes of the arrondissement, as we shall see from the details that follow. All our teachers now have a real garden, in which they harvest the finest and best-chosen vegetables. Each garden is planted with tastefully trained fruit trees that are beginning to bear fruit. And that's not all. Following in the footsteps of the schoolteachers, their neighboring landowners have taken a liking to arboriculture, and the countryside is beginning to be populated with fruit trees. In the arrondissement of D**, there are two cantons whose soil, formed by alluvial deposits, is wonderfully suited to all kinds of cultivation, but in which the inhabitants have never wanted to plant trees around their houses, under the ridiculous pretext that trees would block their view of their fields. The advice and above all the example of our teachers have transformed these two cantons; trees are now being planted and our teachers are directing their education. Many of our teachers have grafted several hundred trees over the last four years on various landowners' estates: one alone has grafted 1,800 trees in three years. His well-understood cultivation and zeal for the propagation of arboriculture and floriculture earned him a vermeil medal at the L'** exhibition. Thus, in accordance with the wishes of the higher administration, these modest civil servants contribute with all their efforts, through their advice, their example and their personal work, to the progress of the horticultural art. What's more, we've achieved another very valuable result: all the teachers in the district entrusted to us are no longer asking for changes or promotions, because their gardens are attractive enough to keep them in the communes where they work. From this we conclude that the surest way to fix a teacher in a locality, and to obtain from him the regular fulfillment of all his duties, is to attach him to the soil, by obliging him to find all his relaxation in his garden. It is therefore to this most important aspect of their mission that we call the full attention of competent men; and we cannot urge our colleagues, the primary school inspectors, too strongly to never allow themselves to be discouraged by the obstacles and difficulties they encounter when they set out to persuade their subordinates to overcome their general reluctance to work on the land. Schoolteachers are men of good sense, and when they have been shown all the advantages of the recommendations made to them, they come to understand that what is required of them is all in their interest. If persuasive means don't work, don't shy away from coercion. We never reproach a leader for the pleasures he brings us, even in spite of ourselves. But apart from the direct action that primary inspectors can exert on their subordinates to force them to put into practice the teachings they have received in teacher training colleges, we think it would also be useful to appeal to emulation. Emulation is what gives birth and perfects. For more than sixty years since exhibitions for the arts, industry and agriculture were instituted in France, what progress has been made in all fields! With each new exhibition, artists, workers and farmers, comparing their works or products with those of their rivals, have been driven by the desire to equal, even surpass their victors. Hence the superiority of the next exhibition over the one that preceded it. It was only later that French horticulture felt the need to enter the fray. Its beginnings were laborious with rivals such as the Belgians and the Dutch; but by dint of perseverance our horticulturists soon made up for lost time, and their success exceeded all expectations. Each new exhibition has seen the emergence of true artists who force nature to satisfy their every desire and bend to their every whim. Soon, horticultural societies were springing up everywhere, and each département had its own special exhibition to which everyone was invited, especially schoolteachers, because, working for progress in the general interest, the various societies understood from the outset that it was through schoolteachers that improvements must spread everywhere. It is easy to understand that, with the little time they have at their disposal, outside the duties of their state, with resources as limited as their own in terms of land and equipment, schoolteachers do not have the pretension of competing on the same rank, either with gardeners whose profession is horticulture, or with amateurs who have time and a lot of money at their disposal to cultivate an art which is the charm of their lives. So, while we pay tribute to the benevolence shown to exhibiting teachers by the judges of public competitions, we feel that horticultural society exhibitions only half fulfill the goal we would like to achieve. The same would not be true if, every two or three years, a general exhibition of the products of our school gardens were held in the capital of each département. In a number of départements, some of the district's primary teachers are brought together every year to attend educational conferences held at teacher training colleges. Couldn't we take advantage of this meeting, which always takes place in September, the most favorable month of the year for fruit and vegetable exhibitions, to hold a general exhibition of their produce at no cost to the teachers? There, our teachers would be in the presence of their equals; they could compare the results of their care with what would have been obtained by the efforts of their colleagues who, better versed in the horticultural art, were superior to them; they would confer among themselves, share their procedures, and soon there would be established among all the teachers of the same department an emulation that would produce the best effects. In this way, all the consequences of the decree of July 31, 1852 would be realized. But, as we have already said, schoolteachers need to be guided in their cultivation; on their own, they would produce only partial results, which would be powerless to achieve the general progress of horticulture in the countryside. It is with this in mind that we have written this little treatise entitled : Horticulture in elementary school, because it is specially designed for primary school teachers, although we have arranged it in such a way that it can be used for the management of rural gardens, which are almost all in the same conditions as those in school houses. While we pay tribute to the merits of the many works we have on horticulture, we believe that a book, if it is to become popular, must not resemble all those overly voluminous treatises whose aim is rather to make science for people of the art, than to give elements for practitioners. We would add to all that we have just said 1. that schoolteachers, by propagating a taste for agriculture and horticulture, will render immense services to their country if they can, if not entirely stop, then at least reduce the migration of the countryside to the big cities. Iammna - G AF NEIBIYAN SOMARTIOIE IMOIMI AHT UR mmammme m AA MIIROmARAE MORRRUE MEETRIIMETI AuNA D D RNRN MMIUR D muuve ebon onp golimmni' elto ene u o amoh mm OUILAHIIREDNEETI HDD NA D MERE OEU NHUINDHOO que Due a MAATENUOT NI E - mieté eux LE JARDIN DE L'INSTITUTEUR The land annexed to the school houses is intended mainly as a vegetable and fruit garden.fruit garden. The schoolteacher's first priority is to be useful rather than pleasurable. He will grow vegetables for household consumption, and raise fruit trees to make use of their produce, and to demonstrate to the people among whom he lives the benefits to be gained by choosing the right fruit species, and by carefully and intelligently managing the trees planted in his garden. Horticulture thus practised comprises two main divisions: market gardening and arboriculture. CHAPTER ONE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF GARDENING 1. Soil study. In order to give each plant the soil it needs, we need to learn about the soils on which we work and their various properties. 1° Strong earth, with a clay base, is generally suitable for vegetable plants; it is usually yellow and sometimes gray: it is essential to mix it sufficiently with manure; 2° Soft, whitish clay earth is suitable for fruit trees; 3° Light, sandy earth is very good for bulbous plants; 4° Heather earth is used particularly in floriculture, and is generally well suited to all plants with weak, slender roots. These different soils can be modified and mixed in a number of ways, but it would be difficult to assign precise rules to these modifications. Practice is the best guide in this respect. 2. Ploughing. Ploughing comprises three operations: 1° ploughing proper, 2° ripping, 3° hoeing. 1° The purpose of plowing is: 1° to make the soil loose, loose, light and easy to penetrate by heat and humidity, the two great agents of vegetation, and to increase and maintain its fertility by putting underneath the upper parts of the soil that have been improved by the sun, and by bringing upwards the lower parts laden with salts that have precipitated there, to a depth at which the roots of plants rarely penetrate. 2° to destroy weeds by burying them, so that as they rot they provide new salts. Ploughing should be carried out at different times and in different ways, depending on the nature of the soil and the species of plants to be cultivated. Light, dry soils should be ploughed very deeply before winter, so that rain and snow can penetrate them much earlier and correct their lack of moisture. During the summer, they should only be ploughed when it rains, or if they have to be ploughed because of drought, they should be given abundant watering immediately, to bind all their parts together and make them less prone to evaporation of the little moisture they still contain. In this type of soil, which heats up easily, ploughing is less necessary to introduce heat than to allow rainwater and watering to pass through. On the contrary, strong, compact, cold and damp soils only need to be lightly ploughed towards the end of October, to straighten them out and kill weeds; but in spring, when the rainy season is over, and in summer, when the weather is driest, they must not be ploughed too deeply or too frequently, in order to break them up, divide them, let the heat penetrate and evaporate the moisture they contain too abundantly. In addition to large-scale ploughing, small-scale ploughing is often necessary to maintain the soil's loose surface, and prevent or counteract the cracks and fissures to which it is prone, and which allow the sun to penetrate to the roots of plants and trees. 2° Ripping. When taking possession of a plot of land previously used for other crops, to turn it into a vegetable garden, it is necessary, even essential, to rip it up. Ripping is nothing other than ploughing deeper than ordinary ploughing: the latter is done to a depth of Om 25 or Om 30, whereas ripping goes to Om 60. Om 80 and even 1 mềtre deep. When ripping, the worker must set aside the good soil from the surface without mixing it with the subsoil and without bringing the latter back on top. It is important that the lower layer is perfectly loosened and cleared of any stones, roots or pieces of wood that may be present. As these plant substances decompose, they become covered with underground fungi that often invade plant roots and cause them to perish. In addition to the spade, the gardener who is breaking up the soil must be equipped with a pick of the kind that earthworkers call a pick to attack the hard parts of the soil and to extract the large stones it contains. 3° Hoeing. Under this name, in gardening, we mean the superficial manners given with the help of the instrument called a hoe to the beds occupied by a more or less advanced crop, turning around the plants without disturbing them. If you hoe a bed in the vegetable garden that is more or less overgrown with weeds, this hoeing cleans the soil and at the same time produces the effect of weeding. This last operation involves hand-pulling the weeds that grow with the plants. It's an operation that needs to be carried out often, because nothing harms the garden like weeds, whose growth is always very rapid. 3. Fertilizing. When soil has been eroded by a series of productions, ploughing is insufficient to sustain and perpetuate its fertility; fertilizers must restore the salts it has been depleted of. Anything that the soil nourishes can become fertilizer. Plants, animal excrements and animals themselves, whether aquatic or terrestrial, can maintain or increase the earth's fertility when their parts, dissolved by corruption, mingle with the earth, or rather become earth, carrying back to its bosom and returning to it the salts and juices with which they were formed or nourished. Among the minerals themselves, salt, marl, lime, gypsum and all materials from which salts can detach and melt, fertilize the earth. The fertilizers best known to gardeners, and most commonly used to improve their land, are rotted and consumed manures. But what kind of manure is best suited to what kind of soil? When and how should it be used? For not only do all manures provide the soil with salts, but some also heat it up, loosen it up and give it action. Some need more salts, others less; some have enough salts and need only heat to become active. Horse manure, which, when new, contracts a heat almost equal to that of fire, is suitable for correcting the defects of compact, cold and sluggish soils: if it is not yet sufficiently effective, sheep dung should be substituted, or a certain quantity added: in this case, poudrette would be even more effective. Stable manure, which has little heat, but is fatty and unctuous, is suitable for light, warm soils whose dilated parts need to be bound together to retain freshness and moisture. Poultry, rabbit and pigeon manures can also be used to good effect in horticulture; but the last of these, known as colombine, should never be mixed with other manures: if it is not quite dry, it should be dried when collected; then ground to powder and spread by hand over vegetating plants in cold, damp soils, without ever burying it; this is the real way to make good use of it. Sheep dung should not be mixed either: it is generally used for bathing plants that do not fear heat. No horticulture is possible without an abundance of manure and compost. When you ask schoolteachers to take up horticulture, they always reply that they have no livestock, and that it's not easy for them to get enough fertilizer to feed their land properly. 1 This is not a serious objection, for the schoolteacher has all the means at his disposal to make excellent manure, without much expense. 1° The teacher has his classroom swept twice a day. Instead of scattering the rubbish from these sweepings in front of his school gate, which is always messy, if he had them deposited in a manure pit at one end of his garden, layering them in alternating beds with weeds from weeding and debris of all kinds from the dressing of vegetables, i.e., from the sort of grooming they undergo before being used, you'd get good compost. Compost made from decomposed soil and plant matter takes on all the properties of potting soil within a few months, and can be used for the same purposes as potting soil. This type of compost is particularly favorable for vegetable plants of the cruciferous family. If, moreover, schoolteachers could place their compost pit behind the pupils' urinals and provide a conduit that would carry the slurry over its alternating layers of grass and sweepings, their compost would soon acquire all the qualities of the most recommended fertilizers. 2° Every year, the toilets in elementary school are cleaned. What's to stop a teacher from using the waste from his pits to increase the fertility of his garden? The product of latrines is a very powerful fertilizer that should never be neglected. The most convenient way for the schoolteacher to prepare it is to place the liquid waste in a pit dug as far away from the house as possible, 1 meter or 1 meter 30 centimeters deep, which is only half-filled: loose earth is placed on the edge of the pit and thrown on top of the waste, scattering it as much as possible. After a while, the whole thing is emptied and made into a heap on the edge of the pit; this is used when it has sufficiently dried out to spread it more easily. This material should never be mixed with turf or other grasses, as vegetable substances decompose very-difficulty. Understandably, this operation can only be carried out in winter. All the care that needs to be taken to collect and preserve fertilizers is in no way costly, and requires only vigilance and attention; but when it does entail some expense, this should not be a reason to dispense with it for the horticulturist who knows the importance of fertilizing gardens. USE OF FERTILIZERS. - Burying manure too deeply renders it useless, and puts food beyond the reach and reach of most plant roots. Winter is the right time to fertilize land. The land is ploughed deeply, manure is spread over it, and it is left in this state until spring. After winter, we plough less deeply than before, and bury the manure. Leaving it exposed on the ground over winter, frosts and rains kill most of them, instead of keeping them in the ground, and the worms that hatch in spring wreak havoc on crops. Manures are renewed more or less often, depending on whether the land is more or less good and yields more or less crops. Land that only produces once a year doesn't need to be smoked as much or as often as it would if several species of plants followed one another every year, or if it never had a rest, like most market gardens. Some vegetables love manure, others fear it and don't do well in recently-smoked soil; others don't do as well as they should; others acquire bad qualities; all are better in manure mixed with loam. The more delicate the plant, the more compost is needed, but rarely more than half. If we've gone into fertilizers at some length, it's because manure is the main element in horticulture. When much is demanded of the soil, it must be fed in proportion to what is required of it. 4. Watering. Most plants only grow as fast and look as good as we want them to, when the soil in which they grow is kept at a suitable level of humidity, and without too long an interruption. But this proper degree can only be learned by practice, because it varies according to the seasons, exposure, soil, nature and age of each plant. We can only say that the soil and potting compost for seedlings must be kept very moist until they have sprouted, at which point less moisture is needed. If it continues to be given in abundance, the growth of the seedlings may be more rapid, but the slightest cold, a warm ray of sunshine, a gust of wind or a momentary drought can cause the plant to melt. Supposing the over-watered seedling has been preserved from these various accidents until the time it is lifted for transplanting or planting, the roots, stems and leaves of over-watered plants will break and bruise, and the plant will be in poor condition; On the other hand, a seedling that has received less water since emergence will have firmer, less delicate roots, stems and leaves; it will withstand a little cold, sun and drought without perishing, and the transplanted plant will grow more easily and be more perennial. To water bedded seedlings, as well as seedlings which, having just germinated and begun to emerge from the ground, are not yet rooted, you need to use a watering can with a very fine head, because too much rain scatters the potting soil, uncovers some seeds and buries others too deeply; it coats and mixes the young seedlings, covering them with potting soil, which is equally damaging. When watering precious seeds that have not yet emerged, you can prevent the damage caused by watering by spreading a little long straw or moss on the bed beforehand, which you remove after watering. Plants transplanted or planted in the ground should be watered often enough to ensure that the soil around the plant is sufficiently moist until it starts to grow again. It's better to give little water at a time, and more often, so that the delicate hair that forms when the plants take root can easily penetrate the soil. But when watering weak plants, avoid using watering cans with either a wide spout or a knob, which, by forcefully delivering a lot of water, tip the plant over onto the soil and cause it to stick, or even cover it with soil that prevents it from standing up. Watering cans with fine holes not far apart are needed for delicate plants that are not far apart; for plants that are far apart, a watering can with a spout should be used, which should be lifted gently so that the jet of water does not remove the soil from around the roots, and does not make a hole at the foot of the plant through which air can penetrate and dry out the foliage. A good way to obviate these inconveniences is to place a handful of layer debris at each foot, which, in addition to the advantage of preventing the water from heavy watering from washing away the soil, also prevents the soil from drying out so quickly and splitting, and shelters the roots from the sun's rays. It's easy to judge when plants need watering, because when they do, their leaves are less green, less firm, less sustained, and the tips of the stems are less upright. You can even tell when they're going to need water if you scrape the surface of the soil, or probe deeper and find the root layer dry. It is advantageous for plants to be watered only a short time before they need it, because their products will be of better quality as a result. However, as the consequences of forgetting would be very harmful, it is advisable to water often, so that the soil is always a little fresh, brown in color and easily broken up; but it should not be watered to such an extent that some time later it gives up water if squeezed in the hand, or becomes muddy or cloddy: this is called drowning the plants. In this case, the hair and often the root soften and eventually perish. An intelligent horticulturist will know how to avoid these two excesses, both of which are equally damaging to plants. There are some vegetables that require more watering at a certain age than at any other in order to yield their produce, such as cauliflowers, lettuces and cabbages, when they are due to bear fruit, but which, once they have reached a certain growth, should no longer be watered, because they would rise. It is therefore in the cultivation of each plant that we must learn what is particular to it. It makes no difference whether you water at this or that time of day: We must always seize the moment when the plant derives the most benefit from the water we give it; and for this it is important that the water is not taken away by the sun as soon as it is poured, or that the cold does not occur while it is still wet, because, in the first case, the sun hardens the earth and sometimes roasts the plant, and in the second, watering delays the growth of plants and exposes them to freezing. These watering conditions cannot be overemphasized by gardeners, who often fail to pay sufficient attention to them. From October to May, when the nights are cold and prone to frost, water only between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m.; even then, only a little water should be given at a time, so that the plants and the top of the soil are wiped clean before night returns. From May 15 to September, but especially in June, July and August, water in the evening and water abundantly, so that the water penetrates right down to the roots and is not washed away by the sun, and so that the soil does not dry out too quickly and crack. In short, there can be no profitable gardening without continuous, abundant watering. Parisian market gardeners, who have no rivals when it comes to growing vegetables, never say "water", they say "wet", which for them means giving the soil something to drink while it's thirsty. A little water given to parched soil evaporates in a short time: cultivated plants suffer more from such watering than they benefit from it. Wherever water is scarce, frequent hoeing is needed to give the roots access to the dew of spring and summer nights. 5. Sowing. Propagating plants by sowing seeds is the most natural way of propagating: by this means, you can obtain plants that are better constituted and more durable, and breeds that are better able to adapt to the climate to which you want to accustom them. This is the only way to propagate herbaceous plants, if you want to obtain interesting varieties. The main condition for successful sowing is to have good seed, and the only way to be sure of seed is to collect it yourself, with all due care and precaution. If you want vigorous plants, you need to choose seeds from the last harvest, collected from healthy, robust plants, at the time of their perfect maturity. If, on the other hand, you want to sacrifice the beauty of the plant to that of its fruit, if you want to obtain double flowers or new varieties, give preference to old seeds, provided they have not lost their germinative virtue; and they will have retained it if they have been kept in a dry place with their natural envelopes. Most seeds can be sown as they are harvested, simply by taking them out of their envelopes; but a few, which have hairs and burrs, require preparation by mixing them with ash or sand, and rubbing them in the hands until they are free of these appendages, which would prevent even sowing. You can hasten the germination of some seeds, such as peas, beans and broad beans, by soaking them in water for twenty-four hours before sowing. Seedlings should only be sown in loose, soft, clean soil. All vegetable seeds can be sown by hand, either in rows or broadcast. Row sowing should be preferred to any other method for plants that are to receive one or more subsequent hoeing operations. When broadcasting, care should be taken to level the beds with a rake, after pulverizing the soil as much as possible. Fine seeds are thrown on the ground and should only be covered with well-consumed compost; most of the others only want to be lightly buried; it's always better to bury them less than too much. The soil is then firmed up, either by hand or with a flat board, and watered if there is no hope of rain. To prevent the water from over-watering the soil, cover it with chopped straw, moss, etc. Summer seedlings are planted in the shade, and require frequent watering. In general, the finer the seeds, the less they should be buried. Some seeds need to be sown on a bed, as we shall indicate when we list the plants that must be included in the composition of a vegetable garden. Seedlings are sown on the spot, either in rays or broadcast, when the plant is not to be transplanted, and in the nursery when it is to change places before taking up permanent residence in the one where it is to grow fully. Transplanting is often confused with transplanting. Transplanting is a provisional transplant that precedes the placement of plants in their definitive position, which is usually called transplanting. Some plants require one or even two transplants before they can be put into their definitive position, while others only need to be transplanted. This is what we will indicate for each plant in its place. 6. Layers. The bed should be considered the mother of all plants. A bed should be placed at midday, so that one end faces the east and the other the west. After marking the required width with a chalk line or stakes, dig a ditch 0.20 m deep, and work backwards to pile in the manure, mixing it well with a pitchfork to make it as uniform as possible. The manure used to make the layers should be new horse manure, after it has been left in a heap for some time. If the worker is skilful, he will roll up the manure so skilfully as he makes each bed of the layer that all the straw ends are inside. Once the first bed has been made square, of the length and width decided upon, all the other beds are then made in the same way, beating them with the back of the fork or stamping on them, to make sure there are no voids so that they can be remedied immediately, the bed having to be equally packed everywhere, so that it has no part weaker than another. This work is continued until the layer is the height it should be; this height is, depending on the season, d° Om, 70 to iu and 1n,20 when it is finished; but it decreases by a good third when it has subsided. Paths 35 to 40 centimetres wide are laid around the bed, both for traffic and for placing stoves, i.e. urine-soaked manure from the stable. This manure, placed in the paths, imparts a very high level of heat to the bed. Each layer, depending on its intended use, after being well walked on, from end to end, with feet together, and especially on the edges, must be immediately loaded with good compost, which is spread, from large to large, on its surface. For the quantity of potting soil to be used, refer to what we'll say later in the article on each plant. But above all, when you finish the layer, especially in cold weather, you must be careful to put in a larger quantity than in ordinary weather, to help it warm up; you then remove the excess when you straighten it out. Layers for melons should be made in this way, as they are always sown on only 8 or 10 centimetres of compost, which in principle would not be able to set the manure in the layer in motion. In times of snow or frost, it is even advisable to cover the entire layer with warm manure, until it is thoroughly heated. Potting soil should never be stirred too much, i.e. too finely for all seeds, and the surest way to make it so is to pass it through a claie. This rack should be made of small-mesh wire, as used to be used for sideboard flaps, and should be two meters long in all directions. Before sowing or planting anything on a newly-made layer, wait seven, eight or even ten days for it to contract the heat it needs, and then, if this heat reaches too high a level, let it moderate. This decrease in heat can be recognized by the settling of the layer. A layer that is too hot will burn the seeds; a layer that is not too hot will delay germination. The layer can retain all its heat for ten or twelve days, and when you realize that it is cooling, you surround it with stoves placed in the paths, as we have said. These stoves are made with horse manure from the stable. But when renewing stoves, it's not always necessary to use new manure: quite often, it's enough to stir the old stove completely, provided it's not too rotten, to release a residue of heat that can last another seven or eight days: often, too, a third or half of new manure is added to the old stove manure to keep the layer warm. When a layer is exposed to heat loss, and the plants it contains begin to melt, after removing the old stoves and before replacing them with new ones, pull a handful of manure from the sides under each bell, ten centimetres below the soil. This vacuum forms a kind of furnace into which the heat from the stove is more easily introduced and more effectively communicated to the plant above. Layers are made from month to month: but horticulturists rarely use layers until spring, when the soil is still cold. DIVIDING A VEGETABLE GARDEN 27 In order to keep the land of a vegetable garden as unoccupied as possible, and to maintain its fertility at all times, it is essential to alternate crops; in other words, it is not advisable to cultivate plants of the same family twice in succession, in the same part of the soil. If the garden is large enough, it should be divided into eight parts, which should be managed as follows: FIRST PART. - From September to May, winter peas and lettuces; from May to July, radishes, spinach, lettuce, cucumbers, nine-week potatoes; from August to November, autumn turnips, winter cabbage and carrots. PART TWO. - Spring lettuce transplanted in March; from May to September, peas, broad beans, beans, lentils, early potatoes, early turnips, spinach, radishes, early chicory, melons, giraumons. From September onwards, this second part will become the first, i.e. it will be cultivated like the previous one, which will be cultivated like the sixth. THIRD PART. - In March, transplant cabbage, spring cauliflower, radishes, turnips, spinach, lettuce, spring onions; in May, peas, beans, potatoes: in September, this third part will become the second, taking the place of the fifth. FOURTH PART. - From March to July, peas and broad beans are sown; from July to October, summer salads, spinach, radishes and turnips are sown, cardoons and celery are transplanted; in October, green cabbages and Brussels sprouts are transplanted. In March, this fourth part will be treated in the same way as the third. PART FIVE. - In March, planting of garlic, shallots, late potatoes, onions, cabbage, scorzon seedlings, salsify and leek. This fifth part will receive seeds from the second and will be treated like it. SIXTH PART. - From March to August, radishes, spinach, lettuce: autumn cauliflower, leek and lettuce transplants. This part will become the fourth the following year. SEVENTH PART. - This part will only receive artichokes, which are planted in April and May, and last for three years. EIGHTH PART. - The eighth part will form an asparagus pit that commonly lasts from 12 to 15 years. Most of our teachers' gardens are not large enough to follow a distribution similar to the one we have just outlined. However, in a plot of 5 to 7 ares in size, as we would like the gardens to be for school houses, we can largely conform to the distribution we have just indicated. A schoolteacher should be able to find in his garden all the vegetables he needs for his annual supply: moreover, if he knows how to make the most of his land, he will have a large enough quantity of good fruit for all seasons. Although our main aim in this treatise is the cultivation of vegetables and fruit, we are not banishing flowers from the garden. Far from it, and we recommend that schoolteachers garnish their flowerbeds with selected and varied flowers. First and foremost, time should be given over to what is useful; but the pleasurable should never be neglected, when it can be obtained without interfering with ordinary occupations. Floriculture relieves the fatigue of vegetable gardening; it speaks a sweet language: it is often the occasion for charming relationships, and this branch of gardening is sometimes the source of fruitful products. We know of schoolteachers who have made considerable profits with their varieties of reinemarguerite, and others with their collections of chrysanthemums. Incidentally, we only recommend that schoolteachers grow annuals or perennials that do well in our climates. Plants grown in hot greenhouses require expenditure that teachers cannot afford, and time that they are not allowed to give. CHAPTER III ELEMENTARY NOTIONS ON THE ORGANIZATION OF PLANTS We thought it would be useful to give a few notions on the organization of plants in general. A teacher who is called upon by his position to teach horticulture to his pupils, and to give advice on this art to all those among whom he lives, must be able to define the organs of the plants he cultivates, and explain the main phenomena they present. The plant is an organized being, deprived of the sense of its existence, of voluntary movement, feeding on inorganized substances that it draws from the air or water with the help of a vital force faculty according to laws that 2. of inorganic chemistry; combinations in which carbon dominates, and which it assimilates by a veritable intussusception, always increasing from the center to the circumference, by the duplication of the parts that constitute it, and consequently being endowed only with a relative individuality. The main organs and phenomena of plants, on which we will focus as clearly and concisely as possible, are: root, stem, rhizome, bulb, leaf, inflorescence, flower, fertilization, fruit, seed, embryo and germination. 1 Roots. The root is the part of the plant that runs towards the center of the earth; it does not turn green, even in contact with light, and normally produces neither buds nor leaves. It serves to anchor the plant to the soil, and to draw the food necessary for its growth. The presence of oxygen is essential, which is why it is important to bring it into more or less direct contact with the outside air, either by ploughing and draining, or by keeping plants in pots made of porous soil. The root differs from the stem in that it has no clearly visible central pith or tracheae. (Plant lungs.) In general, plants use their roots to draw part of their nourishment from beneath the soil, and this absorption is carried out by the spongiales that terminate them. As oxygen is the gas that most activates vegetation, it is essential to distribute well-oxygenated water to plants, or water that has been subjected to the action of atmospheric air, which, as we know, contains 79 parts oxygen and 21 parts nitrogen. 2. Stem. The stem is the part of the plant axis that grows in the opposite direction to the root, at the time of germination. It branches by means of buds in the leaf axils. The stem exists in all vascular plants (i.e. those full of vessels), but sometimes it develops only slightly, and the leaves, as well as the floral branch, seem to grow from the root. The plant is then said to be acaule (stemless). The stem is perennial when it lives several years, biennial when it lives two years, annual when it lives only one year. It's called herbaceous when it's greenish, soft and easy to break: these are generally annual stems. It is woody when it forms a solid wood that persists after hardening. It is said to be sub-woody when its base alone is hard and persists above ground for several years, while the twigs and branch tips perish more or less completely and are renewed every year. The woody stem of our trees is called the trunk. D The herbaceous stem is said to be indefinite when it flowers only through the secondary axes born in the leaf axils, and when nothing puts an end to its vegetation, it can grow, so to speak, indefinitely. The stem is defined when the axes end in flowers and cannot, therefore, extend indefinitely. The stem is stoloniferous when, from the axils of its leaves, a bud is born that elongates by flowing over the ground, develops leaves at its tip, then straightens and produces fibrous roots below the tuft of leaves that terminates it, which sink into the ground. (Strawberry.) The stem is thorny when the branches, instead of developing completely, stop in their evolution and metamorphose into hard spikes. Thorns are degenerated twigs. Buds (eyes) are the rudiments of twigs, usually found in the leaf axils. Developed buds are called shoots, scions or arrows. 41 G 3. Rhizome. The name rhizome is generally given to stems which, instead of rising, crawl obliquely or horizontally below or on the surface of the ground: its front part emits fibrous roots, leaves and buds: its rear part is gradually destroyed with age (Iris). The rhizome has the same characteristics as the stem; it is indefinite when it extends into the soil with the help of a terminal bud that continues it indefinitely. 4. Bulb. The bulb is a rounded rhizome forming a thicker or thinner, more or less convex plate, which gives rise to roots in the lower part and produces leaves in the upper part; this part represents the scaly bud of any plant. This kind of reduced stem also gives rise to lateral buds (cloves) in the axils of its scales. The bulb is tunicate when the outer leaves form interlocking chains around the base of the stem (onion); it is scaly when the leaves are narrow, fleshy and interlocked in several rows (leek, hyacinth, lily); it is solid when the bases of the leaves are tightly packed, fused and welded together, so that the bulb seems to form a fleshy, starchy, homogeneous mass (colchicum). Comparing rhizomes with bulbs, it's easy to see that these two types of stock differ only in the length of the plate, and the more or less fleshy consistency of the underground leaves. The rhizome can therefore be seen as a bulb with a very long horizontal plateau, just as the bulb can be seen as a shortened rhizome with fleshy leaves. Tubers are the name given to the ends of branches that crawl under the ground and are swollen with starch (potatoes). 5. Leaf. Leaves are usually green; along with roots, they are the main organs of nutrition: they draw gaseous and liquid substances from the atmosphere, which can be used for plant growth; they also transpire and exhale substances no longer needed for vegetation. It is in their tissue that the sap absorbed by the root and transmitted by the stem is stripped of its aqueous juices and acquires all its nutritive qualities. Of all the plant's organs, leaves are the ones that contribute most energetically to plant life. They are also the ones that show the most modifications, and from which we derive the most characters for distinguishing species. The leaf is an appendage of the stem or branch bearing one or more buds in its axil. Although the leaf axil does not appear to have buds, they do exist, but in a latent state; they can develop under certain conditions. This fact is very important in horticulture: it explains tree pruning, and should always guide the gardener in a host of operations. A complete leaf has two distinct parts: 1° the tail or petiole; 2° the blade or limbus. The leaves of a tree have been aptly compared to the lungs of animals, because of their functions and the innumerable cells they contain; we might add that they also act as stomachs, digesting or elaborating the raw sap they receive from the roots. Chemically speaking, leaves contain: 1° woody substances; 2° albumin; 3° sugar or gum; 4° green matter; 5° wax; 6° fatty and resinous substances; 7° free or combined acids; 8° essential oils. The greater or lesser presence of one or other of these principles will make the leaves sought after as food, fodder, stimulant, etc. 6. Inflorescence. The term inflorescence means the arrangement of flowers on the stem. The flower supports are the pedicel, peduncle and receptacle. The pedicel refers to the tail of the flower: it is analogous to the petiole of a leaf. The peduncle designates the axis that bears the pedicel: it is the analogue of the branch, and is usually accompanied by a small sessile leaf to which we give the name of bract, and that of bracteole to the even smaller leaves that frequently accompany the pedicel. These organs are often flower-colored. The receptacle is the bottom of a flower's calyx. It is not our intention to go into great detail about inflorescence, as this would involve abstract questions that we wish to avoid in this book, 7. Flower. The flower in plants is an assembly of several rows of organs arranged one above the other in stages so close together that each of these different circles seems to be born on the same spot as the one that precedes or follows. The flower has been regarded as a true terminal bud, since this bud seems to emit foliaceous or appendicular organs that develop from the base to the top, and these organs, as they advance towards the center of the flower, lose their leafy appearance to take on other characters. Let's assume that a flower is made up of leaves that have been variously transformed in their tissue, color, consistency, odor, etc.; that they have taken on the name of calyx, corolla, stamen, pistil, depending on the rank they occupy as they move from the circumference to the center. A complete flower is therefore made up of four rows of organs. 1° The calyx. Whatever its coloring, the calyx is the outer row or lower whorl of the flower; its position alone should serve to distinguish it. It is made up of a variable number of small leaves, more or less free and independent, more or less intimately fused. The pieces making up the calyx are called sepals. 2° The corolla is the second row of organs in the flower; it is placed inside the calyx and alternates with its divisions; it is usually simple, very rarely multiple; its leaves are called petals. The corolla is usually of a color other than green; however, some plants have green petals. The corolla is single-petaled when the various parts of which it is composed are more or less completely fused together; it is polypetaled when the petals are free and independent of each other. 3° The stamens, to which we have given the name androecium, show more profound modifications than the corolla. Instead of flat, foliaceous organs, there are small bodies, usually yellow in color and ending in a small head. A complete stamen is made up of a foot or net and a kind of head, the anther, most often with a deep furrow dividing it into two equal halves; each of these halves is called a loge and has a slight suture through which, when the flowers open, a particular dust called pollen escapes. The dust (pollen) contained in the anthers, acting on the stigma or top of the pistil, helps to produce seeds. This impalpable dust, often carried great distances by the wind, is made up of small grains of a particular shape in certain plant families, but of an identical structure in the vast majority of plants. These microscopic granules are made up of two interlocking sacs, or membranes, one outer and the other inner; the latter contains a mucilaginous liquid interspersed with granules to which we have given the name fovilla, which is the essential element of pollen. 4° The pistil. We have just defined the three rows of organs that make up a perfect flower, to arrive at the central body known as the pistil. This organ occupies the center of the flower, ending, as it were, the vegetation of the floral branch. In most cases, the pistil is placed immediately on the receptacle or more or less dilated or flared top of the pedicel; most commonly, the pistil is sessile; but in some plants, its base is very elongated (carnation), either on its own (caprier), or with the stamens fused to it; in the latter two cases, the pistil and stamens are carried outside the corolla. The pistil consists essentially of two parts: the lower, usually swollen and green, ovary; the upper, papillose, whitish and often viscous, stigma. 8. Fertilization. When the flowers open, the anther lodges open and spread their pollen over the stigma, which retains this dust with the help of its viscous papillae. Once applied to the stigma, the pollen grains undergo a sort of germination, so to speak; the inner membrane of these grains herniates and exits through the small doors pierced in the outer membrane in the form of an excessively tenuous tube which insinuates itself between the papillae of the stigma, penetrates the style, whose central canal it follows, arrives in the cavity of the ovary, penetrates the ovule to connect with the embryonic cavity via the micropyle. Once there, the embryo sac receives the fovilla, and the embryo begins to appear in the form of a small globule. Everything is thus ready for this important act of plant life. Once fertilization has taken place, the ovule continues to develop to form the seed. 9. Fruit. The fruit is the fertilized, ripe pistil, containing seeds capable of germinating and reproducing the plant. This is the normal state, as we know of fruits that ripen without producing fertile seeds. If we have succeeded in making ourselves understood, it will be easy to see how fruit can sink and abort; indeed, a drop of water falling on the stigma is enough to wash it clean, sweep away the pollen, prevent fertilization and often halt the development of fruit and seed. However, it's worth noting that ovule sterility doesn't always lead to fruit drop. The fruit must always contain the seed: one is the container and the other the content. A fruit must always contain traces of the style; a seed will always contain traces of the micropyle. We shall not stop to describe the innumerable forms of fruit. In general, fruits can be divided into two groups: simple fruits and aggregated fruits, which are dry or fleshy. Among the former, we distinguish the follicle, the vegetable and the drupe; among the latter, the capsule and the berry. With these five names, we can describe all fruits; we always manage to make ourselves understood without overloading the memory with bizarre names. 1° The follicle is a dry fruit with several seeds, opening by its ventral suture, like the peony, columbine and oleander. 2° The vegetable or pod is a dry fruit usually opening in two valves, either by its ventral suture, or, more rarely, by its dorsal suture. Vegetables sometimes twist in a spiral, like alfalfa, or divide into several articles, like sainfoin, each enclosing a seed. 3° The capsule is a dry fruit with one or more chambers that open more or less completely. The fruits of purslane, chickweed and henbane have a peculiar arrangement: they split crosswise and open like soap boxes; they are called pyxides. In reseda, the fruit remains open and the seeds are exposed to the air shortly after fertilization. 4° The drupe is a fleshy fruit that doesn't open and usually contains just one seed, like the peach, plum and walnut. The berry is a fleshy fruit in which there is no stone; it differs from the capsule only in consistency. Some fruits can be called either a berry or a capsule, so to speak (e.g. chillies). 10. Seeds. Seeds are fertilized ovules suitable for germination; they contain a plant in miniature: the seedling, embryo or germ destined to reproduce the species. Every seed is covered by a tegument, which itself is usually composed of three membranes or skins more or less intimately fused together. The teguments of the seed vary infinitely; each species has, so to speak, a particular character, and this is often a good way of differentiating them. 11. Embryo. Plant seeds contain an embryo or seedling. In the vast majority of cases, the embryo has two lobes or cotyledons. Hence the name dicotyledons. Other plants have only one undivided embryo, i.e. a single cotyledon: hence the name monocotyledon. D Every dicotyledonous embryo consists of a kind of small stem (tigelle) reduced to a nipple at the tip of which corresponds the young root, and two lobes or cotyledons between which the rudiments of the bud can often be distinguished; this rudimentary bud has been given the name plumule, because of its resemblance to a small feather. The monocotyledonous embryo is usually cylindrical in shape. In general, it occupies the axis of the seed; but in grasses, it is placed, so to speak, outside and pushed back to the geometric base on one of the sides. 12. Germination. Germination is the act by which the embryo grows, sheds its integuments and eventually becomes self-sufficient, drawing its nourishment from the element in which it is placed, or even from another plant if the plant is parasitic. The free end of the tigelle, ending in the nipple or root point, is usually the first part to protrude outwards, enlarging the orifice of the micropyle to which this radicle always corresponds. The degree of heat, and the amount of oxygen a seed requires to germinate, varies for each species. The need for the seed to remain in the ground before germinating also varies widely. It's a fairly general fact that the seeds of spring annuals need a fairly long time in the ground before they can germinate. The physical phenomena of vegetation are brought about by a combination of atmospheric elements, water and certain organic substances in the soil. The action of atmospheric air on plants is divided into two perfectly distinct phases: germination and vegetation proper, which includes the development, growth and multiplication of the species by means of the organs and phenomena we have just briefly defined. It therefore follows from the foregoing: 1° That a plant, since it assimilates inorganic substances, is a living being, an intermediary between the mineral and animal kingdoms; 2° That we must not consider a tree as a simple being, such as an animal which has only one vital center, but as a true polypier, endowed with a relative individuality, formed from the particular and successive productions of all the gems or buds which have developed and succeeded one another since its origin; 3° That the common life of a plant consists in the property of all its tissues to absorb in common the inorganized substances necessary for the development of its gems; 4° That each bud produced by the plant is the center of a particular vital force, and that all these buds are the origin and natural source of new individuals. The care to be given to young plants is the domain of horticulture; the details relating to it will necessarily find their place in the various articles of this treatise. GARDENER'S CALENDAR 41 To conform to custom, we will begin our horticultural calendar with the month of January, although gardening work forms a circle that is difficult to break, and there are times when the cultivator's care must be, and indeed is, more multiplied. But we would point out with the author of Le Bon Jardinier that, for a vegetable garden, we could fix the beginning of the horticultural year at August, because it is at this time that the gardener begins to work by distant forecast, that he begins to calculate the seasons and to sow a certain number of seeds, the produce of which will only be harvested the following year. As the temperature of all years is not uniform, our indications cannot be rigorously exact; sowing will have to be brought forward or delayed, depending on whether the season is early or late. It should also be noted that our calendar is designed for the average climate of France, and can only be applied to the south or north of the empire, with the modifications required by differences in climate. JANUARY. Vegetable garden. - Work in the open ground. - Work continues on the ripping of the soil, which began in November and December. The fertilizers to be buried during the first ploughing are brought to the beds. When the weather is mild and rainy, we remove the litter or leaves covering artichokes, celery and other delicate plants. Pits are opened for planting asparagus in March and April, to give the soil at the bottom time to ripen. If the weather doesn't allow us to work outside, we make straw mats, put our tools back in order, and check the seeds to see which ones we're short of, so that we can stock up in good time. We sow, in small quantities at a time, early peas and bog beans on the coasts, on the south-facing slopes, or in well-sheltered places; towards the end of the month, we can sow onions in light soil, with the precaution of covering them with litter, in case of frost. Cauliflower seedlings sown in autumn for coastal planting, at the foot of a south-facing wall and to be used for spring planting, are sheltered under frames or, in the absence of frames, under straw mats supported by pea oars. Fruit garden. - Ripping is done more deeply here than in vegetable beds. If there are trees to be planted, the holes should have been made in autumn, if time, location and circumstances allow. All tree species, except conifers, can be planted in dry soils; but in wet, cold and rotting soils, it's best not to plant until March and April. When it's not freezing, start pruning weak apple and pear trees, and those of mediocre vigor. For those that are too vigorous, we wait until March and April. In rainy weather, we scrape the bark of old trees to remove moss and lichen, or rid them of their dead wood. Landscaping. - In general, there's little in the way of groundwork to be done in a pleasure garden in January. However, despite the cold of the season, you should find snowdrops, violets, crocuses and pink saxifrages ready to bloom in a parterre. When the weather is mild and rainy, we remove the litter from herbaceous plants, which fear rot as much as the cold. Cover them if frost returns. In soils that are not too damp, you can plant hyacinths and tulips, if you neglected to plant them in autumn. We stock up on normal or free soil, heather soil, sand and all the animal or vegetable substances that can go into the various composts, which we take care never to run out of. FEBRUARY. Vegetable garden. - Everything that could not be completed in the previous months is continued, but in February the work becomes more extensive. Ploughing is done as often as the weather permits, so as not to be behind schedule in March. Onions, early peas and broad beans are sown; after the 15th, spinach, chervil, wild chicory, prinprenelle, sorrel, parsnips, carrots, leeks to be replanted later, and parsley are planted in beds or borders. Small spring lettuces, such as gotte, are sown in the onion beds. Garlic and shallots are planted, and green romaine can be planted on good soil to be grown under cloche. Whenever the weather is mild, we remove the leaves or litter covering artichokes and celery, and cover them if there is any sign of frost. Towards the end of the month, you can replant sorrel and thyme borders. During bad weather, we make straw mats and repair tools. We continue to warm the beds planted with seedlings or plants already transplanted; we make others on which we permanently transplant cucumbers, melons, lettuces, romaine (remembering that lettuce and romaine need very little heat), and early cauliflowers; We continue to sow melons, cucumbers, radishes, head lettuces, romaine lettuces, Italian curly endive, various supplies, and lettuces for cutting while we wait for the head lettuce. We destroy the layers made in December that have yielded their produce and lost their heat, and take the unconsumed manure, which we mix with new manure to make new layers. Dwarf peas should be sown in frames, dwarf beans and broad beans in close proximity, and then transplanted to warm layers. Asparagus is planted on beds to replace asparagus that is running out, and new beds are forced into the ground, as are strawberry plants; cauliflowers and eggplants are sown, and in March will be ready to be replanted on beds or on the coast. Fruit garden. - The work indicated for the previous month continues in this one, but we must hurry to finish planting in dry, light soil. The pruning of apple and pear trees continues; the vines must be completely pruned in this month, because if they were pruned later, weeping would result. Strawberry plants are pruned back to make them branch out and produce more fruit. If, in December or January, you have not cut your supply of fruit and other tree branches and put them in the ground, with a northern exposure, to make split grafts at the end of March, in April and May, when pruning, look for the most suitable branches for grafting among those removed, and put them in the ground, each at the foot of his tree, to avoid mistakes, until they are available. After the 15th of the month, wherever the trees have been pruned, we start the general ploughing, so that it will be finished by the time the March hail arrives. If you haven't already done so, you can also cut the shoots of trees and shrubs that have taken cuttings, dividing them, species by species, into sections 0 m. 20 to 0 m. 30 long, with several eyes, and making small bundles that you bury by the large end, in fresh sand or light soil, sheltered from frost, sun and heat, until March and April, a favorable time for planting. You can also sow pear and apple seeds, as well as many seeds from trees and shrubs that don't have the bone envelope, such as chestnut, chestnut, ebony, rose, etc. Bedding. - You can sow ranunculus, anemones, thlaspis, quarantine, larkspur, poppies, poppies, immortelles, blueberries, adonides in the ground. In the open ground, you'll find helleborine, small periwinkle, perennial daisy, a few fragrant violets, perceneige, herbaceous heather, liverwort, Japanese spirea, rosemary, etc. in January. Sow wallflowers, different kinds of verbena, dahlias, bright sage, amaranth, sensitive, cobea, etc. on the bed. MARCH. Vegetable garden. - March is the month when the earth calls for all the gardener's activity. Ploughing is completed; all manures and fertilizers are buried; borders of all kinds are replanted. We start sowing various types of peas, broad beans, romaine, several types of lettuce, wild chicory in borders or beds, chervil, parsley, onions, leeks, spring onions, carrots, spinach, turnips and radishes, and most garden vegetables, except beans, which cannot withstand the slightest frost. The first early potatoes are planted. Artichokes are uncovered, started and ploughed after the 15th of the month; asparagus is ploughed and smoked; last year's seed-bearing bulbs and roots, such as celery, onions, carrots, turnips, beet, etc., are put in the ground, and to avoid the bad effects of sunstroke and light frosts, which are often felt at this time of year, seedlings and plantings are covered with a thin layer of compost or light mulch. Asparagus is planted, but in strong, cold soil, it's best to wait until the first days of April. Now is still the time to sow this plant, either in the field or in a nursery. Layers and frames. - Maintain the warmth of the beds on which first-season melons and cucumbers, cauliflowers and fine Italian chicory are permanently planted. Melons and cucumbers, cauliflowers and lettuces already grown are replanted on new beds for the second season, and the same seeds are sown for a third season; in addition, turnips, lettuces and supplies are sown to await the produce of the open ground, as well as beans, some intended to produce on the spot, others with the aim of replanting them either on beds or in a good soil with proper care. Fruit garden. - Prune espaliers and counter espaliers. All branches that are to be tied should be tied immediately after pruning, before their eyes have elongated, so that they cannot be broken or cut off during the tying operation; after removing all the removed wood, the base of the trees should be ploughed and a good mulch spread. Peach trees should not be pruned, so as not to hasten their flowering, which could be damaged by late frosts. Nursery plantings should be completed as quickly as possible, cattails and tall trees pruned, staked and ploughed. The mothers of coignassier, paradise and all shrubs propagated in this way are pickled or ridged. You can also sow apple and pear seeds and many other tree and shrub seeds in the ground or in a terrine. Towards the end of the month, if the weather is favorable, cuttings prepared in February can be planted, but they must be properly mulched. Bedding. - Sow in beds: balsamines, queen marguerites, tagetes or carnations and marigold roses, nyctages, belles-de-nuit, elegant ragworts, Chinese bumblebees, campanulas, wallflower ragworts, and in general all delicate plants. In the open ground, we have almond, thorn and nannyberry trees, mountain ash, spirea, andromeda, viburnum, iris, tulips, narcissus, primrose, bear's ear, spring cynoglossa, anemones, double-flowered poplar, arbutus, etc. APRIL. Vegetable garden. - We continue the work of the previous month: but as heavy frosts are no longer to be feared, we sow and plant all kinds of vegetables in abundance. White melons, wild chicory, Versailles and Italian lettuces are sown on beds for July; celery and kale for August, long-headed cabbage and broccoli for September. In the open ground, previous seedlings are weeded, those that are too thick are thinned out, artichokes are grommeted, and the best grommets are planted to form a new plant. We continue planting asparagus, and straw the plants to protect them from drought. Water in the morning and around mid-day, but refrain from doing so in the evening, for fear of the cold. Care should be taken to sow fast-moving plants such as turnips, radishes, spinach, chervil, lettuces, romaine, peas, etc. frequently, so as not to run out. We also sow summer chicory, celery, cardoons, savoy and Brussels sprouts. The first peas and broad beans are headed, to bring their fruit forward. Lettuces, cauliflowers and cucumbers grown on beds are planted in the open ground. Beets, beans, cucumbers and gherkins are sown in potting soil pots. Fruit garden. - We finish pruning the vigorous fruit trees that we had left last, as well as the peach trees whose flowering we had feared to bring forward by pruning too early. When the buds of trees that have been pruned into any shape have elongated from Om 020 to Om 025, all those that are useless, harmful or misplaced should be removed, leaving only those that are necessary for the fruit, beauty and harmony of the tree. During this month, late frosts often surprise the young vine buds, flowers and new shoots of some fruit trees. The damage is not irreparable, however, if you catch it in time, i.e. before the sun's rays have struck and destroyed them. You must therefore be quick to light grass or wet straw, whose thick smoke is directed by the wind onto the affected buds: this is enough to save them. As for the flowers and shoots of fruit trees, if late frosts threaten to damage and destroy them, they should be covered with canvas and straw mats, especially at sunrise, if the trees are exposed to the sun's rays. Those who don't have sheets and mats are content to water the areas affected by the cold with well or fountain water, which is sprinkled down as a fine shower using a watering can with a knob riddled with tiny holes; this method often works well for them. It's time to graft the vine. You can still plant a few trees, if you have neglected to do so at a more suitable time; but recovery will only be assured in damp soil. Bedding. - Volubilis, nasturtiums, belles-denuit, dahlias and sweet peas are sown; most perennials are transplanted. The number of flowers blooming this month is considerable, in addition to those in greenhouses. Primroses, bear's ears, anemones, narcissi, hyacinths, tulips and a large number of other lilies are in the open ground; bulbous fumitory and corydalis, their neighbors, European trolleys, lilacs, cherry trees and double-flowered cherry trees, false ebony, several cytises, etc., are also in the garden. By the first days of April, the ornamental garden should be in top shape; paths should be raked and removed; all perennials should be well cleaned, lawns mowed, beds and flowerbeds well tilled, and annuals sown on site should be in full vegetation. New plantings are visited, to encourage those that are behind schedule by watering them appropriately. Pests, especially caterpillars, are hunted down. MAY. Vegetable garden. - This month's work is so varied and numerous that it would take too long to list them all. In the first fortnight of May, plant beans, which are to be harvested dry; this does not prevent the sowing, every two weeks, of those that are to be eaten green, as well as peas and broad beans; and, as lettuces, romaine, spinach, chervil, radishes, etc., are fast-growing, sow more of them every two weeks, As lettuces, romaine, spinach, chervil, radishes, etc., grow quickly, they need to be sown often and a little at a time. We continue to sow carrots, beet, summer chicory, celery, cardoons, tetragons and gherkins. We sow savoy cabbages, large-ribbed cabbages, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, kohlrabi, Swedish turnips and some early second-season turnips. Layered celery and cardoons are planted, as well as eggplants, tomatoes, cucumbers, gherkins and cauliflowers; tarragon is separated and replanted; finally, all the vegetables used in the country you live in are sown and planted. We make warm, muted beds for the last season's melons, for Batates if we don't plant them on mounds; we also make open-air mushroom wheels; we replant celery and cauliflowers on old beds to make them grow faster than in the ground, and we keep them in water to increase their vegetation. Now is the time to cut back old parsley and purslane, reserving the seed-bearing plants. Water indiscriminately in the morning and evening, according to the plants' needs. Fruit garden. - Trees with soft wood and thick bark, such as chestnuts, figs, walnuts and cherries, are grafted during this month, using splits and escutcheons. We begin to disbud the most vigorous. Wild shoots are removed from trees grafted the previous year, and the graft bud is attached to the tree or to a stake, to ensure that it remains upright, and to protect it from accidents that could cause it to come unstuck. Espaliers require frequent visits by the gardener, to monitor the progress of fruit development and advise on ways to encourage it. He must also pay attention to the growth of the various types of branches, so that each one achieves its intended purpose as much as possible. When a fruit-bearing branch of a peach tree has not retained any peaches, it should be cut back immediately onto the replacement branch, so that the latter gains in strength. This is also the time to remove any harmful or misplaced shoots that may have escaped disbudding the previous month. Nursery care consists in monitoring split grafts, destroying imbrications, hunting down bud cutters, reattaching trees that have become detached, and finally, carrying out the first hoeing. We start grafting with flutes and budded buds. Bedding. - Sow autumn flowers such as quarrantine, nigella, thlaspi, Venus mirror, volubilis, runner beans, carnations and wallflowers. Auricula carnations are detached and planted. The bengal, hazelnut and cinnamon roses are in full bloom, while we wait for the prodigious number of roses that will grace the gardens during the following month to come into full bloom. The other flowers are so numerous and varied that it is superfluous to name any of them. During this month, there is usually no need for

But they are always useful for receiving sick plants, either in pots or planted bare: it's a good idea to keep a few around at all times. JUNE. Kitchen garden. - Continuation of May's work. The most important thing is to ensure that none of the season's vegetables are lacking, and that those which are to produce later are in sufficient numbers and in good vegetation. From this point of view, we sow large-ribbed cabbage for replanting in August and September, early apple cabbage, kale and early cabbage in cool soil for planting in August, overwintering in the greenhouse and replanting in March; fine chicory, large curly endive, escarole, giraumons, celeriac to be replanted in cool soil and eaten until winter, pancalier cabbage and black radish for autumn and winter, wild chicory for autumn Water in the evening. Artichokes that have worn out are grilled; onions are thinned out, and the small onions removed are used to fill in the empty spaces. The most beautiful cauliflowers are selected and marked for seed-bearing. Parsley roots are thinned out. Leeks and parsley are planted for winter. Maize beans are reserved for seed. Remove rotting leaves from seed-bearing lettuces. Cover plants when the sun is too hot. Fruit garden. - We visit the espaliers to ensure that balance is maintained in all parts of each tree: if we find any disorders, we will remedy them by the means indicated for tree pruning. Early apricots are the only fruit that may need to be cut green in this month, and their branches should be trellised. As for the branches of other trees, it may be necessary to tie some and pinch others to maintain balance. In nurseries, cleanliness is maintained by weeding and hoeing; care is taken to ensure that the trees form well, and in this, they are helped merrily by pinching and removing unnecessary buds. We are still grafting stone fruit trees, particularly roses, if we have no reason to prefer blind grafting. We are starting to harvest a fairly large quantity of fruit, such as strawberries, cherries and redcurrants. At the end of the month, we see the ripening of petit-muscat, Amiré-Joannet or petit-Saint-Jean pears, and myrobolan plums. Flowerbeds. - Watering flowers and plantations is the most important task of the month: however, we must not neglect to provide good stakes for all plants that do not support themselves, such as hollyhocks, dahlias, some asters, etc., and to provide oars or stiles for those that climb. We cut off the stems of herbaceous plants whose flowers have passed, reserving only those from which we wish to collect seeds. Rosehips can be made into growing eye patches, if their wood is well nourished. This is generally the flowering time for roses. Dahlias begin to blossom, stopping only at the first frosts in October. Each of these two beautiful genera offers the most brilliant and varied flowers, and should be the object of care and admiration. As for the other flowers that bloom in this month, it would take too long to enumerate them. The beds that have been used to raise flowers are excellent for receiving languishing plants, whether placed bare or in pots. With the necessary care and well-reasoned wetting, these plants soon return to a state of perfect health. JULY. Vegetable garden. - We continue sowing and planting vegetables whose produce can be obtained in less than four months, such as lettuces and supplies, beans to be eaten green, peas and broad beans, in places where white does not take them in September; cucumbers and gherkins, black radishes, autumn cauliflowers, broccoli, kohlrabi, turnips. Celery is harvested every two weeks, so that we can always provide enough for consumption. At the end of the month, we sow apple cabbages for the following year, which we then transplant to the coast to spend the winter there, when we fear they will suffer from the cold if we plant them at the end of September. Chives are sown for winter, and leeks to succeed those sown in spring; it's worth remembering that, if the seeds sown to produce them the following spring were too new, the plants would be prone to bolting (however, the safest time to sow them is from August 10 to 15). In July, we sow white onions to be replanted in October, and scorzonera to spend the winter in the ground; we also sow red chicory for November, whose first frosts turn it white, long-shelled peas and passion lettuces. Escarole and curly endive are beginning to blanch. Finally, the gardener must not lose sight of harvesting seeds as they ripen. Garlic and shallots are harvested in this month and the next, as soon as their tops have dried out; they are left exposed to the sun for several days, then the shallots are laid out in a dry place, and the garlic is hung up in small bunches. Strawberries of the month and English strawberries are sown at sunset in very loose beds covered with a mixture of sand and earth. In general, plants are watered frequently, mainly in the evening. A Dee du ErO L Fruit garden. - Espaliers, and especially peach trees, should always be carefully tended, to ensure that the balance is maintained, or to re-establish it when it has been broken: branches that get carried away should be pinched back strictly, and weak ones pulled forward. In dry weather, in addition to the water poured at the foot of the trees, water is syringed over the fruit to soften it and give it color. Nursery work consists of raking, budding to form cattails, and grafting with a growing eye on trees whose sap lasts until the frosts, and with a dormant eye on those in which it stops earlier; but it is often safer to wait until August before grafting with a dormant eye. Bedding. - Raking, watering, mowing and pruning are the main and most expensive tasks of the month. Autumn flower nurseries are tended to, so that they can be planted in clumps in flowerbeds and along the edges of beds at the end of July or the beginning of August. Care should be taken to ensure that the taller plants don't lack stakes, so that the wind can't break them. Carnations are pickled at the end of the month or beginning of the following month. Onions and flower grafts whose leaves and stems have dried out are lifted and replanted in autumn, or even immediately, after separating the cloves and changing or modifying the soil, if you want to put them back in the same place. Among the large number of flowers in bloom are Bengal and hazelnut roses, four-season roses, king roses, Belle-Favert roses, hollyhocks, dalilias and shrubs that bloom only during hot weather. AUGUST. Kitchen garden. - You won't see an empty patch of earth in this month any more than in June and July. Strawberry plants are planted and potted to be stretched in frames. This month's strawberry plants are planted on old layers and teens, to harvest in winter. We put tiles under melons that are nearing maturity. Litter is dried to cover plants that could be damaged by heavy frosts in December. Cucumbers and gherkins need a lot of watering when it's not raining, and cauliflowers, cardoons and celery require copious watering even when it's raining a little. In addition to sowing and planting everything to be consumed within the year, we must also take care of what can survive the winter and produce the following year. So we sow white onions, leeks, salsify, scorzonera, passion lettuce, which we replant in the ground on a hillside, York and sugar loaf cabbages, which we treat in the same way, spinach, chervil, turnips and lamb's lettuce for winter, carrots for spring. The gardener must carefully study his land and his locality, in order to know the advantages and disadvantages attached to the nature of each of them. In some areas, autumn sowing must be done a fortnight earlier or a fortnight later than in others; in some, peas and broad beans can be harvested right up to the frosts, while in others they can no longer be harvested after September. All this care and work must not make us forget watering, weeding and hoeing; chicory and escarole must be tied, cardoons must be stuffed, celery must be buttered or rather stuffed, and new strawberry plants must be planted often and a little at a time. If the old ones are bald or more than two years old, replant the borders with sorrel, thyme, lavender, tarragon and so on. Winter onions usually ripen in August; if some don't drop their tops, cut them off with the back of a rake to prevent the sap from rising, so that the onion ripens better. Artichoke stalks that have ceased to produce are cut close to the ground, so that the stalk grows back better. At the end of the month, you can sow peas and beans if you can cover them with a frame just before the first frost. Fruit garden. - Up to now, we've only done partial trellising and pinching to maintain the equillibrium; now we must start to trellis completely, i.e. put all the branches in the direction they should occupy, lest later their induration gets in the way. However, if a few weak branches are still growing, which you'd like to make stronger, leave them free for a while and don't trellis them until they've hardly grown any more. If disbudding is carried out correctly in April and May, there will be few or no branches to remove. Fruits nearing maturity are carefully uncovered, to add to their flavor and color. In nurseries, we disbud trees to give them the shape we want; we make sure they are always firmly attached to their stakes; we graft all kinds of fruit trees: ornamental trees and shrubs, except perhaps the excessively vigorous almond trees, whose vegetation often lasts until the frosts. Parterre - If all the autumn annual flowers, such as balsamines, daisy queens, marigolds, etc., have not been planted in July, they should be lifted into sods and planted at the beginning of August. Maintenance, consisting of watering, raking, hoeing, cutting grass, mowing borders, etc., is much the same as in July. Carnation marcots are dried and planted in pots or in the ground. Sow quarantines for transplanting. Poppies, larkspur, immortelle, etc. are sown in place for spring flowering. Roses continue to display their beautiful flowers, accompanied by dahlias, asters, several clematis, phlox, verbenas, perennial suns, etc. SEPTEMBER. Vegetable garden. - Water in the morning; wet often and a lot at a time artichokes that are marking, and leave them only a head when the foot is not very strong. Plant wild strawberries, tarragon, sage and rosemary; place this month's strawberries on the old beds. Cut pear and virgin sorrel, to have new leaves to cut in October. Part of the parsley is cut off, for tender leaves in winter, as long as the cold doesn't destroy them. We sow radishes on their own or with chicory, chervil in rays or broadcast for the winter, spinach and parsnips in rays for spring, as well as white carrots. Serious attention is paid to piling up the manure for the time when we'll have to make layers. Celery is successively ridged, or uprooted, and replanted in deep gutters cut into the soil of the old layers. Stuff cardoons to blanch them, as well as pear corms, if you don't prefer to plant them in troughs like celery, which is simpler and better. If the winter potatoes are ripe, we dig them up. We have all kinds of vegetables, with greater ease than in the previous two months: with less heat, they don't bolt as quickly and require less watering. Asparagus berries are harvested and left to dry in the shade, then macerated in water until the seed separates easily when crushed between the fingers. The seed is washed, dried and saved for the following year's spring sowing. Fruit garden. - There is usually nothing to do to the fruit trees during this month, except for the peach trees, which are still growing, and whose balance could be disturbed by the carrying away of some branches or the weakness of others; in this case, the most vigorous ones are strictly pinched and plucked, and those which are too weak are pulled forward. We continue to uncover over-shaded fruit. The last weeding is carried out in the nurseries, and subjects whose sap was too strong in August are grafted. We visit the budded grafts made the previous month, and loosen the ligatures to prevent bulges from forming. This precaution is essential for all escutcheon grafts, in all seasons, and should be taken twenty or twenty-five days after they are taken up. The most beautiful bunches of grapes are wrapped in horsehair or paper bags to protect them from birds, flies and even the first frosts. The flowerbed. - We go through the garden carefully to see if the plants are fulfilling their purpose. If some are growing badly or seem to be suffering, if others are poorly placed or are not producing the desired effect, we take steps to remedy the situation at the time of the next planting; we keep an eye on the maturity of the seeds, so as to harvest them at the right time.  Everything indicated for the previous month can still be sown. Hyacinths, daffodils and tulips are planted towards the end of the month. Quarantines are sown for transplanting on the ground or in crates which are brought in when it freezes. You can also sow seeds of anemones, ranunculus or other bulbous or tuberous plants. The summer bloom is over and the autumn bloom begins, with the most beautiful and prodigious variety of flowers. HORTICULTURE. G OCTOBER. Vegetable garden. - We can only sow a little lamb's lettuce, spinach and chervil, which, if the autumn is favorable, will produce in March; but we can sow early romaine and lettuce with advantage, to replant in beds in November and December.  Young York cabbage and other cabbages sown in August can be transplanted, either in the nursery to be planted in February and March, or immediately if there is no fear of winter damage. White onions, passion lettuce and cauliflowers can also be transplanted in situ, but during severe frosts, the latter will need to be protected by cloches or frames, or at least by mats supported on slats or poles. At the end of October, asparagus stalks are cut, the pit smoked and ploughed; this is also the time to cut the last artichoke stalks, clean the base, shorten the outer leaves, and plough them to facilitate the ridging that will take place in November. We continue to blanch celery, cardoons, escarole and chicory. We pile up the new manure, which will be used extensively in the following month. We destroy the old layers, setting aside the unconsumed manure to make mulch or to bury as fertilizer. When the weather announces a few light frosts, we cover with mulch the last beds of chicory and escarole that have not yet been made, and especially those of green beans from the last season: it often happens that with this precaution taken for a few days, we secure the enjoyment of vegetables that would otherwise have been lost.  We don't make layers yet, but we can sow several vegetables on the old ones, to be replanted on new layers in December and January. Fruit garden. - During this month, trees require no care other than to be cleared of fruit, and to rest until pruning. Winter fruit should be picked in dry weather, one by one, so as not to crumple them; they are gently placed in baskets and taken to a dry room, where they are spread out and allowed to dry out for five or six days; they are then transported to the shelves of the fruit house. Towards the end of the month, if the trees have been stripped of their leaves, we can already start replanting all species of fruit trees in light, dry soils, and we can continue this operation throughout the winter, weather permitting. In cold, damp soils, where the roots could rot during the rainy, frosty and snowy seasons, it's best to wait until spring. If you have vacant land, break it up and smoke it, so that you can plant at the first favourable moment. Bedding. - The slowing down of sap and the cool nights give the leaves various hues that the horticulturist sees as the harbingers of the cold season. This news alerts the gardener that it will soon be time to bring in all the plants that must not spend the winter outside. You can still sow immortelle and other annual flowers that are resistant to the cold; plant hyacinths of all kinds, narcissi, daffodils, tulips, anemones, ranunculus, etc.; separate the marcottes of carnations better than in spring, and put them in pots to squeeze them in. The only flowers that bloom in October are Bengal roses, hazelnut roses, mus4 cades, dazzling sage, late gladioli and the many dahlias that can be considered as the backbone of a pleasure garden, if the cold doesn't attack them too early. You'll agree that all these flowers form a rather beautiful procession in a month that begins nature's sleep. NOVEMBER. Vegetable garden. - This month's work is more or less the same as the previous month's; but we start with the layers, which we take great care to protect from the cold and cold rains, and warm up from time to time. In the last fortnight, we sow snow peas, preferably at the foot of walls, with good exposure. It's still time to plough and butter the artichokes, after having shortened the longest leaves, the uprights having had to be cut as low as possible, as the fruit has been removed; we hoe celery in place and pull it out to plant it deep in old bed soil, where it whitens more quickly; we still transplant York and Cabus cabbages and winter lettuces on the hillside; we can even put some of the cabbages in place: If winter isn't too harsh, they'll benefit. Salsify and scorzonera can be silted up in case of hard frosts. Fruit garden. - You can start pruning old or weak seedling fruit trees, so that the sap doesn't needlessly rise in the buds to be removed. Worn-out trees are uprooted and the soil removed immediately, so that they can be replaced as soon as possible. Trees are cleaned of mosses, lichens, etc., which attach themselves to the bark. Nursery work consists of raising trees as they are needed, and clearing land for new plantings. Trees and shrubs that fear frost are covered with straw. Paterre. - Flowers are becoming scarce, and the only thing to be seen in gardens are Bengal roses and chrysanthemums, the varieties of which have long since been multiplied ad infinitum. We uproot annuals whose flowers have faded, and replant all kinds of perennials, so that next year they will flower better than if replanted in spring. This is also the most favorable month for planting most ornamental trees, except for resinous trees, which are best planted in spring. DECEMBER. Vegetable garden. - There's very little to do in December, unless you have to do a lot of digging. If the vegetable garden is in strong soil, and when frost is not an obstacle, the soil in the empty squares can be ploughed roughly, so that future frosts and cold weather will penetrate it and make it more crumbly: it will warm up all the better in spring, and the plantings will prosper all the more because it will have been more divided. Fertilizer and manure should be buried where they are needed. Fruit garden. - Trees need to be carefully checked for caterpillar nests, weevils and earwigs. Most apple and pear trees are pruned, and pits, pips and generally all tree seeds are stratified: to do this, a suitably large crate is prepared. First, a layer of damp sand is spread over it, then a bed of pits is placed on top, which is covered with a second, two-centimeter-thick layer of sand, a second bed of pits and so on, until the crate is full. The box is then placed in a cellar or other frost-proof place, and left until spring, when it's time to plant in the ground. Then carefully remove the pits, so as not to damage the sprout; put them in the ground and gain a year on the germination of certain seeds and on the development of the plant. Bedding. - You can still plant ranunculus, anemones, tulips and all the other onions you couldn't plant before. We no longer see flowers in the open ground, except for violets and a few chrysanthemums when the cold has not attacked them. If the open ground is not very busy during this month, the beds are very busy: they must be made successively for new seedlings and to transplant the seedlings planted in November. CHAPTER V DESCRIPTION, CULTIVATION AND PROPERTIES OF VEGETABLE PLANTS Several authors have adopted the family system for listing vegetable plants. While recognizing the superiority, in many respects, of this classification, we shall retain the alphabetical order as the most convenient for research purposes. However, so as not to deprive readers who are interested in these botanical comparisons of the advantage they could find in them, we will give at the end of this chapter the table, arranged by family, of all the vegetable species we have discussed. An. - Ordinary garlic is a bulb covered with very thin, white, purplish membranes and formed from several tubers joined together, commonly called cloves, each separately enveloped, with a very pungent flavor and a very strong odor. It throws out several fine fibers or loose threads, from which it draws its nourishing substance. Its leaves are green, oblong, full and flattened like those of quackgrass; its stem is united and bears at its tip a head wrapped in a white, pointed membrane; when this head opens, it produces lily-like flowers arranged in a bouquet, each composed of six white star-shaped florets. These flowers are followed by purpurine-colored, almost round, pea-sized fruits, which are small tubers called rocambole. Garlic multiplies through its cloves. In February or March, the cloves are planted Om, 16 apart, in beds or, better still, in borders. They can also be planted in October to produce their first products in spring. At the beginning of June, we tie a knot with the leaves and stem, to stop the sap flowing to the bulbs: when the leaves are dry, we pull out the garlic and leave it to dry out in the sun, then we tie it in bunches and hang them in a dry place. Garlic likes strong, healthy soil; if it's too damp, it'll be exposed to grease. Horse manure suits it best of all. Garlic is good for scorbutic patients, hydropics and asthmatics; it also aids digestion. Working people, such as sailors, bargemen, soldiers and peasants, who are reduced to eating coarse food or drinking unsanitary 4. water, do well to use it. In addition to ordinary garlic, there are two varieties that are not grown in France: red garlic, which is cultivated by the Gènois, and oriental garlic, which looks a little like leek. Artichant. - The root is thick and hard; the leaves are about 66 centimeters long, broad in the middle, divided into strips, cut and covered with a whitish down; its stem is 67 centimetres to 1 metre high, fluted, cottony, with branches at the top of which is a round, pointed head, more or less, depending on the species, formed of large sea-green scales, the base of which is thick, tender and whitish, good for eating; this is the only part of the plant that is used. The artichoke is propagated by eyelets, which are separated from the mother plants in spring and planted immediately, i.e. around April 15th. Artichokes have long, deep roots and require deep, cool, fertile soil. Weeding and watering are necessary when the plant is young, but it's a good idea to continue them throughout the year: with the help of the right season, and by promptly harvesting the stems, you'll get a second harvest in autumn from the strongest plants. Artichokes must be carefully protected from the cold by a cover of litter or, preferably, dry leaves: this cover must be removed as soon as possible, then ploughed, the dead or rotten leaves removed and the superfluous eyelets cut off.  This plant lasts for three years; it is warming, aperitive and very nourishing. The most remarkable varieties are: gros vert or de Laon, the best, most esteemed and most widely cultivated; gros camus, a little earlier than the preceding one, but less fleshy; De Provence, less fleshy, but earlier than the preceding ones: fears frost and is only suitable for the south of France; Rouge, a variety from the south, similar to the preceding one; Le violet, early, not very large, excellent for peppers, not so good cooked. Asparagus. - Asparagus is a perennial vegetable that plays an important role in urban diets. This appetizing, diuretic plant is very good for your health, and its cultivation is all the more profitable as it is easy to transport without deteriorating. If the soil is suitable, no vegetable garden should be without its asparagus pit; but it is above all in the garden of rural schoolteachers that this precious vegetable should occupy first place. So a teacher's first task on taking possession of his garden should be to plant the asparagus that will later bring him benefits and profits. There are two main varieties of asparagus: the green or common variety, and the large, purple or reddish-tipped Dutch variety. Asparagus multiplies by seed. It is sometimes sown in the field; more commonly, it is raised in nurseries, to establish squares with ready-made claws. The biggest disadvantage of growing asparagus is that you have to wait at least three years for the produce, but this is offset by the plant's longevity, which produces abundantly for fifteen years or more. This is the objection made by schoolteachers to whom we recommend planting asparagus: but if we demand that asparagus be grown in all school gardens, we'll have no more objections to make to advice which is all in the interest of those to whom it is given. SOWING ASPARAGUS IN A NURSERY. - Choose a patch of light soil, sandy if possible, which has been well prepared and, if necessary, amended. Sow in October, or from mid-February to the end of March, either broadcast or better, in rays spaced 20 to 25 centimetres apart; bury 15 centimetres deep; if the soil is a little hard and likely to fight on the surface, it's a good idea to top-dress. In the event of drought, either before or after emergence, water and weed the plant by weeding and hoeing. This plant is best used after the first year; this is the age at which asparagus should be preferred; however, it is customary to leave it in the nursery for two years; in this case, the same care is given in the second year as in the first.  PLANTING ASPARAGUS IN PITS. - The most important operation is to establish the plant permanently. We'll go into some lengthy details on this operation, because from our point of view, asparagus is one of the most important issues in horticulture. The methods for planting asparagus vary according to the nature of the soil. Sometimes, pits of Om, 70 to 1 metre or more are dug, from which all the soil is removed and replaced by fertilizer and other better soils. When the soil is damp, a first bed of plaster and coarse sand, heather, broom and tree twigs is placed at the bottom for drainage: Elsewhere, trenches 20 to 40 centimetres deep are dug, and manure is spaded into the bottom of the trenches; elsewhere again, only heavy smoking is used, and the whole plot is ploughed thoroughly, or just the beds where the seedlings will be planted, flat. The layout and spacing of the plants are no less variable: sometimes two, three or four rows of asparagus are planted together in a pit or bed (from Om, 80 to 1m, 60 wide); in this case, the beds are separated by paths that become ados when the soil from the dig is deposited on them; sometimes they are planted in isolated, equidistant rows, from Om, 50 to Im, 60. It cannot be said that one of these methods is absolutely and always preferable to the others, since all of them, if properly practiced and executed, produce very beautiful asparagus and long-lasting plants. Here, then, are the general principles to which we must adhere in order to operate correctly: Asparagus fears stagnant moisture at its roots, and must therefore be protected from it: this is why deep pits with bottom drainage have been devised for damp soils, and why planting on the surface, or even on raised beds, is the opposite procedure. The asparagus root reaches Om, 70 and more in length when it finds soil to its liking; it must therefore be given soil that has been added to or deeply disturbed. Sandy, permeable, soft soils are best suited to asparagus; if the bottom layer of soil is arid, thin and stubborn, it must be replaced with a better base. Consumed peat and turf, puddle and ditch muds and curings, and bedding soils can be used with advantage in these replacements. Asparagus requires a lot of food and fertilizer; whatever method is adopted, the soil must be richly fertilized. Pits should be backfilled to within 20 to 25 centimetres of soil level, and the last bed of this backfill should consist of Om, 15 of the best, softest soil possible, into which the claws are planted. Placing two or three rows of claws together in pits or beds has the advantage of making cultivation and annual replanting easier; placing the rows in isolation provides more air and food for the plants. The distance generally adopted is 40 to 50 centimetres in all directions for the large species; the common species can be a little closer. In a 1.60 m pit, you can place four rows of Om, 40 claws which, over a length of 10 meters, give 100 claws, a quantity we feel is sufficient for a teacher's garden. By planting in a checkerboard pattern, you can give the plants a uniform spacing of Om, 50. Whatever the respective dimensions observed in your planting, everything should be drawn up with a chalk line and a tape measure, and the beds marked at all four corners with good stakes. Once the pits have been prepared, it's time to plant. This is usually done from March to mid-April; the claws must be pulled out carefully, so as not to break the ends of their roots, which are very brittle, and care must be taken to leave them in the air as little as possible. Once the lines have been drawn with a chalk line, we mark the position of each plant along their length, at the set distance, with a small mound of earth taken from and around the position itself. The claws are established on this mound, with the roots carefully arranged along its sides, and then covered with 6 to 8 centimetres of soil. Once planted, it's best to cover each bed with earth. Care then consists of watering as needed, hoeing and weeding to destroy weeds. At the end of October or in November, dry stems are cut and removed, and 3 to 6 centimetres of soil or compost is added; but this is generally done in March, after light hoeing. The same care is continued for the first three years. At the third flush, you can cut some of the best asparagus, but it's better to wait until the following year, when they'll be in full production. From then on, care consists of hoeing, weeding and watering in summer, and a fall and spring treatment each year. For some, the autumn method consists simply of removing dry stems and cleaning the beds; others, on the contrary, top up immediately or at the end of December with a few centimetres of soil, compost or even short manure. The spring method is limited to light ploughing or forking with a fork, carried out with care to avoid damaging the buds, after which the soil is replenished if not done in autumn. In all cases, manuring every two or three years with short manure, at the beginning or end of winter, is essential to maintain the abundance and beauty of the produce. Depending on the quality of the asparagus being cared for, the thickness of the top-dressing will vary, but it is important to spread it evenly, so that the surface of the pit remains even. Beet. - Its roots are up to Om, 12 in diameter and 34 to 36 centimetres long; its leaves are green or violet-red, broad and flat; there are several varieties, all of which can be grown in the same way. Beet needs good, loose, deeply tilled soil, otherwise it forks and makes no profit; it is sown at the end of April in warm soils, and in mid-May in cold soils; when sown earlier, it often rises. We pull it up around All Saints' Day; remove all the tops; clean it as much as possible, even wash it if the soil is too sticky; then leave it in the air for a day to dry out, and place it in a cellar or dry greenhouse away from frosts. Nasturtium. - Nasturtiums are sown in rows in March, after the soil has been well smoked and prepared; they are then rowed, and yield more the more they are watered. The barely-formed buds and still-green seeds are preserved in vinegar and used as capers. The flower is used on salad. Cardoon. - Cardoon is sown in April in the open ground. Holes are dug one meter apart, Om, 50 wide and of equal depth; three-quarters of them are filled with earth mixed with well-consumed manure, then three or four seeds are placed in each hole, Om, 06 apart, and covered with earth mixed with manure; if all the seeds in the same hole sprout, they are pulled out so that only the most vigorous plant remains. When the cardoons are strong enough, the stalk is ridged, after having been tied into bundles; they are covered with straw and, when the ribs are white and tender, the cardoon is good to eat; it has the same nutritional properties as the artichoke. Carrot. - A biennial, indigenous plant, comprising a large number of varieties; but the red collared carrot is the best and most widely grown in our countries. Carrots are broadcast or sown in rows, with the proviso that they should be walked on a few hours after sowing, as long as the weather is fine. You lose less space by broadcasting; but, on the other hand, you can't care for the plant as easily as by raking: nevertheless, carrots grow equally well in both ways, and everyone should follow their own ideas in this respect. The key to its success is to be weeded and wetted often when young, and above all to be spaced out properly: to this end, it should be thinned out as early as possible, and left O m. 15 cent. apart in all directions from one plant to another; the further apart it is from the rest, the more food it has to enjoy. Harvest at the end of October, or during the winter following sowing. Celery. - Two species of celery are grown: common celery and celeriac. Each of these two species has given rise to several good sub-varieties. Common celery is tender and pleasant-tasting. Celery root is an excellent vegetable that deserves to be better known and more widely grown than it is: its flavor is milder than that of ribbed celery. To grow celery at different times of the year, sow from January to June. From January to March, we sow on beds and under cloches: the seed should be lightly covered and often basked. Only at the beginning of April are seedlings sown on a bed and under the same cover. Subsequent seedlings are planted in the open ground (April seedlings are planted in a sheltered spot); they are carefully thinned out, as the seedlings are to be planted without transplanting, and therefore need to gain strength in the first soil. The soil on which the plants are planted should be deeply spaded, well amended and damp or cool rather than dry. Celery should be planted in staggered rows, 20 to 25 centimetres apart, with each plant watered immediately for recovery, and moistened every two or three days if it doesn't rain. These waterings should be continued assiduously, as this plant likes water very much. When celery is strong enough, it can be blanched by tying it with three ties, in dry weather, and lining the bed with dry straw, so that only the tips of the leaves are visible; or, after tying it, mound the soil around the plant, first up to the first tie, then eight days later up to the second tie, and finally up to the third tie eight days later: this operation is called buttering. When you HORT. intend to butter your celery, you leave an interval at the time of planting equal to the width of the beds, which you plant with lettuce, chicory, etc., and whose soil is used, after the harvest of these plants, to make your mound. It is necessary to mulch or butter last season's celery before the severe frosts to which it is very susceptible. A few plants left in the ground and covered with straw can be used as seedbeds. The newest seeds are the best, although they may keep well for three or four years. Celeriac can be sown in the same way, but to obtain a soft, tender, mellow root, you need to choose deep, fresh, loose soil, or soil made soft by ploughing before winter and good topdressing. If the soil is not naturally fresh, make up for this by irrigation and frequent watering. It is planted at a distance of 40 to 50 centimetres, after having removed the large leaves and all lateral roots from the young plant chosen in the sowing. At the start of winter, we pull in some of the roots, or all of them if the soil is damp, and after cutting off the leaves, minus those in the heart, we bury it in the cellar. Celery is digestive and pectoral; it is usually eaten raw in salads; it is also served cooked in fat, and used to make aperitif broths. D Chervil. - Indigenous annual plant, sown at any time of year, either broadcast or in rows. To obtain chervil more quickly in spring, sow a few borders at the foot of well-exposed walls. The main autumn and winter sowing is done from the end of August to the beginning of October, and the last sown is the one that goes to seed last and therefore provides the longest supply. It succeeds everywhere, provided the soil is well prepared. It is eaten in salads and drunk to refresh and purify the blood. The seed ripens within the year and keeps for three years. BULBOUS CHERFEUIL, introduced into France a few years ago, has had little success: its small, starchy, slightly sweet root is somewhat similar in flavor to that of the chervis. However, as the cultivation of bulbous chervil is not very advantageous, we limit ourselves to indicating this variety, without going into further details. Chicory. - Chicory is a native plant that is much sought-after as a salad. There are several varieties, of which the main and most commonly grown are: wild chicory, curly chicory and escarole. Wild chicory is perennial: its emerging leaves produce a salad similar to baby lettuce, a little bitter, but very healthy and highly prized: it can be grown all year round by successive sowing. They can be sown very thickly, in almost any type of soil, and only require watering. The winter lettuce known as capuchin beard is obtained from this species, which is harvested in autumn and placed in alternate beds with potting soil or sand in a warm cellar. Curly endive only does well in autumn and winter; in summer, it rises easily and becomes tough. Its main merit is that it provides a lot, keeps for a long time and melts less in the fire than the others: moreover, it is a little firm and slightly bitter when eaten raw. Sow from May or June to mid-August, spacing the plants 35 to 40 centimetres apart and watering copiously during hot spells. When the plants are sufficiently full, bind them to blanch them. Escarole has a leaf as broad as that of some lettuces; it is more or less indented or elongated: it is soft and tender and of great profit, either raw or cooked, because it melts very little; its defect is that it rises easily during the summer and gets speckled by the rain. Like chicory, it should be tied only in dry weather, and then watered only with the neck of a watering can. It is grown in the same way as curly endive. COIUd de drpen d Cabbage. - The main varieties of cabbage are: white cabbage, regular cabbage, early kale, Savoy kale, savoy cabbage, large-ribbed cabbage, kohlrabi and red cabbage. The cultivation of the various cabbage species is more or less the same; they are propagated from the seed of the best species and of those that are the best eaten, which are replanted in March in the open ground. The seed of all species of apple cabbage is sown in beds at the beginning of March, or in the absence of beds, in well-smoked, well-prepared soil with good exposure; if they sprout too thickly, they need to be thinned out and watered often; whole squares are planted and tilled carefully; the more the soil is disturbed, the faster they grow. They are planted around the beginning of June, a metre apart in all directions. They should be watered and ploughed often. Seeds are sown again in mid-August, to be transplanted to a well-sheltered nursery in October and planted out the following March in well-amended, well-prepared soil. Cabbages transplanted in this way can be harvested in July, and keep well into winter. At the end of November, the remaining cabbages are removed and replanted in the nursery, bent slightly to the south-east, along the walls, protected from heavy frosts; they are covered with large, long beds: they can thus be kept well into Lent. After the cabbage harvest, the soil is left to rest until March, then ploughed to sow with onions. Cabbages should never be planted in the same place two years running. When replanting or transplanting cabbages, care should generally be taken to set them firmly in the ground, so that the eye of the plant is flush with the soil, and rather lower than higher. It's also a good idea to choose rainy weather whenever possible for this operation, because cabbages that don't wilt or recover easily are less likely to be attacked by insects. If the weather remains dry, this can be remedied by watering. If the plant is too weak, it will languish and fall prey to aphids; if it is too strong, its new roots will have difficulty penetrating the soil, it will grow little and will be exposed to climbing, knotting or hardening off. To preserve free-ranging species, it's important to keep seed-bearing plants of different species or even varieties well apart. Seeds of different cabbage species or varieties should be harvested, dried, threshed and stored separately. They retain their productive virtue for six or seven years. Cauliflower. - Cauliflower is considered to be a separate breed, although it undoubtedly originated from kale. There are three main varieties: tender or Salomon, semi-hard and hard. They have no external characteristics that clearly distinguish one from the other, but they differ significantly in their qualities. Cauliflowers need well-prepared, well-smoked, soft soil, and must be watered often. By sowing cauliflowers in September, and transplanting them to a warm exposure on ados and under cloches that are covered with straw during the cold, they can be harvested in spring: they can be put in place around March 15; until then, they should be given air whenever the weather permits. Sow in warm beds in February for late summer harvest. Cauliflowers sown in the open ground at the end of April and cultivated as above produce in August. The most common practice is to sow cauliflowers on beds in June and transplant them in July; if watered carefully, they will produce a plentiful harvest from September to November. Cauliflowers sown in autumn and overwintered under a bell, with strong, stubby stems and firm, clean, white, tightly packed heads with no inner leaves protruding, should be reserved for seedbeds. When replanting cauliflowers on loose, well-amended soil, space them 80 cm to 1 m apart. Dn mi ee min nammidide A Brussels sprout. - This variety belongs more to the Milans than to any other race: its stem is 70 centimetres to 1 metre high, producing small, tender, curly apples in the axils, which are highly prized and picked as they grow. Sown successively from mid-April to mid-June, this excellent vegetable can be enjoyed from autumn through to the end of winter, as it resists severe frost better than any of the Milans, although many of these are very hardy, especially when only half-headed. Chives. - There are two types of chives: annual and perennial. Chives grow very quickly, and can be sown from March to September. They are usually grown in borders, and all you need to do for them to grow well is to separate the clumps when they become too strong. This species, which is the perennial, does not produce seeds, and multiplies only by cloves, which are separated by bursting the clumps when planting. Annual chives multiply by seed, which is best sown in light, substantial soil in February and March, and replanted in May and April, 16 centimetres apart; the seed keeps well for two or three years. Chives are propagated by separating the cloves in March and planting them in beds or, more usually, in borders. They like good soil, warm exposure and a little watering in summer. Cucumber. - Cucumbers are sown in well-soiled soil, in April and May, in holes prepared in the same way as for melons. They need a warm exposure and plenty of water. When the stem begins to elongate, pinch it over five or six eyes and that's enough. Cucumbers are refreshing and slow down blood circulation. Gherkin is a variety of cucumber that can be sown like cucumber and requires no further care. Squash. - Originally from warm climates, squash love heat and humidity. Their seeds are germinated on a bed and under a bell in March, in pots filled with potting soil; then, after the plants have become accustomed to the air, they are removed from the soil and placed in a good exposure, from the end of April to mid-May, in the open ground, if the soil is healthy and well amended, or in small pits 40 to 50 centimetres wide and 32 centimetres deep, filled with manure and a few centimetres of potting soil on top. They can also be sown in the open ground, or in similar pits, from late April to mid-May, with two or three seeds in each hole, leaving only the strongest plant, which is watered frequently. Most species of squash are left to develop naturally and are not pruned in any way, but many gardeners do prune pumpkins. The first stem is usually cut off above the second or third eye, so that it produces as many arms. When the fruit has set, the branch carrying it is stopped 2 or 3 eyes above. Two fruits are often left on the same plant, rarely three; if you want large pumpkins, leave only one. D Ripe squash, pumpkins and pumpkins can be stored in a dry, temperate place for three or four months, or much longer in some species. There are many different types of squash, each with different qualities. But we especially recommend the following, because they do best in our temperate climates: ordinary pumpkin, giraumon, pumpkin, Ohio squash, whose flesh is easy to cook, sweet and very floury. All squashes need manuring and watering. The seeds of these vegetables keep for six to eight years; for seedlings, three- or four-year-old seeds are best. Cress. - A native perennial that, in many places, is simply collected from the banks of cool streams where it grows naturally. It can be cultivated by sowing, or by planting clumps brought from elsewhere on the banks of running waters, where it soon multiplies infinitely. The garden cress, however, is the cress alénois, an annual plant that received the name cress because of its pungent, pungent flavor. It doesn't last long, and quickly goes to seed, which means it has to be sown every fortnight, either in a row or broadcast, and in the shade in summer. There are three varieties: curly cress, broad-leaf cress and golden cress. Shallots. - Shallots can be propagated by planting bulbs, preferably small ones that are less profitable in households, and whose planting is at least as good as that of the larger ones. Good, soft, healthy soil, smoked the previous year, is needed, as shallots fear fresh fertilization as well as excessively damp soil. Plant in borders or beds almost flush with the ground, 10 centimetres apart, in February rather than March, and sometimes in October, to produce new shallots as early as June. From July to August, when the leaves are cooked, we pull them out and, after letting them dry on the ground for a few days, we take them to the attic. They must be kept dry and protected from the cold over winter. We also grow a large shallot that is less common and prone to degeneration: it is planted at 22 centimetres. Same cultivation. Spinach. - Spinach grows well everywhere; however, it produces more in light, slightly cool soil, which is especially well loosened and smoked. To grow spinach all year round, sow every twenty days from March to October. Summer seedlings should be sown in the shade, with a northern exposure, and they need a lot of watering: despite this, they are not very productive, because they go to seed almost immediately. We save for seed a plate of the first spring seedlings, or even better, of the autumn seedlings; we pull up the male individuals as soon as their flowers have passed. The seeds keep for two or three years. Spinach has a soothing effect, purifies the blood and can be used in all seasons. Spinach that appears frozen can be soaked in cold water and allowed to dry out in the open air, to regain its original appearance. Tarragon - A perennial, aromatic plant from Siberia that is propagated by bursting the stalks in April and May. Place 5 plants 30 cm apart in well-tilled soil. It's a good idea to cut off the stems at the start of winter and cover them with compost or even bedding on top, in case of heavy frosts, as the plant is a little sensitive. It can be used as a salad dressing, and makes a very pleasant vinegar. Marsh bean. - Beans are sown from the beginning of February to the end of April, and even later, in cool soil not exposed to sunlight. To get them early, sow them in December and January in beds facing south. Sow in rays or clumps. Clumps are formed by placing three or four beans in holes made with a hoe and spaced about 30 centimetres apart. Rays are planted at the same distance apart. Beans are usually hoeed twice; the second time, they are reshod, which increases their strength and yield. The blossom is much sought-after by bees; when it is completely spent, we pinch the end of the branches and stem to stop the sap and bring it to the advantage of the fruit. Many people like to eat the bean very young; when it has been harvested in this way, by cutting the stems straight away, we can hope, if the season is favourable, for a second harvest produced by the new branches that will grow from the base. Beans, especially if left in their pods, retain their germinative powers for four or five years. Strawberry. - A perennial plant with short, sub-woody stems, not very difficult to grow and requiring little heat to reach full maturity. In our climate, it's the fruit that ripens first; it's also the one that gives the longest. Strawberry cultivation has produced a large number of varieties, but there are really only three distinct species, two of European origin and one from America (see Le Bon Jardinier). Strawberries grow everywhere, but light soil suits them better than any other. Provided the sun doesn't beat down on them during hot spells, they need no care other than to be cleared of weeds. They also need to be cleared of useless runners and grommets, and old plants replaced: this is done from spring to autumn. There's no need to sow them; eyelet nets are all you need to multiply them, and this is both the quickest and easiest way. Strawberries prefer water from the gardener to rainwater and natural soil moisture. With a new plant every two years, you can be sure of always having plenty of good strawberries. The white worm is fond of strawberry roots; you'll notice that it's eating them when the leaves wither for no apparent reason; then you'll be quick to dig down and kill the worm. Beans. - Cultivation and differences in climate have given rise to a prodigious number of varieties of this excellent vegetable, but almost all are considered to belong to the common bean species. In terms of their cultivation and use, the various types of bean differ considerably, which must be taken into account when choosing the right species. Some are oars; their climbing stems need oars of between Im 50 and 3 meters to support them; others are dwarf; several are somewhere between these two dimensions. Some are particularly suitable for eating as beans, others as small green pods (green beans); a third type, called mange-tout or without parchment, can be eaten with pods and beans together almost to the point of maturity. One of these qualities does not always exclude the others. For example, the Swiss red bean, one of the best green beans, is also very good dry, and most mange-tout beans are highly prized in grain form. We'd like to give a brief introduction to the cultivation of pole and bush beans. The first beans are planted towards the end of April, weather permitting (i.e. if the weather is fine and dry); otherwise, they must wait until May, as the excessive humidity of the soil, combined with frequent rainfall, causes them to rot. The soil is first ploughed in March, then left to rest until it is time to sow the beans, at which point the soil is ploughed a second time, and the rake is used to even out the planks or squares. Runner beans are sown six or eight times on clods purposely made at a distance of Om 60 from each other, with a handful of potting soil thrown in at the bottom to ensure good growth. Dwarf beans are sown in rows only Om 07 deep, Om 12 apart, then covered with soil, dragging both feet along the sides. Beans can be sown from the end of April to the end of May only, to have them ripe, and from the beginning of June to mid-July, to have them green by the end of summer and into autumn. This vegetable is used so frequently in the kitchen, that it's arguably the most industrious in the home. It can be used in all seasons, in all conditions and for the most delicate of tastes. Dry bean seed, especially in the pod, is good for several years. As we have said, it does best in light soils; in clay soils, it needs more fertilizer and more care. Lettuce. - This vegetable has two main varieties that form two divisions: head lettuces and romaine lettuces. The former has a rounded shape; the latter is more elongated; its heart develops more easily; its flavor is much milder. The varieties of these two divisions are numerous and well enough known without needing to be enumerated. Spring lettuces can be sown in March on a small bed or in well-sheltered soil, and replanted in April; or they can be sown in the open in February and March among onions, carrots and salsify. This method is not without its disadvantages; however, it can be practiced by sowing very lightly and using only very small species. Summer lettuces can be sown in the two ways we have just described, so that their produce follows that of early lettuces; but their sowing, instead of being limited to the first spring, extends into July. After March, the plants are raised in the ground. Transplanting requires no attention other than to avoid overloading the soil around the roots, especially if the soil is strong. Lettuce sown between onion beds stays in place, after being hoeed and thinned out, and grows just as well as that transplanted. Lettuce thrives best in clean, light, substantial soil; frequent watering produces tender, soft lettuces. It is very useful, especially in dry soils, to mulch the beds before planting. Winter lettuces can be sown from mid-August to around September 10th. Replant at the end of October in the southern flowerbeds, at the foot of walls, and protect against hard frosts by covering with large beds or straw mats, which are removed as soon as the weather permits. It's a good idea to sow two seedlings a fortnight apart; sometimes the first seedlings advance too far and are liable to perish. It's always a good idea to use seeds harvested the previous year. Romaine lettuces are similar in all respects to head lettuces, but need to be tied so that they blanch and their heads fill out better. Perennial lettuce is rarely grown in gardens, but it can be cultivated with advantage: in April and May, its new shoots make an excellent salad. Lentil. - This annual plant is native to southern France: it prefers dry, warm, sandy soil. It is sown either in a garden or in the open field, in clumps or rays, and more rarely broadcast, as soon as frosts are no longer a threat, i.e. at the end of February or beginning of March. It requires no special care.  To ensure that the seed is of the best quality and most beautiful, it is threshed only as needed, either to eat it or to sow it; in this way, it is still very good in the second year. Mache. - Lamb's lettuce is a small, indigenous annual lettuce that is sown every eight or ten days from mid-August to the end of October in loose, soft, smoky soil from the previous year. Cover very lightly with a rake, and water if necessary. Lamb's lettuce should be used whole and only when young; by picking the most advanced for consumption, the plant will be sufficiently thinned out. A few plants are left to go to seed; as they ripen, the seeds fall off, so harvest several times, shaking the stalks on a cloth or cardboard. Lamb's lettuce can be harvested in the field, where it can be sown on its own, but it is always preferable to sow and harvest lamb's lettuce in the garden. This plant is refreshing and purifies the blood. Melon. - The flavor and fragrance of this fruit, which originated in Asia, have from time immemorial made it sought after and propagated in almost every part of the globe. Its varieties have multiplied to such an extent that today most of them are barely distinguishable, and every day we see those that for a time had somewhat pronounced characteristics lose them and merge with others. Melons can be divided into three main breeds: 1° common or embroidered melons, 2° cantaloupe melons, and 3° plain-peel melons. FIRST BREED. - Market garden melon, embroidered, round, sometimes a little depressed from the umbilicus to the stalk, without ribs and of medium size, very thick flesh with abundant water content, mediocre flavor. The following melons belong to this breed: sucrin de Tours, sucrin à petites graines, Sucrin à chair blanche, Ananas à chair verte. SECOND BREED (CANTALOUPE). - Cantaloup orange, noir des Carmes, prescot, petit prescot and cantaloup d'Alger. THIRD BREED. - White-fleshed Maltese melon, red-fleshed Maltese melon, United States nutmeg, white-fleshed winter melon, red-fleshed winter melon and Persian or Odessa melon. Melons in this series are referred to in many countries as watermelons, but this name should be applied more specifically to watermelons. GROWING MELONS. - Successful cultivation of early melons requires considerable equipment in terms of frames, windows and glass cloches, so that melon seeds can be sown on warm beds as early as January, and cultivation can continue until the fruit ripens on constantly warmed beds, at considerable expense. Those with limited equipment should sow at the end of April, or even better, at the beginning of May. This is what we recommend to schoolteachers, whose resources in warm manures are very limited, and who cannot hope to have ripe melons before the end of August or the first fortnight of September. For this limited crop, not layers but mounds of fresh manure are prepared at the foot of a south-facing wall around May, the time when melons can withstand the outside temperature. These mounds are rounded, flattened at the top and soon collapse in on themselves. A little potting soil mixed with light earth is spread over the top of these mounds, spaced 1.50 m apart, and four or five seeds are placed in a hole in each mound. When the plants have five or six leaves, we destroy all those that are not vigorous, keeping only the two most beautiful. As soon as the plant has grown its fourth leaf above the cotyledons, we top above the second leaf: this gives rise to two stems; if we top above the third leaf, three stems are born, from which we remove the least robust after a few days; but it's better to have only two stems, i.e. to top above the second leaf. A little later, we pinch off the two lateral stems to make them branch out; we pinch off again above the second leaf all the shoots that the first pruning has given rise to; after which we give the plant over to the natural course of vegetation, until meshes form, i.e. female flowers, which are followed by fruit. As each fruit is formed, the branch bearing it is pinched off one eye above the young fruit, and the branches with only male flowers are removed. Soon after, the number of fruits is reduced to two or at most three on each plant, choosing the liveliest, greenest and best-formed, and removing all the others. In plantations with two plants on each mound, only two melons are left on each plant. Subsequent pruning consists solely of cutting back weak, confused and overabundant branches, pinching off those that grow too long, and seeking out and destroying any fruit that appears afterwards. Watering should be very sparing, as melons are very sensitive to excess humidity, especially at the base of the plant. Water should therefore only be given during dry spells, and preferably in basins and on the sides of the mound rather than in the middle. When the melon is at the point of ripeness, and there is a fear that it may take on the taste of the earth, the fruit is placed on a piece of slate or tile; the sun's ardor then strikes it from all sides, perfecting it and bringing it to perfect ripeness. It is ripe when the stem seems to be coming off and when it gives off a strong odor; it will be good if it has a short stem, is firm under the finger and heavy in the hand. The various types of melon should not be grown too close together if they are to be kept fresh, unless they are planted at different times and do not flower at the same time. It is also advisable to keep away from melons all other plants of the Cucurbitaceae family (pumpkins, squash, giraumons, cucumbers), whose proximity could lead to accidental cross-breeding, so that after very careful cultivation, mongrel melons could be harvested that would not be edible. To obtain good seeds, we choose the most beautiful and straightforward fruit of each species, and let it ripen as much as possible. The seeds are then separated from the juice and filaments, dried thoroughly, and kept for seven to eight years, sometimes longer. Seeds from fruits eaten at their normal ripening point can also be used, even if they have been washed. Melon is an excellent fruit, very refreshing, but very indigestible. Watermelon. - Fruit usually rounded, with smooth, green, mottled or speckled rind; flesh red or white, very melting, sweet, but a little bland; seeds black or red. By sowing it early, like early melons, and then transplanting the plant into good, prepared soil with the best exposure, you can hasten its maturity and have it ready for hot weather. This type of squash can be pruned like melons and given the necessary watering. Turnip. - The turnip is an indigenous biennial plant. It has been cultivated since time immemorial, and its flavor and external characteristics are easily modified by the soil and climate. Turnips come in a large number of varieties, many of which are not very specific. Turnips are sown from mid-June to mid-August. In light soils, early varieties can be sown until the beginning of September, and seedlings sown in May and early June sometimes do well if the weather is damp and not too hot. Some gardeners risk sowing in March and April to get summer turnips, but they rarely fail to come up, even when using old seed, which should always be done. Sow on freshly-turned soil, clear and broadcast, whenever possible in rainy or overcast weather; care consists of weeding and thinning. onion. - This plant, one of the most important of the root vegetables, is perennial by nature, but is treated as a biennial in cultivation. Its many varieties change easily under the influence of soil and climate. Onion seed is sown in March in loose, light soils, and in April in clay soils. If it grows too thickly, it should be thinned out, leaving the largest plants 15 cm apart; the thinned-out plants will be used to transplant where the seed has not sprouted. Onions like substantial soil, rather light than strong, amended from the previous year, or at least before winter. They can be successfully sown in beds previously occupied by cabbage, to which good fertilizers are always given. Onion beds must be carefully cleared of weeds, and repeated watering must be kept in mind until they begin to turn, at which point watering should be discontinued unless there is a severe drought. When the onion has made its apple and reached its full size, its tops begin to yellow and fall to the sides. If, however, as autumn approaches, the onion remains green and takes too long to finish, you can force the tops to lie down by pressing lightly on them with the back of a rake, or by any other equivalent means, which speeds up ripening a little: you then pull it out and leave it in the field for a few days, then bring it in during dry weather, after peeling it and cutting off the tail 0.15m above the fruit. It is usually placed in the attic, where it is stirred from time to time to keep it in good condition. When frost approaches, it should be piled up and covered with straw and blankets to protect it from the cold, of which it is the declared enemy. Very fine onions can also be obtained by another process, which consists in sowing the seed very thickly in May, and letting it grow without watering or thinning; onions pressed in this way ripen without becoming larger than hazelnuts. As soon as they are ripe, we pull them up and keep them until the end of February; then we prepare beds, draw lines and replant these small fruits in a straight line at a distance of 16 to 18 centimetres in all directions from each other. These plants will come into their own if you give them occasional ploughing and watering when they need it: they will be earlier than seedling onions. Onions for seed are planted in February and March. They are spaced about 30 cm apart; the seed is good for two years, rarely three; it is rounded, black on the outside and white on the inside. Onions are pectoral and aperitif. D sorrel. - Several varieties of this plant are grown, including Belleville sorrel, which has broader, less acidic leaves than common sorrel; it is generally grown around Paris. It is generally grown around Paris, and is sown as a broadcast or bedding plant, or as a border plant in spring, or even better in autumn; it does well in all types of soil, although it prefers light, deep soil that is neither too dry nor too wet. It is customary to cut it flush with the ground, but market gardeners rightly prefer to pick it leaf by leaf, and always take the outer ones. Summer heat increases its acidity, so sow a bed or border in the north for that season. It can also be propagated by sprouting: this is the almost unique way of propagating and preserving the species that delicate tastes prefer, i.e. virgin sorrel, whose leaves are longer and less acidic than common sorrel. Sorrel seeds germinate for three years. Sorrel is a refreshing aperitif, particularly suited to bilious temperaments. Parsnip. - Its root is large, long, white, charming, sinewy and strong-smelling; its taste is not unpleasant in soup; it can be grown like carrots. Under the name of round parsnip or Metz parsnip, there is a spinning top-shaped variety, earlier and better suited to soils with little depth; its seed is only good for one year. Parsley. - Its seeds, which usually take a month to set, should be sown from February to August, in good, loose soil, and in autumn at the foot of a wall facing south, so as to have some early in the spring. This plant does not go to seed until the second year, and the seeds keep for two years. To grow parsley through the winter, cover it with good straw mats in times of snow and frost. Parsley is a depurative. Chili pepper. - Sow in beds in February and March, or in compost in April. Replant at the end of April or beginning of May, in a bed at midday, or in pots which are exposed in the same way or buried in a bed. Its taste and properties are similar to those of pepper; it is used in cooking, particularly for pickling gherkins. Its seeds can be kept for two years, but it's better to use new ones. Burnet. - Weans in March on beds or in flowerbeds, in sun or shade, as long as you don't let it run out of water. It can even be grown on paths, without the need for cultivation. It can also be propagated by splitting the stalks. Its seed is good for three years. Pimprenelle is used as a salad dressing; it is refreshing and an aperitif. Poirean. - Leeks require substantial soil, preferably amended the previous autumn; fresh horned cattle manure seems to be harmful to them, but they are not afraid of horse or sheep manure, especially if it is consumed; grape marc is also a good amendment for this plant, as is leached ash. - Leeks are sown in February, March and July. When it has grown to the size of a feather-pipe, we take advantage of rainy, overcast weather to carefully remove it from the ground, and immediately replant it in a bed of well loosened soil, about Om 16 apart and 10 or 12 centimetres deep, after cutting off the tips of the leaves and roots. During the summer, weed and water often, especially in dry weather. Many gardeners cut the leaves off their leeks 3, 4 or even 5 times during the summer, to make the stems grow; this practice, contrary to theory, seems justified by experience. Leeks can remain in the ground until the frosts. Around this time, they are pulled up, gathered into bunches and placed in small trenches; they are covered with litter and kept that way until May, when the best seed-bearing ones are replanted. The seed lasts for two years. Leeks are healthy and refreshing. Peas. - The many varieties of this excellent vegetable can be divided into two main sections: shelled peas, which are eaten only in the kernel, and peas without parchment or mange-tout, which are eaten in both the pod and the kernel. Both contain dwarf and paddle varieties. Peas are an annual plant that thrives in all types of soil, but they don't grow in the same place twice: they need at least three years between plantings. Peas are sown in clumps or rays, with Om 34 between each clump of five or six plants, or Om 25 between each ray if sown in rays. Care of this crop consists of hoeing, weeding and raking large species, watering when the weather is too dry and pinching early species between the third and fourth flower to make them more precocious. To obtain early plants, sow in light, sandy soil, amended with compost, at noon, in November and December. Early varieties such as Michaux peas are chosen for this purpose. Ordinary varieties can be sown as late as July. Those sown from December to March should be covered with straw during the frosts, but should be given plenty of air. D All that has just been said concerns peas to be eaten green; for dry harvesting, the usual sowing season is March and April, and even, for early species, until the beginning of June. Early pea seeds are vulnerable to attack by an insect known as the pea beetle. Late peas are much less susceptible, probably because the insect has finished laying its eggs. Peas destined for seed and mashed potato could perhaps be protected from the insect by not sowing them until April. Peas germinate for three or four years, and longer if stored in the pod. G Peas are appetizing and laxative, but not easily digested. 1★1 Chickpeas are mainly used as a puree. Potato or parmentière. - The potato is one of mankind's most useful plants, providing abundant, wholesome nourishment and yielding a starch or flour of excellent quality and in three times the proportion that would be produced by an equal quantity of land sown with wheat. ▽ INE D SI Its main varieties are: grosse blanche, spotted with red, the most vigorous of all; grosse rouge, grosse jaune, blanche longue, jaunâtre ronde flatatie ou anglaise hâtive, rouge oblongue ou vitelotte, rouge longe ou Hollande rouge, longue rouge ou corne-de-cerf, jaune de Hollande, petite, rouge longue marbrée, rouge longue ou truffe d'août, violette, petite blanche sucrée ou chinoise. Potato cultivation is based on a single principle: whatever the nature of the soil, the species or variety of potato, the soil must be made as loose as possible before planting and throughout the period of growth. The question of whether to give preference for planting to large or small tubers, to quarters or to detached eyes with or without a portion of pulp, has often been discussed. Comparative experiments seem to have shown that whole tubers, at least of medium size, give the most considerable yield, while small tubers or pieces reproduce their seed more often. So, you should prefer one or the other, depending on whether you need to be more gentle on the seed or its soil. As for the eyes or sprouts detached from the tuber, this is a very good supplementary method to use in years when potatoes are in short supply or excessively expensive, but in ordinary cases, it is far from being as good as whole or cut tubers. Finally, we have recently obtained good results from cuttings of developed and sufficiently consistent stems, planted in the course of June, to refill the lack of a room. Sowing seeds is another important means of reproduction, particularly for the renewal and improvement of breeds. Potatoes can be planted from February to May. They are planted in Om holes, 17 in each direction, staggered and 50 to 60 centimetres apart. These holes are dug with a hoe, taking care to reject the earth extracted from the edges, as some of this earth must first be used to cover the small potato planted in it with a thickness of two to three fingers. The surplus, removed from the hole, is intended to butter the plant when it reaches a height of 40 to 50 centimetres. The potato's profit lies solely in its tubers, so it's a good idea to increase their number or volume. Piling soil around the stem encourages the sprout at its base to emit a higher row of new roots, which will have grown by harvest time. The more these plants are raised, the greater their yield: this is why ridging is favourable to multiplication; it can be repeated in June or July, when the weather is favourable. In any case, we must not lose sight of the fact that the more and the better we work the potatoes, the greater their yield; so if we refrain from ridging, we must replace it with good hoeing. There is no agreement on the best method of fertilization; the method of combining the fertilizer at the bottom of the furrows or holes and placing the potato immediately on top, however, seems preyalor. In strong, clayey soils, where potatoes are of poor quality, they are improved by using new straw or other dry plant stalks as fertilizer. Potatoes are usually harvested in September, and once the soil has been removed from the tubers, they are placed in the cellar or, better still, in silos, but in any case protected from the cold. To preserve potatoes throughout the year, simply protect them from frost during the winter and, when vegetation starts to develop, place them in a dry place and cover them with dry sand, or even better, with ashes. As soon as you notice that sprouts are developing on the fruit, you visit the potatoes and break off all the shoots. Potatoes are particularly suited to field cultivation, but it's a good idea to have some idea of how to manage this plant, of which only the early varieties are usually planted in vegetable gardens. POTATO DISEASES. - The alteration of potatoes, which, for lack of knowledge of its nature, has simply been referred to as the disease, has persisted until now in several parts of France, so we think it useful to mention it here. Of all the means proposed to combat the effects of the disease, none has proved to be nearly absolutely effective; but from the mass of known experiments and observations, we can deduce a few rules, or at least a few indications, the application of which would increase the chance of obtaining healthy harvests. Excessive soil fertility, freshness and, even more so, humidity are generally considered to be conditions unfavorable to healthy harvests. For this reason, dry or at least healthy soils with little or no smoke should be chosen for planting. Harvesting as soon as the stalks have softened is also an essential precaution. The choice of varieties which, under equal conditions, are usually less affected than others, is also one of the main points to consider. These varieties, even if less productive than others, should obviously be multiplied in preference. Planting before winter (October or November), deep enough to protect the tubers from frost, is another method that has given and still gives great hope. To these various means should be added that of sowing, less direct and less rapid in its effects, but which, in the event of the disease continuing, would be one of the most effective in removing the potato from its influence. It has also been thought that a very long interval between plantings of potatoes in the same soil would bring about the complete cessation of the disease. This method, which is beginning to be tried out, promises happy results, as we have seen potatoes harvested from land that had not produced potatoes for twenty years, yielding very healthy, well-preserved fruit. Experiments will no doubt continue, and it is to be hoped that they will rid us of an evil that threatens to deprive us of one of the most precious vegetables in horticultural and agricultural crops. Several plants have been proposed to replace the potato, such as: Olluco, Glycine-Apios, Picotiane; but none of these vegetables has so far given results with which we can be satisfied. Purslane. - Purslane is very sensitive to cold; it can be sown in layers or under cloches in March; but in the open ground, it can only be sown in May, in loose, well-smoked soil. The seed is very fine and spreads lightly and freely; it needs to be very lightly covered and basked assiduously until emergence. When purslane needs it, you need to give it water and clean it of all weeds, to see it do well. It is usually eaten raw in salads, but is also very good cooked and seasoned with juice like lettuce. The variety known as golden purslane is highly prized, but often degenerates and reverts to its original green color. Another variety with large leaves has recently been introduced and is quite remarkable. Purslane seed keeps well for five or six years. Radish. - Radishes are grown for their roots, and several varieties are known: early white, ordinary white, half-long white, half-long scarlet, half-long pink, large summer, early pink, summer yellow, salmon, early violet, ordinary violet, horseradish or black winter radish. Most of these radishes, especially the small round ones, can be sown almost all year round: 1° on a bed in winter or in the first spring; 2° in the open ground in other seasons. Sow lightly and broadcast. To obtain well-rounded radishes in light soils, the soil must be heavily trampled before sowing. In hot weather, it needs plenty of water, a little shade and little sowing at a time. Horseradish is sown towards the end of May; sowing it earlier would make it prone to going to seed; thin it out when it is too thick, and leave only Om, 18 from each other, to give it good growth. Another radish variety brought to us from China is the early yellow. It is a truly garden root and one of the most beautiful autumn radishes. Rave - Used for the same purposes and cultivated in the same way as radishes, its varieties are: white, small early, pink or salmon, long red, twisted Le Mans. The latter requires soft, deep soil and needs to be sown lighter than the others. It is essential to cover turnips during frosts. Radish and turnip seeds are harvested in summer, and are good for three or four years. Rapunzel. - Sown towards the end of August on well-smoked and ploughed beds, it requires frequent watering to raise it from the ground; it is then weeded, isolating it from all weeds, and left until after winter, when it can be enjoyed from the end of February until the end of April, when its stem begins to rise. We leave in the ground the plants we want to keep for seed. - It's one of the best winter salads. salsins. - This plant needs deep, substantial, perfectly loosened soil that has been smoked for at least six months. It is broadcast from March to April and watered often, especially to help the seed set; weed, hoe and pull up the roots for consumption before the stems come up. Scorsonera. - Differs from salsify only in its black root; its cultivation and properties are the same. The seed of both plants can be kept for one or two years at most. Savory. - Cultivation of this plant is very simple; it grows easily in any kind of soil, so easily that it reproduces itself every year. It can be used until it sets seed, which keeps well for four or five years. It is particularly useful for seasoning peas and broad beans, where it enhances the taste. It is a tonic and aperitif. Tetragon. - A New Zealand plant recognized as a good antiscorbutic vegetable. It is regarded as a summer spinach, whose qualities it shares. The advantage of tetragonia is that the hotter the weather, the more it produces. It can be successfully sown in place at the end of April, in 6. soft earth and loam, spaced Om,60 apart in all directions, three or four seeds per clump to leave only the best stem. Spring sowing is sometimes capricious; autumn sowing is almost always more successful. Tomato. - An annual plant native to Mexico. Sow early on a bed or in a frame, then prick out in the garden, at midday, when frost is no longer a threat, and at a distance of 70 or 80 centimetres. When the plants have grown to around Om, 40, they are tied to a stile or trellis; they are stopped at Om, 80 or 1 meter, by pinching the top of the stems; the secondary shoots above the flowers are also pinched. When a large number of fruits have reached half-growth, we start to thin out the leaves and remove the small new shoots. At the end of the season, the leaves are completely removed, so that the fruit is fully exposed to the sun. Plenty of water in summer. Tomatoes come in several varieties: the large red, which is furrowed, is the most widely grown for cooking; the early red; the large yellow, a very beautiful sub-variety of the red; the small red, the small yellow, the pear-shaped tomato and the cherry tomato. Tomato seeds collected from the most beautiful and ripest fruits germinate for three or four years; when winter is not too harsh, tomatoes sow themselves. Tomatoes are successfully grafted onto potatoes using the herbaceous or Tschudy graft. This produces a potato crop in the ground and a tomato crop in the air. The fruit of the tomato is used to make a much-appreciated sweet and sour sauce. It's easy to digest. Jerusalem artichoke. - Multiplies by tuber, which is planted in February and March, like the potato. It does not fear frost, so it keeps perfectly well in the ground; but it is rarely planted, because once it has been grown in a garden, it is very difficult to destroy. CHAPTER VI MEDICINAL PLANTS France's average climate makes it possible to grow a fairly large number of medicinal plants, whose presence in a schoolteacher's garden is of undeniable benefit, both to the teacher and to those he or she lives among. A teacher needs to be familiar with these plants and their proven properties. We advise him to always have around his house and in his garden, i.e. at hand, all the most commonly used plants, which we will list below, indicating in each item the parts of these plants that are used medicinally. EMOLLIENT PLANTS Marshmallow. - Multiplies only by the bursting of clumps; grows everywhere. Its flowers, leaves and roots are used. Round-leaved Mallow and Wild Mallow. - Multiplies like marshmallow; leaves and flowers are used. Flax. - Only the seeds are used as an emollient. PECTORALS EMOLLIENTS Marshmallow, its flowers; Parma violet, its leaves and flowers. White broth. - Stems from Om, 70 to 1 m; blooms in July and August, in long spikes. Light, warm soil; southern exposure; multiplies from seed; used as flowers and leaves. EMOLLIENT DIURETICS Quackgrass. - Grassy plant; jointed stems; Om, 70 to 1-meter-long creeping roots; grows everywhere; used by its roots. Parietaria. - Straight stems, 35 to 65 centimeters long; full, oval, pointed leaves; small, greenish flowers. Grows in dry soil and rubble; multiplies by seed and splinters. We use the whole plant. Borage. - Can be found anywhere, and is used as fresh or dried leaves or flowers. REFRESHERS Licorice. - Its root is not widely available. Barberry. - Used as berries. We will say nothing about narcotics, which cannot be grown safely in a teacher's garden. AROMATIC EXCITANTS sage. - Leaves and flowers are used. Rosemary. - Perennial plant whose twigs, leaves and flowers are used. Lavender. - Flowering spikes and leaves. Lemon balm. - Harvested in June and September; grows in light, south-facing soil; can be propagated by sowing or sprouting; can be used as flowering spikes and leaves.

leaves. STOMACHIQUES TONIQUES Gentian - Root. Small knapweed. - Harvested from June to August; requires light, slightly dry soil; multiplies from seed in spring; used for its flowering tops. Water clover. - Its leaves. Wormwood. - Leaves and branch tops. Roman chamomile. - Flowers and flowering stems. DEPURATIVES Burdock. - Multiplies from seed and is used as a root. Wild chicory. - Roots and leaves. Dandelion. -Can be found everywhere; used as leaves and roots. Hops. - Flowering cones. Fumitory. - Sow in spring in any kind of soil; use the whole plant. Patience. - Sow in fresh, substantial soil; use as roots. Soapwort. - Its whole plant. Bittersweet. - The sarmentose stems. ANTISCORBUTIC Wild horseradish. - Multiplies from seed; grows in cool, shady soil and can be used as a root. Mustard. - The seed. Watercress. - Whole plant. Holly. - Root. Celery. - Root. Juniper. - Berries.  D EXCELLENT CARMINATIVES Anise. - Sow in good, light, warm soil; water frequently; use as seed. Angelica. - Sow in spring and autumn, lightly covering the seed; water well; prick out. Use leaves, stems and roots. Coriander. - Its seeds are used. Fennel. - Whole plant. ASTRINGENTS Bistort. - This plant requires marshy soil; it multiplies by seed and splinters; it is used only by its root. Rose de Provins. - We use the unopened petals of the flower.  In this last nomenclature, we have not mentioned poisonous and narcotic plants, which we must always take great care to keep away from places where children are received. However, we recommend that teachers explaining horticulture to their pupils describe and indicate to them all the plants of our climates whose use may present dangers. 106 CHAPTER VII DESTROYING ANIMALS HAZARDOUS TO PLANTS The best-kept gardens are often ravaged by a host of harmful animals, whose destruction requires a great deal of care and patience. The number of parasitic insects is very considerable, so we shouldn't be surprised to find them on plants. Some serve as their cradle, others as food. The gardener must therefore be particularly concerned with the care that can rid him or her of these troublesome hosts. In this chapter, we'll focus on those animals that cause the greatest damage in vegetable gardens. As with plants, we'll follow their alphabetical order. Flea beetle. - This insect, still known as the earth flea because of its ability to jump, is oval in shape, metallic blue in color and remarkable for the swelling of its two hind thighs. It is very common in certain years; it can be found on young plants, especially those belonging to the Cruciferae family, such as cabbage, rape, turnips, etc. It attacks these plants at the time when they are most susceptible to attack. It attacks these plants as they germinate, and later pierces their leaves right through. Its larva, which precedes it by almost a month, is just as harmful. The only known means of repelling this insect are decoctions of pungent plants, such as tobacco, walnut leaf and elderberry, or water laden with potash or soot. But all these methods are highly effective. Perhaps it would be better, when you have a limited amount of land, to make the sacrifice of a first sowing. When the larvae have developed, cover the surface with a layer of straw and set fire to it: in this way, the insects can be reached before they have undergone metamorphosis. Or you could sow the seeds of cruciferous plants only in heavily smoked soil, where they can develop several young leaves in a few days, in addition to their seminal leaves. The flea beetle's mandibles or jaws are too weak to attack the leaves once they have developed to a certain extent, and the insect dies of starvation. Moth. - The courtilière is one of the most feared insects by horticulturists: it is remarkable above all for its legs and the torsos of its two front feet, which are enlarged, flattened and lined with teeth that give it the shape of a hand; the other legs are nothing special; they end in two hooks. Its front legs are responsible for all the damage for which it is blamed, since it feeds on worms and insects, and by searching for them in the earth, it saws and tears up any roots in its path. In gardens, it's easy to recognize when a cricket has passed through. Plants that were beautifully green the day before fade, pale and die, and when you pull them out you find their roots truncated. It's not easy to get rid of this annoying enemy. The usual advice is to pour boiling water into the hole and oil over it. The cricket, to avoid being scalded and drowned, runs away, but on contact with the oil its stomata become blocked, and it dies of asphyxiation. Crickets can also be destroyed by placing small pots half-full of water in the ground, at Om, 04 below the level of the boards. Moths, which love humidity, fall into the water and drown. Others destroy them by spreading water dissolved in fish-mill manure on the garden beds they frequent. Criocere. - This insect attacks asparagus exclusively, laying its eggs on the surface. The only way to destroy it is to search carefully for its eggs and crush them. Ant. - The little black ant, which often invades gardens, is a most harmful insect, seeking out anything sweet. It is easily destroyed by placing honey, syrup or crushed ripe fruit mixed with corrosive sublimate in the path it usually follows. A less dangerous method, most commonly used by gardeners and very simple, is to put a little sugar water in small bottles. The ants, attracted by the sweet liquid, enter the bottles and drown. Chafer. - The cockchafer harms in all its forms: as a larva, known as a white worm, it respects no root; it is the terror of market gardeners and nurserymen alike. Larvae have been known to destroy entire fields. We are defenseless against them; their greatest enemy is the cold. Once the larva has become a beetle, it devours tree leaves, but this is also the time when it can be reached most safely by relentless hunting. Nothing is easier than catching chafer beetles: you just have to shake the trees to which the hametons have clung before going to sleep to determine their fall; you then pick them up and crush them. Be careful not to bury them alive in the ground, as not a single female perishes; they escape by digging galleries in all directions, and lay their eggs all over the garden. Earwig. - The earwig wanders and feeds at night, and hides during the day. Although it attacks vegetables, it is more likely to attack fruit, as it prefers sweet substances. To get rid of them, place hollow stems, pigs' dewclaws or broken pottery in the places they frequent: the earwigs take refuge in them as day approaches; collect and burn them. Cabbage whitefly. - The cabbage maggot is a butterfly whose larvae, along with those of the rose and turnip maggot, are the most common in our gardens. The former and the latter eat away almost entirely at the leaves of cabbages and turnips, perforating them right through and leaving only the ribs; the latter, on the other hand, attacks the center of the leaves. Although birds, when they have young, as well as toads, consume them extensively, their numbers are so considerable that it is impossible to destroy them entirely. If we observe the habits of these insects, we see that they almost all shy away from light and only come out at night to feed. If you want to avoid them, you have to hunt them by candlelight. You can crush them on the spot, or enclose them in pots to feed them to poultry, which is very fond of them. Aphids. - These insects are easily distinguished by the two horns or chelons, usually pointing upwards, which they have at the end of their abdomen. Above all, they are remarkable for their prodigious fecundity. Aphids damage the plants on which they settle in three different ways: 1° by their stings; 2° by the deformations they cause to leaves and twigs; and 3° by their exudation, which covers the surface of the leaves, causing dust and corpuscles floating in the air to stick to them, giving rise to a large number of microscopic fungi and imparting a black color to the leaves that eventually dries them out under the sun's rays. Plants can be freed from this by fumigating with tobacco. Teridion or earth spider. - The teridion attacks young seedlings, particularly carrots, biting the stem to pump out their juices. This type of spider is sometimes so numerous that it destroys entire seedlings, no matter how large. You can get rid of them by spreading an infusion of tobacco on the infected boards. The same result can be achieved with an infusion of soot, which is less costly. 1 In the mollusc class, there are still some animals that are very harmful to vegetable gardens: snails, slugs and earthworms. Snails and slugs are herbivores, and so they cause damage in vegetable gardens. Snail. - The chagrined snail is the one we encounter most often in our gardens, where it wreaks havoc. You can remove as many as you like by hand on a fine summer's day, either by looking for them under leaves, in the edges of flowerbeds, in holes in walls, or wherever you know they retreat during the day. Slugs. - The surest way to destroy these animals is to hunt them in the morning and evening during spring and autumn, when the weather is mild and especially when it rains. Quicklime, slaked in the air (powdered lime), limewater and several other caustic substances kill them, but their use by sprinkling is hardly practicable in vegetable gardens. Here's a simpler method: small piles of bran are placed at intervals; the slugs gather there, and are easily killed by sprinkling powdered lime on them. Earthworms. - Worms don't directly harm the vegetable garden, but the way they disturb the soil, even though they don't eat any plant matter, disturbs seedlings and prevents young plants from emerging. So they're an enemy you need to get rid of. This can be done by spraying with hot cattle urine, or by making infusions of walnut leaves or walnut stain, which are then sprinkled over the beds. These liquids don't actually kill them, but the odor they give off is so unpleasant that they leave the watered area when they emerge from the ground; they are then collected and fed to poultry. OBSERVATION. - Don't neglect to propagate the golden beetle, commonly known as the gardener's beetle, in your garden. This beetle wages constant war on ants and other insects, without ever attacking plants. Unfortunately, these birds are hunted or killed as a hobby, or to punish them for the slight damage they seem to commit. We have no idea of the services they render us, and we do not want to understand that the more of these birds there are in a region, the fewer insects there are. CHAPTER VIII TABLE OF POTABLE PLANTS CLASSIFIED BY FAMILY Mushrooms. Truffle. Edible mushroom. Garlic. Liliaceae. Chives. Civet. - Oriental. Shallot. Onion. Leek. Rocambole. Asparagus. Dioscorea. Chinc yam. Polygonaceae. Sorrel. Rhubarb. Baselle. Chenopodea. Arroche. Chard or pear. Beet. Spinach. Quinoa. Labiatae. Basil. Marjoram. Mint. Savory. Thyme. solanécs. Eggplant. Cockerel. Morel. Chili pepper. Potato. Tomatoes. Convolvulaceae. Potato. Campanulaceae Rapunzel. Compositae. Chicory. - Lettuce. - scarole. wild. romaine. - perennial. Dandelion. Salsitis. Scorsonera. Artichoke. Cardoon. Tarragon. Topinambour. valerian. Lamb's lettuce. Umbelliferae. Angelica. Carrot. - Celery. - Musk. Chervis. Fennel. Parsnip. 1Persil. Ranunculaceae. Nigella. Cruciferae. Cabbage. Sea cabbage, crambe. Watercress. - Watercress. - Perennial. Mustard. Turnip. Radish. Horseradish. Turnip. Rocket. Capparidae. Caper. Oxalidae. Oxalis. Tropxolea. Nasturtium. Portulaceae. Claitone. Purslane. Cucurbits. Cucumber. Squash. Gircaumon. Melon. Watermelon. Pumpkin. Rosaceae. Strawberry. Burnet. Peanut. Chenillette. Dolique. HORTICULTURE. [Bean. Chickling vetch. Bean. - Lima. Lentil. 1 - chickpea. We have included in the above table several plants that we did not mention when describing vegetable plants, because some are very-difficult to cultivate and of little use, and others are never used in our homes; however, it is good to know them at least by name. CHAPTER IX FRUIT GARDEN A schoolteacher's fruit garden consists of little more than the trees he can plant around his vegetable patches and those with which he lines the few walls at his disposal. Very few teachers have enough land to create an orchard separate from their vegetable garden. So we'll proceed on this assumption, which is the more or less general situation in our schools. In a previous chapter, we said that a schoolteacher could not, with his own resources, maintain a kitchen garden of more than 7 ares. In our reasoning, we'll take the average, 5 ares, which is a good size. Masters with land of 8 or 10 ares would have to devote part of their enclosure to creating an orchard, the size of which would depend on the size of their kitchen garden. In this case, they would plant tall trees, taking care to leave enough space between them to be able to use the orchard soil to plant field vegetables, or to sow seeds for their household needs. What is important, therefore, for the civil servants with whom we are concerned, is to deal above all with the question of the vegetable and fruit garden. When you have a large enough enclosure, you should always arrange your garden in such a way as to make squares of at least 80 centiares and no more than one acre in extent, which you arrange according to the following method for planting fruit trees. A pyramid is planted at each corner of the squares, and three spindles are placed between each pyramid at equal distances from each other. The outer beds are then planted with an indeterminate number of apple trees arranged in continuous rows. If the squares are longer than they are wide, place as many spindles or columns on each side as will fit, taking care to leave a space of 2 meters between each one. Many people prefer pyramids to espaliers, claiming that the former require less time and care than the latter. To these reasons, which seem to us to be inconclusive, we would add another which is certainly of much greater value when dealing with a schoolteacher's fruit garden, and which justifies the recommendation we make to equip gardens mainly with pyramids and spindles: this is because espaliers require considerable use of wood to support their branches and twigs, and the incessant renewal of these woods and palisades becomes expensive enough in the long run that we try to free ourselves from the expense it entails. Pyramid and spindle-shaped trees don't have the same disadvantages. However, while we recommend these last two models of fruit tree, we would still recommend that teachers erect espaliers along walls, so as to keep themselves abreast of the correct methods for pruning and directing fruit trees, whatever their shape. The following diagram applies to a 5-acre vegetable garden. 15 3 = V PV PV 4 - - NORTH. St D. PV PV 4 RV . - PV P represents pyramids. - F represents spindles. - E represents espaliers. - C represents cords. - PV represents open-air trees. A garden laid out in this way will contain eight north-facing trees, 16 pyramids, 48 spindles or columns, an indefinite number of espaliers and cords of apple trees in the three outer beds. The soil of the beds in which fruit trees are to be planted must be deeply dug up, drained if it is marshy; but if it is only damp, it should be cleaned up with a layer of 0n, 20 of house rubble, platras, which should be placed at the bottom of the dug-outs: in addition, it should be suitably amended. The most exposed walls, if any, will be lined with espaliers. These espaliers should only be made up of trees with good stems, chosen from among those whose fruit needs a lot of heat to acquire all its beauty, size and fragrance, such as peach trees, apricot trees, greengage plum trees, some cherry trees and winter pear trees. But the tree most in need of wall espaliers in our climate is the peach. If the walls are high enough, a cordon of vines can run above the espaliers. When the garden is of a suitable size, it's always a good idea to set aside part of it for a small nursery. This way, you'll never be mistaken about the kind of fruit you want to plant. It's easy to see that, with resources as limited as those of schoolteachers, only the best and most productive species should be planted. Their main concern when planting is to make a good choice between summer, autumn and winter fruits. In a special table at the end of this chapter, we will therefore indicate the species of fruit trees that are most suitable for cultivation in the fruit gardens of schoolhouses and the majority of gardens in rural communities. 7. We will divide this chapter into three parts: Multiplication, Planting and Pruning. We would point out that, in such a concise treatise as the one we are undertaking, we can only give general notions of these three arboricultural operations. However, we shall endeavor to make these notions as complete as possible, given the framework we have set ourselves, so that any teacher who wishes to follow our advice can find in our indications sufficient knowledge, not only to properly manage the trees he will be planting, but also to inculcate the principles of arboriculture in his pupils, and to help with his advice those of his neighbors who, following his example, will abandon the routine which is still perpetuated in the cultivation of country gardens, to follow the path of progress which has so notably changed the art of horticulture over the last twenty years. As for those who would like to make an in-depth study of arboriculture, we refer them to the comprehensive treatises by Messrs Hardy and Dubreuil, or to a short course recently published by an esteemed priest from Franche-Comté, Abbé Raoul. In our opinion, this treatise has the triple merit of being very simple, of resolving all arboricultural questions with great clarity, and of not costing much. We also recommend Le Bon Jardinier, which is an excellent aid for all those involved in growing vegetables, fruit and flowers. 1. multiplication. All plants multiply naturally by their seeds; but many of them reproduce naturally in our crops only by their roots, others by their stems, branches and cuttings. Propagation by seed sometimes gives rise to new breeds or varieties; propagation by roots, stems, branches and cuttings perpetuates them unaltered. Arboricultural propagation is the nurseryman's industry. But as we want teachers to raise the plants they want to populate their gardens with themselves, so as not to be misled in their choice of species, we're going to give a few notions on the art of multiplying fruit trees. PROPAGATION BY SEED. - The soil of a nursery must be well prepared by careful breaking: it is given a suitable fertilizer appropriate to its nature, and left for at least a year to any crop other than that of fruit trees, so that the delicate roots of young trees born from seed do not come into contact with fresh manure, which is very harmful to them. As a general rule, soil that is too rich and abundant is no more suitable for a nursery than soil that is poor and deprived of fertilizer. The important point is that, when they leave the nursery, plants take well wherever they are placed. Industrial nurserymen always choose a generous and very loose soil for their seedlings, because in such a soil they gain a lot for the growth. In doing so, they are only acting in their own interest, but they are doing fruit gardens a disservice, because the trees suffer enormously, and often even fail to take root when they are removed from rich soil and planted in poor-quality soil. This is why I advise schoolteachers to set up a small nursery in their own garden. Seedlings can be broadcast or combed. The pits are planted one by one at a suitable distance. Sowing is done in spring, but more often in autumn. Seedlings should be sown at Om,03 and cores at Om,06 depth. During heavy frosts, the seedlings are covered with straw or leaves, and decored in spring. In the same way, but in diflerent beds, pear, apple and quince seedlings are sown. All these seedlings produce seedlings on which we graft the species we want to cultivate mainly at the end of the autumn of their first year. All young trees, born from seed, must be uprooted and peeled, so that they can be darkened for germination. In this operation, they are subjected to a severe tringe Propagation by maromies is only used for vines and currants, which are easy to root. easily muliplie by cuttings for semi-sucking pear trees, vines, redcurrants and raspberries. Vine cuttings, O 35 to 1 m long and weak, cannot be placed without inoonvemien! per- pendicularly This position does not seem to be the most favorable for them; so, after having been "halled" and pruned on benux eyes, they are placed in gullies 0.10 or Or I1 deep, dug in earth soaked in or mixed with brupère earth, so that only two or three eyes of the upper bolt emerge from the earth. MMITIUCAMIOY BY CRITTLE - The purpose of the gnesle operation is to force an eye or a Nion from one tree to grow on another tree, so that all deur by forming an orgamic union, become a compound individual. Cest-à- dire que de deux plantes on en fait une seule dont les branches, les fleurs et les fruits sont d'une autre espère que celles des racines et de la tige On gresle les arbres de sir mamières diflenentes - la geffc en fonie, la grefle en oparoxne, la gresse en ecman. "Om appelle muliller un sujel, netmundaer s avec la sarpe tomtes la racimes qui Seralont colatćes ce mocurtries et supprumer des hronches tomies celles qui sermient cassées ou endommmagćes. la greffe en approche, la greffe anglaise et la greffe herbacée. 1° Cleft grafting. - After choosing a healthy, vigorous subject, we take a branch from the previous year from the tree we wish to propagate, whose wood will be well seasoned, i.e. perfectly ripe. It must be at most as big as the subject or smaller. The head of the tree is cut to the required height, and a longitudinal slit is made in its upper part. The graft is bevelled on both sides, shortened so as to leave only 2 or 3 eyes, then inserted into the slit, which is held open with the tip of the pruning knife. The prerequisite for success is that the inner parts of the bark of the subject and of the graft coincide perfectly. Note that the part of the branch whose bark has been well preserved should always be turned outwards, and as far as possible, an eye should be placed above the part that has been squeezed into the slit. If the subject is large enough, several scions can be placed above it by splitting it on several sides. Ligature the grafts to hold them firmly if the individuals are weak: then protect the wounds from contact with the air with grafting wax, made up in the following way: Burgundy pitch... ... ... ... . 500 grams. Black pitch... ... ... ... ... . 125 Yellow wax ... ... ... ... ... . 100 Resin ... ... ... ... . 100 Sheep's tallow . 60 - - - - - This mixture is melted over a very low heat, and each time you want to use it, you heat it up enough to make it liquid so that you can apply it with a brush. It is essential not to use this composition too hot, as this would dry out the bark and prevent it from regrowing. 2° Crown grafting. - This type of graft is used on trees too large to be split safely. After smoothing out the horizontal cut of the tree, a small hardwood wedge is driven between the sapwood and the bark, to a depth of Om.05. The graft is trimmed to a length of 0.04 m, so that little or no wood remains at the lower end of the bevel: remove the wedge, replace it with the graft, whose denuded bevel rests against the sapwood, and press it in so as to hide the entire bevel. The same operation is performed for each of the scions, which are carefully inserted between the bark and the wood, about 0m 008 or Om 009 apart, so as to form a crown of grafts around the circumference of the stump. If the pressure of the wedge causes the bark to split, it is pulled together with a ligature when the graft is placed, then the wounds are covered with grafting wax. 3° Crested grafts. - This is very expedient, especially for small plants. It is performed in two seasons, in spring with a growing eye, and in July and August with a dormant eye. Dormant eye grafting. - Young trees are grafted in the FRUIT GARDEN. Bud grafts. 123 10 centimetres from the ground and tall stems at indeterminate heights. Choose a plain spot on the stem, make a transverse incision on the subject and a perpendicular one in the shape of a T. Using the spatula of the grafting machine, lift the lips of the bark to the right and left, then slide the prepared escutcheon underneath it from top to bottom, cutting off the part that extends beyond the transverse incision on the subject: We fold them over the escutcheon, pressing them firmly with our thumbs, and tie them with wool, taking care to leave the eye uncovered and to visit it after about three weeks to loosen the tie if necessary. In the following spring, before the serva rises, we cut off the upper part of the plant at a small distance from the escutcheon, leaving one or two call eyes above it. The buds resulting from these eyes are pinched off, when they are 12 to 15 centimetres long, in favour of the graft. Once the graft has reached a length of 50 to 40 centimetres, they are completely removed. Growing eye graft. - This is done in the same way as the previous one; only 8 to 10 days after grafting, and when the graft is taken up again, we remove the portion of the subject that exceeds the graft, leaving however a calling eye above it. The bud is pinched off when it is 12 to 15 centimetres long, and treated as we have just described for the dormant eye. Grafting or budding of fruit crops. - This graft is performed in August, when the buds have formed on the trees. A sting, stalk or twig with its impasto is removed from a tree that is abundantly supplied with these products, and placed on another tree that has little or none, absolutely like a crest, after which it is tied. This process is highly advantageous for setting fruit trees and for trimming the bare parts of structural branches. A very suitable type of ligature for bud grafting would be a wire braid prepared in the following way: seven parts of wax and one part of fat turpentine are melted together; when the substances are mixed, the braid of indeterminate length is plunged into it, and removed by pressing it with a piece of wood against the rim of the pan containing the mixture, so that it is impregnated with the substance to just the right point. When it has been used to bind the escutcheons, it would be prudent to hold it in place with a thread or a drop of grafting wax. 4° Grafting on approach. - This technique works well on all kinds of trees, provided they are close enough to touch each other in their most perennial parts. It requires the following precautions: 1° cut off part of the tree's head to encourage the sap to flow into the graft; 2° make clean wounds in the parts to be grafted, of a length and depth proportionate to the volume of the tree. To increase the chances of success, a notch is sometimes made on the subject and another in the opposite direction on the graft, so that the splinter of one enters the notch of the other; 2° join these wounds so that the barks coincide at the edges of their internal surfaces, while taking into account their external parts; 3° securely fasten these parts with ligatures or ropes made of wicker, bark or wool, depending on the size of the grafts, and if necessary with stakes; 4° protect the wounds from contact with light, air and water with the grafting wax; 5° monitor the development of the grafts to prevent nodosities, and prevent the branches from being cut by the ligatures, which are loosened if necessary: these conditions are essential for all scion grafts; 6° wean the grafts only when the parts have completely fused. Grafting is done when the sap is moving. This operation can be used to cross branches in diamond shapes, to form hedges or other fences, to change the nature of one tree into that of another, or to give two trunks instead of one to the same individual. Nature frequently performs approach grafting on its own in forests and hedges: in fact, when two branches touch and are agitated by the wind, they soon wear away at the point of contact, the bark thins, the cortical parenchyma is exposed, and then all that's needed is a few days' rest to see adhesion and mutual welding take place between the parts at the point of contact. 5° English graft. - This involves bevelling the end of the subject and the graft, so as to bring the two wounds exactly together. The operation, which can be complicated by notches in opposite directions, ends as in the approach graft. 6° Herbaceous graft. - This is a split graft performed using the still herbaceous parts of plants. It is used with great success to propagate resinous trees. The essential condition is that the part of the plant to be grafted must be herbaceous, as must the graft itself. There are several other types of graft, such as the Pontoise graft, the Faucheux graft, the connection graft, etc., all of which fall within the six types of graft we have just explained, with a few slight variations. It is therefore unnecessary to go into further detail on this subject. Preparing grafts. - Take grafts only from one-year-old wood, from healthy, fertile trees; cut the branches a month or six weeks in advance; during this interval, plug them into the ground at the foot of a wall, sinking them up to a third of the way into the northern exposure. This state of deprivation starves them and makes grafting easier. If they have been traveling and arrive tired and with wrinkled bark, soak them in water for a day or two. For scion grafting, the branch can be used immediately after cutting. 2. Planting. The success of fruit trees depends largely on the care taken when planting them, and before planting the soil must be prepared. The aim of this operation is to encourage the trees to grow as quickly and vigorously as possible. As our treatise is intended for teachers who only have a garden in which they sow vegetables at the same time as planting fruit trees, we must limit ourselves to indicating the soil preparation method best suited to the isolated plantings they are called upon to make. In an exclusively fruit-growing garden, the soil should be broken up to a depth of one meter, and drained if it is excessively moist. But in a market garden, as is usually the case in a schoolteacher's garden, it will suffice to break up and drain the beds in which the plants are to be planted, as described below. RUNNING. - Beds less than 0.80 m wide should be trenched to a depth of 1 m across their entire width. Start the trench at one end of the bed, taking care to transport the soil from the first excavation to the other end of the bed. You stand in the pit and put the soil from the trenches behind you, after dividing it up and removing any stones and roots. It's especially important to place the soil from the surface of the ground you're attacking at the bottom of the pit, and if possible, to place well-divided turf at half depth: this is an infallible way of providing your trees with rich vegetation for a long time to come. Continue in this way to the end of the flowerbed, taking care to raise it from Om, 08 to Om, 10 above the neighbouring land, with the broken earth settling down by about Om, 08. The void that remains at the end of the flowerbed is filled in with earth collected from the surface of its squares. If the subsoil of the land is watery, it can be cleaned up by breaking it up by 1m,10; this decimeter is filled in with stones or platras, so that the roots of the tree to be planted do not reach the bad subsoil. You can also avoid the disadvantages of humidity by raising your beds in mounds of Om, 20 above the garden floor. But the best thing to do when planting in damp soil is to ensure good drainage when the position of the soil allows it, and it doesn't take long to feel the happy effects. As the beds intended to receive trees in the open air (pyramids, goblets, counter-paliers) are usually close to the garden paths, it is advisable to evenly rip out the entire surface, beds and paths; the expense will not be much greater, and the tree roots will benefit from the soil in the paths. It's a good idea to do the ripping especially during the summer months, so that the soil, less humid, divides easily and is thus more suitable for vegetation. We know that soil disturbed under the influence of humidity, especially if it is a little clayey, is put in such poor condition that vegetation suffers for many years. SOIL FERTILIZATION. - As a complement to soil preparation for fruit tree planting, it is important to fertilize the soil properly. The trees will then grow more vigorously, and the desired result, the complete formation of their framework, will be achieved sooner. But for this fertilization to have the desired effect, it must be placed at a suitable depth. It is in the layer between the surface and Om, 40 deep that this fertilizer must be applied. This is done by spreading it over all the beds after breaking up the soil and immediately before planting, then burying it with a fairly deep plough. As for the type of fertilizer to be used, you'll need to make use of what you have on hand, such as actual manure, and pond or ditch silt extracted at least a year ago and stirred frequently. Slow-decomposing fertilizers, although just as energetic as the previous ones, are preferable. We include in this series: crushed bones, wool rags, wadding, manes, hairs, horn scraps, tendons, etc. Such is the care required to prepare the soil for planting fruit trees in a garden. CHOOSING THE RIGHT TREES. - Choose smooth-barked trees that have been grafted for only one year. These grafts should be healthy and vigorous, with well-conformed buds at each end where branches are needed to form the tree. These trees should have a good footing and already have good roots; care must be taken to ensure that these are healthy, free from bruising or tearing, and that the grafted branch is of good quality. Young roots should be left exposed to air as little as possible, and never to frost. When planting is delayed by a few days, the plants should be nursed in small ditches. If the roots have dried out after a long journey, soak them in water for twelve hours and plant them before they have had time to dry out. If the roots were frozen, they should be put in the cellar to thaw before being planted; just as the roots and heads of trees must be properly dressed, which is done by cutting away with the pruning knife any roots that may have been splintered or bruised during replanting, down to the healthy part; refreshing the end of the desiccated hair and roots, cutting them at a slightly elongated bevel underneath so that the wound rests directly on the earth. As for the branches, the dressing consists in removing only those that have been broken or damaged, leaving the healthy part attached to the tree. It should be noted that if too many roots are bruised, they should not be removed, as this would compromise the tree's recovery; instead, the wounds should be scraped off and smeared with grafting wax. TIME OF PLANTING. - Late autumn or vegetation is the most favorable time for planting. This is an advance, because trees planted at this time quickly sprout new shoots, and therefore grow more vigorously than those planted after winter. Nevertheless, planting can be carried out throughout the winter, from the end of October to April, whenever frosts and heavy rains do not prevent it; but care must be taken not to throw frozen soil into the trenches, or around the roots of the young plants: such soil would be poisonous to the young trees. Spring planting is preferable only for cold, damp soils that may be submerged during winter. If, however, we are unable to plant in autumn, we can do so successfully in spring by opening trenches well in advance. GROUNDING. - One of the first precautions to be taken is to set the tree at the right depth, which varies according to the nature of the soil and of the subject on which the species is grafted. In light, hot soil, it will be necessary to bury the tree a little deeper than in damp, cold soil, where it will be advantageous to keep the roots as close to the surface as possible, in order to avoid rotting and stimulate vegetation. However, the graft should be left above ground, never buried: it is always advantageous to be able to reach the roots, and therefore not to cover them too much. This makes the tree more fertile and the fruit better. When planting, we must take into account the effect of compaction of freshly disturbed soil: this is estimated at Om.08 to Om.12 per 1 metre, depending on whether the soil is light or heavy. To determine whether the tree is placed at the right height, use a large ruler placed across the hole; lay the stem along it, holding the graft at Om,07 or Om,08 above. The tree is then removed and the hole filled as follows: first, soil is thrown in so that the tree is at the required height. If you have decomposed turf, we'll put it at the bottom, dividing it well with the spade, so as not to cause too much compaction. One man holds the tree in the position indicated, taking care to align it with its neighbors if necessary, while another introduces the earth, which will be substantial, between the roots. They must all pass through the hands of the planter, who will make them take their natural direction, without constraining or forcing them. If there is a pivot and it cannot be kept vertical, it is tilted horizontally to one side. Care should be taken not to shake the tree, as is so frequently done, with the aim, it is claimed, of pushing the soil down between the roots; this habit of shaking the tree by lifting it slightly has the serious disadvantage of disturbing the roots, piling them up when they should be spread apart, and often even breaking off some of them. This practice is vicious in that, by plumbing the soil, you run the risk of breaking the roots, or at least bruising them. You only need to press lightly with your foot to hold it against the wind; rainfall is enough to pack the soil. In very late plantings, it is a good idea to wet the roots so that the soil can attach immediately, and to pour a watering can of water gently around the foot to help it settle. When planting late, or when transplanting strong trees, it's also a good idea to coat the stems and branches with St. Fiacre ointment, to protect them from sunburn and drought, and to ensure better growth. For espalier planting, the same procedure applies. Just take care to keep the stem away from the wall Om, 12 to Om, 15 (to allow it to grow bigger later) and to place it obliquely towards it so that it can be applied more easily. The roots are distributed to the right and to the left to prevent them from meeting the foundations, and care is taken not to fix the small tree to the trellis until the soil has settled. It's preferable to plant in fine weather rather than in the rain; healthy soil is better than excessively wet soil, which becomes compacted and impairs the development of the young foliage. In spring, once the planting is complete, unless the soil is too damp, a light mulch should be applied to keep the soil cool. A few hoeings and waterings during the summer, if necessary, will complete the care required. The distance to be observed between the various trees is an important factor. We are almost always in the habit of planting too close, and only see the tree when it is young, without realizing the extent and growth it is likely to take on later, and which it needs to obtain abundant, regular fruiting. Pyramid pear trees grafted on franc or coignassier should be set back 3 m in all directions in good soil, and 2.50 m in poor soil. Pear pyramids............... 2m, 66 Pear espaliers. . . . . . ..... . . ... 6m These distances may vary according to locality and soil quality. Careful examination of the vegetation in the locality will give an accurate idea of the dimensions they are likely to reach; the species and varieties that thrive best there, and whose fruit acquire all the desirable qualities, should also be noted; and it is these observations and this study, made on site, that will guide the choice of subjects and increase or decrease the distances to be established between each tree foot. When planting pyramid-shaped trees, always take care to turn the graft to the south: here's why we recommend this arrangement. The strongest winds come from the south; if the graft is turned this way, it is more resistant, as the wind presses it against the tree: otherwise, the wind would push it away from the tree, and it could come unstuck. It is also advisable to stake stemmed or pyramidal trees to prevent the wind from shaking them. 3 3. Pruning. Pruning is a combination of operations designed to: 1° to give trees, and especially espaliers, the most favorable exposure, according to the country of origin; 2° to subject them to forms recognized as suitable for good sap distribution and perfect fruit ripening; 3° to maintain this shape throughout the life of the tree, and to preserve the balance between the supporting branches, in order to prevent some of them from capturing the sap to the detriment of others; 4° to produce fruit with all the desirable qualities, and to replace fruit production that becomes exhausted or perishes. PRUNING TOOLS. - Serpette. - The pruning knife is the tool par excellence for pruning; its use is very old-fashioned; it must be well tempered and kept very clean. Handling this tool requires a great deal of practice, which only practice can provide. Here's how to cut a branch: the blade is presented obliquely to the branch opposite the eye being pruned, so that a third of the blade is engaged; the branch is held with the left hand, at Om, 03 or Om, 04 below the eye, the thumb raised in a bow, then the serpette is drawn obliquely, so that the cut ends in a point and is bevelled, at Om, 005 above the eye. A cut should be made in a single stroke, even for branches that are a little strong; in this case, the left hand exerts a slight pressure that helps the cutting action. An essential point is to know where the instrument should pass after cutting the branch, so as to direct it in that direction; failure to take this precaution would expose you to cutting and damaging neighbouring branches and, what is more serious, to injuring yourself. A bevelled cut protects the wound from humidity, as rainwater slides down the inclined part, whereas it remains on a horizontal cut where the wound is difficult to cover. Secateurs. - Pruning shears are small spring-loaded shears used for pruning trees. This tool is very injurious, and the pressure of the hook is felt on the fibers of the bark and sapwood, to such an extent that the cut closes with difficulty. These shortcomings, however, do not prevent it from being used extensively. To obtain an oblique cut, the tool should be held with the hook on top, and the hand lowered so that the tool is oblique rather than horizontal. However, the serpette is always the best tool for cutting branches against the stem where the secateurs cannot reach, and for pruning extension branches whose cut must be covered promptly. Egohine. - The egohine is a small hand saw, On.25 in length, with a hollow handle to accommodate the blade. It is used to remove large and dead branches. After sawing, the cut should always be trimmed with a serpette, to facilitate covering. TIME OF PRUNING. - The time of pruning is determined by the fall of the leaves and the rest of the vegetation; it can continue until the start of the sap, unless there are heavy frosts during which pruning is not carried out. In all cases, it is advisable to reserve stone fruit trees for the end of pruning, as they are more prone to gum and their buds are more likely to be destroyed by frost than those of other trees, especially in severe winters. We will now outline the general principles of fruit tree pruning, as we have always found it to be advantageous for fruit production and for the health, preservation and longevity of the trees. It goes without saying that pruning fruit trees requires special modifications depending on the species of trees or the shape you want to give them. For all this, we refer our readers to the masters of the art, and urge them to pick up one of the treatises by Dubreuil, Hardy, Raoul, Lachaume, etc., which deal extensively with these subjects. But we especially recommend to teachers, as we have already said, Abbé Raoul's treatise on arboriculture, to which we add Lachaume's elementary method for pruning and managing your own garden fruit trees. Both treatises are well done, and have the advantage of being clear, practical and within everyone's reach. Before starting to prune a tree, you should always assess its strength and vigor, and examine the effect of the previous pruning, in order to correct any defects. A vigorous tree can be pruned quite differently from a weak, languid one. GENERAL PRUNING PRINCIPLES. - According to Abbé Raoul, all arboriculture is encapsulated in the following four principles: 1° Air and light make a tree bear fruit; lay out your tree's symmetrical framework so that these two principles of vegetation visit it in all its parts. Don't leave it as a thick bush, a real thicket that won't give you fruit, or that will only give you fruit of poor quality and most often badly made. Space the branches so that there is Om,20 to Om,30 between them for those which are superimposed one on top of the other. 2° Let your tree, no matter what form it takes, have only the wood necessary to form its framework. It is a pyramid; it has its carpenter branches as nature has given them to it, following along and around its stem the wood eyes that must produce them; only the arboriculturist's attention must be focused on not allowing any buds to grow in the space of Om, 20 to Om, 30 that separates the ground from the lowest branch, as well as on suppressing any branch that might grow in the space of Om, 20 to Om,30 that separates a lower branch from the one vertically above it. For the same reason, only one branch should be allowed to grow from the same point, so that it has more vigour; if two are left, they will both be too weak, and the structure will be defective. This is a palmette, espalier or counter-espalier; it must have one arm on each side, 20 or 30 centimetres from the ground, on the second tier 25 or 30 centimetres from the first; a third at equal distance from the second, and so on. Any buds that appear in front of or behind the stem, as well as in the 20 or 30-centimeter space separating the first tier from the ground and the tiers between them, must be removed. This is done with a sharp instrument, when these useless buds are 10 or 12 centimetres long. These spaces of 25 or 30 centimetres between the structural branches must be observed when forming a tree, whether you want it to be full-stemmed, cylindrical or goblet-shaped. 3° All your tree's supporting branches should be lined from one end to the other with fruit-bearing products, of which there are four: the flowering bud, which will blossom the following spring, or the small bud accompanied by a rosette of two or three leaves, which still needs a year's vegetation to complete its ro8. the sting, which is 1 to 5 or 8 centimetres long, and looks like a javelin. It often takes several years to bear fruit. It is not pruned; if there are several on the same spot, only one should be left. The twig, a small, small and flexible branch 0 to 15 centimeters long, is one of the first resources for fruiting. It is easily brought to fruit by breaking off its tip. It's worth noting in passing that it's only the weaker branches that set fruit easily, while the vigorous ones usually only produce wood: hence the care that must be taken to obtain fruit, which we'll discuss later. The bursa, which is the point where the fruit or flowers are attached, is a small, fleshy, tender body with several eyes around its circumference, a precious reservoir of fruit for several years. In the midst of these four different fruit productions, any bud tending to exceed 10 centimetres in length should be pinched off. 4° In general, only remove a third of the previous year's extension or shoot in spring. You form a pyramid; this removal of a third of the growth should be carried out on all the lower branches each year, until the tree is fully formed; as for the upper branches, removing only a third of the previous summer's growth would not be enough. The cone shape of the pyramid is a guide to the length to be observed when pruning the structural branches each spring. In the same way, when you form a palmette, pruning should only remove a third of the previous summer's growth from the tier closest to the ground; the triangular shape imposed on the palmette-shaped tree will regulate the pruning of the upper tiers. For all other shapes, high stems, goblets or funnels, the principle retains all its force. In spring, remove only a third of the previous year's growth from all the supporting branches, until they are perfectly shaped. Well-meaning pruning enables you to give your trees a shape in keeping with the place you want them to occupy; it determines a wise and equal distribution of sap, and ensures that each of the main branches remains filled with fruit production to its full extent. Proper pruning also offers a tree the advantage of producing larger, better-quality fruit, because a significant proportion of the nourishing fluids that would have fed the removed parts are turned to the benefit of the fruit retained. We have said that, as a general rule, only a third of the previous summer's growth should be removed in the spring; however, this principle does admit of a few modifications, in the event of a capricious sap leaving one side of the tree to favour another. The first way to remedy the problem is to prune the branches on the strong side very short, and those on the weak side very long; As sap is known to be attracted by leaves, short-trimmed twigs will have fewer leaves, and consequently less sap, so vegetation will be reduced in this part, whereas weak twigs, having been trimmed long, will emit a greater number of leaves and be covered with more abundant vegetation, which, in the long run, will restore the balance. A second way is to incline the strong part and straighten the weak part. The vertical direction given to the weaker branches will attract sap in greater abundance, their buds will grow more vigorously, and the numerous leaves they develop will continue to attract sap during the summer, to the detriment of the strong branches that have been inclined. A third way would be to pinch the strong part very early on, and as late as possible on the weak part, or not at all, since pinching slows down vegetation in the parts where it is done. Unpinched buds will continue to draw sap from the branch carrying them. These methods can be used successively, until the balance is restored. If you need a woody branch for extension, prune short. This is the procedure used for a tree exhausted by excessive fruit production; vigor is restored by pruning short for a year. If you want to develop flower buds on a rebellious branch, or one that is to be removed later, bend it or make an annular incision, as the more the sap is hindered in its circulation, the more flower buds it will produce. If, on the other hand, you want to convert a fruit-bearing branch into a wood-bearing branch, straighten it or prune it short, to concentrate all the sap's action on one or two buds. In addition to these principles, we'd like to add a few details on various complementary pruning operations, which will provide guidance on occasion. To bend a branch back on its crown means to leave the crown, or the beginning of the branch, at least the thickness of a five-franc coin, because this is where the new shoots will be born to replace those that have been removed. These productions are born from two sub-hairs or stipular buds, which are small, slightly protruding spikes in a small cavity on either side of the base of the first ring, and half-covered by the epidermis. We also use the expression "tailler sur les sous-yeux". The advantages of this operation are great; carried out in spring, towards the top of a tree, it reduces the suction of the sap, which always tends to rise, and pushes it back into the lower parts to prepare the eyes to develop more strongly there during vegetation. Done on branches that are too heavily impastoed, this operation restores the balance of sap in a tree. Notching. - Notching consists in removing a portion of stem or branch down to the sapwood, by cutting into the latter, with the aim of temporarily interrupting the flow of sap. It can be done above or below a branch, an eye or any other production. The lower notch is made to prevent a branch from growing too much; in this case, it is made on the root ball itself, the deeper the notch, the stronger the branch; above, on the other hand, to help a bud or branch that is too weak to develop, we avoid offending the eye or the branch. The lower notch prevents too much sap from passing into the branch, weakening it; the upper one deflects this liquid into the branch or bud, forcing it to develop further. Occasionally, the bud only grows slightly, so the operation is repeated the following year. If nothing develops, there's no point in starting again in the second year. Often, to make it more fruitful, instead of making the cut horizontally, we make it obliquely in the shape of a chevron, so as to surround the eye more and make the sap flow into it more abundantly. When you want to apply it to stone fruit trees, in which it also gives good results, as they are prone to strangles, be sure to coat the wound with grafting wax. However, on peach trees, it should be done with the greatest circumspection. Incision. - Several types of incision are made in the bark, with different effects depending on the shape given. The transverse incision is a diminutive of the notch, but is only made above the eyes, at a distance of around 5 or 4 millimeters; it interrupts the sap ducts without removing the wood; it is less effective, but in many cases it is enough to ensure the development of an eye. It is mainly used on branches or twigs whose diameter is too small to withstand the notch; it is preferable to the latter for peach trees. Longitudinal incisions are made in areas where hardened bark compresses the sap canals, preventing them from allowing branches to expand to their full potential. The tip of the pruning knife is used to make a slight incision in the bark to expand it, penetrating as far as the sapwood, but without touching it. Don't make too many cuts, leaving a gap of around 5 to 4 centimetres between them, and avoid making cuts on the side facing south. This method is excellent for increasing the size of the incised parts, and is often very useful in spring; it can also be used throughout the vegetation period. It is used on peach trees to prevent gumming or to cure the tree of this disease; in this case, the incisions are more sparing and shallower. Ring incision consists of removing a circular piece of bark, using a special instrument known as ring shears, or simply with a serpette. The width of this piece varies according to the diameter of the branch on which the incision is made, but in no case should it exceed one centimeter, so that the wound can close within a year. The purpose of this operation is to bring the upper part of the branch into fruit, and to develop wood in the lower part: it also hastens the ripening of the fruit, but is somewhat detrimental to its quality. It should only be carried out on the same tree in part, and then only if it is vigorous, as it soon weakens it, especially when multiplied. A weak, already fertile tree will not withstand it. Trees with fruiting seeds, and mainly vines, are subjected to this operation; on the latter, it takes place at the moment of flowering to prevent run-off, and on the others when the sap begins to move. The incision is made immediately below the cluster, at Om,02 or Om,03, to ensure success. Seeds swell more than in the ordinary state: maturity on some species is quite suddenly advanced. Above the bunch, it gives only poor results, and the grapes hardly ripen at all. However, this procedure should be used with extreme caution, if you do not want to see the vine weaken soon. Don't wait too late, so that the wound has time to heal before the end of vegetation, otherwise the branches operated on risk perishing. Debudding. - This is the removal, at the time of pruning, of eyes deemed completely useless, and which should be removed later, during disbudding: in this way, part of the sap is used, which would have been lost if these buds had been left to grow. It should be used very sparingly. The most common case is when a fruit-bearing branch of the peach tree has been pruned long and the fruit is far from the base: all the eyes between the two closest to the heel and the fruit buds are then removed. Bending. - This consists in bending twigs and even branches into an arc or semicircle, with the end inclined towards the ground, and holding them in this position by means of a tie, with the aim of making them set fruit. The sap, whose movement is slowed down by the curve it has to follow, only develops stings and twigs, and buds are formed. This is a powerful method, but we recommend its use on terminal branches only in extreme cases, i.e. on trees so vigorous that elongated pruning and severe pinching have failed to bring them to fruition. But let's only partially bow the lateral branches taken from the strongest branches, and the twigs, taking care to remove the terminal eye. Some growers subject their entire trees to this form to make them bear fruit quickly, but we must beware of imitating them, as trees treated in this way quickly wear out and live for a short time. The fruits become small, and the sap no longer feeds them sufficiently, an inconvenience that does not occur when the arcure is only partial. When the tree is fully fruited, the arched twigs and branches will have to disappear, while the stings and lambourdes will suffice to ensure production. Disbudding. - This is useful for the training of all trees, and is essential for espaliered trees, especially peach trees and vines. More buds always develop than are necessary for the tree's existence and good conformation. Pinching only stops them from growing, while it is often useful to remove them altogether to make trellising practicable. Disbudding therefore removes all unnecessary buds, which would cause confusion and take away part of the sap, which is then reserved for those that must remain. This operation, which complements pruning, requires a certain amount of care, and should be carried out gradually rather than simultaneously: the latter would have the serious disadvantage of slowing down vegetation; you need to know which shoots to protect by training them and pinching them if necessary. It's best to start with the first shoots, mainly old trees and those that are weak and languishing. On peach trees, however, there is reason to fear that by disbudding too early, the buds destined to produce the following year's fruit will become too strong, and the fruit will be scarce; we wait a little, especially on young trees, to allow the replacement bud a sort of relative inferiority. On the same tree (peach), when triple or double eyes develop on the top of the supporting branches, keep only the weakest shoot. If it's underneath, we'll keep the strongest. When two or three buds appear at the end of an extension branch, remove the weakest and leave the strongest, as good vegetation is essential for good framework. In all cases, don't wait until the bud is more than 5 or 6 centimetres old before removing it, to make room for those that need to be trained. These should be neatly removed with a razor blade, so that the spot heals easily. If carried out too early, disbudding has the disadvantage of giving rise to false buds, which often become an embarrassment on stone-fruit trees at the time of pruning; if done too late, it disrupts vegetation by taking away outlets for the sap, which is forced to reject itself in other parts, often taking on too much strength. However, it is sometimes necessary not to disbud until late, or even not at all, but only to pinch; this is when you want to strengthen a weak branch, leaving it with a large number of buds. Misplaced shoots, such as those in front and behind, on the supporting branches of a tree in espaHORT. 9 lier, will be removed, unless they are useful for filling a gap, and even then it's better to graft. Pinching. - Pinching is an operation which consists in trimming and removing, with the thumb and forefinger nails, the top of the bud when it is still tender. The time of year is naturally determined for each locality by the temperature and the earliness of the trees to come into vegetation. It is therefore because of these two variations that it should be carried out successively, starting with the buds that absorb the most sap, and continuing gradually according to the phases of vegetation. There are circumstances where it must be delayed, as in a change of temperature with a cold wind that momentarily suspends the course of the sap, or in any other circumstance that would produce a similar effect. The effect of pinching is to 1° Stops bud elongation by suppressing the apex and forcing the sap back onto the lateral eyes, thus helping their formation; 2° Establishes a means of balance when applied to the apex of the strongest terminal buds on the lateral branches of pyramids or espaliers, by momentarily stopping the flow of sap, which then benefits the weak buds left intact; 3° To help the formation of fruit productions which, due to their position on the tree, are neglected by the sap, because of its tendency to follow a direct course. It is important to differentiate between the nature of the subject, and even between the parts of the same tree where the pinch is applied. For example, a side laden with fruit will be pinched more severely than one without. There are also species of tree where a pinch that is too short attacks the organs, such as the good winter Christian, the crassane, and generally the varieties with soft, porous wood: these are differences that you must learn to distinguish in order to produce the effect you want. In short, it's better to pinch a little long than too short, since crown pruning is used to weaken production and bring it to fruit successively. Breaking. - Breakage is an operation which consists in breaking off the lateral branches 5 centimetres from their starting point, either on pyramids or espaliers: it is carried out at the end of August, when the sap begins to slow down, so that breakage concentrates it on the fruit crops, while avoiding spoiling and aborting them. However, this sometimes happens when, after long droughts, the sap regains its strength, cancelling out and destroying the expected results. Pinching is of little importance for trees that have been well pinched; but it becomes necessary for those that have been forgotten or neglected, or for unpinched twigs left in reserve to prevent abortion of fruit production. Breakage is performed by pressing the blade of the pruning knife against the base of the twig between two leaves, squeezing it lightly with the thumb; then, turning the hand, breakage is performed. The breaking method predates pinching, and its application comes to us from the ancients, who practised it at various times of the year. The trees to which breaking is applied are pear, apple, cherry, plum and apricot, all of which are subject to the various shapes in use. Shaping trees. From the moment you plant a fruit tree, you want to give it a shape of some kind: but this shape must be subordinate to one main aim, which is to obtain, by cultivating fruit trees in a given area, the greatest possible quantity of the most beautiful fruit in the shortest possible time and with the least possible expense. This is what schoolteachers should be particularly concerned with. To achieve this, they need to use the simplest forms, the easiest to establish, and which require the least time and expense either to set up or to maintain. In addition to full-wind trees, we will reduce these forms to five, for the reasons given above. These forms are: 1° full-wind trees; 2° the pyramid; 3° the cattail; 4° spindles; and 5° cords. 1° Full wind trees. - This shape is applicable to all tree species. Trees treated in this way are best placed in orchards or along a roadside: they only take their branches from a trunk grafted onto a free-standing trunk about 2 meters high. Pruning for high-stemmed trees consists in leaving only three or rarely four of the most beautiful and best-placed branches to form the head; leaving them the first year, even before planting, for pear and apple trees, at a length of around 10 to 12 centimetres, depending on the strength of the wood. We say pear trees, because some stone trees require longer pruning, others shorter. 2° Pyramid-shaped pear trees. - Trees of this shape consist of a vertical stem topped from the top to Om, 30 from the ground by lateral branches whose length increases as they approach the ground or the base of the tree. These branches must grow in such a way that there is an interval of Om, 30 between each of those that immediately overlap, following the same direction, so that air and light can penetrate between them. They should be free of bifurcations, with only fruiting branches from top to base. Finally, they should form an angle of no more than 25 degrees with the horizon. In general, the largest diameter of the pyramid should equal one third of the tree's total height. This proportion is necessary so that the balance of vegetation is more easily maintained between the various parts of the tree. If the diameter is less than the indicated third, the inner branches, half as long and with half as many leaves, will no longer have the strength to counterbalance the tendency of the sap towards the top of the tree, and retain a sufficient quantity for their own benefit: they become increasingly languid, and eventually perish. If, on the other hand, the diameter is increased, the lower branches will absorb too much sap, to the detriment of the top. The height to be given to pyramids is proportionate to the richness of the soil and the vigor of the subjects; it varies between 5 and 9 meters. Fruit trees can only be properly framed as long as they are developing vigorously. Newly-planted young trees only show this degree of vigor once they have taken possession of the soil, i.e. once they have developed new rootlets to replace those destroyed by transplanting; for it is only then that these trees can draw abundantly from the earth the nutrients they need for their vegetation. (See for guidance, construction and pruning of pyramid-shaped pear trees. DUBREUIL, RAOUL, HARDY and LACHAUME). 3° cattail. - The cattail shape has long been confused with the pyramid shape, and is still often mistakenly so. However, it differs greatly both in layout and results. The cattail is shaped in such a way that its largest diameter is located towards the middle of the height, so that the lateral branches decrease in length as they approach the base and the top. 1 What does this shape mean? The sap is drawn towards the middle of the tree by the greater mass of branches, and abandons the branches at the base, which are then loaded with a very large quantity of flower buds and fruit, rapidly exhausting them. Despite this disadvantage, we recommend this arrangement to schoolteachers, for the trees they place between pyramids, because young trees lend themselves quite naturally to this shape, and what's more, they take less time to prune, while giving good results. Cattails can, however, be replaced by spindle-shaped trees, which are ideally suited to small vegetable gardens such as those usually found on schoolteachers' premises. 4° Spindle or columnar trees consist of a single, vertical stem, rising to an average height of 6 meters and regularly topped with fruiting branches from the base to the top. The result is a cylindrical column 0.35 m in diameter. This shape is not very graceful, but it does offer certain advantages in certain circumstances. For example, the trees that are subjected to it shade the ground much less than pyramids do, and take up much less space, enabling other products to be grown in their vicinity, and also, for the same reason, enabling a greater number of different varieties to be brought together in the same space. We also believe that the fruiting branches form more quickly, that being better lit by the sun and born directly on the stem, they are more fertile, and that the fruit is generally more beautiful. As a result, for the same surface area, a slightly greater quantity of fruit would be harvested than with pyramids. But this success can only be achieved under certain conditions. Firstly, pear and apple trees are the only two species that seem to lend themselves well to this shape. Secondly, these two trees need to be grafted, the first on quince, the second on doucin. If they were grafted on franc, they would grow too vigorously, and the pruning method applied to them would only result in the development of woody shoots. Finally, and for the same reason, these trees should be placed in warm, light, moderately fertile soil. (For this training method, see the authors already cited above, and especially Dubreuil, whose method, which we have borrowed here, seems to us the most rational). 5° Cordons. - Under this form, apple trees, which do not stand still, so to speak, generally bear fruit more quickly than under the other forms, and give more colorful fruit. In fact, this is the only form suitable for school gardens. Cords can be arranged in two different ways, but we'll concentrate on the one that best suits those for whom we're writing. HORIZONTAL OR LATERAL CORDON. - Apple trees of all varieties, one year old grafted on paradise and with a single stem, are planted at a distance of Om, 50 to Om, 40 from the edge of the path and 1m, 50 to 2 meters apart from each other, in a line along a path or all around a tile. A wire is stretched at Om, 30 or Om, 35 from the ground; a peg is planted at the foot of each tree and behind it, i.e. on the opposite side of the direction in which each inclined tree will be; it is tied loosely to this peg with a wicker, a few centimetres from the bottom of the wire, then gently inclined on to it, making it form the swan's neck, and tied to it. Later, during the winter, it is bent completely to form a perfect square. In spring, its length is reduced by pruning it close to an eye at the top, a few centimetres from its tip. When the extension branch of the first meets the second, they are grafted together by cutting the tip of the first into a triangle or, better still, into a bevel which is pushed into the elbow of the second, where a triangular or flat incision is made; they are tied together, and the ligature made over the incision is covered with a little hot grafting wax. Do the same to the others as they come together, and soon the whole is a cordon, a chain of beautiful and excellent colored fruits. The sap from the first will thus reach the second, and even the following ones: the weak will thus benefit from the health of the robust. When the cordon is welded from one end to the other, the wire is eliminated. 4 According to several reputable practitioners, it would be better not to graft apple trees together, as this would make it easier to control the sap, by letting it flow into the extension of the end, which is passed through a wicker ring under the next tree, and pruned a little each year, as is done on the ends of a finished espalier. As a result of this procedure, a distance of 2 meters should be set between each apple tree at the time of planting. exter A single cordon can form two if the subjects grow well, and this second cordon is often very useful to the lower one, in that it spends the superfluous sap and thus prevents the fruit production from going to wood. This cordon is obtained by making the first apple trees produce a bud that is raised to Om, 25 above the first cordon, and applying it to wires like the first and treating it absolutely like the latter. Fan. In addition to the above five forms, which we feel are most suitable for school gardens, we also encourage teachers to practice the management and education of a few trees, which they can form into 9. fans, palmettes, candelabras, espaliers or counter espaliers, vases and goblets. Simple palmettes. -===---- - Candelabra. It's always a pleasant distraction when you can force trees to bend to your every whim! CHAPTER X CULTIVATION OF THE PRINCIPAL FRUIT TREES In the short presentation that follows, we shall proceed as in our description of vegetable plants, i.e. in alphabetical order. Apricot tree. - This tree grows tall and fairly large; it is covered with thick, hard, greyish bark; its branches extend well; its leaves are short, broad, almost round, toothed, pointed, dark green and pungent in taste; its flowers are pale pink, each composed of five florets arranged in a pink pattern: once the flowers have fallen, they are followed by round, fleshy fruits, as large as eggs, flattened on the sides and furrowed along the length. When fully ripe, they are red on one side and yellowish on the others; their flesh is yellow, tender, melting and sweet, and contains a hard, bony, flattened stone, pointed at both ends, which contains a white, bitter almond with a pleasant taste. The apricot tree seems to be the most robust of all fruit trees, since when transplanted large enough, not only does it take well, given a few precautions, but it also often produces very fine fruit in the same year. It can be grafted to plum, almond and even peach trees, but never to other apricot trees, as the slit made to receive the graft often becomes an incurable wound. To obtain better fruit, we prefer grafting on wild black damask plum trees. Grafting onto plum trees with large or white fruit produces larger apricots, but at the expense of quality. Moreover, this tree is easy to grow, as it is content with any kind of soil that is neither too wet nor too clayey. In cold, damp soils, it should be placed to the south, but naturally it prefers a sunny exposure and warm, sandy soil, which should be deeper for trees grafted onto almond trees. Apricot trees don't like manure, and should rarely be given manure if the soil is too thin. You can dispense with pruning full-blown apricot trees, but then they bear less beautiful fruit. They should be pruned before the sap starts to move, in February, mainly to remove dead or gummy wood and greedy branches. Trees planted in espaliers require more careful pruning. They are arranged and managed in the same way as peach trees, bearing in mind that large branches must be cut off several times, lest the abundant sap turn to gum: this is what can happen to all novau fruit. It should also be noted that the sun's heat can be harmful to espalier fruit, so this disadvantage is remedied by de-spreading the branches, and holding the fruit away from the wall with a small wooden fork. You can also help them to ripen and take on a beautiful color by uncovering them before or after the rain. This operation must be carried out with care, as the fruit should only be uncovered a little at a time, and sometimes only half the leaves should be cut off. Apricot fruit is nourishing, healthy and refreshing. Cherry tree. - Most cherry trees grow to a mediocre height and medium size. The bark is hard, thick, russet or grayish, the leaves long, narrow, pointed and toothed at the edges. The flowers are white, each composed of five florets arranged in a pink pattern: the flowers are followed by round, green fruits, which gradually become red, black or white, depending on the species; they are borne on a more or less long stalk; inside, they contain a hard, bony stone, containing a small white almond, with a very pronounced bitter taste. Cherry trees do particularly well in light, deep soil. Grafting is the best and most widely used method for propagating fine varieties. If you want strong, slender trees, you can graft them to wild cherry or cherry from seed, using the "dormant eye" grafting technique. We'd like to point out that preference should be given to red-fruited cherry, as it grafts much more easily than black-fruited varieties. For medium-sized trees, graft on wild cherry or guignier scions, and for dwarf trees, graft on sour cherry. The cherry is an excellent fruit, aperitif, digestive and very healthy. Cognassier.Its gnarled, often twisted trunk sprouts many diffuse branches, with alternate, entire, etiolated, oblong, cottony and whitish leaves on top, large, white, terminal, almost sessile flowers which become fruits called quinces, pear-shaped, always covered with down, more or less large, watery and fragrant, depending on the soil that produced them; and finally greenish-yellow when ripe and good to eat, but only cooked. Quince can be propagated by seed, cuttings, offshoots and grafting, and requires no care other than the removal of greedy branches, dead wood and buds that develop at its base; this tree is not much cultivated for its fruit, but much for grafting pear trees. Walnut. - Its straight, well-spun trunk divides, at a more or less considerable height, into numerous branches that form a beautiful head. Its leaves are broad, alternate, winged, with five to nine muffled leaflets, whole sessile, elongated ovals, yellowish-green, giving off a strong odor when crumpled. The flowers, either male or female, live on the same individual: the former are arranged in long, axillary catkins, which fall after the female flowers have been fertilized. These are usually grouped in threes or fours at the tip of the young twigs, and become rounded fruits covered with an aromatic pulp, which is at first green and firm, but soon softens and takes on a dark brown tint that it communicates to everything that touches it; This is known as the brou, and surrounds a woody, very wrinkled shell, acute at the top and opening into two equal parts, revealing a kernel with solid, white flesh, divided about halfway into four parts, whose shape and taste are familiar to everyone. These fruits differ in size and quality according to variety. Walnut trees are not very fussy about the choice of land, as they thrive in a variety of soils. However, they prefer stony, sandy soils that can also retain some freshness. They are propagated from seed; young walnut trees are pruned with hooks, until the stem has reached a circumference of 0.m12, at which time they should be grafted if the quality of the fruit is more important than the beauty of the tree. Walnut trees can be grafted with a slotted eye, a ring or a flute. The latter is the most commonly used, and we feel it is the most advantageous. The following year, they can be put in place after the soil to be planted has been cleared as much as possible and well loosened. Once in place, they need no further pruning, except for the first two or three years, to form a regular head. Sin. - Left to its own devices, this tree is not likely to reach great heights, and its head is almost always sloppy and graceless, when nature alone is responsible for its adornment. But under the hand of art, it submits to all shapes, and its docile branches lend themselves to all directions. Its trunk, which only grows to a mediocre size, is made of very hard wood, covered with ash-grey bark whose epidermis, over time, rises in more or less wide, more or less thick scales, depending on the age of the tree and the stoutness it enjoyed in its youth, or the illnesses it suffered during the course of its vegetation. The bark of the young wood, colored a dull, pale green, turns a more or less dark brick-red, depending on which side the sun hits it. As it matures, its epidermis takes on a number of irregular, padded dots, advancing the maturity of the woody parts. The main branches arising from the trunk naturally take a direction closer to the perpendicular than to the horizontal, and in their early youth, their base is provided with numerous shoots or buds which follow a direction similar to that taken by their mother. Gradually, however, these buds disappear, and all the work of vegetation is carried to the ends of the branches, leaving their lower parts bare, unless art prevents or halts the effects of this tendency. Peach trees like deep, light, warm, sandy soil. It can be propagated by sowing, but only a few varieties reproduce identically and it is usually by grafting that it is multiplied. In light, warm and deep soils, hard-shelled and sweet almond trees are the most suitable for grafting; in soils lacking these qualities, especially the latter, preference should be given to black Damask and Saint-Julien plum trees, but from seed rather than suckers. Peach trees are sometimes grafted onto themselves, but in this case they are much more prone to gum. Grafting is carried out from mid-July to September, and the operation is completed by choosing the moment when the sap is not abundant enough to drown the bud, but sufficient to weld it together. If you want to grow them in the open air, place the escutcheon at a height of 1.60 or 2 meters; if you want to grow them in espaliers, place them at Om.15 from the collar. The cultivation and pruning of the peach tree require a great deal of detail, which we cannot go into here. Suffice it to say that attention should be focused on the eye, bud, shoot and woody branch of the peach tree, for these are all that make up its vegetation. Pear tree. - This is the tree that stands out most in an orchard for its elevation and the regularity of its head. Its numerous branches support each other without confusion and, in almost all varieties, present a well-rounded dome that can do without the help of art to preserve the graces of its form: in a word, it is the most beautiful and elegant of all fruit trees. Its leaves are alternate, smooth, whole, more or less oval, but always slightly elongated and pointed. The serrations along their edges are more or less deep and regular, sometimes barely perceptible. The stalks that support them are short but not too flexible, so they are always supported in an almost horizontal direction. Composed of at least five rounded petals, almost always white and concave, the flowers are gathered in clusters on a very short support, and feature a fleshy, persistent calyx, cup-shaped and divided into five long, pointed indentations. The center of the corolla is occupied by twenty or thirty awl-shaped stamens, shorter than the petals, and by a pistil whose five styles, crowned by simple stigmas, rest on an embryo that forms part of the calyx and becomes a fleshy, succulent fruit whose shape, volume, color and flavor vary according to variety, and whose center is occupied by five membranous lugs, each containing one or two pepins. All pear varieties can be propagated by scape, cleft and crown grafting: on wild pear to form large, long-lasting canopies, but only if the soil is deep enough; on quince for shallow soils and for espaliers, pyramids and cattails; on small quince for low espaliers and palmettes. Pear trees grafted onto quince set fruit sooner, but are prone to yellowing and live less long than those grafted onto sauvageon, because not all soils are suitable for quince. In general, espaliered pear trees produce much more beautiful fruit than those left in the open air, and they prefer east-facing and west-facing exposures to any other. However, there are some that can adapt to all exposures, provided the soil is suitable. Sometimes pear trees, after having been vigorous, languish and turn yellow; this is because, planted in artificial or shallow soil, they reach a depth that does not suit them; or it is because they have worn out the soil. The latter can be remedied by renewing the soil: to do this, in November, the plants are uncovered.

The roots are then immediately covered with mud collected from the streets and paths, on top of which manure is placed, which is removed in the spring and replaced with new, suitable soil. In general, melting pears and those grafted onto franc trees do best in dry soil, while fat, fresh soil is well suited to brittle pears and those grafted onto quince trees. (For pruning and management of pear trees, see Dubreuil, Raoul, Hardy and Lachaume. Apple tree. - This tree is of mediocre stature, but its half-vertical twigs give it a bushy head, which shines alternately with the brightness of its spring flowers, the suavity of its foliage, and the goodness of the fruit that crowns its annual growth. Its buds rise straight up and are covered with elliptical, elongated, alternate leaves, tapering to a point at both ends: bordered by a more or less deep serration, they are made of a strong, whitish-green, slightly hairy fabric, veined on the underside and tinted a more or less dark green on top. The flowers appear in clusters, and each is composed of a one-piece, fleshy, cup-shaped calyx, divided at the edges into two long, pointed indentations; five large, concave, rose-shaped petals, variegated with red on a white background; twenty stamens, attached to the inner walls of the calyx; and a pistil whose five fairly long styles, terminated by their stigmas, rest on an embryo that serves as the calyx's background. This embryo becomes a fleshy, rounded, conical or cylindrical fruit ending in two cavities, one of which receives the peduncle and the other contains the umbilicus. It is covered with a varnished skin adhering to the flesh, and its center is occupied by five large forms of thin, supple yet solid membranes. Each compartment contains one or, more often, two teardrop-shaped seeds, flattened on the side where they touch, and covered with a cartilaginous skin that protects a slightly bitter kernel. Apple trees thrive in all types of soil, but do best in slightly damp, oily soils. Although the roots don't prickle, it doesn't last long in shallow soil. Except for southern exposure, it can grow in all other types of soil. Like the pear tree, the apple lends itself to any shape you want to give it. Precious apple varieties can be propagated by grafting onto their own species, either in the form of a shield with a dormant eye, or in the form of a cleft or crown, but they must be chosen according to the place and shape you wish to give them. Plants raised from seedlings or burst suckers from wild apple trees or orchards are suitable for making large open-air apple trees. Small open-air trees, goblets, espaliers and cattails, spindles or pyramids can be grafted onto doucin, a smaller species than the wild apple. Lastly, cordons are grafted mainly onto paradis, a dwarf, very fertile species that imparts its qualities to grafts. Paradiso sets fruit very quickly and produces larger fruit; it also produces many root offshoots that serve as subjects. It is also more receptive to reinette, rambur and api, which are usually grafted as escutcheons. When planting apple trees, care must be taken not to bury the graft. Pruning large, full-wind apple trees consists solely of removing dead wood; funnel-shaped trees need to be hollowed out in the middle, among other things: more art is needed for espaliers, which also need to be trellised like pear trees, twice a year, at pruning and disbudding in July. Plum trees. - The plum tree is generally of medium size, with a fairly pleasant habit as long as its shoots are straight, vigorous and complete. But as it ages, its fragile wood breaks under the weight of its fruit or yields to the force of the winds, and soon these repeated mutilations cause it to lose its regularity and grace. Most of this tree's fruit hang from the branches on long, slender stalks that implant themselves at the lower end of the fruit, in a more or less deep cavity. Light, sandy soils that are not arid are suitable for this tree, which in strong soils produces too much wood and much less fruit, which ripens very late. Exposures to the east and west are the most favorable; finally, plum trees like full wind and languish when sheltered by walls or overhung by trees. Stem plums with full exposure to the wind can be grafted onto wild stone plums: pruning should be long, to prevent them from producing too much wood and very little fruit. MAIN SPECIES OF FRUIT TREES. 165 CHAPTER XI PRINCIPAL SPECIES OF FRUIT TREES THAT MUST BE PLANTED IN A VEGETABLE GARDEN Pear trees. SUMMER FRUIT. Beauprésent. July deanery. Beurré précoce. Peurré d'amanlis. Beauprésent d'Artois. Beurré William. Doyenné Boussoch. AUTUMN FRUITS. Louise bonne d'Avranches Fondante de Charneu. Bon-chrétien Napoléon. New Poiteau. Adèle de Saint-Denis. Duchess of Angouleme. Soldier ploughman. Christmas fondant. Clairgeau butter. Arenberg butter. Diel butter. Passe-colmar. Hardempont butter. Triomphe de Jodoigne. WINTER FRUITS. Beurré Noirchain. Pentecost Bergamot. Pergamot d'Espéren. Suzette de Bavay. Winter Bon-Chrétien. Saint-Germain d'hiver. Apple trees. Calville white and red. Api small and large. Short-hanging. Grey fennel. French cherry. Canadian cherry. Early English. Early jinx. Apricot trees. Early blane apricot. Early large apricot. Apricot royal. Plum trees. Drap d'or d'Espéren. Mirabelle petite. Mister. Reine-Claude. Peach trees. Petite mignon. Grosse mignonne. Madeleine de Courson. Belle de Vitry. Teton de Vénus. The latter is excellent, but the tree is Cerise de Montmorency. I not very productive. CHAPTER XII HARVESTING AND PRESERVING FRUIT Harvesting begins with summer fruits, continues with autumn fruits and ends with winter fruits. Harvesting, which usually takes place in October for winter fruit, may be delayed or brought forward, depending on the local temperature and, above all, the nature of the trees, which differ in their vegetation. For example, pear trees grafted onto quince trees, whose vegetation starts early, produce fruit earlier than those grafted onto franc trees. Fruits should be harvested when the weather is fine, and as soon as you notice that some are detached from the tree without being worm-eaten. The same species of winter fruit grafted onto the franc tree should be harvested at least fifteen to twenty days later than those grafted onto the quince tree, because they retain their vegetation very late and the adherence of the peduncles to the branches protects them from gales. Harvesting can be advanced or delayed by the shape of the trees and the exposure in which they are placed; espaliered pear and apple trees ripen almost twenty days before the same species in pyramid, spindle or cattail shape. Great care must be taken when picking the fruit, to preserve the peduncle (or tail), and to avoid breaking the bursa to which they adhere, as this glues them in the future. Fruits picked about a fortnight before ripening keep longer, but this is to the detriment of their quality; more often than not, they are wrinkled and tasteless. Once the fruit has been picked and sorted into different species, it is placed in a chamber to release its water through transpiration. This transpiration, which is noticeable by the steam with which the fruit is charged, will be all the more active if the harvest has been made in fine weather, after the sun has evaporated the dew and before the cool of the evening. Before taking the fruit down to the orchard, select the most beautiful and healthiest ones that are likely to keep longer, and place them on separate shelves, keeping a small distance between them so that they don't touch. You can convert either a frost-free room or a cellar or dry cellar into a fruit store, with shelves to hold the fruit. Whichever room you choose, you need to keep it very clean, and visit the shelves often to remove spoiled fruit, as its decomposition can be harmful to others through the gases it gives off. As the fruit ripens, it loses water and its sweetness increases, due to the action of the oxygen gas in the fruit tree's air. By adjusting to this chemical combination, we can prolong or delay the ripening of part of the fruit by keeping it closed in a place deprived of air and light, at the same temperature. CHAPTER XIII DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS HAZARDOUS TO TREES Caterpillar. - The surest way to destroy them is to comply with the law, i.e. to weed. This consists in carefully removing all caterpillar nests and egg rings from the branches, while pruning the trees, and burning them: finally, to destroy the caterpillars scattered on the plants, as well as the butterflies that come to lay their eggs. Ants. - For a long time, ants were thought to be immune to damage to fruit trees, but we now know that they devour young buds in spring, when they are first developing, and that they attack perfectly healthy fruit. It is therefore useful to think about destroying them: this is done by hanging small bottles, half-filled with honeyed water, from the branches of trees, from place to place. It doesn't take long to get rid of them completely. Wasps and hornets. - These insects sometimes cause considerable damage, especially to pear trees. To destroy them, we use the same procedure as for ants. Slugs and snails can be destroyed by the methods described in the chapter on animals harmful to plants. birds. - While some birds are a nuisance in the garden, there are some in large numbers that are undeniably useful: we therefore recommend not destroying them, but keeping them out of the garden when the fruit ripens. We have recently devised a successful method of keeping them away from fruit: small two-sided mirrors are placed above or in front of the trees and vines we wish to preserve. Tie them with a long string, so that they float in the slightest wind. Aphids. - Green and black aphids cause considerable damage to peach trees. These insects attack the underside of the youngest leaves, absorbing the fluids they contain. They can be destroyed by using tobacco as a fumigant or lotion. The woolly aphid can be recognized by the abundant white down covering it; it attacks apple trees in particular, which it promptly kills. It gets under the bark of trees, and during winter, part of it hides in the ground around the root collar. To combat it, the tree must be dug up so that it can be reached wherever it is, since it comes up again in spring. Several methods have been recommended for destroying the woolly adelgid; unfortunately, most are either inapplicable or ineffective. Only one has so far produced good results: the use of fatty substances, the most common and least expensive oils. Simply apply them with a stiff brush to all affected areas, while the vegetation is resting. Bugs or kermes. Tiger bugs. - These insects are destroyed with a mixture of quicklime, black soap and lye. HORT. 10 The soap is used in the proportion of 500 grams to 4 liters of lye, and the lime in sufficient quantity to form a sort of clear slurry. After leaf fall, apply this mixture with a brush to all infected branches and twigs of these various animals. Rats, mice, dormice and field mice. -These animals harm trees by eating fruit and sometimes gnawing twigs. They are easily destroyed before the fruit is ripe, by placing bait mixed with vomitus nut in small pots hung against the wall. Mousetraps can also be used for the same purpose. D Moles. - They disrupt the soil and fan the roots with their underground galleries. They need traps that are easy to obtain. LNGIAT NE DU BUTEERRE n avu'que av HCENTOS BERII IORMD ME MARROOEEA 4 memte n mnem OEL D CHAPTER XIV EHRAHI TREE DISEASES Gum is specific to stone fruit trees. It can be recognized by secretions that appear on the surface of twigs or branches, tearing the bark. In young trees, gum is often the result of pruning that is too short, or pinching that is too rigorous. In older trees, it is sometimes the result of impeded fluid circulation. It has been noted that gum is more frequent on trees planted in damp soils, and can also appear following sudden changes in temperature. As soon as gum appears, the deposits it forms should be scraped away to the quick, and the wounds covered with grafting wax. In the early stages of the disease, longitudinal incisions made on the branches on the opposite side to the one where the gum has formed are usually quite successful. But if the gum has vitiated the bark and sapwood around it, there is no remedy. The twig or branch must be cut off below the disease, and pruned on a vigorous dormant eye placed above it, in order to obtain a replacement twig. Blistering. - This disease is specific to peach trees, and appears on their leaves towards the end of spring. Affected leaves first take on a yellowish-green tinge; soon afterwards they thicken, tighten up, blister, turn purplish-white and yellow, and eventually fall off. The main cause of this disease seems to be sudden changes in temperature, which suddenly stop vegetation in its tracks. Experience has shown that the surest way to prevent it is to use movable coping or canopies for espaliered peach trees. If a bud is completely affected, it should be removed without hesitation, lest the disease wreak further havoc. Le Blanc, miller or leprosy. - This is a kind of whitish mold that attacks leaves, buds and fruit. As soon as it begins, to stop the disease, wet the affected leaves on a calm day at sunset and sprinkle them with sulfur flower. Repeat this operation every eight days, and the disease disappears. Chlorosis or jaundice. - Pear trees are very prone to this; leaves turn yellow, buds languish and often dry out at the tips. If it lasts throughout vegetation, it indicates soil exhaustion. If it is due to certain adverse atmospheric influences, it presents no serious danger. In the first case, fertilizers should be used to revive vegetation: if this fails, the tree should be replanted. In the second case, there's usually no need to worry about it, as jaundice ceases with the causes that produced it. As for the burning that occurs at the end of branches during droughts, simply remove the dead wood by pruning the green twig to a good eye outwards. Cankers. - All trees, especially pears and apples, are prone to cankers, which indicate poor health or exhaustion. If they are the result of accidents, such as blows, bruises, etc., they are easily cured by scraping off the affected branches with a sharp instrument, and covering the scraped areas with grafting wax. When they are due to lack of vigor, remove all the old bark, scrape it away and girdle to obtain new shoots. Mosses. - They interfere with the functions of trees and are harmful to them. Get rid of them by scraping them off in wet weather; then heat the whole tree with great care. CHAPTER XV CULTIVATION OF VINES IN GARDENS The preferred varieties are Chasselas de Fontainebleau, Chasselas rose, which takes on its pink hue only when ripe, and Franckenthal. If you want very early grapes, you can plant a black Magdeleine. Light, deep soil is best for excellent grapes. In moist, shallow soil, vines languish; in more consistent soil, their production is too strong, too watery, and their fruit is of lesser quality. In our temperate climate, vines need a warm exposure to ripen fully, and it's only along a wall, facing south or east, that they find the heat they need to ripen perfectly. Of all the methods for pruning vines, trellising them and laying them against a wall, we'll just mention the one used at Thomery, near Fontainebleau: we think it's preferable to all the others for its simplicity. The walls on which the vines are trained in Thomery are about 2.50 m high, and are finished with a projecting coping of Om.25 to Om.30. This coping protects the vines from frost and heavy rain, and prevents the upper cordon from growing too strongly. The walls are lined with trellises, the uprights of which are spaced at Om, 65 from each other and the horizontal slats only at 10. Om, 25. The first row of these is at Om, 16 from the ground. Here's how to plant the vine. The bed along the wall against which the trellis is to be planted is cleared, loosened and smoked to a width of at least 1m,60 and a depth of Om, 40 or Om, 50. If the soil is damp, the bed is sloped to keep the water away from the wall. Once this has been done, a trench 1.60 m from the wall is opened in parallel, Om.65 wide and Om.25 to Om.28 deep; then the required quantity of marcottes or crossettes is prepared, after removing the spurs and tendrils, etc... These crossettes lie crosswise in the bottom of this trench, with their heads turned towards the wall; at a distance of Om,55 from each other: when they are covered with Om,10 to 0m,14 of soil, they are compacted a little with the foot, while the end facing the wall is raised to give it a more or less vertical direction; the trench is then only two-thirds full, with the rest of the soil spread over the bed. In general, it's a good idea to spread a layer of manure Om, 08 thick in the trench, to keep it cool and prevent the soil from drying out, hardening and splitting. In March, each plant is cut at two eyes above the ground; weed, hoe and water during the summer if the heat requires it, or if the drought is prolonged, as a vine cutting must always be in a mild humidity to produce roots: we tie the shoots to a stile, encouraging their development by all known means. In the following spring, the weak shoots are pruned off, leaving only the best on each vine, which is then laid down towards the wall, as in the previous year's operation, and so on until it reaches the foot of the wall and can be planted there. These various operations usually take three years. Now it's time to form the cords. If the wall is 2.50 m high, five cords are established: the first at 0.16 m from the ground, and the other four at 0.50 m from each other, on trellis crosspieces set up in advance for this purpose. The vine destined to form the lowest cordon should be pruned just at the height of the cordon, if it has a double eye at this point; otherwise, it is important to prune on the eye immediately above the marked point; at the same time, the development of the eye placed just below is encouraged: these two eyes should form the two branches with which to form the two arms of the vine, one on the right and the other on the left: when the wood is ripe, if the upper branch rises a little above the trellis against which it is to be laid, it is gently bent so that it rests exactly on the trellis; if the other branch, on the contrary, originated a little too low, it is directed vertically up to the level of the first, and there it is also bent over the trellis on the opposite side, so that the two branches are perfectly opposite or placed on the same line and appear to come from the same point. The second cord, located at (lm, 65 from the ground, cannot be formed as soon as the first; the third will be formed even later, and so on for the others. Whatever the height the vine reaches to form the cordon, it should only be lengthened by Om, 35 to Om, 40 each year, and the lateral buds should be left to prune into spurs, in order to make it grow and produce grapes; but as soon as the cordon has reached the required height and its two arms have received the first pruning, all the spurs that would exist along the entire length of the vine should be scrupulously removed. We assume that all the vines have reached the height assigned to each one, and that their last two branches have been extended horizontally to the right and left to form the two branches of the cordon; here's how to prune these two branches until they are each 1m, 30 in length, and no longer elongate; we prune in the first year, so as to obtain three buds placed at a distance of 0m, 10 to 0*, 16 from each other; two of these buds Horizontal cordon. are converted into spurs at the next pruning; the third, on the other hand, and the furthest apart, is intended to extend the arm or cordon. During the summer, the shoots intended to form spurs are tied vertically to the trellis, while the shoot with which the cordon is to be extended is extended horizontally. At the second pruning, the two spurs are cut back to two eyes, and the terminal branch is again pruned so as to produce three buds spaced from Om, 10 to Om, 16 apart; two of these buds are trellised vertically, and the third is extended horizontally, as in the previous year, and so on, until each arm is 1.30 m long; at this point, the terminal shoot prunes itself into a spur. Each arm should have eight spurs on the upper side; this is achieved by completely removing the eyes on the underside of the cordon. It is well known that the eyes at the bottom of the buds in the vine are very small and very close together; there are at least six of them over a length of Om,005; when the bud is pruned too long, i.e. to Om,030 or Om,055, these small eyes die out and do not grow; but if you prune above them, they develop perfectly and give very beautiful bunches. Skilled gardeners are well aware of this: they always prune the spurs to 0m, 002, and sometimes less; this is why these kinds of branches never elongate in their hands. Pruning shears are much more convenient than pruning knives for trimming spurs to this length of Om, 002. If, after pruning, we see more than two buds developing on a spur, we remove the surplus, even if the shoots bear bunches; two buds with two good bunches each are better than a larger number with mediocre bunches. As young buds can easily come unstuck, you must be careful not to try to force them, when you first plant them, to suddenly take a direction opposite to the one they naturally take. Until then, simply remove tendrils and shoots without bunches, and remove and pinch the tips of those which, after flowering, seem to want to grow too much. It's a good idea, however, for the buds to extend as far as the cordon above them, but none should go beyond it: everything that goes beyond it is removed. When the grapes are close to full size, it is a good idea to sprinkle or water them with a hand pump. This softens the skin and coarsens the berry, which is then carefully uncovered by removing a few leaves, so that it can be exposed to the sun, take on color and improve its quality: if you intend to keep grapes on the trellis until the hard frosts, enclose them in paper or horsehair bags eight or ten days before they ripen. Our average climate is not conducive to vine propagation by seed. We must therefore use the only means we have used up to now for propagation, which are marcotte, cuttings and grafting. Three types of grafting are used in vineyards: 1° herbaceous grafting with and on growing shoots; 2° split grafting on wood that is one or more years old; 3° shuttle grafting. O TETNGIENIUARRE Vine disease known as Oidium tuckéri. This alteration appears in the form of a grayish-white efflorescence, first on leaves and young buds, whose development it suspends, then on the bunches themselves, whose growth it stops. The skin of the berries hardens, takes on a tawny hue, the berries split, acquire a bitter taste and corrupt before ripening. Attacked leaves and buds are covered with brown spots, the leaves fall off, and, if the disease is intense, the buds themselves are disrupted right down to their base, so that not only that year's harvest is lost, but even that of the following year; and if the vines themselves are subjected to this scourge for two or three years in succession, the vines eventually perish. Numerous methods have been tried to combat this disease, which is threatening one of our most important products, but the safest and most effective method is that employed by Mr. Rose Charmeux de Thomery, which consists of using the flower of sulfur spread dry on all the green parts of the vine. The sulfur must be spread evenly over all green parts (buds, leaves and bunches). M. Charmeux recognized, and it has since been observed everywhere, that the action of sulfur is all the greater when it is applied at the first onset of the disease, and even before it appears. It is therefore advisable to apply a first sulfur treatment before flowering; a second when the grapes are as big as small shot; a third when they have reached two-thirds of their size. Rarely is a fourth sulphur treatment necessary. Two types of instrument are used to spread the sulfur on the vines: 1° the tassel box; 2° the bellows. This concludes the task we have undertaken to popularize horticulture in the countryside. However, we do not pretend to have done a better job than our masters in the art of horticulture, the Bon Jardinier, Dubreuil, Raoul, Isabeau and Lachaume, who have been reliable guides for us in many circumstances; but what we wanted to write was a simple, clear, concise treatise, suitable for all hands, especially children. We hope to have achieved the goal we have set ourselves, and we shall consider ourselves very fortunate if we can contribute to hastening the progress of an art which is the source of much enjoyment for all those who devote themselves to it.  FIN. mitmnim o (l MIEIMIA UU HHRAMIIO -VI AMINIEM TERIDNT FI MAUTEEMRIMMAII - T MATO aMTXAM . TABLE OF CONTENTS IUi LadlEIE RUAMIA RAN ROROMMIEAT - .IIV MMIAM HMAN ALA RAIREMIDERTRAN EAN NIAMIAT - IIIL! memum munit M METONM ... ... . - LE JARDIN DE L'INSTITUTEUR..... . . . .. . . . . . . 11 MHATE MHAPITRE Ier. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF GARDENING. . . . 12 G e HIIO- * 1. land studies . . . . . . . anm2. Ploughing . .. . .. . .. .. MONAI NN aro. Fertilizer. . . . . . . . . . . . 4. Watering . . . . . . . . . 5. Sowing ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 6. layering... . . . .. . .. . . 24 II. - VEGETABLE GARDEN DIVISION . . . . . . . 27 III. -BASIC PLANT ORGANIZATION. "ae d'adai" * . 4. Roots . . . . . . . . . . . 2 Fige.-. 5. Rhizome). . . - . . . . . . . " . . . . . . . . . . 4. Bulb ... ... ... ... ... . 51 Leaf ... ... ... ... ... .... 6 Inflorescence ... . . . . . . .. 7. Flower . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 50 33 8. Fertilization . C. C. . . . . -. . 36 11 141 9. Fruit. . . . . . . . 10. Seeds. . . . . 11. Embryo ... ... ... . 12. Germination... ... . CHAPTER IV. - GARDENER'S CALENDER ... ... .  V. - DESCRIPTION, CULTIVATION AND PROPERTIES OF VEGETABLE PLANTS . . . . . . . . . . . VI. - MEDICINAL PLANTS . . . .. VII. - DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS HARMFUL TO PLANTS ... ... ... ... ... . VIII. - TABLES OF PLANTS CLASSIFIED BY FAMILY. 1 IX. - FRUIT GARDEN. . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 aulia mmomial 1. Propagation . . . . . . . . . 1 2. Planting . 3. Pruning . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 T . . mutmumiume umirla samomi - . aa X. - CULTIVATION OF THE MAIN FRUIT TREES . 15 Da - XI. - MAIN SPECIES OF FRUIT TREES THAT MUST AND 11 MUST NOT BE PLANTED IN A FRUIT GARDEN... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 10 D . ae - XII. - HARVESTING AND PRESERVING FRUIT ... . 16 - MII. - DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS HARMFUL TO TREES. 16 - XIV. - TREE DISEASES . 17 AE - E6 En 1 1 16 XV. - CULTIVATION OF VINES IN GARDENS . 17 mama D PALS. - IMPRINERIE SION RA CON ET COMP, RLE BERFUIOR, 1. 11 "--------- E - (THÉORIE ET EXERCICES) PAR M. GUÉRARD, Préfet des études à Sainte-Barbe. (Each volume sold separately.) PREMIÈRE PARTIE. Grammaire élémentaire, d'après LuOMoND, new edition 1 vol. in-12. Price, cart. . . . . . . . . " 78 Work adopted exclusively by the city of Faris for all its schools. Cadres de la Grammaire élémentaire, by M. Feillet, 1 vol. in-12, br. . . . . . . . . . . ." 28 Exercices sur la grammaire élémentaire, 1 vol. in-12. Price, cart. ... ... ... ... ... ... . 1 25 NOTA. Exercises also sold in 48- and 96-page booklets. Price, br. rog. ... ... ... ... . 35 and 70 c Lessons and exercises on pronunciation, 1 vol. in-12. Price, cardboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . "7 Cahier de la conjugaison, 1 vol. in-12. Price, br..." 20 Exercices sur la conjugaison des verbes, new edition. 1 vol. in-12. Price, cardboard ... ... ... ... " 80 Leçons et exercices gradués d'analyse grammaticale, 1 vol. in-12. Price, cart. . . . . . . . . . . " 80 Cours de dictées élémentaires, 1 vol. in-12. Price, card. 2 PART TWO. Grammar and complements, new ed. 1 vol. in12. Price, card... . . . . 1 50 The introduction of this work in public schools is authorized by decision of His Ex. M. le Ministre de l'Instruction publique et des cultes. Cadres de la grammaire et compléments, by M. Feillet, 1 vol. in-12, br. . . . . . " 45 Exercices sur la grammaire et compléments, 1 vol. in-12. Price, cart. ... ... ... ... ... . 1 50 Graduated lessons and exercises in logical analysis, 1 vol. in-12. Price, cart.... . . . . . . . . Exercises on homonyms and paronyms, 1 1 " vol. in-12. Price, cart.. . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Cours de dictées, 1 vol. in-12. Price, card. 2 50 Traité des participes, 1 vol. in-12. Price, cardboard . 1 Exercices sur le traité des participles, 1 vol. in-12. Price, hardback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 THIRD PART. Cours de composition française (Préceptes et Modèles), followed by Notions de littérature, d'un Recueil d'Exercices et de Sujets de composition, and accompanied by more than 200 Exemples ou Modèles. 1 strong vol. in-12. Price, cart. 2 50 6 - 1 2 - 4 4 4 G A1 COTHEQUE NATIONALE DE FRAN 7531 05083720