pratique des environs de Paris, by l. Ponce,.... 1869. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the BnF collections. Their reuse is governed by the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: -The non-commercial reuse of this content, or in the context of an academic or scientific publication, is free of charge, subject to compliance with current legislation, and in particular to the preservation of the source of the content as specified below: "Source gallica.bnf.fr /Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF ". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial reuse means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other reuse of content that directly generates income: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the general code of public property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are -reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. Reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 7/ To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, contact utilisation. commercialeobnf.fl. Sai -ue ~~ Source gallica.bnf.fr Bibllothèque nationale de France VIANT. ="= V TT * I - - - 3 D D WE V 3 - - PRATIQUE DES ENVIRONS DE PARIS PAR 1. PONCE MARAICHER OUVRAGE ORNÉ DE 16 PLANCHES LTTHOGRAPHIQUES, PARIS LIBRAIRIE AGRICOLE DE LA MAISON RUSTIQUE 26, RUE JACOE, 26, 1869 1 1ET 1. 11 4 JLTURE MARAICHÈRE PRATIQUE DES ENVIRONS DE PARIS PAR I. PONCE MARAICHER OUVRAGE ORNÉ DE 16 PLANCHES LITHOGRAPHIQUES PARIS RAIRIE AGRICOLE DE LA MAISON RUSTIQUE 26, RUE JACOE, 26 1868 All rights reserved. 4 Any copy not bearing this mark will be considered counterfeit. Cucar. - Impr. M. Lerenor, Paul Deroxr et Cie, rut da Bac-d'Asnières, 12. For fifteen years I have been cultivating the land, and for fifteen years I have suffered from the absence of a special treatise which I could consult without fail and which would provide me with positive information and foolproof instructions. This treatise is intended to fill the gap. It is the fruit of long experience and can be consulted with profit. May it spare young people hardship and loss of money, may it help the memory of older workers, may it provide men of fortune with the means to take an interest in the land and receive from it all that it can give, may it inspire all friends of our beautiful soil of France with the taste and the will to increase its prosperity and wealth. And he will have obtained the fortune I dreamed of for him, and which all my efforts have tended to secure for him. Paris, 1869. 1. PONCE. CHAPTER ONE GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS To produce a lot in a small space, to provide vegetables to feed a thousand people by cultivating a plot of land whose surface area would not feed fifty if ordinary processes were applied, and if art did not know how to help nature, such is the problem posed every day to market gardening in the Paris area, And every day, the problem has its solution, although the difficulties accumulate as the vast city crosses its boundaries, erecting new shelters to house new guests, covering the formerly cultivated soil with buildings and forcing those who feed it to seek more sun and space. The horticulturalist occupies a plot of land rarely less than 7,000 meters deep and rarely more than 10,000 meters, all in one piece. They rarely own the land themselves, and pay a higher rent the closer they are to Les Halles, and therefore to the center of their business. However, it takes exceptional circumstances or a poor understanding of his profession for him not to achieve, after a certain number of years' work, a modest ease and, for intelligent people, a justly deserved and always legitimately earned fortune. Competition is a useful source of emulation among market gardeners. Vegetables sold early are excellent value; in season, they provide the grower with enough to live on and pay his expenses; late, they provide a new harvest that is productive in terms of ecus. The soil lends itself admirably to this combination of the demands of human appetite. Siliceous soils, sufficiently fertilized and mixed with a skilfully combined loam, produce early crops. Clay soils, under the same conditions, only produce late; but when the siliceous soil has produced its early crops early, and can no longer retain the moisture needed by food plants, the clay soil will begin to produce its own, and will give late crops in the middle of the hottest weather, because of its property of retaining water like a sponge and delaying the decomposition of fertilizers. The smallest plot in a market garden should not be left unoccupied for more than twenty-four hours. Any plant uprooted must be replaced immediately if the soil does not require a new way; where no plants are to be seen, the worker must be seen at work. As market gardens are always close to housing and population centers, they do not lack fertilizer, but fertilizer is insufficient to achieve the goal of this type of farming, as nature must be forced to provide spring in the middle of winter, and summer during the still short and uncertain days of spring. The soil of the market garden has no rest; although it nourishes the most exhausting plants, its master returns to it, as and when it loses, the elements it needs to comfort itself and provide vegetation with new production. Manure provides the heat, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen, sulfur, phosphorus and calcium salts it needs. Wooden boxes covered with glass frames protect the young plants from contact with the cold air during the harsh season. A warm, humid temperature, favorable to vegetation, then reigns under these chests, as the air, heated internally by the heat of the sun and the fermentation of manure, does not cool down, experience having shown that heat does pass through the glass in the company of light, but that heat alone can no longer pass through it and remains trapped. In addition to chests, glass cloches are used to retain the heat of the sun's rays. The shape of the market garden is usually that of a more or less elongated rectangle; this is the shape that should be sought, as it is easier to supervise and divide up. The plot must be fenced off, both against marauders, animals and people, and against the wind. The best fence is a good wall; but if you can't use one, at least fence with a good chestnut trellis, against which you can apply straw mats, called windbreaks. The land should be divided into rectangles, with the longest dimension facing south. These rectangles should be set square, and those intended for frames should have a dimension of 21 meters to accommodate 15 frames, i.e. 20 meters for the frames and one meter for a pathway and two supports. They are laid out end-to-end in this way, throughout the southern exposure. When it becomes impossible to obtain a new 21-meter line, transverse lines formed in the same way are laid out at sunset. This is called making squares. A 2.34-metre rectangular board that runs the full length of the wall or windbreak established on the south side is known as the "costière"; this board is separated from a second one by a 33-centimetre path. This second board is called the counter-costiere. A new path separates the counter-costiere from the space reserved for the frames or the square. The other boards after the square are laid out in the same way as the upstand and counter-upper. The border and counter-border are repeated on the opposite side of the garden; only the second counter-border is divided into paths every 20 meters for watering. As far as possible, the grower's dwelling should be on the roadside and at the southern corner. It generally consists of a basement used as a store, a first floor and a second floor; next to this is the stable, the shed and the hangar for equipment; in front is an open space containing the well, the manege or the steam pump, the reservoir, if there is one, the tank for washing produce for sale, and the manure dump. Abundant water at one's discretion is the essential condition for market gardening. Prior to 1859, all such gardens were watered using the following system. A fulling pump driven by a manege lifted the water above ground, through a pipe, into a tank that fed a system of barrels buried at ground level, connected by terracotta tubes anointed with bitumen. These tubes do not lead directly to the barrel; a lead pipe, fitted with a stopper or swan-necked tap, runs from the buried pipe at a distance of at least 40 centimetres or 50 centimetres at most, and empties its contents into the barrel. Once the barrel is full, the pipe is plugged with the cork or tap. In some operations, the barrels are connected to each other by the pipe, so that the whole system fills up successively; this is a bad method, as the last barrel can only be filled when the others are full, whereas the system described allows water to be supplied to one, several or all the barrels at once, as desired. Buried barrels hold 2 hectoliters or more, are strapped in iron, and tarred on the outside to prevent rotting. They are placed 10 meters 66 apart, i.e. every four planks. The worker draws water from them using two copper watering cans. The author of this book has adopted, and had many of his colleagues adopt, a less primitive and much more advantageous watering system, the layout of which is his own invention. The barbaric barrel system takes a considerable amount of space away from production, and the men who do the watering are barefoot in the sodden earth all day long. Their work is very time-consuming, and is perhaps the most arduous of their profession: how many pleurisies, chest fluxions and rheumatisms have been contracted in such circumstances! - Barrels on the ground, at the crossroads of trails, have been the cause of deplorable accidents. There are hardly any years in which the newspapers don't record a few deaths of children or old people drowned in market-garden barrels, some as a result of the carelessness inherent in their age, others as a result of failing eyesight. All human motives: enjoyment, because the land watered by the new system no longer presents the muddy, odorous cesspools found around every barrel of the old system; 1. interest, because land is gained and labor saved; and finally, duty, because all danger of disease and death is eliminated for one's own and for others; all human motives, we say, must urge market gardeners to adopt the new watering system. In this system, which we shall describe in detail later, the water from the food pump, raised above the ground to a height of 5 to 6 meters, is poured into a sheet metal tank of 20 to 22 cubic meters capacity, more or less. The terracotta pipe is replaced by sandstone pipes solidly joined together by a broken ring embedded in cement, or by cast-iron or lead pipes. Barrels are eliminated. In their place, however, there is a water intake to which a 15-meter-long rubber tube is connected, fitted with a hose and a watering can head. The expensive taps of ordinary water intakes are replaced by a tubular piece of rubber, clamped to the cast-iron intake by means of a collar and closed when not in use by means of a pressure screw. The connection to the sprinkler pipe is made by means of a sleeve clamped by the elasticity of the rubber. Thanks to this system, the worker can water with dry feet, without getting wet or bending over; the lack of fatigue attaches him to this type of work, the most essential to his profession, and which was formerly performed only with bad humor due to the fatigue and dangers to which the worker was exposed. The market gardener cultivates all the food plants that grow naturally in our climate; however, if he confined himself to those that are easy to grow and require the same amount of time to develop as field crops, he wouldn't be spending his money. This is why he limits himself to plants that can be cultivated relatively quickly, and whose normal growth time he reduces by using the instruments at his disposal to obtain the temperature and humidity levels he requires. He also cultivates certain annual plants from warmer climates, which are much sought-after by Parisian appetites, and which acquire finer and more delicate qualities through this artificial cultivation. The honorable profession of market gardener counts only honest, hard-working people among its members. All of them, with the two indispensable aids of health and drive, achieve their goals. Women are in charge of sales and harvesting: women's activity is one of the first conditions for success. All the market gardener's commercial operations are cash-based. What he hasn't been able to sell during the day on the Halles square is put into the greenhouse and put back on sale the next day. In general, he has to sell at the day's price; this can sometimes be a disappointment, but the stale harvest the next day will rarely be worth more than the day before, so it's with regret that he turns to his Paris greenhouse. As we said at the start of this chapter, he has two problems to solve: arriving first for a certain product, or arriving last; in both cases there's a business to be done. The interval is just a routine trade that still pays its way, and is by no means to be scorned. A great deal of progress has been made over the last few years, and many new crops have been introduced, especially since Les Halles opened its doors to goods from the south of France brought to Paris by the railroads, which had to compete with them. This is a warning to market gardeners to try to be one step ahead and do better; the interest and honor of the trade oblige them to do so, and they will not fail. COMPOSITION OF A MARAICHER'S GARDEN We think it useful, for the intelligence of the work and the good understanding of the layout of a market gardener's garden, to describe one, such as it exists: it is that of the author of this book, who has endeavored to have an establishment without rival in the vicinity of Paris and who, self-love aside, believes he has succeeded. The cultivated surface area is 11,000 square meters. Watering is by hose, according to an economical system invented by the author of this book. The equipment includes a two-horsepower steam engine for the fulling pump when the horse is occupied, and a manege for the same service when the horse is available. - The whole is worth 1,700 francs for the pump, and 2,000 francs for the machine. The water is raised, by means of a lead pipe, to the upper part of a bolted sheet metal tank, with a capacity of 22 cubic meters. This tank is placed on a platform, 5.60 meters above ground level. A massive frame and masonry supports the whole. - The whole cost 1,300 francs. Two large lead pipes carry the water down to sandstone pipes buried 40 centimetres below ground. In these pipes, the water is subjected to a pressure that varies between one atmosphere when the tank is full and one third atmospense is 88 francs. The water mains are made up of 550 meters of sandstone pipe, to which 70 water intakes are fitted for watering purposes. Watering is by means of two rubber tubes, each 14 meters long, onto which a copper lance is mounted, ending in a watering can head. - Expenditure: 1,582 francs for the pipe, and 260 francs for the rubbers and their lance. 950 frames and their boxes, and 3,500 bells are used for the cultivation of early fruit and vegetables. 800 straw mats are used to cover the frames in times of frost during the night, and to protect the plants from the effects of the cold. - Total cost: 15,700 francs. 4 spades, 2 iron rakes, 4 iron shovels, 2 rakes, 4 planters, 2 ropes, 2 squares: this is the plowing equipment. - Value: 60 francs. Two stretchers with their two pairs of odds and ends are used to transport the frames, bells and crops. - Total cost: 48 francs. Transporting crop manure also requires 4 loaders, 4 hoods, an unlimited supply of mannes, mannettes and mannequins, and a large wheelbarrow. - Total cost: 175 francs. Manure work requires 6 forks and 2 hooks. - Together, 32 francs. Tomatoes require 1,000 stakes and 30 rolls of wire. - Cost: 250 francs. A gardener's cart and a horse are used to transport crops for sale. - Total, including harness, 1,730 francs. In addition to the head of the establishment and the lady of the house, the staff consists of three servants, one of whom is in charge of taking the crops for sale to the Halles and bringing manure back to the farm; the rest of his time is taken up with gardening work, while his two colleagues devote all their time to it. - Annual expenditure is 1,620 francs. Two daughters, one of whom devotes her time half to sales, half to harvesting, and a day laborer during the summer, complete the staff. They are paid 600 francs a year. Using the above equipment and personnel, we produce the following per year: 24 hot layers, producing carrots, black lettuce and spinach. 12 hot-air layers, producing radishes. 40 cold beds, where parsley, sorrel, parsnips, various lettuces and cauliflower are harvested. 36 banks of romaine, some under cloches, others cold grown with carrots. Melons and tomatoes require 70 to 80 trenches, where the plants are placed under cloches, and a few trenches for early green beans. Depending on the season, the rest of the land is planted with cauliflower, apple cabbage, onions, spring onions, civet, parsley, chervil, sorrel, pink and black radishes, leeks, carrots, romaine, lettuce and spinach, all grown outdoors and cold. An establishment set up in this way provides the following average harvests per year: During the spring season: 10,800 feet of black lettuce, hot-grown. 240 bunches of spinach, obtained in the same way; average weight per bunch: 1,500 gr. 1,600 bunches of carrots, obtained in the same way; average weight per bunch: 2 kilograms. 1,000 bunches of radishes, obtained both hot and cold. 11,000 feet of Georges lettuce, cold-grown. 500 bunches of sorrel, cold-grown; average weight per bunch: 1 kilog. 500 gr. 500 bunches of parsley, cold-grown; average weight per bunch: 1 kilog. 10,500 feet of green romaine, cold-grown. 1,000 bunches of cold-grown caroites; average weight: 2 kilograms. 1,500 plants of cold-grown cauliflower. 8,000 plants of Georges and red lettuce, grown in costières. 6,000 vines of red lettuce, bedded. 3,500 feet of blond romaine in squares. 2,500 bunches of radishes, 3 handfuls each (the handful is the commercial radish bunch). 6,000 feet of cabbage-apples. 1,200 bunches of onions: average weight: 2 kilos. 1,200 bunches of seedling leeks; average weight: 2 kilos. 800 bunches of spring onions; average weight: 1 kilo. 1,200 bunches of spring onions; average weight: 1 kilo. 300 bundles of field sorrel; average weight: 1 kilo. 500. 500 callets de régence, harvested in the melon patch; average weight: 1 kilog. 1,200 bunches of carrots; average weight: 2 kilog. 200 bunches of chervil; average weight: 1 kilog. 200 bunches of civet; average weight: 400 gr. All the crops detailed above are harvested before July. The summer season begins at this time, and includes: 3,000 melon plants, on trenches with frames and cloches, and on beds with compost. 4,500 tomato plants, producing 5,000 callets of fruit for sale. 5,000 dozens of beautiful fruit. 30,000 plants of chicory, romaine and lettuce, obtained from the counter-planting of white celery. 10,000 plants of the same species, obtained from the counter-planting of escarole. 12,000 plants of escarole, also obtained in cauliflower squares by counter-planting. 120 small mannes of long pepper. 3,000 feet of autumn cauliflowers. 1,000 bunches of carrots, harvested in October. 1,000 bunches of transplanted leeks. This harvest ends in November, when the winter season begins, with crops including: 6,000 feet of celeriac, planted in June. 35,000 plants of white celery, planted in July. 600 callets of lamb's lettuce. 100 bundles of chervil. This sale ends in February, when the harvest and sale of early spring vegetables begins. It is obvious to everyone that the harvest we have just detailed can be more or less abundant, more or less good in quality, more or less productive, according to the needs and tastes of the day: the great variation in selling prices imposes absolute silence on this item. We should also mention the sale of 200 cubic meters of potting soil for disposal. We have seen from the above that the establishment has already cost: In operating equipment, round figures...................... 26,000 fr. To this must be added two sheds for the frames, and the vegetable greenhouse.................. 2,400 TOTAL....... 28,400 fr. These constructions are, in general, the property of the tenant. As for the annual costs, we know them personally; they add up... Horse feed costs....................... Shoeing and harness maintenance, veterinary care, cartwrighting. Rent, taxes, insurance and unforeseen expenses............. Staff food, maintenance and laundry... Frame repairs, bell replacement...... Coal for the machine.................. Pump for maintenance and repairs.................. Seeds for sowing, straw for binding........................ Callets for tomatoes and mâ2,170 fr. 1,200 200 100 2,500 6,600 500 200 109 160 ches....................... 600 Manure. Set........ 2,500 Total annual expenses... 16,830 The dwelling comprises one floor over ground floor and cellar, with living room, dining room, bedroom, kitchen and servants' quarters. Market gardeners rarely have a living room; everything else is necessary. Some market gardeners specialize in one crop, because they have a real superiority in it, and because the product compensates them for the care they give to the plant they have specially adopted, and even provides them with a considerable profit. It's up to everyone involved in horticulture to find their own path. In any case, the trade feeds its master, and that's the main thing. When the land is walled, the walls can be planted with vines, peach trees or apricot trees, which can be used to generate income or for staff consumption. Work distribution. The head of the establishment is absent as rarely as possible: his presence is necessary to direct and supervise the work, which he almost always shares. Getting up for him and for the dorestics specially attached to the cultivation usually takes place in summer at 5 a.m.; however, some jobs require getting up between 3.30 and 4 a.m., or even spending the whole night. When rising takes place in these exceptional circumstances, or when the night has had to be devoted to work, the necessary rest takes place during the heat of the following day. The housewife gets up between one and two o'clock, depending on the distance she has to cover to get to Les Halles. The three of them set off in the carriage loaded with products to be sold. The servant's role is to drive the car, unload the produce and return after loading manure in the stables, where it is bought by the year or month. The housewife makes her sale to the fruit-growers without moving from her place, while the daughter carries the goods sold in a hood to the carriages parked some distance away, which the fruit-growers have brought with them; this is how the delivery takes place. It's easy to see why such hard work calls for a first meal; the necessary bread is brought from home, and the rest of the food can be found around Les Halles. There's something for every taste. Without going into further detail, we can say, without fear of contradiction, that market gardeners feed their staff well, a necessary condition for the hard work and exceptional fatigue of their profession. For workers who stay at home, the first meal is at six o'clock in the morning, and generally consists of bread at discretion and 20 centilitres of wine. The second meal takes place at nine o'clock, when the entire staff is assembled. Immediately afterwards, the women and servants in charge of the Halle take a two-hour rest and then get down to work. The third meal takes place at two o'clock. This is immediately followed by cultivation work by all the men, and harvesting work by all the women. At seven o'clock, the next day's sale has to be prepared, so all the staff are busy loading, which is immediately followed by the fourth meal or supper, which immediately precedes bedtime. It's hardly before nine o'clock that the market gardener and his staff can take their well-earned rest. It's clear from the above that, in this profession, the woman's activity and intelligence is the first condition for success. In charge of sales, she must not only apply herself to getting a good product from what she brings, but also guess what the needs are and indicate to her husband the species of plant that is lacking on the market and whose cultivation would be advantageous. She must adorn her merchandise, that is, give it that coquettish look without which the most beautiful products go unnoticed, be affable with the customer and willingly lend herself to any services he may require to help with transport. On the way back, she thinks about the day's provisions for meals and other family needs. No sooner has she taken a few moments' rest than she has to supervise the kitchen, take care of the dishes and laundry, then preside over the making of the boots, mantles and callets for the merchandise, examining them one by one to see if her prescriptions have been well understood, the washing well done, the measure properly filled. All this may seem very difficult to accomplish, but it's all done every day, and households where the woman's activity and intelligence are lacking are the exception. In the establishment we have just reviewed, the new watering method is being put into practice. As a point of comparison, we'd like to give you the cost of the barrels if we'd stuck to the old system. It would still have required 550 meters of pipe. 1 large barrel................ 15 1 large stopcock.......... 30 70 barrels, supply and installation... 840 70 taps................... 700 70 meters of lead pipe... 210 4 pairs of watering cans............ 120 Total costs..... 2,465 fr. The sprinkler system for the same plot costs 2,540 fr. The difference is therefore the tiny sum of 75 francs, which is well repaid by 70 meters of land returned to cultivation, not to mention the savings in labor. Anyone intending to become a market gardener must complete an apprenticeship of at least four or five years; he must remain single until he feels ready to establish himself, and work for others during this time; his establishment as an owner dates from his marriage. It's not a matter of taking a wife from an indeterminate class of society; the first condition of success is that the woman he takes should be familiar with work and sales: so it's from among his daily workmates that the aspiring market gardener chooses his fiancée. This habit, which has perpetuated the customs of the old guilds among our class of workers, is one of the first necessities of the trade. The difference in the work of each of the spouses is so clear-cut that they cannot work without the other, and the death of one of the spouses almost always leads fatally to the disastrous sale of the business when this cruel separation comes too soon. To the husband: production; to the wife: selling the products and forecasting needs, in conditions that early experience must have prepared her for. Exposed from two o'clock in the morning to all the inclemencies of the seasons, forced to be constantly on guard against the tricks of the not always very scrupulous buyers at the Halles, obliged to think about and provide for the needs of the household before enjoying a few hours of well-earned rest, the market gardener's wife has no other satisfaction than to see her savings accumulate little by little and protect her family from need. She is the strong woman of Scripture: she reigns in the interior of her home, surrounded by the love of her family and the respect of those she occupies. What a hard life, even compared to that of simple workers in other professions! But what a difference in results! The market gardeners were right to preserve the esprit de corps that ensures daily life and prosperity for all their members. However, market gardeners' wives and daughters also have their days of coquetry and festivity. Saint-Fiacre's Day, always religiously celebrated, and wedding feasts provide opportunities to adorn themselves in pompous finery. It's then, after a hearty meal seasoned with good appetite and open merriment, that the ties that will later become the solid knots of a matched marige begin. It should be added that, as a result of this corporate structure, with all market gardeners forming a single family, marriages are made with full knowledge of the facts, and none of the spouses can be fooled by the illusions so common in unions contracted among other members of society. Once the marriage has been decided, it's time to find a suitable plot of land. If the couple is wealthy, they will do well to buy the land and equipment of a market gardener who is going out of business. It's true that this will put them into debt, but they'll only have one creditor to wait on. What's more, the equipment and manure will enable him to produce immediately, and therefore make money. If, in such a case, you wanted to buy new land, you'd have to buy the necessary equipment and manure at short notice, and you'd have to make large payments before you had a single product to sell: you'd be courting ruin. When it comes to buying land, you need to consult your means and balance them in such a way that the commitments you make do not exceed three quarters of the income less anticipated needs, the other quarter being intended as a reserve against unforeseen circumstances. New plots of land are only suitable for market gardeners with their own equipment and a sufficient quantity of manure and potting soil to immediately bring their gardens into production. To put things in perspective, we can say that funds below 5,000 francs and above 30,000 francs are rare. FERTILIZERS AND LAND WORKING The only fertilizer used for market gardening is manure from stables, or failing that, from cowsheds. Anything else would only imperfectly fulfil the purpose: the first condition, in fact, is to develop heat, the second to nourish the plants. Artificial fertilizers overloaded with nitrogen cannot fulfill the first condition, as the heat produced by their decomposition is insignificant due to their small volume. Market gardeners obtain manure from stables by means of subscriptions with transport contractors, omnibus and small carriage admistrations, cavalry regiment barracks, etc. The subscription is for a fee. Subscriptions are concluded for a fixed sum of so much per month and per horse, depending on the market price on the day of the contract and the quantity of manure. Police regulations prohibit horse owners from maintaining manure heaps in their yards beyond the quantity supplied daily by the stables, when this manure is not at a regulated distance from neighboring properties. Stable manure is supplied by feeders. Stable manure is colder than stable manure and decomposes more slowly, making it particularly suitable for siliceous soils, whereas stable manure is an indispensable ingredient for clay soils. The two manures should therefore be mixed in proportion to the amount of clay and silica in the soil. If you have enough stable manure, you can do without it, and it's even preferable to do without. As the soil is expensive and must produce as much as possible, the market gardener's manure bin, although containing a considerable quantity of this fertilizer, must take up as little space as possible, so it gains in height what it is denied in surface area. It is shaped like a quadrilateral, placed on a flat surface that is as impermeable as possible. In general, the length is no more than twice the width, and the height no more than two-thirds the length. Manure is piled up with a fork and trodden down with the foot as it is unloaded. A sort of chimney is built into the center of the heap, into which other horizontal ducts lead on all sides, so that fresh air penetrates the heap and neutralizes the excess heat produced by fermentation, which can go so far as to ignite the mass. All too often, this precaution is neglected, and fire breaks out in these fertilizers, which can only be extinguished by spreading out the heap; for water, which cannot penetrate the incandescent center, is little help against this kind of fire. In such cases, a season's harvest is lost, both through the loss of the manure itself and through the spreading. As market gardening establishments are located in the middle of homes or similar establishments, manure is spread at the expense of the premises where the fire occurs, and on land in full cultivation. By delaying decomposition, he preserves gas and heat for his crops, which would otherwise be lost to the atmosphere, to his detriment and that of his neighbors. This fire hazard means that manure piles should be kept away from dwellings. We place it at least 10 meters from the premises inhabited by the market gardener, so as to monitor it more easily and to quickly multiply the air holes if we feel the need. It should also be placed close to the well, so that help can be provided more effectively in the event of a disaster. As humidity encourages decomposition, and abundant water carries away soluble parts, it should be protected as much as possible from rainwater. To this end, we make it as wide as possible from base to top, slope the edges and line the top with the longest straw least penetrated by urine and excrement. The manure heap thus constructed contains fresh manure at the top, which will produce a lot of heat as soon as it is buried and wet, but will not become fertilizer until some time after burial, at least eight days. The second, intermediate part between the top and the bottom, contains half-hot, half-fertilized manure, which is ideal for planting delicate plants requiring both abundant warmth and nourishment. The other third is made up of manure, suitable for robust plants that require nothing more than nourishment. year on a small surface such as that of a market gardener's garden leaves behind a thick layer of humus known as compost. Potting soil is composed almost entirely of carbon, with a few particles of silica and clay; repeated watering has removed the most soluble parts. Used on its own, it is unsuitable for crops intended to be grown quickly, but mixed with soil it is an excellent fertilizer for cold crops. It is also a sales product for other crops. Manufacturers of artificial fertilizers, notably poudrette, buy potting soil, which acts both as an absorbent and as a disinfectant for faecal matter, thanks to the carbon it contains, and which finds new soluble combinations in this addition, once again becoming a powerful fertilizer for field crops. Flower growers also use it to make the compost known as "terre de bruyère"; to increase its fertility, they add colombine or poulaite. Finally, in ornamental gardens, the soil in baskets and flowerbeds is covered with it, to keep the soil fresh and to bring out the greenness of the foliage and the brightness of the flowers against the velvety black background. The market gardener retains only as much compost as he needs to cover his fertilizers and form a layer of topsoil in which his produce can take root. When the frames are moved, after the crops have been harvested in layers, we find, in addition to the compost, patches of straw that have not been completely destroyed and still contain soluble parts. This is known as "fond de couches" or mulch, and is a fertilizer that market gardeners often use and keep. This light, cold manure is used as a cover for spring seedlings; it keeps the young plant moist and protects it from the scorching spring sun and the night frosts of the same period. A few trials have been carried out in order to avoid the immense quantity of manure required for early crops. Layers without manure were created, heated in the same way as greenhouse tarpaulins, using a thermosiphon, i.e. a hot-water circulation system. The soil in the tarpaulin was then fertilized with a powerful fertilizer such as guano, colombine or poulaite. These trials produced results, but they were costly in terms of fuel and, above all, manpower; a worker was needed to accomplish the task that manure does on its own and at no cost. What's more, neither potting soil nor mulch could be produced for cold cultivation. These disadvantages led to the abandonment of these trials. The first condition for the existence of a market garden is a good supply of manure. The second is the intelligent use of this resource, which will be the subject of the following chapters. Preparatory work and ploughing for cold and hot cultivation. In discussing how to lay out a market garden, we said that it was divided into plots 21 meters long and 2.34 meters wide. Now let's suppose we have a new plot of land, and we'll prepare it for its intended use as follows. The land will be chosen in such a way as to have a well that is not too deep and that provides water at all times; if this condition cannot be easily met, a tube will be drilled and sunk deep enough to reach a good underground water table. The land will be levelled, if it is not already, and first ploughed to the depth of a spade-head. During this operation, all roots and weeds will be removed, and only then will the garden be laid out, starting with the hillside and counter-hillside as mentioned above. All the paths will be cordoned off, and the soil will be kept higher than that of the planks, so that the water from the moorings runs off well into the planks and not into the paths, where it would only make mud without profit. Once the first ploughing has been completed and the beds and frame squares have been laid out, the first cold harvest can be obtained in new soil, taking care to protect the surface of the soil with a good cover of half-consumed manure in spring, and compost at any other time. To this end, the necessary quantity of manure (5 to 10 centimetres thick) is brought to the smoking bed with a hood. The plank is spaded at one end and the earth is thrown away at the other. A first trench is thus opened, and a layer of manure is buried in it, to be covered by the earth removed with the spade for the second trench. The second trench is then filled with manure and covered by the soil from the third, and so on until the end. This ploughing method is only used for cold cultivation; the manure used comes from the bottom of the layers mixed with soil from the same source. After ploughing, the clods are broken up with a rake and the soil is levelled, taking care to remove any stones, roots or weeds found. This precaution is essential, especially in the case of mercurial and common spurge, commonly known as "foirolle" and "réveil-matin", plants which invade new land in surprising numbers. After this, the land is ready to receive the seedlings or plantations it is to receive. The choice of manure is not a matter of indifference, because if you put new manure in cold crops, you will have too much heat and the plant will grow too fast, then wither or even perish immediately without having vegetated; moreover, this method will make the weeds grow back whose seeds have not yet been destroyed by the fermentation of the manure. When potting soil is lacking, we make a floor from a light layer of manure, which we water abundantly to help it decompose rapidly. It is then used as mulch and cover. As soon as a bed is empty, it is ploughed again and fertilized in the same way. It's said that it takes three years to make a good marsh; this is true, but you shouldn't imagine that the land remains unproductive during this time; it simply means that after three years, there will be too much fertilizer and the market gardener will have potting soil to sell. If fertilizer is lacking, it will take twice as long. To make a hot layer, the soil is first ploughed with a spade, then levelled. On a bed 20 metres long and 1m 66 wide, a 40-centimetre-thick bed of old, dry horse manure is laid, well handled and stirred with a fork. This layer of manure is tamped down to bind and even it out, then covered 2. with a 25-centimeter-thick bed of potting soil. Continue the same work as many times as you want to make layers, but if you make only one layer, it must be at least two meters wide, including paths and shoulders. The paths are taken at the expense of the manure layer, and the shoulders are the manure accumulated at each end of the layer. To cultivate melons, we make what we call melon trenches; the bed is broken up with a spade and all the earth removed with a hood: we thus have a trench 20 meters long by 1m 66 wide, and Om 40 deep. This trench is filled with old, dry horse manure, or, if there's a shortage, with fresh manure mixed with half mulch and half potting soil: the latter method has the disadvantage of heating unevenly and, in places, giving off blasts of fire that destroy the plants by burning the roots. The whole, well watered and trampled, is covered with 20 centimetres of soil. Before laying the soil, a series of wooden boxes lined up end to end were placed on the trench, to be covered by fifteen glass frames. These boxes are fitted with feet at each of the four corners, and with crosspieces to maintain their spacing; their cross-section across the width is a right-angled trapezoid, with the large base facing north and the small base facing south. Each trench is covered by five trunks, each closed by three frames. These are oak frames, divided into three parts by small iron bars, to which the glazing is applied with pins and putty. Each sash is fitted with two handles to lift it; it is opened to the north and south by means of a rack generally cut from a flat piece of wood such as a piece of planking; the edge of the sash bears on one of the teeth of the rack, which rests on the edge of the box. This is called giving air. The temperature of a layer can be judged by plunging your hand into the ground. It can be determined using a thermometer. The space between two rows of frames is filled with manure, known as a pathway. New manure is used for hot cultivation, and is called "rechauds". Ados are boards sloping towards the south, on which spring and autumn seedlings are sown under cloches at a time when it is prudent to be wary of the north wind. Each ados is designed to receive three rows of cloches placed in staggered rows, after a provisional sowing of radishes or other plants. To make an ados, a chalk line is stretched in the direction in which it should slope, i.e. from sunrise to sunset, over a length of 20 meters. Beginning at one end of the chord, spade the soil to the distance of a spade shoe, and throw it back onto the bare part. This creates the beginning of an embankment. Once the first row has been completed, the second is started by throwing the soil back onto the first slope. We continue in this way until we have a sloping board 1.83 m wide and with a slope height of Om 33. As we have said, the slopes are designed to receive cloches, glass vases Om 33 in diameter and the same height, which owe their name to their particular shape. Cloches are used for seedlings and transplants in nurseries. The ados are laid out in such a way that they receive sun all day long on the shortest days, while their steep slope protects them from cold north winds and exposes them to hot south winds. Frames and ados should be fitted with a sufficient number of doormats to cover the glass during frosty periods at night. These permanently installed mats are rolled to the top of the slopes, so that they can be quickly unrolled as shade, and consequently frost, gains the board they are intended to cover. When a recent layer ceases to give heat, it's because it's too dry; a slight dampening soon brings the temperature back to the desired point by reviving the fermentation of the manure. Experience is the best guide in such cases. Harrowing in market gardens is almost always carried out with a three-pronged fork that is very close together; some practitioners use an instrument called a harrow, which we feel works less perfectly. Sowing is done either broadcast or in rows for all plants that must remain in place. To broadcast seed, the gardener holds a light handful of seed in his hand and lets it pass between his fingers, swinging his arm back and forth. A bed is usually sown with two handles, dividing the width in two. When the seed is very fine, there is a risk of sowing too thickly. This is avoided by mixing the seed with very dry compost. After sowing, the seed is harrowed with a fork, then the bed is tamped, an operation also known as ploughing. The edges of the bed are then covered with soil using a rake, and covered with a light layer of fine compost. If the weather is dry, the operation is finished off with a basining. lument in the same way. Row sowing is used for supplies. The line is drawn with a hoe or foot along a string. The seed is carefully scattered along the line; the soil is brought back to the furrow with both feet, then raked in; the potting soil is spread and basined as in the previous case. Nursery sowing is used for plants that cannot be sown in situ, such as lettuces and romaine. Under a frame, it's a simple broadcast sowing; under cloches, a pinch of seeds is sown; on ados, in the circumference traced by a bell that has first been placed there. As soon as the young plant has developed two leaves, pull out the seedling and prick it out with your finger, under a frame, five centimetres apart and staggered. Twenty to forty young plants are placed in the same way under a bell jar. As the young plants grow and get in each other's way, the distance between them is doubled. At the end of the transplanting process, no more than five and no less than three plants should remain under each bell, and no more than thirty and no less than twenty plants under each frame. Very young seedlings are transplanted with the finger, large seedlings with the planter; in all cases, the soil must be firmly pressed against the roots with the hand or planter. In market gardens, weeding is done by hand to avoid injuring plants close to the weeds to be removed. Hoeing is carried out as often as the soil hardens. Experience shows when and how it should be done. We call edging the operation that consists in raising a bank around the bells to support the soil with which they are loaded. The kerbstone is a plank applied along these embankments, which is tamped down to bind and solidify the soil. The muted layers are laid in trenches half as wide as the ordinary layers, they receive the same thickness of manure and are covered with a bed of earth. In very cold weather, hot cultivation layers need to be reheated. Ordinary paths and bunds are replaced with new manure, which is forked in every week, and new manure is added as soon as it becomes apparent that the heat is dropping. It's at the time of ploughing and bed reshuffling that you need to destroy the larvae of white grubs, moths, the larvae of earwigs known as fiddleheads, which destroy a good number of lettuce plants in spring, and the earwig, which destroys cauliflowers. Many ways have been suggested to destroy these enemies of plantations, the best of which is to pick them up by hand and kill them. Slugs and snails are another scourge. They are hunted down every day, as are caterpillars. Ants rarely establish themselves in marshes, and are rarely seen except in new fields. CULTIVATION TOOLS AND INSTRUMENTS MEANS OF MAINTAINING AND PRESERVING THEM Everyone is familiar with the spade; there are several shapes; the one we prefer is 36 centimetres high, 22 centimetres wide at the top, and 18 centimetres at the tip: it is attached to the handle by a socket, and the blade is very lightly girdled. The hoe, iron rake, rake, chalk line and planter deserve no special mention. The loader is a kind of horizontal T mounted on three 80-centimeter-high legs. The longest leg of the T carries two horn-shaped pieces of wood spaced apart. The loader is used to support hoods loaded with manure or vegetables. Carriages known as jardinières belong to the tapissière family; they are suspended on two wheels. For transporting manure, a cart is used which is suspended when it is used for two purposes, i.e. when it has to carry manure back from the hall. If it's used only for manure, no springs are used. Mechanically-made doormats are now more regular, more convenient and just as inexpensive as the doormats that used to be made by hand; however, for people who are far from manufacturing centers, it's a good idea to know how to make doormats yourself. For this purpose, we use a wooden frame 2 meters long and 1.33 meters wide. Three pegs are fixed to each end bar. With the frame thus laid out, we stretch a string from bottom to top over each corresponding peg; the top string being stopped on the peg by a slipknot, we leave it an excess length equal to twice the length of the frame. Once this is done, we spread a very even layer of rye straw over the frame, then a second layer of the same straw, with the ears pointing in the opposite direction to those of the first; we take the string holding the middle peg, and wind it onto a piece of wood which serves as a shuttle. Separate a pinch of straw by passing the shuttle from right to left over the straw and under the string, then pass it back into the loop formed earlier, and tighten the knot by flattening it between thumb and forefinger, and so on to the end where the string is stopped by a knot. The same procedure is followed for the two rows at the ends, and when the doormat is finished, the ears of corn are cut on each side to even out the edges. Doormats are made on rainy days and winter evenings, when it's impossible to attend to outside work. There are two types of sash boxes: they can either be made in one piece, or they can be dismantled. The former are made as follows: Take four pieces of 8-centimeter squared oak, cut two to 35-centimeter lengths, and the other two to 30-centimeter lengths. On the first two pieces, nail the two ends of a 30-centimeter-wide by 3.90-meter-long plank, leaving 5 centimeters of foot space for the oak pieces. On the other two pieces, we nail a plank 25 centimetres wide and 'm 90 long, leaving a further 5 centimetres free. The first board and its two feet form the back of the trunk, while the second board and its feet form the front. To close the trunk, we join them together by nailing a plank to each end, so that with all four feet in the same place, the upper part should slope 5 centimetres over a length of 1m 40. Since the quadrilateral thus formed is to accommodate three frames and a heavy load of soil, it's clear that these boards would warp if they weren't prevented by two bars, dividing the trunk into three equal parts, each of which is intended to be covered by a frame. These bars are cut into dovetails at each end, which fit into notches made in the boards for this purpose. When not in use, these chests are kept in the garden in the shade, and along a wall as far as possible; they are stacked dozens or dozens on top of each other, and last for five or six years. The short lifespan of fixed boxes, and the inconvenience of having to leave them unprotected after they have been in use, has led to the adoption of boxes that can be dismantled, and which, although initially requiring a larger outlay of capital, actually cost less, since they take up less space when not in use, and can be sheltered from the inclemency of the seasons. Market gardeners use two types: gambrel boxes and crutch boxes. The gambille consists of a 1.40-meter oak crossbeam nailed to two unequal legs, one 30 to 35 centimeters long, the other 20 to 25. Each of the legs carries an iron staple or hook on the outside, and the boards of the trunk engage in this staple by means of two notches. To cover a layer of fifteen frames, you need four gambilles and two heads for each end. These heads each consist of a plank, cut to match the slope, and mounted on two legs, each bearing a hook. The crutch is the essential part of the sliding chest. It's a 1.40 m long oak crosspiece nailed at each end to two solid legs of unequal length. These legs are notched, the front leg 11 centimeters deep, the rear 16 centimeters. These notches are the same thickness as the boards they are designed to accommodate. Two strong legs join each crutch to its two feet. Two plank ends are joined in the notch, and the planks are notched so that they fit snugly together. Ten boards are needed for each layer of fifteen frames. The heads are nailed to two notched feet like those of the crutch. The crutch trunk is superior to the gambrel trunk because of its simplicity and ease of repair; it is also less expensive and easier to assemble and disassemble, as the parts have less adherence to each other. The main disadvantage of the gambrel chest is that the wood has swollen with humidity, and the iron parts hold them so tightly together that they cannot be dismantled without damaging some of them; crutch chests, being made entirely of the same material, do not have this disadvantage. The bar is one of the most important parts of the chest, and it is generally at the point where the bars are assembled that the rotting of the chest boards begins. The tail bar, which requires a deep notch, must therefore be rejected; it has been replaced by the staple bar, fitted at each end with a right-angled iron plate attached Chassis Barre à queue Tête de Coffre à Gambilles Barre à Agrafe FI Tête de Coffre à Béquilles 4 Barre à Crochet R4II Mear A Lagnon. Lopont " D D D G G D D D D D D D D D . D D D D D D G D 1 the bar with two screws. The board is only notched a few millimeters thick, i.e. the thickness of the small iron plate. The use of the staple bar is obviously an improvement, but it does have its drawbacks: the staple is too weak to bear a heavy load, and after a few years, the screws play into the wood and the plate comes loose without the bar being able to be used again. The author of this book has invented a system of hooked bars, which he has been using with advantage for some time now. It consists of counter-soldering an iron plate in such a way that the hook screws are applied from underneath the bar. The plate is applied to the standing wood by a first right-angled bend, a second brings it back in the direction of the bar, and finally a third completes the hook. This system enables the bar to withstand heavy loads without inconvenience. Each hook costs just 12 to 15 centimes. You can do it yourself, but you need to take precautions, as strip iron is very brittle. You can be sure of success by reddening the iron and bending it onto a specially-made core. Market gardening frames all have the same shape and dimensions: they are rectangles measuring 1.40 m long by 30 m wide. They are glazed with twelve equal panes and four half-panes of half-double glass at the bottom, and have a handle on each opposite bar along the length. The oldest model is made entirely of oak and costs 12 or 1,300 francs with its box. It provides good service, and well-maintained paintwork lasts from fifteen to twenty years. Preference is given to an oak-framed sash, the small timbers of which are replaced by T-iron bars. One hundred frames of this model cost 1,400 to 1,500 francs with their boxes. They have the advantage over their predecessors of being less shady in the trunks and of lasting a few years longer. A third type of frame has three oak bars and the fourth, lowest bar is made of double-T iron. One hundred frames of this model are worth 1,600 to 1,700 francs. It is superior to the previous models in that the bottom bar, which is most exposed to humidity, rots very quickly in wooden-framed sashes. It therefore requires fewer repairs and lasts longer. Frames made entirely of iron are not used for market gardening: their high price, their weight, which makes them difficult to maneuver, and the conductivity of iron, which causes too much heat in the sun and heat loss in the dark, all combine to make market gardeners reject this type of frame. Before the tiles are laid, the frames are given two coats of ceruse white, crushed with linseed oil and petrol, and the brilliance of the white is extinguished with a little lampblack. The glazing putty is applied in the same shade with linseed oil and Spanish white mixed with black. A third coat is applied to the top after this putty has been applied. The frames should be returned to the shed as soon as the glass is no longer needed, i.e. as soon as the plants grown under them no longer fear the cold of the night. Beforehand, we take care to accustom them to the outside temperature by giving them plenty of air. Under the sheds, stacks of fifty frames are formed, sometimes more, depending on the height of the shelter and the space available, but the lower the stacks, the more manageable they are. The chests are left on the ground for a while, then stacked in the open air in the shade. Ten to twelve chests are stacked one on top of the other; if any can be dismantled, they are stored in the shed whenever possible, otherwise they are piled outside with their accessories, and secured with a layer of bedding. When the rains give us time to spare, we iron the frames one by one, replacing any missing glass or putty, as the market gardener needs to know how to use a diamond like a glazier; a coat of oil paint on top and underneath completes the maintenance work. It is customary, when removing bells before tightening them, to put one inside the other. This is a bad habit, because the inside of the bells is more or less damp, and this is enough to make the two touching glass surfaces stick together, and cause breakage when you try to free them. It's a good idea to set the bells upright one on top of the other; a small wooden cube is placed on top of the first, which is removed, and the edges of the second, which is placed on top, cannot touch those of the first; a new cube is placed on top of the second, so it can receive a third bell. All must be placed on the wooden cube in such a way that they can rotate freely without touching the glass of the bell below. Before clamping them permanently, they are washed one by one, and placed, as we have just described, in a shed or even in the open air, they are covered with litter and old mats to prevent shocks which could break them. A broken bell is discarded only when it cannot be repaired. 4. Bells that have been broken into several large pieces are repaired when these juxtaposed pieces only form cracks that need to be reattached in a solid manner. For this purpose, pieces of glass are cut into small squares, called pins, and white ceruse ground in oil is added to a little minium to speed up drying; one side of each pin is coated with this preparation and applied externally across the crack; the whole length of the crack is thus lined with pins from distance to distance. The preparation is left to dry thoroughly before the bell is stirred, making it as strong and usable as a new one. Doormats are returned to the shed as soon as the season allows their use to be discontinued. Care should be taken to expose them first to dry air, and to ensure that they are no longer damp. Sprinkle them with fine ash to absorb any remaining water and protect them from insect attack; then roll or stack them until they are needed again. Temperature is an essential thing to know; our senses can deceive us, but the thermometer never does. We have the bad habit of hanging the thermometer along a wall and using the primitive thermometer fixed on a wooden board. The only admissible instrument that gives accurate readings is the glass thermometer, which can be suspended from its top so that the air envelops it completely. Observations should be made in the middle of the garden, in the prevailing wind, one in the shade, the other in the sun. This thermometer is suspended by a cord from the end of a small gallows. There's no need to keep it stationary, and it can be used for other useful indications. To judge the temperature of a layer, the grower usually uses his hand, and this is sufficient in practice. However, as it may sometimes be useful to determine a constant temperature for certain crops, it would be a good idea, in experiments intended for publication, to use the very thermometer whose use we recommend. Almost all market gardeners have at home, and with good reason, the Vidi dial barometer, which indicates atmospheric pressure and depression with sufficient accuracy for their needs. However, the bad habit of striking the dial to set the needle in motion should be avoided, as this causes mercury to escape from the bowl, thereby destroying the correspondence between the needle's position and the barometric height. A more convenient barometer is the Bourdon. It takes up less space, is more sensitive and, as it contains no mercury, can be set in any position without being disturbed. An equally useful instrument is the hygrometer, which indicates the degree of dryness and humidity in the atmosphere. It's a simple fixed point, wound around a movable pulley and terminated by a small weight. A needle is attached to the pulley shaft. Air saturated with water vapour causes the rope to stretch, absorbing its moisture; dry air, on the other hand, causes it to shrink, evaporating the water vapour it contained. The needle moves in one direction or the other as the rope lengthens or shrinks. The two extreme points indicate maximum and minimum air humidity. Commercially, the support for this device is shaped like a capuchin, with a movable cap serving as a needle. The cap covers the head when the string lengthens, meaning rain or thaw; it uncovers the head when the string narrows, meaning drought, heat or frost. CULTIVATION Seventeen families of plants provide the vegetables strictly necessary to supply the market halls with this branch of industry. 1° Liliaceae provide garlic, asparagus, spring onions, civets, shallots, onions and leeks. 2° Polygonaceae provide sorrel and rhubarb. 3° Chenopodaceae provide spinach, pear, arrowroot and beet. 4° Solanaceae supply tomatoes, chillies, eggplants and potatoes. 5° Labiatae supply basil, savory and thyme. 6° Borraginaceae supply borage. 7° Companulaceae supply raiponium. 8° Compositae supply artichokes, cardoons, lettuces, chicories, escarole, romaine, dandelions, salsify and scorzonera. 9° Valerian plants provide lamb's lettuce and regency. 10° Umbellifers provide carrots, celery, parsnips, chervil and parsley. 11° Crucifers provide cabbages, cauliflowers, watercress, mustard, turnips, radishes and turnips. 12° Tropaeolae provide nasturtiums. 13° Portulaceae provide purslane. 14° Ficoides provide tetragonia. 15° Rosaceae supply strawberries and burnet. 16° Legumes include beans, lentils, peas and broad beans. 17° Cucurbits include melons, cucumbers, gherkins, squash and pumpkins. To these families can be added a grass, maize; a bromeliad, pineapple; a convolvulaceous, sweet potato; a dioscorea, Chinese yam; an oxalid, crenellated oxalis; and finally, a fungus of the agaric genus, the mushroom. With the exception of the pineapple and the mushroom, which form the object of special cultivation and an important trade, and of the corn, cultivated especially for vinegar makers, these last plants are hardly to be found except in the vegetable gardens of large houses or with market gardeners who have assured themselves in advance of their certain sale. For the special characteristics of families, we refer our readers to botanical treatises; it seems sufficient to us to say that plants of the same family generally have the same needs; and, given a plant of a given family, even if the cultivation of this plant is unknown, we can a priori succeed by giving it the cultivation of the plant whose botanical characteristics it most closely resembles. Once this is understood, we will follow the alphabetical order for the special cultivation of each plant, because it is the most convenient for research. Garlic. Garlic is native to Sicily. It is a bulbous plant of the Liliaceae family; in our climate, it multiplies by cloves planted 4 or 5 centimetres apart. Planting takes place in February or March in loose, moderately smoky soil. They can also be planted in rows, which facilitates the weeding and hoeing this plant needs to thrive. Harvesting takes place in July or August. The plants are left to dry on the ground, then tied into bunches and kept hanging in a dry place. Only as many bulbs as are needed for the following year's planting are kept; the rest are sold. Garlic is a seasoning plant that awakens the appetite when used in small quantities, but becomes indigestible and gives bad breath when abused. Market gardeners cultivate this plant only rarely and in small quantities. Pineapple. See Special crops below. Arroche. Arroche or belle-dame is a chenopod native to Tartary. It is sown from March to September, from month to month, in the midst of other plantations. Sow very lightly, and pull up the excess if sown too thickly. Wet the plant moderately, and only in dry weather. Pick the leaves, which can be eaten cooked like spinach or mixed with sorrel to sweeten it. There are two varieties: blond and red. The seeds are harvested before maturity from the most beautiful plants, which are set aside for this purpose. They are dried in the shade away from the wind, as they are very light. Seeds do not retain their germinative power beyond one year. Artichoke. Artichokes are native to southern Europe and are propagated by eyelets or suckers in March or April. As far as possible, roots are removed from the eyelets, and the leaf tips are cut off. Prepare well-ploughed and, above all, well-smoked beds, and mark out rays 80 cm apart. The artichokes are planted in these rays, 70 to 80 centimetres apart in a chessboard pattern. Each eyecup should be planted by hand, tightly packed and with the roots well elongated; once planted, each plant is given a little water, which makes it easier to take root. We can make them more precocious by planting them in small pots placed in a chessboard under a frame on a warm layer. When the roots have developed sufficiently to fill the pot, each plant is planted in place. Artichokes take up a lot of space and grow slowly, so make the most of the considerable space left between plants. Savoy cabbages or white onions can be planted; radishes or lettuce can be sown in the space; in any case, these sowings and counter-plants should not be long-lasting. An artichoke plantation should last three to four years. Every year, a young plantation is planted, the produce of which is harvested in autumn after that of the old plants. When frosts are imminent, the longest leaves are removed, the plants are spaded and surrounded with dry manure. On larger farms, the plant is spaded and covered with leaves; the leaves must then be covered with earth to prevent them being blown away. In March, we uncover the plants, remove the eyelets for young plantations and bury the manure used as a cover. Artichoke seed is good for five years; it is rarely harvested in our climate, as the eyelets are sufficient for reproduction. Seedbeds should be grown in the middle of the day, sheltered from the north winds. It is the unopened flower of the artichoke that is sold as edible; it is the spiny sepals of the calyx and the disk that form what are known as the artichoke leaves and heart. The rudimentary flowers form the hay. The few market gardeners who grow early artichokes obtain the first heads for sale in April, by covering old plants with frames and surrounding them with stoves. Ordinary harvesting takes place between May and June, and young plants in early autumn. Asparagus is a lily of central Europe; the variety we cultivate seems to have originated near Abbeville. Asparagus is grown in squares or banks laid out in such a way as to accommodate frames. The seed is sown in a nursery in March. The young plant is transplanted in place, 8 to 10 centimetres apart. The soil has been heavily smoked beforehand. For three years, radishes and spinach are grown in the asparagus plants in spring; lettuces, romaine, cauliflower and apple cabbage are planted in the paths; the asparagus plant benefits from watering, and grows flowers and seeds. It's a good idea to remove the seeds, which exhaust the plant. At the end of September or beginning of October, cut the stalks low to the ground and replenish the banks with soil. If you don't force the plant with manure, you can harvest in the spring of the third year. When you want to force asparagus, you 4 This transplanting takes place in April. place specially-built boxes on the banks in the third year, and cover them with a good bed of soil or compost. This work is done from the first days of November. The paths are dug to a depth of 5 centimetres, and the soil is thrown back on top of the compost to fill half the coffers. The pathway pit is then filled with mixed manure, which is well tamped down to the level of the frames. For the duration of the cultivation, this manure must be reworked every twelve or fifteen days; it is stirred with a fork and a small quantity of hot manure is added. Don't give the asparagus any air; at night, the frames should be covered with straw mats. A crop of asparagus is best cut after twenty to twenty-five days, after which it should be picked every two or three days. Once the crop has been harvested, the boxes used for reheating are only slowly and carefully removed, and everything is restored to its original state as soon as there is no longer any reason to fear a sudden change in temperature. Only half the asparagus plants are reheated each year, so as not to exhaust them too much. The crop we have just described is white asparagus. It can also be obtained by obtaining asparagus claws, which are placed on a warm bed at the same time, and from which the shoots are picked as they grow, but the plant is completely lost after harvesting. Growers around Paris sow asparagus in nurseries in February or March, then plant it in soil prepared as follows: they make trenches 1 meter wide, leaving a width of 1 meter between two trenches. These trenches are 20 centimetres deep. The soil is thrown back onto the in-between trenches. The bottom of the trench is filled with manure or gadoue (Paris mud). Three rows are planted per trench, spaced 30 to 35 centimetres apart. The whole is maintained by hoeing and weeding in summer and covering with manure in spring. The in-between areas are planted with oats, cabbage, beans, potatoes and beet for two years. In the third year, the soil is removed and spread over the plant to increase the length of the shoots. Harvesting takes place in April, May and June, taking care not to ruin the plantation, which can produce crops for ten years. It is these asparagus plants that provide the claws for the horticulturists who heat the green asparagus known as pea asparagus. There are currently two practical ways of achieving this, one using layered manure, the other using thermosiphon. These two processes are used with outstanding success by two Clichy horticulturists: Messrs Vassou and Cauconnier. We will therefore describe their processes. Mr. Vassou has created a special set of boxes and frames. The height of these boxes differs from those normally used. Towards the end of October and the beginning of November, he starts by 8. making layers 60 to 70 centimetres high of good mixed manure. Once the trunks are in place, the layer is covered with a few centimeters of soil and compost. Once fermentation is established and the hand immersed in the layer feels 18 to 20 degrees of heat, the claws are placed close together. It doesn't take long for vegetation to appear, so we cover the shoots with potting soil and put up the frames. If the weather is mild, air is let in; at night, straw mats are put down for fear of frost. If the temperature is too harsh, we put heaters in the paths. This type of cultivation produces until March. Mr. Cauconnier has installed powerful thermosiphons on his farm. This appliance consists of a hearth, an enclosed boiler, three-quarters full of water at 100 degrees when the appliance is in operation, i.e. when the furnace is lit. A siphon-shaped cast-iron pipe plunges into the water, exits the boiler in the direction marked out, and returns to the boiler after a circuit of varying length. When the boiler is closed, the steam produced by boiling compresses the surface of the water, which rises in the siphon-shaped tube. The water thus displaced travels through the entire circuit, cooling as it moves away from the furnace, and returns to the boiler, where it regains heat and begins the same journey again. The heat released by cooling the water replaces the manure in Mr. Cauconnier's eulture system. Instead of chests, he uses a masonry greenhouse covered with double glazing. The air trapped between the two frames forms a mattress, preferable to a doormat for keeping out the cold. At the bottom of the greenhouse run the thermosiphon pipes, above which a shallow wooden or sheet-metal tarpaulin filled with earth holds the asparagus shoots to be heated. The temperature is regulated by a thermometer. The work is the same as that described above. It begins in October and ends in March. Towards the end of October, the seed-bearing fruit is harvested from beautiful vines that have been staked. The fruit is crushed in water to separate the seed from the pulp, and the seed is dried in the shade. It can be used for up to four years. Eggplant. Eggplant is a member of the solanaceae family, native to the tropical regions of the Old and New Worlds. It is sown in January and February on a warm bed. Once the plant has emerged, it is transplanted to another layer with boxes and frames. This layer is made of mixed manure covered with a bed of compost, and accommodates 200 to 300 plants per frame. It is protected from the cold at night by a straw mat. In May, the same procedure is used to prepare a third layer for planting eggplants. This layer is covered with sashes or bells; if sashes are used, nine chessboard feet are planted under each sash; if bells are used, one foot is planted under each bell. When eggplants are planted in May, there's no need to worry about frost; they're planted on an old carrot bed or in a costiere, along a wall, so that they're well sheltered. Only five or six fruits should be kept on each plant; those on branches that are too weak should be removed, and buds that could sap the fruit should be cut off. Repeated watering and hoeing are necessary. There are two varieties of eggplant: round and long; this difference only applies to the fruit, which is a more or less intense purple. These fruits are edible after cooking, and are eaten stuffed. The seeds of the most beautiful fruits are preserved, dried in the shade and used for up to seven years. This is a labiatae native to India, which is sown in March or April on a drained bed, and transplanted in the nursery on another specially prepared bed. In May or June, the plants are planted on old beds or in the open ground. If possible, keep the root ball to facilitate recovery. This plant requires frequent wetting. The seed rarely reaches maturity in our climate; it is brought in from the Midi. It lasts for six years. This plant is used as a seasoning. Beet. This plant is a goosefoot native to southern Europe, which is sown in April and May in rows or broadcast, in well-smoked, deeply-ploughed soil; the seedling is thinned out as soon as the leaves touch, leaving a distance of about 25 cm between each plant. The plants are hoeed several times, and in October or November, the roots are pulled out after the leaves have been removed. These roots are kept in the vegetable greenhouse to protect them from frost. Beet is used as an edible plant, after cooking. The seeds, which last five years, are harvested from two-year-old plants. The healthiest roots are replanted in early spring. They soon provide a stem that rises, flowers and bears fruit in August or September. Planting for seed should take place in a south-facing position, and the plant should be frequently moistened to stimulate vegetative growth. Borage. A native plant in the Borage family, borage is sown in spring in the open ground. To have borage all year round, sow in September, prick out in rows in October, cover with a frame or straw mat and harvest in January or February. In January, sow in the ground and transplant onto an old bed. Borage is used as a medicinal plant. Its flower is used to decorate salads and is eaten with them. Borage seed is harvested a little before maturity and left to dry in the shade; it lasts for three years. Baselle or American spinach. This plant is native to tropical regions and belongs to the Basellaceae family. It is sown in March on a bed or in good exposure when frosts are no longer to be feared. The leaves are harvested in the same way as spinach, and have the same uses. The seed, which is brought in from the south because it does not ripen in the Paris climate, lasts three years. Nasturtium. Nasturtium is a tropalea native to Peru that is sown in April at the foot of a wall, or better still, on a trellis in good exposure. It can also be sown on its own, but must be raked. The flower is edible and is used to dress salads, giving them a pleasantly piquant flavor. Its green fruit can be preserved in vinegar. The seed is harvested in August and thoroughly dried before being stored. It lasts five years. Cardoon. A member of the Compositae family native to the island of Candia. It is sown in April on an old bed and the young plant is transplanted in May at a sufficient distance from the soil to later raise the cardoon clods. If you want to sow on the spot, place two or three seeds 80 centimetres apart in two rows per bed in holes filled with potting soil. When the seeds have emerged, leave only the most vigorous plant in each spot and remove the others. In the early stages, the potting soil is used for a counter-planting of romaine and chicory, as cardoons are very slow-growing. Towards the end of October, the cardoons have reached their peak vegetation, and it's time to blanch them. To this end, the leaves are lifted and tied with straw ties. As this plant has formidable thorns and the leaves are very thick, the leaves are lifted as follows: two people hold a stick in one hand and the end of a straw tie in the other. They lift the leaves with the stick and pass the straw tie underneath, successively going around the plant; when the tie is all the way around the collar, one of the people tightens the tie and ties it. The plant should be swaddled in this way, leaving only the leaf tips free. If the plant is to be blanched outside, we surround each foot with dry litter held in place by two ties. Leave in this state for three weeks. Otherwise, they are taken down to the cellar at the first threat of frost, and can be kept there throughout the winter. The seed-bearing plants are transplanted to a good exposure during the winter and secured with a good bedding. In spring, they are uncovered and watered frequently. Soon the flowers, which are almost identical to those of the artichoke, appear. The seed is harvested like that of the artichoke, and lasts for seven years. Carrot. The carrot is a native member of the Umbelliferae family. It is a market garden plant par excellence. The most widely grown variety is the chassis carrot, which is short and almost round. In early season, it is sown in beds in November. We're going to describe in detail how to set up the beds so that we don't have to come back to the subject later. The bed is set up in the best exposed spot in the garden, as close as possible to the house and manure storage area, to avoid wasting time and unnecessary effort. If the land is new, the soil is ploughed deeply, levelled, trampled and raked. If you don't have enough potting soil, mix it with soil by half at most. Mix as evenly as possible with a shovel. Pure potting soil is preferable, as plantations will suffer if soil is mixed, and if pure soil is used, as is too often the mistake in new establishments, four or five bad years will pass until good potting soil is available. It's a good idea to leave the soil 20 to 30 centimetres deep below the paths, to keep the layer warm. Five banks of potting soil for fifteen frames are formed across the square, making a length of 21 meters. Each bank is used to load three frames. Once the potting soil or mixture of soil and potting soil has been raised to the banks, any excess is removed. The manure is placed between the banks. If it's dry, we place it in advance to moisten it. It is handled to break it up - this is called a manure chain - and then the banks are covered with compost and manure. The first layer is isolated and 2 meters wide to serve as a gauge. For the others, we first establish a chain of old, dry manure, which we cover with a chain of new manure; we carefully mix these manures and compact them with the feet so that no gaps remain, and we cover with dry manure to prevent the seeds of the new manure from rising through the potting soil with which we will load the layer. The trunks should be placed square to the ground, with 20 to 25 centimetres of potting soil piled on top, spread out and pressed against the boards with the foot. The layers are then ready for sowing. Once the seedlings have been sown, they are evenly harrowed with a fork to prevent the seeds from forming a heap. The surface is then tapped with a flat board to tighten the seeds. Planting begins as soon as the layers have reached a suitable temperature, which is not long after the frames cover the trunks. A few days later, the paths are filled with manure, the beds are made, and the beds are reshaped whenever necessary. To speed up the work on the layers, we believe it's even preferable to the one we've just described, which is the one most generally used. After leaving 2 meters of width for the first gauge layer, we take a bank of potting soil lengthwise; we remove extra, then we make the banks for each layer by cutting the potting soil in a straight line with a string at the boundary of each layer; we shovel it up on each side and bring dry manure to each in-between. In this way, the soil and compost are protected from frost. The new manure is brought in over the top, and the work is carried out without interruption, the soil for loading the layer being within reach, whereas in the and you have to bring in the chains of dry manure and those of new manure separately. The result is greater speed and less fatigue. Layer manures are not wetted, except in February and March when they are too dry. Cloche layers are made in the same way as chassis layers. Each layer of fifteen frames should hold one hundred and twenty to one hundred and thirty bells. These layers should be edged with a board or a trunk board, so that two people can edge them more quickly. The soil must be well levelled before sowing, which is harrowed and tamped as we said for the frames. Planting takes place as soon as the bed warms up. The bells are placed in three rows, chalked and chessboarded. Then, as for chassis layers, the paths and shoulders are made with dry manure. Having said that, let's get back to the carrots. The carrot beds are 50 to 60 centimetres thick with mixed manure, and are fitted with their own boxes and frames. Thirty to thirty-six lettuces are planted in the seedbed to ensure a double harvest. Chassis are covered only during hard frosts. No air is given until the lettuce is ready to harvest, which takes place in January. Once the lettuce has been removed, air is given as needed and the frames are covered during frosts. Harvesting takes place in late March or early April. Carrots continue to be sown in layers every month until the first of March, and these layers are covered with frames or bins as required. A few spinach seeds can be sown at the same time as the carrot seed, and harvested after the lettuce. Radishes are often sown, but this is not always profitable, as radishes like air and lettuce fears it. In this case, it's better to do away with the lettuce and sow only radishes. In April, all the carrot beds are uncovered, and glass is needed to grow melons. Some time before uncovering the carrots, you need to get them used to the outside temperature by frequently giving them air. If the weather turns cold when the carrots are uncovered, they are covered overnight with mats, which are carried on strings held taut by stakes, so as not to crush the leaves. When sowing under cloches, plant three black lettuces and one green romaine per cloche. The lettuces can be removed and replaced with radishes. In this case, plant romaine between the cloches; those under the cloches will grow and be ready for planting.

are the first to be harvested: each bell is then placed on top of one of those outside. Carrots are still sown on open-air beds with radishes, and covered during frosts with mulch supported by small trellises. From January onwards, carrots are sown in the open ground under cold frames and cloches. If they were sown earlier, they would grow taller. Thirty plants of George or Gotte lettuces are planted per frame, otherwise they are replaced by twenty Romaines. If sowing was done under cloches, a good bed of compost should have been used, and three romaine or Gotte lettuces should be planted per cloche. In February, carrots are sown in pots with radishes, and lettuces or romaine are planted in the seedbed. Sowing continues from month to month until July 15, combining carrots with radishes or spinach, and planting romaine, lettuce and even celeriac in the seedbed. For beautiful, healthy carrots, we recommend planting only lettuces and romaine in the seedbed, and not combining the seed with any other. Carrots require good composting in spring and light mulching in summer. They need to be moistened in small quantities and often. The last ones sown for winter consumption can be kept in the ground, taking care to cut off the tops and cover the bed with a good bed of dry manure. If not, we pull them out, make a hole in the ground where we pile them up and cover them with dry manure. In autumn, we select the seed-bearing plants, which are the most beautiful and roundest, and place them in a nursery in a sheltered spot or under a frame. In March, they are planted outdoors, 35 centimetres apart. The seed is harvested in July or August. It lasts four years. Everyone knows the uses of carrots. The best varieties, after the short round one, are the early red from Holland and the half-long one. It is an indigenous umbellifer whose cultivated varieties are white celery, Turkish celery, purple celery from Tours, celery root and hollow or knife celery. The first three varieties are grown in exactly the same way. Hot-sowing of these varieties begins in late February and early March. Celery is transplanted in rows in April. It is good for harvesting in August and September. Second sowings take place a month later, with clear sowing and thinning of the plant instead of transplanting. Harvesting takes place in October and November. The third sowing takes place in the open ground from April 25 to May 6. The seedling is left in the nursery and thinned out if too thick. This last sowing will be sold during the winter. Celery is planted in lettuce, romaine or chicory beds that are half-planted. After planting, the plant is wetted to create a border. Celery requires a lot of water, but you mustn't give it more than it needs, as it will become too tender and contract the disease known as grise. The first celery to be sold can be blanched by covering it with old straw mats or bedding. For winter celery, make a trench 1.33 meters wide and 25 centimeters deep, discarding the soil to the right and left; plant the celery that has been removed in clumps in rows 15 to 20 centimeters apart, then wet abundantly to prevent the leaves from wilting. When they start to grow again, soil is poured between the rows until only the tips of the leaves are out. If you're not afraid of frost, it's a good idea to bury the celery only halfway and not to complete the operation until a little later, but you should bury it right away if the weather is doubtful. To raise the celery, once it has been simply placed in the trench where it is to be blanched, which happens when there is no fear of frost, two men, each equipped with a stick the width of the plank and two stakes, take a row of celery between their two sticks and straighten it. Once this is done, they secure the sticks with their two stakes, then spade earth between the separated rows. It's a good idea to cover the leaves of buried celery with a bed of dry manure when the frost is heavy. Celery is harvested from seed from the best plants of the previous year, transplanted along a wall in good exposure. It starts to grow in spring, and the seed is harvested in August; it lasts for seven years. Celery is eaten as a salad. Celery root differs from the preceding varieties in that it has a very fleshy root, which develops at the expense of the leaves, which are spindly and not very tall. Sow hot from March 1st on a good bed, transplant at the end of April on an old bed or in the ground. Combined with carrots, romaine or escarole, it needs to be planted light, with 30 to 40 cm between plants, and watered frequently. It's more harmful than useful to remove the leaves, as we do too often. A good mulch is an excellent precaution for celeriac. Two varieties are grown: white and red. The red variety produces larger roots, but is more prone to the disease known as grise. Celery root is used for the same purposes as the leaves of the above varieties, and is harvested from seed in the same way. Care must be taken to isolate seed carriers from other celery species, which are also harvested from seed, as hybridizations produce no good results. Hollow or knife celery is less sensitive to cold than the preceding varieties. It is sown hot in February, and on the ground in March. If you cover the seedbed with a frame, you'll be able to pick celery earlier. It is used as an ingredient in salads and stews. It is harvested from seed like other celery. Cerfeull. A native umbelliferous plant, chervil can be sown at any time, in rows or broadcast. It thrives better in the shade than in the sun. Soil mixed with compost is the preferred soil for this crop. Mulch attaches to the leaf and is difficult to detach. This plant requires frequent watering. Chervil is harvested by cutting it close to the ground and bundling it for sale. It is a seasoning plant. The seed is harvested from plants sown in September, which come up in spring and bear fruit in June or July. The seed lasts two years. Bulbous chervil differs from bulbous chervil in that its taproot is similar to that of the carrot, but gray in color. It is native to the region, as is bulbous chervil, and is broadcast in September or October for harvest in June or July. It is also sown in February and March for harvesting in August and September. Sowing requires amended soil and a bed of compost. Keep the soil moist until the seed has emerged. The roots are harvested and eaten like chestnuts, with the same flavor, and stored like potatoes. The seed is harvested by replanting roots in spring in good exposure, giving the carriers frequent wetting in the early stages to facilitate recovery, and harvesting the seed in July. The seed lasts for two years. Edible mushroom. See Special crops below. Wild chicory. Chicory is a native compound that market gardeners only grow in hot climates. It is sown on a bed in January or February, broadcast and a little thickly. The young leaves are cut as soon as they are sufficiently developed and before they harden. This is done several times, as long as the product is profitable, and then the bed is ruined. Seedlings are sown in the open ground in spring, producing a harvest of leaves until autumn. At this time, the plant is covered with a good bed of potting soil, into which it grows etiolated leaves. These leaves are cut between two plots of land, and sold under the name of white chicory. To make chicory known as capuchin beard, sow wild chicory in April in rays spaced 15 to 20 centimeters apart. In October, the plant and its roots are removed with a fork and placed in gauges. A layer of well-mixed manure is then prepared in a cellar or cellar, sheltered from light. As soon as it warms up, we place the chicory roots in bunches, taking care to remove the bad leaves. Water the plants lightly until vegetation develops, then only when the leaves start to droop, as this would cause the plant to rot internally. It takes fifteen to eighteen days to produce a harvest. If you take care to maintain the layer of new manure to keep it warm, you can continue the same work on the rest of the chicory, which you have put in a gauge until March and April. In the North, we grow a variety with large roots which, when burned and ground, are used to make chicory coffee. This is not the subject of this article. The seed is harvested from the previous year's plants in August. The heads must be rubbed by hand to separate the seed. In large-scale cultivation, the heads are beaten with a flail. The seed lasts for eight years. This compound originated in the tropical regions of the Old World and probably in the East Indies. - The varieties grown by market gardeners are first and foremost Rouen chicory, followed by Italian, Meaux and escarole. Chicory is sown in January, February and March, on a thick layer of mixed manure covered with boxes and frames. When the heat developed by the manure is so great that it is hard for the hand to bear, the seed is sown on the compost without covering it. It should germinate within twenty-four hours. As soon as you see that it has sprouted, you sprinkle the seedling with fine potting soil, while continuing to keep the layer at the same temperature. A layer is then prepared for transplanting, on which 400 or 500 plants per frame are placed. This layer is kept well covered against frost overnight. A fortnight or three weeks later, the chicory can be planted out. Give it air whenever the temperature permits. It can be combined with new tomatoes in trays, or with other chicories that have half come into season. To plant cold chicory, you need to get the plant used to the outside temperature by giving it frequent airing. Twenty-five or thirty chicories are planted per frame and three per bell. Tomatoes are used as counterplants, with six or nine per frame and one per bell. Cold planting should not take place before April, otherwise the plant will be prone to bolting. Tomatoes should only be counter-planted when chicory is half established. If you sow chicory in the ground in September, you can plant it under a frame and harvest it in winter, taking care to protect this cold-weather plant. All seedlings made before June should be sown in the soil, but it is no longer necessary to hasten germination from April onwards. Sow in the ground from June onwards. Plants can be planted in the open ground from May onwards, but the plant must be accustomed to the outside temperature. From May 15 onwards, all chicory seedlings, transplants and plantings can be exposed to the air: so remove the frames and their cases. In June, white or Turkish celery chicory is counter-planted in fields where apple cabbage and onions have been grown, as soon as the harvest of these vegetables has been completed. The cultivation of escarole is no less important than that of the previous crop, but takes place in autumn. If you want to harvest it early, sow it hot. It is grown in the open ground in the same way as chicory. Its disadvantages lie in beds of lettuce, romaine, celeriac and cauliflower. Depending on the time of sowing, it is harvested in September, October and November. Curly endive and escarole are eaten as salads; as they are only valued when the leaves are tender and white, they need to be etiolated. This is done in the following way: As soon as the vines have developed normally and the plant is in full bloom and the leaves have spread out well, we place a tie of rye straw under the leaves, joining them at the top, and bind them slightly so as to prevent the light from penetrating to the heart of the plant. As soon as you see that the plant is white inside, pull it out. It has been suggested that the stem be removed under an upside-down flowerpot, in which the chicory plant is enclosed. This is more or less successful in dry weather, but the plant rots in wet weather. In any case, only chicory and escarole that have been bound and cleaned, are white inside and have green leaves, are sought after at the market. To harvest from seed, we put beautiful plants under frames to protect them from frost. In March, each clump is removed and planted in a good spot. Care should be taken to separate curly endive and escarole plants, as hybridization is easy and produces no useful products. The seed is stored on the stalks, which are bunched together; these stalks are beaten as and when needed, as mice are fond of it when it is separated from its envelopes, and don't attack it otherwise because the bunches are hung from the ceiling; preserved in this way, the seed can be used for seven or eight years. You can also sow the seedbeds in January and February for planting in March, but you can't be sure of success or of getting such clean seed, because in the first case you know which plant will bear fruit, and in the second you don't know what you'll get. Cabbage. Plant of the cruciferous family, native to Western Europe. Two species are grown: apple cabbage and cauliflower. Peony cabbage itself is subdivided into a large number of cultivated varieties, the main ones being York, beef, Bonneuil and red cabbage. The cabbages to be harvested in spring are sown towards the end of August. This makes SaintFiacre a memorable date for cabbage cultivation. By September 10 at the latest, you should stop sowing spring cabbages. You need to know the age of the seed, because if you sow a young seed too early, the plant will bolt in the spring. Cabbages are transplanted in October in beds, and the final planting takes place in November and December in deeply tilled, well-smoked soil. Early cabbages are planted 35 to 40 centimetres apart, larger ones 45 to 50 centimetres apart. Planting takes place in rays, which you trace as deeply as possible with your foot. In spring, hoe the soil well and fold it back into the rays. Spinach or baby lettuce is then sown between the cabbage rows. This is done in April. Early cabbages are harvested from May 15 to June 15, and the others from June 15 to the end of July. Bonneuil cabbage is sown in January or February under cloches and is also transplanted under cloches. It is planted in April and in May, succeeding the cœur-de-bœuf. There are two varieties of red cabbage: large and small. The latter is preferred for its earlier maturity. It is sown in May or April, planted in May or June, and harvested in September or October. For information on growing Quental, Milan, Vertus, Brussels and kohlrabi cabbages, etc., please refer to the chapter on agricultural crops. Everyone knows how to use choupomme. For seed harvesting, we select the best cabbages and mark them, then cut off the head, leaving four or five leaves on the stem. Buds soon develop on this stem, and the root ball is transplanted to a separate spot. Each eye thus developed can be removed by splitting the stem and planting the eye with the portion of stem to which it is attached. When each eye has taken root, it is set in place and protected from frost over the winter. In spring, the flowering stem sprouts, and the siliques are harvested before maturity and dried in the shade. When the silique dries on the ground, it pops open and the seeds are dispersed. The small pod containing the seeds is called a silique. Seeds can still be harvested from cabbages sown in May. This is one of the plants most prone to hybridization, so keep seedbeds away not only from other cabbage varieties, but also from other crucifers such as turnips, mustard, turnips, radishes, rapeseed, etc. Cauliflower. Cauliflower - This cruciferous plant differs from the previous one in that its flowering parts are sufficiently large and fleshy before their full development to be the main focus of cultivation and provide succulent food. Cauliflowers are divided into three varieties: tender cauliflower, semi-hard cauliflower and hard cauliflower. For tender cauliflower, we grow Petit Salomon and Lenormand cauliflower in spring. They are sown on beds from September 1st when grown in hot conditions; if grown in cold conditions, they are sown on the ground from the 10th to the 15th. In October, 200 to 300 plants per frame are transplanted under cold frames, in a thick layer of potting soil. The plant is watered to bind it immediately after transplanting. In December, the plant is pulled out and ploughed thoroughly before being put back in with a good layer of soil. Air is given when it doesn't freeze, but at the slightest sign of frost, cover with mats or litter. Cauliflower is planted on a bed in January or February. If the bed contains no carrots, plant six plants per frame. If, on the other hand, the bed contains carrots, the number is reduced to four cauliflowers. Other growers plant cauliflowers on old beds and counterplant with Georges or Gotte lettuces, depending on their own ideas. When the cauliflowers are getting stronger, the frames are removed as soon as the plants have become too strong for the shelters; but, if frosts are still to be feared, stakes and string are stretched out to shelter the cauliflowers during the night by means of straw mats laid over the stakes and string. Full-ground cultivation takes place when four cauliflower plants per cold frame have been planted in lettuces and romaine. In March, cauliflowers can be planted in a square or as a counterplant in other plants, among carrot and radish seedlings. All these cauliflowers, sown in September, are those of the first spring season. They are also planted on melon trenches and on compost in July. The semi-hard variety is sown in cloches in November, transplanted in trays or cloches in December and planted in April. 1 Sow month by month from January to June. This plant requires a lot of care. As soon as the bud appears, it must be covered, which is done by pulling off a leaf from the mother plant and covering the indiscreet flower. This care must be repeated every day, as it's the whiteness of the cauliflower head that's important. Water frequently, at least every other day. Caterpillars, slugs and earwigs are formidable enemies of this vegetable. When the flower's granulations start to spread, it's time to pick the cauliflower. September seedlings, planted warm, produce a harvest in May, and in June if planted cold. The same seedlings, planted in the ground, only yield in July. Cauliflowers sown at St. Theresa's Day are harvested in July. January and February seedlings are harvested in August, April and May in September and October, June in November and December. This last harvest is often thwarted by frost. In this case, we pull up the plants with their clods and put them in gauges under frames covered with straw mats or manure; we stop sowing from June 15th to start again in September. The tender variety is harvested from the earliest and most beautiful plants. The semi-hard variety is harvested mid-harvest in the same way, and the hard variety at the end of the season. Seed-bearing plants are left to grow, and watered moderately and at the base: excess humidity encourages the development of aphids and plaster. Harvest before maturity and dry the heads hanging in the shade. This seed lasts five years. Broccoli. - Native to Italy. It differs from cauliflower only in its violet hue. It produces eyelets like Brussels sprouts. It has the same uses as cauliflower. It is sown from March to May, then planted 50 to 60 centimetres apart. It is harvested in September and throughout the winter. Although more robust than cauliflower, it is useful to put it in a gauge under a frame when frosts are severe. Crambe cabbage. (See Agricultural crops.) - The leaves of this type of cabbage are eaten blanched like asparagus. If you want to force them, do exactly as you would for forced asparagus. Do not give the frames any light. Ciboule. A lily native to northern Asia. You start sowing chives in February to have them all year round, and stop sowing in October. Lamb's lettuce is combined with September sowings; for other sowings, radishes are sown, or romaine and lettuce are planted. Sow thickly if you don't need to put anything in the seedbed. This plant needs plenty of water and a thick bed of compost. It can be stored over winter in a gauge covered with straw mats or bedding. Chives do not set seed until the second year. Harvesting takes place in August. The seed lasts two years. Perennial chives last five or six years in place; they are propagated by their bulbs. Chives are used as a seasoning plant. Civet. A lily native to southern Europe, the civet is planted in small clumps whose bulbs multiply rapidly. By dividing the clumps when they are too strong and planting the parts, it can be multiplied ad infinitum. Plant in borders or well-smoked beds, in rays spaced 15 to 20 centimetres apart. Leave the civet in the same spot for three or four years, covering it with a good bed of compost over winter. This plant requires a lot of water. It is cut five or six times a year. Before relocating the civet, the new bed should be well smoked. A few clumps are planted on beds in spring for early harvests. Civets are used for the same purposes as spring onions. In many countries, this plant is known as an appetizer, no doubt because of its ability to stimulate digestion. In this sense, the word is only used in the plural: civet sprigs are called appetites. Cucumber. A cucurbit native to Asia Minor and Western Europe. It is mainly grown as an early variety with white fruit, long green fruit and small green fruit, or gherkin. Cucumbers are sown on a warm bed, with 150 plants per frame. A third layer is prepared a fortnight after transplanting; it should be 60 centimetres thick, with mixed manure and a 20-centimetre bed of potting soil. Two or three plants per frame are planted, after topping and retaining only two eyes. Planting is done by hand and in clods, to facilitate recovery. The soil is covered with a light mulch to divide the water for frequent watering. Shade the frames when the sun is too hot, provide frequent airing and only uncover when the plants are vigorous enough to fill the frames, and then only if the weather permits. As the plants are topped at two eyes, only two branches remain on each plant, which are left to spin and spread out. Two types of flowers appear successively on the same plant: male flowers bearing the stamens, and female flowers bearing the pistil. Only the latter bear fruit. The latter, called meshes, are fertilized by pollen from the former. Fertilization has taken place as soon as the fruit has set, i.e. when the swelling or ovary of the mesh increases in volume at the same time as the corolla withers and falls. Only one or two eyes are left above each new-born fruit. Harvesting begins in May and June. The change in fruit color indicates maturity. Cultivation under cloche is done with seedlings from later sowings. Transplanting takes place on an old bed, which is turned over and warmed with small quantities of new manure. A 20-meter layer can accommodate thirty-five or forty bells at most. A foot is planted under each bell. The work is the same as for planting under a frame. The cloches are removed at the same time as the trays. Cucumbers can be eaten as salads, or cooked and stuffed. Gherkin. - This is a variety of green cucumber with rough fruit covered with calluses and furrowed with wrinkles. It is hot-sown in April and May, and is treated in exactly the same way as its congeners, right up to planting, which is done on old, unchanged beds in well-exposed costières. It needs sun, a good mulch and some watering. Gherkins are not pruned. The fruit is harvested before maturity and sold to vinegar makers. Harvesting takes place every other day in July or August. The seeds of all cucumber varieties are harvested from an elongated, ripe fruit. The fruit is cut and the seeds removed, dried and stored for up to five years. As hybridization is easy, different varieties should not be grown in close proximity to each other. Squash. Squash is a type of cucurbit native to India. There are several varieties, xmlns="http://www.loc.gov/standards/alto/ns-v4#" xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.loc.gov/standards/alto/ns-v4# http://www.loc.gov/standards/alto/v4/alto-4-3.xsd"> <Description> <MeasurementUnit>pixel</MeasurementUnit> <sourceImageInformation> <fileName>/mnt/diskSustainability/david/GOM_corpus/corpus_img/La_Culture_maraîchère_pratique/0145.png</fileName> </sourceImageInformation> <Processing ID="OCR_4db7841c-21b7-49c8-a694-285712345995"> <processingCategory>contentGeneration</processingCategory> <processingStepDescription>Baseline and region segmentation</processingStepDescription> <processingStepSettings>model: [&#39;blla.mlmodel&#39;]; text_direction: horizontal-lr</processingStepSettings> <processingSoftware> <softwareName>kraken</softwareName> <softwareVersion>5.2.9</softwareVersion> </processingSoftware> </Processing> <Processing ID="OCR_4f2cb666-242a-46a6-93a8-11e67d3d5383"> <processingCategory>contentGeneration</processingCategory> <processingStepDescription>Text line recognition</processingStepDescription> <processingStepSettings>text_direction: horizontal-tb; models: catmus-print-fondue-large.mlmodel; pad: 16; bidi_reordering: True</processingStepSettings> <processingSoftware> <softwareName>kraken</softwareName> <softwareVersion>5.2.9</softwareVersion> </processingSoftware> </Processing> </Description> <Tags> <OtherTag DESCRIPTION="line type" ID="LINE_TYPE_1" TYPE="type" LABEL="default"/> <OtherTag DESCRIPTION="region type" ID="REGION_TYPE_1" TYPE="region" LABEL="text"/> </Tags> <Layout> <Page WIDTH="2845" HEIGHT="4910" PHYSICAL_IMG_NR="0" ID="page_0"> <PrintSpace HPOS="0" VPOS="0" WIDTH="2845" HEIGHT="4910"> <TextBlock ID="d63bad01-4f72-40ad-906b-28cc561b0f42" HPOS="709" VPOS="501" WIDTH="2092" HEIGHT="3566" TAGREFS="REGION_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1580 501 1916 512 1971 575 1818 643 1897 676 2790 720 2746 916 2790 960 2757 1208 2801 1440 2768 3914 2724 4067 742 4067 709 4023 742 720 775 687 1676 654 1504 597 1504 534 1580 501"/> </Shape> <TextLine ID="19f8e39c-99c4-4d14-9c42-f368403c049c" HPOS="1556" VPOS="501" WIDTH="366" HEIGHT="120" BASELINE="1559 572 1922 575" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1913 512 1840 512 1840 510 1832 510 1804 507 1777 507 1750 507 1722 504 1695 504 1668 504 1646 501 1559 507 1559 510 1559 572 1556 597 1635 602 1651 619 1651 621 1654 621 1657 621 1660 621 1919 600 1922 575 1919 518 1913 512"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_0" CONTENT="-" HPOS="1567" VPOS="506" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="92" WC="0.9981"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1568 506 1567 598 1567 598 1568 506"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_0" CONTENT="-" HPOS="1567" VPOS="506" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="92" GC="0.9981"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1568 506 1567 598 1567 598 1568 506"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_1" HPOS="1640" VPOS="501" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="106"/> <String ID="segment_2" CONTENT="126" HPOS="1673" VPOS="504" WIDTH="82" HEIGHT="116" WC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1674 504 1673 620 1754 613 1755 507"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_2" CONTENT="1" HPOS="1673" VPOS="504" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1674 504 1673 620 1673 620 1674 504"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_3" CONTENT="2" HPOS="1705" VPOS="504" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1706 504 1705 617 1705 617 1706 504"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_4" CONTENT="6" HPOS="1754" VPOS="507" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="106" GC="0.9982"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1755 507 1754 613 1754 613 1755 507"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_3" HPOS="1803" VPOS="507" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="102"/> <String ID="segment_4" CONTENT="-" HPOS="1844" VPOS="512" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="94" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1845 512 1844 606 1844 606 1845 512"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_6" CONTENT="-" HPOS="1844" VPOS="512" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="94" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1845 512 1844 606 1844 606 1845 512"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="827984c2-0c3e-4a10-85ad-708b0ed07a9d" HPOS="756" VPOS="676" WIDTH="2007" HEIGHT="147" BASELINE="756 755 2763 780" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2749 717 2722 714 2694 714 2667 711 2640 711 2612 709 2585 709 2558 706 2531 706 2503 703 2476 703 2449 701 2424 701 2369 706 2350 706 2328 706 2192 690 2176 690 2151 687 1924 695 1873 681 1870 681 1867 681 1736 695 1482 695 1425 676 1422 676 1419 676 1316 692 1307 692 778 687 756 703 756 755 756 801 2064 801 2118 818 2129 821 2132 821 2135 821 2162 818 2266 804 2301 821 2312 823 2315 823 2318 823 2320 823 2323 823 2328 821 2345 810 2380 821 2394 823 2397 823 2399 823 2402 823 2405 823 2408 821 2424 807 2711 807 2754 823 2763 780 2763 717 2749 717"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_5" CONTENT="known" HPOS="783" VPOS="687" WIDTH="315" HEIGHT="114" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="785 687 783 801 1096 801 1098 690"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_7" CONTENT="c" HPOS="783" VPOS="687" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="785 687 783 801 783 801 785 687"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_8" CONTENT="o" HPOS="829" VPOS="687" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="831 687 829 801 829 801 831 687"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_9" CONTENT="n" HPOS="884" VPOS="688" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="886 688 884 801 884 801 886 688"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_10" CONTENT="n" HPOS="939" VPOS="689" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="941 689 939 801 939 801 941 689"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_11" CONTENT="u" HPOS="995" VPOS="689" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="997 689 995 801 995 801 997 689"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_12" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1050" VPOS="690" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1052 690 1050 801 1050 801 1052 690"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_13" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1096" VPOS="690" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1098 690 1096 801 1096 801 1098 690"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_6" HPOS="1142" VPOS="690" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="111"/> <String ID="segment_7" CONTENT="under" HPOS="1179" VPOS="689" WIDTH="158" HEIGHT="112" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1181 691 1179 801 1335 801 1337 689"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_15" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1179" VPOS="691" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1181 691 1179 801 1179 801 1181 691"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_16" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1225" VPOS="691" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1227 691 1225 801 1225 801 1227 691"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_17" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1280" VPOS="692" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1282 692 1280 801 1280 801 1282 692"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_18" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1335" VPOS="689" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1337 689 1335 801 1335 801 1337 689"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_8" HPOS="1391" VPOS="679" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="122"/> <String ID="segment_9" CONTENT="les" HPOS="1427" VPOS="677" WIDTH="76" HEIGHT="124" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1429 677 1427 801 1501 801 1503 695"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_20" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1427" VPOS="677" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="124" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1429 677 1427 801 1427 801 1429 677"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_21" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1455" VPOS="687" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1457 687 1455 801 1455 801 1457 687"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_22" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1501" VPOS="695" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1503 695 1501 801 1501 801 1503 695"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_10" HPOS="1538" VPOS="695" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="106"/> <String ID="segment_11" CONTENT="names" HPOS="1575" VPOS="692" WIDTH="186" HEIGHT="109" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1577 695 1575 801 1760 801 1761 692"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_24" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1575" VPOS="695" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1577 695 1575 801 1575 801 1577 695"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_25" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1621" VPOS="695" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1623 695 1621 801 1621 801 1623 695"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_26" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1676" VPOS="695" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="106" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1678 695 1676 801 1676 801 1678 695"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_27" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1760" VPOS="692" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1761 692 1760 801 1760 801 1761 692"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_12" HPOS="1806" VPOS="686" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="115"/> <String ID="segment_13" CONTENT="de" HPOS="1834" VPOS="684" WIDTH="56" HEIGHT="117" WC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1835 684 1834 801 1889 801 1890 686"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_29" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1834" VPOS="684" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1835 684 1834 801 1834 801 1835 684"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_30" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1889" VPOS="686" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9971"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1890 686 1889 801 1889 801 1890 686"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_14" HPOS="1935" VPOS="694" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="107"/> <String ID="segment_15" CONTENT="squash," HPOS="1963" VPOS="688" WIDTH="360" HEIGHT="135" WC="0.9525"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1964 694 1963 801 2321 823 2323 705"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_32" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1963" VPOS="694" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="107" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1964 694 1963 801 1963 801 1964 694"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_33" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2009" VPOS="692" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2010 692 2009 801 2009 801 2010 692"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_34" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2064" VPOS="690" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2065 690 2064 801 2064 801 2065 690"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_35" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2118" VPOS="688" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2120 688 2118 818 2118 818 2120 688"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_36" CONTENT="g" HPOS="2164" VPOS="689" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9931"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2166 689 2164 818 2164 818 2166 689"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_37" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2210" VPOS="692" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="119" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2212 692 2210 811 2210 811 2212 692"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_38" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2267" VPOS="699" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2268 699 2267 804 2267 804 2268 699"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_39" CONTENT="," HPOS="2321" VPOS="705" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.6275"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2323 705 2321 823 2321 823 2323 705"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_16" HPOS="2358" VPOS="706" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="111"/> <String ID="segment_17" CONTENT="pumpkins," HPOS="2385" VPOS="701" WIDTH="371" HEIGHT="121" WC="0.9967"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2387 704 2385 822 2754 821 2756 717"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_41" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2385" VPOS="704" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2387 704 2385 822 2385 822 2387 704"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_42" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2441" VPOS="701" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="106" GC="0.9712"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2443 701 2441 807 2441 807 2443 701"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_43" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2487" VPOS="703" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="104" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2489 703 2487 807 2487 807 2489 703"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_44" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2514" VPOS="704" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="103" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2516 704 2514 807 2523 807 2525 705"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_45" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2551" VPOS="706" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="101" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2553 706 2551 807 2551 807 2553 706"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_46" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2588" VPOS="709" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="98" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2590 709 2588 807 2588 807 2590 709"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_47" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2643" VPOS="711" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="96" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2645 711 2643 807 2643 807 2645 711"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_48" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2700" VPOS="714" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="93" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2701 714 2700 807 2700 807 2701 714"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_49" CONTENT="," HPOS="2754" VPOS="717" WIDTH="2" HEIGHT="104" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2756 717 2754 821 2754 821 2756 717"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="b4dc79bf-1d69-427e-83d1-51eabbaf5ab0" HPOS="756" VPOS="801" WIDTH="1248" HEIGHT="145" BASELINE="759 894 2004 900" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="759 894 756 938 1214 927 1242 938 1255 943 1258 943 1261 943 1619 935 1733 932 1741 932 1785 946 1788 946 1791 946 1793 946 1796 946 1796 943 1810 932 1812 930 1998 930 2004 900 1998 821 1763 826 1741 821 1690 804 1687 804 1578 804 1575 804 1572 804 1569 804 1569 807 1553 821 1553 823 1452 823 1447 821 1373 801 1370 801 1367 801 1365 801 1288 821 1277 823 1266 821 1193 801 1190 801 1187 801 1184 801 1182 801 1163 818 1070 807 1067 807 1064 807 1062 807 1062 810 1048 823 860 823 813 801 810 801 808 801 805 801 759 821 759 894"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_18" CONTENT="giraumonts," HPOS="788" VPOS="806" WIDTH="509" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="788 808 788 937 1297 942 1297 819"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_50" CONTENT="g" HPOS="788" VPOS="808" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9978"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="788 808 788 937 788 937 788 808"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_51" CONTENT="i" HPOS="836" VPOS="812" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="836 812 836 936 836 936 836 812"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_52" CONTENT="r" HPOS="874" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9971"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="874 823 874 935 874 935 874 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_53" CONTENT="a" HPOS="913" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="913 823 913 934 913 934 913 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_54" CONTENT="u" HPOS="961" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="961 823 961 933 961 933 961 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_55" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1018" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1018 823 1018 932 1018 932 1018 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_56" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1095" VPOS="810" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1095 810 1095 930 1095 930 1095 810"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_57" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1153" VPOS="817" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1153 817 1153 928 1153 928 1153 817"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_58" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1210" VPOS="806" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1210 806 1210 927 1210 927 1210 806"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_59" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1239" VPOS="814" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1239 814 1239 937 1239 937 1239 814"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_60" CONTENT="," HPOS="1297" VPOS="819" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9619"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1297 819 1297 942 1297 942 1297 819"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_19" HPOS="1316" VPOS="811" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="131"/> <String ID="segment_20" CONTENT="pumpkins," HPOS="1345" VPOS="804" WIDTH="441" HEIGHT="142" WC="0.9824"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1345 806 1345 941 1786 946 1786 826"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_62" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1345" VPOS="806" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1345 806 1345 941 1345 941 1345 806"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_63" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1393" VPOS="807" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1393 807 1393 940 1393 940 1393 807"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_64" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1421" VPOS="814" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1421 814 1421 939 1421 939 1421 814"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_65" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1460" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1460 823 1460 939 1460 939 1460 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_66" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1489" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1489 823 1489 938 1489 938 1489 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_67" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1546" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1546 823 1546 937 1546 937 1546 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_68" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1604" VPOS="804" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1604 804 1604 935 1604 935 1604 804"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_69" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1633" VPOS="804" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1633 804 1633 935 1633 935 1633 804"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_70" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1661" VPOS="804" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1661 804 1661 934 1661 934 1661 804"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_71" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1690" VPOS="804" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9937"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1690 804 1690 933 1690 933 1690 804"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_72" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1738" VPOS="820" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.7979"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1738 820 1738 932 1738 932 1738 820"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_73" CONTENT="," HPOS="1786" VPOS="826" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1786 826 1786 946 1786 946 1786 826"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_21" HPOS="1815" VPOS="825" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="105"/> <String ID="segment_22" CONTENT="etc." HPOS="1844" VPOS="821" WIDTH="134" HEIGHT="109" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1844 824 1844 930 1978 930 1978 821"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_75" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1844" VPOS="824" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1844 824 1844 930 1844 930 1844 824"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_76" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1892" VPOS="823" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1892 823 1892 930 1892 930 1892 823"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_77" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1930" VPOS="822" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1930 822 1930 930 1930 930 1930 822"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_78" CONTENT="." HPOS="1978" VPOS="821" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1978 821 1978 930 1978 930 1978 821"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="4ca3df63-269a-4e03-9c62-a7e12f073a2d" HPOS="849" VPOS="938" WIDTH="1925" HEIGHT="153" BASELINE="849 1028 2774 1042" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2763 962 2713 949 2711 949 2708 949 2705 949 2662 965 2659 968 2520 968 2514 962 2484 949 2481 949 2479 949 2476 949 2446 962 2438 965 2432 962 2391 946 2389 946 2249 946 2247 946 2244 946 2241 946 2225 960 2219 962 2197 960 2118 949 2116 949 2113 949 2094 957 2083 962 1941 957 1619 941 1376 941 1373 941 1370 941 1367 941 1359 949 1351 954 1285 949 1190 938 1187 938 1135 946 1078 954 849 943 849 1028 849 1074 1575 1063 1892 1063 1900 1072 1913 1082 1916 1082 1919 1082 2004 1085 2006 1085 2009 1085 2058 1072 2064 1069 2064 1072 2080 1085 2083 1085 2085 1085 2413 1088 2416 1088 2419 1088 2451 1072 2468 1088 2470 1088 2473 1088 2476 1091 2571 1091 2571 1088 2648 1072 2749 1085 2752 1085 2754 1085 2757 1085 2771 1069 2774 1042 2774 1039 2763 962"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_23" CONTENT="La" HPOS="888" VPOS="945" WIDTH="69" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="889 945 888 1073 956 1072 957 948"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_79" CONTENT="L" HPOS="888" VPOS="945" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="889 945 888 1073 888 1073 889 945"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_80" CONTENT="a" HPOS="956" VPOS="948" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="957 948 956 1072 956 1072 957 948"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_24" HPOS="1014" VPOS="951" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="121"/> <String ID="segment_25" CONTENT="culture" HPOS="1044" VPOS="939" WIDTH="263" HEIGHT="132" WC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1045 952 1044 1071 1306 1067 1307 951"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_82" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1044" VPOS="952" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="119" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1045 952 1044 1071 1044 1071 1045 952"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_83" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1092" VPOS="952" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1093 952 1092 1070 1092 1070 1093 952"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_84" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1150" VPOS="944" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1151 944 1150 1069 1150 1069 1151 944"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_85" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1180" VPOS="939" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9984"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1181 939 1180 1069 1180 1069 1181 939"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_86" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1209" VPOS="940" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1210 940 1209 1069 1209 1069 1210 940"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_87" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1267" VPOS="947" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1268 947 1267 1068 1267 1068 1268 947"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_88" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1306" VPOS="951" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1307 951 1306 1067 1306 1067 1307 951"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_26" HPOS="1364" VPOS="941" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="125"/> <String ID="segment_27" CONTENT="market gardening" HPOS="1403" VPOS="941" WIDTH="448" HEIGHT="125" WC="0.9953"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1404 941 1403 1066 1850 1063 1851 953"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_90" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1403" VPOS="941" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1404 941 1403 1066 1403 1066 1404 941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_91" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1481" VPOS="941" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1482 941 1481 1064 1481 1064 1482 941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_92" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1539" VPOS="941" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9891"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1540 941 1539 1064 1539 1064 1540 941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_93" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1578" VPOS="941" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1579 941 1578 1063 1578 1063 1579 941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_94" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1617" VPOS="941" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1618 941 1617 1063 1617 1063 1618 941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_95" CONTENT="̂" HPOS="1627" VPOS="941" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1628 941 1627 1063 1637 1063 1638 942"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_96" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1656" VPOS="943" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9552"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1657 943 1656 1063 1656 1063 1657 943"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_97" CONTENT="h" HPOS="1705" VPOS="945" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1706 945 1705 1063 1705 1063 1706 945"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_98" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1753" VPOS="948" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1754 948 1753 1063 1753 1063 1754 948"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_99" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="1773" VPOS="949" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1774 949 1773 1063 1773 1063 1774 949"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_100" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1811" VPOS="951" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1812 951 1811 1063 1811 1063 1812 951"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_101" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1850" VPOS="953" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1851 953 1850 1063 1850 1063 1851 953"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_28" HPOS="1909" VPOS="955" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="127"/> <String ID="segment_29" CONTENT="ne" HPOS="1948" VPOS="957" WIDTH="59" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.9547"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1949 957 1948 1083 2006 1085 2007 959"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_103" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1948" VPOS="957" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1949 957 1948 1083 1948 1083 1949 957"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_104" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2006" VPOS="959" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9093"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2007 959 2006 1085 2006 1085 2007 959"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_30" HPOS="2074" VPOS="961" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="124"/> <String ID="segment_31" CONTENT="product" HPOS="2113" VPOS="946" WIDTH="292" HEIGHT="142" WC="0.9296"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2114 949 2113 1085 2404 1088 2405 951"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_106" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2113" VPOS="949" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2114 949 2113 1085 2113 1085 2114 949"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_107" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2171" VPOS="956" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2172 956 2171 1086 2171 1086 2172 956"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_108" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2210" VPOS="961" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2211 961 2210 1086 2210 1086 2211 961"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_109" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2259" VPOS="946" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="141" GC="0.9981"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2260 946 2259 1087 2259 1087 2260 946"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_110" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2317" VPOS="946" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="141" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2318 946 2317 1087 2317 1087 2318 946"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_111" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2375" VPOS="946" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="142" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2376 946 2375 1088 2375 1088 2376 946"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_112" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2404" VPOS="951" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="137" GC="0.51"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2405 951 2404 1088 2404 1088 2405 951"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_32" HPOS="2453" VPOS="954" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="129"/> <String ID="segment_33" CONTENT="que" HPOS="2492" VPOS="953" WIDTH="107" HEIGHT="138" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2493 953 2492 1091 2599 1082 2599 968"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_114" CONTENT="q" HPOS="2492" VPOS="953" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="138" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2493 953 2492 1091 2492 1091 2493 953"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_115" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2550" VPOS="968" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2550 968 2550 1091 2550 1091 2550 968"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_116" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2599" VPOS="968" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2599 968 2599 1082 2599 1082 2599 968"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_34" HPOS="2677" VPOS="956" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="121"/> <String ID="segment_35" CONTENT="le" HPOS="2716" VPOS="950" WIDTH="30" HEIGHT="134" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2717 950 2716 1081 2745 1084 2746 957"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_118" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2716" VPOS="950" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="131" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2717 950 2716 1081 2716 1081 2717 950"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_119" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2745" VPOS="957" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2746 957 2745 1084 2745 1084 2746 957"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="424c3b57-1b15-4043-b3e0-b3780ddb31bf" HPOS="750" VPOS="1074" WIDTH="1745" HEIGHT="139" BASELINE="753 1164 2495 1178" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="753 1164 750 1213 2492 1213 2495 1178 2495 1104 2457 1085 2454 1085 2451 1085 2195 1104 2181 1104 2176 1104 2091 1082 2088 1082 2085 1082 1853 1102 1840 1102 1799 1080 1796 1080 1706 1080 1703 1080 1700 1080 1698 1080 1698 1082 1681 1096 1654 1080 1651 1080 1649 1080 1646 1080 1452 1096 1430 1080 1430 1077 1427 1077 1425 1077 1376 1077 1373 1077 1370 1077 1367 1077 1367 1080 1348 1096 1348 1099 1220 1099 1217 1096 1195 1080 1193 1080 1190 1080 1187 1080 1184 1080 1157 1091 1144 1077 1141 1077 1138 1077 1135 1077 1133 1077 1130 1077 1103 1096 1097 1096 980 1096 977 1093 950 1074 947 1074 944 1074 941 1074 753 1091 753 1164"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_36" CONTENT="pumpkin" HPOS="782" VPOS="1075" WIDTH="269" HEIGHT="138" WC="0.995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="783 1088 782 1213 1050 1213 1051 1096"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_120" CONTENT="p" HPOS="782" VPOS="1088" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="783 1088 782 1213 782 1213 783 1088"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_121" CONTENT="o" HPOS="830" VPOS="1084" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="831 1084 830 1213 830 1213 831 1084"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_122" CONTENT="t" HPOS="887" VPOS="1079" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="134" GC="0.9661"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="888 1079 887 1213 887 1213 888 1079"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_123" CONTENT="i" HPOS="926" VPOS="1075" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="138" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="927 1075 926 1213 926 1213 927 1075"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_124" CONTENT="r" HPOS="954" VPOS="1077" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="955 1077 954 1213 954 1213 955 1077"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_125" CONTENT="o" HPOS="993" VPOS="1096" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="994 1096 993 1213 993 1213 994 1096"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_126" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1050" VPOS="1096" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1051 1096 1050 1213 1050 1213 1051 1096"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_37" HPOS="1098" VPOS="1092" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="121"/> <String ID="segment_38" CONTENT="yellow" HPOS="1127" VPOS="1079" WIDTH="202" HEIGHT="134" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1128 1079 1127 1213 1328 1213 1329 1099"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_128" CONTENT="j" HPOS="1127" VPOS="1079" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="134" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1128 1079 1127 1213 1127 1213 1128 1079"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_129" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1165" VPOS="1087" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1166 1087 1165 1213 1165 1213 1166 1087"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_130" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1223" VPOS="1099" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1224 1099 1223 1213 1223 1213 1224 1099"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_131" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1280" VPOS="1099" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1281 1099 1280 1213 1280 1213 1281 1099"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_132" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1328" VPOS="1099" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1329 1099 1328 1213 1328 1213 1329 1099"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_39" HPOS="1376" VPOS="1077" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="136"/> <String ID="segment_40" CONTENT="embroidered" HPOS="1405" VPOS="1077" WIDTH="231" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9927"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1406 1077 1405 1213 1635 1213 1636 1081"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_134" CONTENT="b" HPOS="1405" VPOS="1077" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1406 1077 1405 1213 1405 1213 1406 1077"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_135" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1462" VPOS="1095" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1463 1095 1462 1213 1462 1213 1463 1095"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_136" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1500" VPOS="1092" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1501 1092 1500 1213 1500 1213 1501 1092"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_137" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1558" VPOS="1087" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1559 1087 1558 1213 1558 1213 1559 1087"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_138" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1606" VPOS="1083" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9563"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1607 1083 1606 1213 1606 1213 1607 1083"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_139" CONTENT="́" HPOS="1625" VPOS="1081" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1626 1082 1625 1213 1635 1213 1636 1081"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_41" HPOS="1654" VPOS="1080" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="133"/> <String ID="segment_42" CONTENT="and" HPOS="1682" VPOS="1080" WIDTH="59" HEIGHT="133" WC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1683 1095 1682 1213 1740 1213 1741 1080"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_141" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1682" VPOS="1095" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1683 1095 1682 1213 1682 1213 1683 1095"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_142" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1740" VPOS="1080" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="133" GC="0.9984"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1741 1080 1740 1213 1740 1213 1741 1080"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_43" HPOS="1769" VPOS="1080" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="133"/> <String ID="segment_44" CONTENT="le" HPOS="1807" VPOS="1085" WIDTH="30" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1808 1085 1807 1213 1836 1213 1837 1100"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_144" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1807" VPOS="1085" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1808 1085 1807 1213 1807 1213 1808 1085"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_145" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1836" VPOS="1100" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1837 1100 1836 1213 1836 1213 1837 1100"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_45" HPOS="1903" VPOS="1097" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="116"/> <String ID="segment_46" CONTENT="pumpkin" HPOS="1941" VPOS="1082" WIDTH="269" HEIGHT="131" WC="0.9954"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1942 1094 1941 1213 2209 1213 2210 1103"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_147" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1941" VPOS="1094" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1942 1094 1941 1213 1941 1213 1942 1094"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_148" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1999" VPOS="1089" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="124" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2000 1089 1999 1213 1999 1213 2000 1089"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_149" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2047" VPOS="1085" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2048 1085 2047 1213 2047 1213 2048 1085"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_150" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2075" VPOS="1082" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="131" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2076 1083 2075 1213 2085 1213 2086 1082"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_151" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2114" VPOS="1088" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9686"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2115 1088 2114 1213 2114 1213 2115 1088"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_152" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2152" VPOS="1098" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2153 1098 2152 1213 2152 1213 2153 1098"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_153" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2209" VPOS="1103" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2210 1103 2209 1213 2209 1213 2210 1103"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_47" HPOS="2257" VPOS="1099" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_48" CONTENT="vert." HPOS="2296" VPOS="1086" WIDTH="173" HEIGHT="127" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2297 1096 2296 1213 2468 1213 2469 1091"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_155" CONTENT="v" HPOS="2296" VPOS="1096" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2297 1096 2296 1213 2296 1213 2297 1096"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_156" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2344" VPOS="1093" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2345 1093 2344 1213 2344 1213 2345 1093"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_157" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2392" VPOS="1089" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2393 1089 2392 1213 2392 1213 2393 1089"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_158" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2439" VPOS="1086" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2440 1086 2439 1213 2439 1213 2440 1086"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_159" CONTENT="." HPOS="2468" VPOS="1091" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2469 1091 2468 1213 2468 1213 2469 1091"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="bb7bd92a-38dc-4909-a711-dee971101f20" HPOS="838" VPOS="1208" WIDTH="1925" HEIGHT="142" BASELINE="840 1298 2763 1312" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2757 1238 2692 1219 2689 1219 2438 1219 2435 1219 2432 1219 2386 1238 2383 1238 2380 1238 2339 1216 2337 1216 2334 1216 2146 1232 2116 1219 2113 1219 2110 1219 2039 1232 1559 1232 1324 1232 1324 1230 1302 1213 1302 1211 1299 1211 1296 1211 1294 1211 1097 1227 1042 1208 1040 1208 1037 1208 1034 1208 974 1227 955 1211 955 1208 952 1208 950 1208 870 1208 868 1208 865 1208 862 1208 840 1222 840 1298 838 1336 2757 1350 2763 1312 2763 1262 2757 1238"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_49" CONTENT="On" HPOS="884" VPOS="1208" WIDTH="72" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="885 1208 884 1336 955 1337 956 1212"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_160" CONTENT="O" HPOS="884" VPOS="1208" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="885 1208 884 1336 884 1336 885 1208"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_161" CONTENT="n" HPOS="955" VPOS="1212" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="956 1212 955 1337 955 1337 956 1212"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_50" HPOS="1017" VPOS="1211" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="126"/> <String ID="segment_51" CONTENT="les" HPOS="1052" VPOS="1212" WIDTH="80" HEIGHT="126" WC="0.9185"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1053 1212 1052 1338 1131 1338 1132 1224"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_163" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1052" VPOS="1212" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1053 1212 1052 1338 1052 1338 1053 1212"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_164" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1078" VPOS="1221" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1079 1221 1078 1338 1078 1338 1079 1221"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_165" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1131" VPOS="1224" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.7557"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1132 1224 1131 1338 1131 1338 1132 1224"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_52" HPOS="1193" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="120"/> <String ID="segment_53" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1220" VPOS="1211" WIDTH="176" HEIGHT="129" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1221 1217 1220 1339 1396 1340 1396 1232"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_167" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1220" VPOS="1217" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1221 1217 1220 1339 1220 1339 1221 1217"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_168" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1264" VPOS="1213" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1265 1213 1264 1339 1264 1339 1265 1213"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_169" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="1282" VPOS="1211" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1283 1212 1282 1339 1290 1339 1291 1211"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_170" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1317" VPOS="1225" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1318 1225 1317 1339 1317 1339 1318 1225"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_171" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1396" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1396 1232 1396 1340 1396 1340 1396 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_54" HPOS="1458" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="109"/> <String ID="segment_55" CONTENT="en" HPOS="1485" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="53" HEIGHT="109" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1485 1232 1485 1341 1538 1341 1538 1232"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_173" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1485" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1485 1232 1485 1341 1493 1341 1493 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_174" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1538" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1538 1232 1538 1341 1538 1341 1538 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_56" HPOS="1608" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="110"/> <String ID="segment_57" CONTENT="mars" HPOS="1644" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="168" HEIGHT="111" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1645 1232 1644 1342 1811 1343 1812 1232"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_176" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1644" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1645 1232 1644 1342 1644 1342 1645 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_177" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1723" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1724 1232 1723 1342 1723 1342 1724 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_178" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1776" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1777 1232 1776 1343 1776 1343 1777 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_179" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1811" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1812 1232 1811 1343 1811 1343 1812 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_58" HPOS="1873" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="112"/> <String ID="segment_59" CONTENT="on" HPOS="1900" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="115" HEIGHT="113" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1901 1232 1900 1344 2014 1345 2015 1232"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_181" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1900" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1901 1232 1900 1344 1900 1344 1901 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_182" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1953" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1954 1232 1953 1344 1953 1344 1954 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_183" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2014" VPOS="1232" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2015 1232 2014 1345 2014 1345 2015 1232"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_60" HPOS="2059" VPOS="1227" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="118"/> <String ID="segment_61" CONTENT="layer" HPOS="2094" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="257" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2095 1222 2094 1345 2350 1347 2351 1222"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_185" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2094" VPOS="1222" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2095 1222 2094 1345 2094 1345 2095 1222"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_186" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2138" VPOS="1229" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2139 1229 2138 1345 2138 1345 2139 1229"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_187" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2191" VPOS="1228" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2192 1228 2191 1346 2191 1346 2192 1228"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_188" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2253" VPOS="1223" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2254 1223 2253 1346 2253 1346 2254 1223"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_189" CONTENT="h" HPOS="2297" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2298 1219 2297 1347 2297 1347 2298 1219"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_190" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2350" VPOS="1222" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2351 1222 2350 1347 2350 1347 2351 1222"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_62" HPOS="2412" VPOS="1227" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="120"/> <String ID="segment_63" CONTENT="hot," HPOS="2438" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="318" HEIGHT="131" WC="0.9339"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2439 1219 2438 1348 2756 1350 2756 1238"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_192" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2438" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9958"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2439 1219 2438 1348 2438 1348 2439 1219"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_193" CONTENT="h" HPOS="2482" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9927"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2483 1219 2482 1348 2482 1348 2483 1219"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_194" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2535" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2536 1219 2535 1348 2535 1348 2536 1219"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_195" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2588" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.5497"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2589 1219 2588 1349 2588 1349 2589 1219"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_196" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2650" VPOS="1219" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2651 1219 2650 1349 2650 1349 2651 1219"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_197" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2703" VPOS="1222" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2704 1222 2703 1350 2703 1350 2704 1222"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_198" CONTENT="," HPOS="2756" VPOS="1238" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2756 1238 2756 1350 2756 1350 2756 1238"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="62df1a3a-badb-4fec-92e5-f8a9ac725c7d" HPOS="745" VPOS="1342" WIDTH="2026" HEIGHT="141" BASELINE="748 1434 2771 1448" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="748 1434 745 1470 2765 1483 2771 1448 2768 1372 1952 1347 1949 1347 1853 1363 1851 1363 1791 1347 1788 1347 1785 1347 1561 1358 1539 1344 1537 1344 1534 1344 1531 1344 1318 1361 1296 1361 1225 1361 1124 1358 1108 1342 1105 1342 1103 1342 1100 1342 748 1355 748 1434"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_64" CONTENT="en" HPOS="775" VPOS="1352" WIDTH="54" HEIGHT="119" WC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="776 1354 775 1470 828 1471 829 1352"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_199" CONTENT="e" HPOS="775" VPOS="1354" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9981"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="776 1354 775 1470 775 1470 776 1354"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_200" CONTENT="n" HPOS="828" VPOS="1352" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="829 1352 828 1471 828 1471 829 1352"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_65" HPOS="872" VPOS="1350" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="121"/> <String ID="segment_66" CONTENT="April" HPOS="898" VPOS="1343" WIDTH="178" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="899 1349 898 1471 1075 1472 1076 1343"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_202" CONTENT="a" HPOS="898" VPOS="1349" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="899 1349 898 1471 898 1471 899 1349"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_203" CONTENT="v" HPOS="952" VPOS="1347" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="124" GC="0.9974"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="953 1347 952 1471 952 1471 953 1347"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_204" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1005" VPOS="1345" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1006 1345 1005 1472 1005 1472 1006 1345"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_205" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1049" VPOS="1344" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1050 1344 1049 1472 1049 1472 1050 1344"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_206" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1075" VPOS="1343" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1076 1343 1075 1472 1075 1472 1076 1343"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_67" HPOS="1102" VPOS="1342" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="130"/> <String ID="segment_68" CONTENT="on" HPOS="1128" VPOS="1358" WIDTH="108" HEIGHT="115" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1129 1358 1128 1472 1235 1473 1236 1361"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_208" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1128" VPOS="1358" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1129 1358 1128 1472 1128 1472 1129 1358"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_209" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1182" VPOS="1360" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1183 1360 1182 1473 1182 1473 1183 1360"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_210" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1235" VPOS="1361" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1236 1361 1235 1473 1235 1473 1236 1361"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_69" HPOS="1279" VPOS="1361" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="112"/> <String ID="segment_70" CONTENT="layer" HPOS="1305" VPOS="1346" WIDTH="267" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1306 1361 1305 1474 1571 1475 1572 1357"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_212" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1305" VPOS="1361" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1306 1361 1305 1474 1305 1474 1306 1361"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_213" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1350" VPOS="1358" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1351 1358 1350 1474 1350 1474 1351 1358"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_214" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1412" VPOS="1353" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1413 1353 1412 1474 1412 1474 1413 1353"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_215" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1465" VPOS="1349" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9959"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1466 1349 1465 1475 1465 1475 1466 1349"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_216" CONTENT="h" HPOS="1509" VPOS="1346" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1510 1346 1509 1475 1509 1475 1510 1346"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_217" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1571" VPOS="1357" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1572 1357 1571 1475 1571 1475 1572 1357"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_71" HPOS="1606" VPOS="1355" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="121"/> <String ID="segment_72" CONTENT="lukewarm," HPOS="1633" VPOS="1347" WIDTH="222" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9777"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1634 1354 1633 1476 1854 1477 1855 1363"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_219" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1633" VPOS="1354" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1634 1354 1633 1476 1633 1476 1634 1354"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_220" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1668" VPOS="1353" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.8441"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1669 1353 1668 1476 1668 1476 1669 1353"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_221" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1695" VPOS="1351" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1696 1351 1695 1476 1695 1476 1696 1351"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_222" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="1712" VPOS="1351" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1713 1351 1712 1476 1712 1476 1713 1351"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_223" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1739" VPOS="1349" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1740 1349 1739 1476 1739 1476 1740 1349"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_224" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1792" VPOS="1347" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1793 1347 1792 1477 1792 1477 1793 1347"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_225" CONTENT="," HPOS="1854" VPOS="1363" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1855 1363 1854 1477 1854 1477 1855 1363"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_73" HPOS="1880" VPOS="1358" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="119"/> <String ID="segment_74" CONTENT="and" HPOS="1898" VPOS="1347" WIDTH="54" HEIGHT="131" WC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1899 1355 1898 1477 1951 1478 1952 1347"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_227" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1898" VPOS="1355" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9984"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1899 1355 1898 1477 1898 1477 1899 1355"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_228" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1951" VPOS="1347" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1952 1347 1951 1478 1951 1478 1952 1347"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_75" HPOS="1978" VPOS="1348" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130"/> <String ID="segment_76" CONTENT="on" HPOS="1995" VPOS="1348" WIDTH="55" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1996 1348 1995 1478 2049 1478 2050 1350"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_230" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1995" VPOS="1348" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1996 1348 1995 1478 1995 1478 1996 1348"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_231" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2049" VPOS="1350" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2050 1350 2049 1478 2049 1478 2050 1350"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_77" HPOS="2102" VPOS="1352" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127"/> <String ID="segment_78" CONTENT="met" HPOS="2128" VPOS="1352" WIDTH="134" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2129 1352 2128 1479 2261 1480 2262 1356"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_233" CONTENT="m" HPOS="2128" VPOS="1352" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2129 1352 2128 1479 2128 1479 2129 1352"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_234" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2208" VPOS="1355" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2209 1355 2208 1479 2208 1479 2209 1355"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_235" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2261" VPOS="1356" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="124" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2262 1356 2261 1480 2261 1480 2262 1356"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_79" HPOS="2287" VPOS="1357" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="123"/> <String ID="segment_80" CONTENT="les" HPOS="2323" VPOS="1358" WIDTH="72" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.9978"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2324 1358 2323 1480 2394 1481 2395 1361"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_237" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2323" VPOS="1358" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2324 1358 2323 1480 2323 1480 2324 1358"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_238" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2349" VPOS="1359" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2350 1359 2349 1480 2349 1480 2350 1359"/> </Shape>

</Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_239" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2394" VPOS="1361" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9957"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2395 1361 2394 1481 2394 1481 2395 1361"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_81" HPOS="2438" VPOS="1362" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="119"/> <String ID="segment_82" CONTENT="plants" HPOS="2473" VPOS="1363" WIDTH="266" HEIGHT="120" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2474 1363 2473 1481 2739 1483 2739 1371"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_241" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2473" VPOS="1363" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2474 1363 2473 1481 2473 1481 2474 1363"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_242" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2526" VPOS="1365" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2527 1365 2526 1481 2526 1481 2527 1365"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_243" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2553" VPOS="1365" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2554 1365 2553 1482 2553 1482 2554 1365"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_244" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2606" VPOS="1367" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2607 1367 2606 2606 1482 2606 1482 2607 1367"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_245" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2659" VPOS="1369" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2659 1369 2659 1482 2659 1482 2659 1369"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_246" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2694" VPOS="1370" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2694 1370 2694 1483 2694 1483 2694 1370"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_247" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2739" VPOS="1371" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2739 1371 2739 1483 2739 1483 2739 1371"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="34cf0082-4b33-487e-8ff4-609e8244f790" HPOS="742" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="2023" HEIGHT="131" BASELINE="745 1571 2765 1579" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="745 1571 742 1606 2760 1614 2765 1579 2763 1511 2604 1511 2604 1508 2580 1489 2577 1489 2574 1489 2571 1489 2451 1508 2449 1508 2427 1492 2427 1489 2424 1489 2421 1489 2222 1489 2219 1489 2217 1489 2214 1489 2192 1508 2189 1511 2094 1511 2085 1508 2014 1486 2012 1486 2009 1486 2006 1486 1963 1505 1864 1486 1862 1486 1859 1486 1856 1486 1832 1505 1832 1508 1605 1508 1602 1505 1583 1489 1580 1489 1578 1489 1417 1483 1414 1483 1411 1483 1343 1505 1250 1505 1201 1505 1198 1503 1163 1483 1160 1483 1157 1483 1154 1483 1152 1483 1133 1497 1116 1483 1113 1483 1111 1483 906 1483 903 1483 901 1483 898 1483 876 1500 783 1486 780 1486 778 1486 745 1486 745 1500 745 1571"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_83" CONTENT="en" HPOS="770" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="51" HEIGHT="117" WC="0.9977"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="770 1489 770 1606 821 1606 821 1492"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_248" CONTENT="e" HPOS="770" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9954"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="770 1489 770 1606 770 1606 770 1489"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_249" CONTENT="n" HPOS="821" VPOS="1492" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="821 1492 821 1606 821 1606 821 1492"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_84" HPOS="880" VPOS="1490" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_85" CONTENT="place" HPOS="905" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="177" HEIGHT="124" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="905 1483 905 1607 1082 1607 1082 1483"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_251" CONTENT="p" HPOS="905" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="905 1483 905 1607 905 1607 905 1483"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_252" CONTENT="l" HPOS="956" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="956 1483 956 1607 956 1607 956 1483"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_253" CONTENT="a" HPOS="989" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="989 1483 989 1607 989 1607 989 1483"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_254" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1040" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1040 1483 1040 1607 1040 1607 1040 1483"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_255" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1082" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1082 1483 1082 1607 1082 1607 1082 1483"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_86" HPOS="1133" VPOS="1497" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111"/> <String ID="segment_87" CONTENT="en" HPOS="1158" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="42" HEIGHT="125" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1158 1483 1158 1608 1200 1608 1200 1505"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_257" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1158" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1158 1483 1158 1608 1158 1608 1158 1608 1158 1483"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_258" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1200" VPOS="1505" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1200 1505 1200 1608 1200 1608 1200 1608 1200 1505"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_88" HPOS="1259" VPOS="1505" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="103"/> <String ID="segment_89" CONTENT="mai." HPOS="1293" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="160" HEIGHT="126" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1293 1505 1293 1608 1453 1609 1453 1484"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_260" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1293" VPOS="1505" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1293 1505 1293 1608 1293 1608 1293 1505"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_261" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1369" VPOS="1496" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1369 1496 1369 1608 1369 1608 1369 1496"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_262" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1419" VPOS="1483" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1419 1483 1419 1609 1419 1609 1419 1609 1419 1483"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_263" CONTENT="." HPOS="1453" VPOS="1484" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1453 1484 1453 1609 1453 1609 1453 1484"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_90" HPOS="1487" VPOS="1486" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="123"/> <String ID="segment_91" CONTENT="Dans" HPOS="1520" VPOS="1487" WIDTH="177" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1520 1487 1520 1609 1697 1610 1697 1508"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_265" CONTENT="D" HPOS="1520" VPOS="1487" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1520 1487 1520 1609 1520 1609 1520 1487"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_266" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1588" VPOS="1493" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9961"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1588 1493 1588 1609 1588 1609 1588 1493"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_267" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1638" VPOS="1508" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1638 1508 1638 1638 1610 1638 1610 1638 1508"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_268" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1697" VPOS="1508" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1697 1508 1697 1610 1697 1610 1697 1610 1697 1508"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_92" HPOS="1740" VPOS="1508" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="102"/> <String ID="segment_93" CONTENT="ce" HPOS="1765" VPOS="1508" WIDTH="51" HEIGHT="102" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1765 1508 1765 1610 1816 1610 1816 1508"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_270" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1765" VPOS="1508" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1765 1508 1765 1610 1765 1610 1765 1508"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_271" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1816" VPOS="1508" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1816 1508 1816 1610 1816 1610 1816 1508"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_94" HPOS="1866" VPOS="1486" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="124"/> <String ID="segment_95" CONTENT="but," HPOS="1900" VPOS="1488" WIDTH="143" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.9639"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1900 1493 1900 1611 2043 1611 2043 1495"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_273" CONTENT="b" HPOS="1900" VPOS="1493" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1900 1493 1900 1611 1900 1611 1900 1611 1900 1493"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_274" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1950" VPOS="1503" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1950 1503 1950 1611 1950 1611 1950 1503"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_275" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2001" VPOS="1488" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.8558"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2001 1488 2001 1611 2001 1611 2001 1611 2001 1488"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_276" CONTENT="," HPOS="2043" VPOS="1495" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2043 1495 2043 1611 2043 1611 2043 1495"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_96" HPOS="2068" VPOS="1503" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108"/> <String ID="segment_97" CONTENT="on" HPOS="2094" VPOS="1511" WIDTH="50" HEIGHT="101" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2094 1511 2094 1611 2144 1612 2144 1511"/> </Shape> <Shape> <Glyph ID="char_278" CONTENT="on" HPOS="2094" VPOS="1511" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="100" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2094 1511 2094 1611 2094 1611 2094 1511"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_279" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2144" VPOS="1511" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="101" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2144 1511 2144 1612 2144 1612 2144 1511"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_98" HPOS="2203" VPOS="1498" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_99" CONTENT="fact" HPOS="2229" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="101" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2229 1489 2229 1612 2330 1612 2330 1489"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_281" CONTENT="f" HPOS="2229" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2229 1489 2229 1612 2229 1612 2229 1612 2229 1489"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_282" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2254" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2254 1489 2254 1612 2254 1612 2254 1489"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_283" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2304" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2304 1489 2304 1612 2304 1612 2304 1489"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_284" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2330" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2330 1489 2330 1612 2330 1612 2330 1489"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_100" HPOS="2363" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="123"/> <String ID="segment_101" CONTENT="des" HPOS="2389" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="101" HEIGHT="124" WC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2389 1489 1489 2389 1613 2490 1613 2490 1502"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_286" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2389" VPOS="1489" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="0.9988"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2389 1489 2389 1613 2389 1613 2389 1489"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_287" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2439" VPOS="1501" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2439 1501 2439 1613 2439 1613 2439 1501"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_288" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2490" VPOS="1502" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2490 1502 2490 1613 2490 1613 2490 1502"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_102" HPOS="2524" VPOS="1495" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="118"/> <String ID="segment_103" CONTENT="holes" HPOS="2557" VPOS="1491" WIDTH="177" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2557 1491 2557 1613 2734 1614 2734 1511"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_290" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2557" VPOS="1491" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2557 1491 2557 1613 2557 1613 2557 1613 2557 1491"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_291" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2591" VPOS="1498" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2591 1498 2591 1613 2591 1613 2591 1498"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_292" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2625" VPOS="1511" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2625 1511 2625 1613 2625 1613 2625 1511"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_293" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2675" VPOS="1511" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2675 1511 2675 1614 2675 1614 2675 1511"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_294" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2734" VPOS="1511" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2734 1511 2734 1614 2734 1614 2734 1511"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="b5027777e7-c564-42da-8e3a-aef9b4228989b0" HPOS="739" VPOS="1612" WIDTH="2026" HEIGHT="136" BASELINE="742 1707 2765 1718" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="742 1707 739 1745 2760 1748 2765 1718 2765 1639 2765 1639 2738 1620 2735 1620 2733 1620 2577 1620 2574 1620 2571 1620 2569 1620 2569 1623 2547 1642 2443 1642 2399 1642 2399 1639 2375 1620 2372 1620 2369 1620 2367 1620 2148 1636 2126 1620 2126 1617 2124 1617 2121 1617 2118 1617 1941 1636 1916 1617 1913 1617 1911 1617 1834 1617 1832 1617 1829 1617 1785 1636 1782 1636 1739 1614 1736 1614 1733 1614 1559 1633 1509 1614 1507 1614 1356 1614 1354 1614 1351 1614 1348 1614 1318 1633 1316 1633 1236 1612 1234 1612 1231 1612 1228 1612 1165 1631 1078 1612 1075 1612 1073 1612 1070 1612 1045 1631 993 1614 991 1614 988 1614 985 1614 928 1631 922 1631 742 1631 742 1707"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_104" CONTENT="squares" HPOS="770" VPOS="1616" WIDTH="229" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="770 1631 770 1745 999 1745 999 999 1616"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_295" CONTENT="c" HPOS="770" VPOS="1631" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" WC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="770 1631 770 1745 770 1745 770 1631"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_296" CONTENT="a" HPOS="815" VPOS="1631" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="815 1631 815 1745 815 1745 815 1631"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_297" CONTENT="r" HPOS="870" VPOS="1631" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="870 1631 870 1745 870 1745 870 1745 870 1631"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_298" CONTENT="r" HPOS="907" VPOS="1631" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="907 1631 907 1745 907 1745 907 1631"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_299" CONTENT="e" HPOS="953" VPOS="1623" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="953 1623 953 1745 953 1745 953 1623"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_300" CONTENT="́" HPOS="962" VPOS="1618" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="962 1621 962 1745 971 1745 971 1618"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_301" CONTENT="s" HPOS="999" VPOS="1616" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="999 1616 999 1745 999 1745 999 1616"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_105" HPOS="1035" VPOS="1628" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_106" CONTENT="de" HPOS="1063" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="55" HEIGHT="129" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1063 1617 1063 1745 1118 1746 1118 1621"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_303" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1063" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1063 1617 1063 1745 1063 1745 1063 1617"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_304" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1118" VPOS="1621" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1118 1621 1118 1746 1118 1746 1118 1621"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_107" HPOS="1173" VPOS="1626" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="120"/> <String ID="segment_108" CONTENT="60" HPOS="1210" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="45" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9132"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1210 1617 1210 1746 1255 1746 1255 1617"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_306" CONTENT="6" HPOS="1210" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.8264"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1210 1617 1210 1746 1210 1746 1210 1617"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_307" CONTENT="0" HPOS="1255" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1255 1617 1255 1746 1255 1746 1255 1617"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_109" HPOS="1329" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="126"/> <String ID="segment_110" CONTENT="à" HPOS="1356" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="20" HEIGHT="132" WC="0.9984"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1357 1614 1356 1746 1375 1746 1376 1614"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_309" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1356" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1357 1614 1356 1746 1356 1746 1357 1614"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_310" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="1375" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132" GC="0.9969"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1376 1614 1375 1746 1375 1746 1376 1614"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_111" HPOS="1402" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132"/> <String ID="segment_112" CONTENT="70centimeters" HPOS="1439" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="568" HEIGHT="133" WC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1440 1614 1439 1746 2007 1747 2007 2007 1629"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_312" CONTENT="7" HPOS="1439" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1440 1614 1439 1746 1439 1746 1440 1614"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_313" CONTENT="0" HPOS="1475" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132" GC="0.9982"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1476 1614 1475 1746 1475 1746 1476 1614"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_314" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1549" VPOS="1629" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1549 1629 1549 1746 1549 1746 1549 1629"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_315" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1595" VPOS="1629" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1595 1629 1595 1746 1595 1746 1595 1629"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_316" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1640" VPOS="1624" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1640 1624 1640 1746 1640 1746 1640 1624"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_317" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1695" VPOS="1618" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1695 1618 1695 1746 1695 1746 1695 1618"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_318" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1732" VPOS="1614" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1733 1614 1732 1732 1746 1732 1746 1733 1614"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_319" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1760" VPOS="1625" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1760 1625 1760 1747 1760 1747 1760 1625"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_320" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1842" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1843 1617 1842 1747 1842 1747 1843 1617"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_321" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="1860" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1861 1617 1860 1747 1860 1747 1861 1617"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_322" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1888" VPOS="1617" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1889 1617 1888 1747 1888 1747 1889 1617"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_323" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1925" VPOS="1624" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9967"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1925 1624 1925 1747 1925 1747 1925 1925 1624"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_324" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1961" VPOS="1634" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1961 1634 1961 1747 1961 1747 1961 1634"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_325" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2007" VPOS="1629" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2007 1629 2007 1747 2007 1747 2007 1629"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_113" HPOS="2053" VPOS="1623" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="124"/> <String ID="segment_114" CONTENT="de" HPOS="2080" VPOS="1621" WIDTH="55" HEIGHT="126" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2080 1621 2080 1747 2135 1747 2135 1627"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_327" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2080" VPOS="1621" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2080 1621 2080 1747 2080 1747 2080 1747 2080 1621"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_328" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2135" VPOS="1627" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2135 1627 2135 1747 2135 1747 2135 1627"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_115" HPOS="2181" VPOS="1633" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_116" CONTENT="side" HPOS="2209" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="156" HEIGHT="127" WC="0.9796"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2209 1632 2209 1747 2365 1747 2365 1620"/> </Shape> <Shape> <Glyph ID="char_330" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2209" VPOS="1632" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2209 1632 2209 1747 2209 1747 2209 1632"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_331" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2264" VPOS="1627" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9528"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2264 1627 2264 1747 2264 1747 2264 1664 1627"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_332" CONTENT="̂" HPOS="2273" VPOS="1626" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2273 1627 2273 1747 2282 1747 2282 1626"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_333" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2310" VPOS="1624" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2310 1624 2310 1747 2310 1747 2310 1624"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_334" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2346" VPOS="1621" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9317"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2346 1621 2346 1747 2346 1747 2346 1747 2346 1621"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_335" CONTENT="́" HPOS="2355" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9977"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2355 1621 2355 1747 2365 1747 2365 1620"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_117" HPOS="2392" VPOS="1634" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="113"/> <String ID="segment_118" CONTENT="sur" HPOS="2420" VPOS="1642" WIDTH="110" HEIGHT="106" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2420 1642 2420 1747 2530 1748 2530 1642"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_337" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2420" VPOS="1642" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2420 1642 2420 1747 2420 1747 2420 1642"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_338" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2465" VPOS="1642" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2465 1642 2465 1748 2465 1748 2465 1748 2465 1642"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_339" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2530" VPOS="1642" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2530 1642 2530 1748 2530 1748 2530 1642"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_119" HPOS="2566" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_120" CONTENT="25" HPOS="2594" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="56" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2595 1620 2594 1748 2649 1748 2650 1620"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_341" CONTENT="2" HPOS="2594" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2595 1620 2594 1748 2594 1748 2595 1620"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_342" CONTENT="5" HPOS="2649" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2650 1620 2649 1748 2649 1748 2650 1620"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_121" HPOS="2704" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_122" CONTENT="à" HPOS="2731" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="19" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.572"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2732 1620 2731 1748 2750 1748 2750 1629"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_344" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2731" VPOS="1620" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.5456"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2732 1620 2731 1748 2731 1748 2732 1620"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_345" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="2750" VPOS="1629" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="0.5985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2750 1629 2750 1748 2750 1748 2750 1629"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="6b3e394c-0b43-4bd6-886e-dd1f4b6f6f4dbd" HPOS="742" VPOS="1745" WIDTH="2026" HEIGHT="148" BASELINE="745 1841 2768 1857" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="745 1841 742 1863 775 1882 778 1882 780 1882 909 1868 2763 1893 2768 1857 2768 1775 2664 1759 2662 1759 2659 1759 2656 1759 2637 1773 2612 1789 2563 1789 2531 1773 2506 1762 2503 1762 2500 1762 2375 1767 2372 1767 2369 1767 2364 1770 2342 1786 2135 1786 2110 1770 2110 1767 2107 1767 2105 1767 2102 1767 2091 1770 2036 1781 1998 1767 1974 1759 1971 1759 1968 1759 1965 1759 1943 1767 1919 1775 1892 1767 1848 1753 1845 1753 1842 1753 1731 1764 1619 1778 1572 1764 1526 1751 1523 1751 1520 1751 1518 1751 1490 1764 1463 1775 1378 1762 1280 1748 1223 1748 1220 1748 1217 1748 1214 1748 1198 1762 1193 1767 1182 1762 1152 1748 1149 1748 1146 1748 1032 1759 914 1773 884 1759 854 1745 851 1745 849 1745 849 1745 745 1756 745 1841"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_123" CONTENT="30" HPOS="773" VPOS="1748" WIDTH="47" HEIGHT="133" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="774 1753 773 1881 819 1878 820 1748"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_346" CONTENT="3" HPOS="773" VPOS="1753" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="774 1753 773 1881 773 1881 773 1881 774 1753"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_347" CONTENT="0" HPOS="819" VPOS="1748" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="820 1748 819 819 1878 819 1878 820 1748"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_124" HPOS="912" VPOS="1772" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="96"/> <String ID="segment_125" CONTENT="centimeters" HPOS="950" VPOS="1748" WIDTH="465" HEIGHT="127" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="951 1769 950 1869 1414 1875 1415 1768"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_349" CONTENT="c" HPOS="950" VPOS="1769" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="100" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="951 1769 950 1869 950 1869 950 1869 951 1769"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_350" CONTENT="e" HPOS="996" VPOS="1763" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="997 1763 996 1869 996 1869 996 1869 997 1763"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_351" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1042" VPOS="1758" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1043 1758 1042 1870 1042 1870 1043 1758"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_352" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1098" VPOS="1753" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1099 1753 1098 1871 1098 1871 1098 1871 1099 1753"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_353" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1135" VPOS="1749" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1136 1749 1135 1871 1135 1871 1136 1749"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_354" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1163" VPOS="1753" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1164 1753 1163 1871 1163 1871 1163 1871 1164 1753"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_355" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1238" VPOS="1748" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1239 1748 1238 1872 1247 1873 1248 1748"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_356" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="1265" VPOS="1748" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1266 1748 1265 1873 1265 1873 1265 1873 1266 1748"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_357" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1293" VPOS="1750" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1294 1750 1293 1873 1293 1873 1293 1873 1294 1750"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_358" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1321" VPOS="1754" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1322 1754 1321 1874 1321 1874 1322 1754"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_359" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1368" VPOS="1761" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1369 1761 1368 1874 1368 1874 1368 1874 1369 1761"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_360" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1414" VPOS="1768" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="107" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1415 1768 1414 1875 1414 1875 1415 1768"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_126" HPOS="1470" VPOS="1768" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="108"/> <String ID="segment_127" CONTENT="de" HPOS="1498" VPOS="1759" WIDTH="57" HEIGHT="118" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1499 1760 1498 1876 1554 1877 1555 1759"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_362" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1498" VPOS="1760" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1499 1760 1498 1876 1498 1898 1876 1499 1760"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_363" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1554" VPOS="1759" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1555 1759 1554 1877 1554 1877 1555 1759"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_128" HPOS="1628" VPOS="1776" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="102"/> <String ID="segment_129" CONTENT="depth;" HPOS="1665" VPOS="1753" WIDTH="493" HEIGHT="132" WC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1666 1772 1665 1878 2158 1885 2158 1786"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_365" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1665" VPOS="1772" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="106" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1666 1772 1665 1878 1665 1878 1665 1878 1666 1772"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_366" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1721" VPOS="1765" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1722 1765 1721 1879 1721 1879 1722 1765"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_367" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1758" VPOS="1761" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.9965"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1759 1761 1758 1879 1758 1879 1759 1761"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_368" CONTENT="f" HPOS="1814" VPOS="1756" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1815 1756 1814 1814 1880 1814 1880 1815 1756"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_369" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1842" VPOS="1753" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1843 1753 1842 1842 1881 1842 1881 1843 1753"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_370" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1888" VPOS="1766" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1889 1766 1888 1888 1881 1888 1881 1888 1881 1889 1766"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_371" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1944" VPOS="1766" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1945 1766 1944 1944 1882 1944 1882 1945 1766"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_372" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2000" VPOS="1768" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2001 1768 2000 1883 2000 1883 2000 1883 2001 1768"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_373" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2046" VPOS="1779" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="104" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2047 1779 2046 1883 2046 1883 2047 1779"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_374" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2102" VPOS="1767" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2103 1767 2102 1884 2102 1884 2103 1767"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_375" CONTENT=";" HPOS="2158" VPOS="1786" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="99" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2158 1786 2158 1885 2158 1885 2158 1786"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_130" HPOS="2232" VPOS="1786" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="100"/> <String ID="segment_131" CONTENT="on" HPOS="2269" VPOS="1786" WIDTH="56" HEIGHT="101" WC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2269 1786 2269 1886 2325 1887 2325 1786"/> </Shape> <Shape> <Glyph ID="char_377" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2269" VPOS="1786" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="100" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2269 1786 2269 1886 2269 1886 2269 1886 2269 1786"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_378" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2325" VPOS="1786" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="101" GC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2325 1786 2325 1887 2325 1887 2325 1887 2325 1786"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_132" HPOS="2418" VPOS="1765" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="123"/> <String ID="segment_133" CONTENT="filled" HPOS="2464" VPOS="1762" WIDTH="280" HEIGHT="131" WC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2465 1763 2464 1889 2743 1893 2744 1771"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_380" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2464" VPOS="1763" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9941"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2465 1763 2464 1889 2464 1889 2465 1763"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_381" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2501" VPOS="1762" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2502 1762 2501 1889 2501 1889 2502 1762"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_382" CONTENT="m" HPOS="2548" VPOS="1782" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2549 1782 2548 1890 2548 1890 2548 1890 2549 1782"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_383" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2632" VPOS="1776" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2633 1776 2632 1891 2632 1891 2633 1776"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_384" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2687" VPOS="1763" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2688 1763 2687 1892 2687 1892 2688 1763"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_385" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2715" VPOS="1767" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2716 1767 2715 1892 2715 1892 2716 1767"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_386" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2743" VPOS="1771" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2744 1771 2743 1893 2743 1893 2743 1893 2744 1771"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="e5bcc7ac-4251-4fb6-a553-1eaeb3a629c5" HPOS="739" VPOS="1893" WIDTH="2018" HEIGHT="139" BASELINE="739 1980 2757 1991" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> < <Polygon POINTS="739 1980 739 2026 1206 2015 1234 2029 1242 2032 1232 1245 2032 1232 1247 2032 2054 2029 2757 1991 2754 1920 2550 1901 2547 1901 2544 1901 2506 1917 2500 1923 2334 1923 2326 1917 2296 1901 2293 1901 2176 1898 2173 1898 2170 1898 2167 1898 2140 1917 2135 1920 1965 1920 1960 1914 1919 1898 1916 1898 1913 1898 1911 1898 1908 1898 1881 1914 1875 1920 1793 1920 1788 1914 1750 1895 1747 1895 1744 1895 1741 1895 1684 1914 1681 1914 1673 1914 1534 1895 1531 1895 1528 1895 1526 1895 1504 1914 1501 1917 1422 1917 1414 1914 1362 1895 1359 1895 1356 1895 1354 1895 1321 1912 1316 1914 1310 1912 1245 1893 1242 1893 1239 1893 1236 1893 1236 1893 1187 1912 1912 1111 1895 1108 1895 1105 1895 1073 1912 1034 1893 1032 1893 1029 1893 739 1909 739 1980"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_134" CONTENT="ces" HPOS="767" VPOS="1902" WIDTH="95" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="767 1907 767 2025 862 2023 862 1902"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_387" CONTENT="c" HPOS="767" VPOS="1907" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="767 1907 767 2025 767 2025 767 1907"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_388" CONTENT="e" HPOS="814" VPOS="1905" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="814 1905 814 2024 814 2024 814 1905"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_389" CONTENT="s" HPOS="862" VPOS="1902" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="862 1902 862 2023 862 2023 862 1902"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_135" HPOS="918" VPOS="1899" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="123"/> <String ID="segment_136" CONTENT="holes" HPOS="947" VPOS="1893" WIDTH="179" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="947 1897 947 2021 1126 2017 1126 1898"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_391" CONTENT="t" HPOS="947" VPOS="1897" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="947 1897 947 2021 947 2021 947 1897"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_392" CONTENT="r" HPOS="984" VPOS="1895" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="984 1895 984 2020 984 2020 984 2020 984 1895"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_393" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1022" VPOS="1893" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1022 1893 1022 2019 1022 2019 1022 2019 1022 1893"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_394" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1079" VPOS="1909" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1079 1909 1079 2018 1079 2018 1079 1079 1909"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_395" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1126" VPOS="1898" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1126 1898 1126 2017 1126 2017 1126 1898"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_137" HPOS="1201" VPOS="1903" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_138" CONTENT="de" HPOS="1229" VPOS="1896" WIDTH="57" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1229 1896 1229 2026 1286 2032 1286 1905"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_397" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1229" VPOS="1896" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1229 1896 1229 2026 1229 2026 1229 1896"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_398" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1286" VPOS="1905" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1286 1905 1286 2032 1286 2032 1286 1905"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_139" HPOS="1333" VPOS="1900" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="132"/> <String ID="segment_140" CONTENT="manure" HPOS="1371" VPOS="1896" WIDTH="245" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9574"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1371 1898 1371 2032 1616 2031 1616 1906"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_400" CONTENT="f" HPOS="1371" VPOS="1898" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="134" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1371 1898 1371 2032 1371 2032 1371 2032 1371 1898"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_401" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1399" VPOS="1909" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1399 1909 1399 2032 1399 2032 1399 1909"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_402" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1456" VPOS="1917" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.7447"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1456 1917 1456 2032 1456 2032 1456 1917"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_403" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1541" VPOS="1896" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1541 1896 1541 2031 1541 1896"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_404" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1569" VPOS="1900" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1569 1900 1569 2031 1569 2031 1569 2031 1569 1900"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_405" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1616" VPOS="1906" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1616 1906 1616 2031 1616 2031 1616 1906"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_141" HPOS="1673" VPOS="1914" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_142" CONTENT="hot" HPOS="1701" VPOS="1895" WIDTH="207" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1701 1908 1701 2031 1908 2031 1908 1898"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_407" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1701" VPOS="1908" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1701 1908 1701 2031 1701 2031 1701 1908"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_408" CONTENT="h" HPOS="1748" VPOS="1895" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1748 1895 1748 2031 1748 2031 1748 1895"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_409" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1805" VPOS="1920" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1805 1920 1805 2031 1805 2031 1805 1920"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_410" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1852" VPOS="1920" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1852 1920 1852 2031 1852 2031 1852 1920"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_411" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1908" VPOS="1898" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1908 1898 1908 2031 1908 2031 1908 1898"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_143" HPOS="1974" VPOS="1920" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="111"/> <String ID="segment_144" CONTENT="que" HPOS="2003" VPOS="1920" WIDTH="113" HEIGHT="110" WC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2003 1920 2003 2030 2030 2116 2030 2116 1920"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_413" CONTENT="q" HPOS="2003" VPOS="1920" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2003 1920 2003 2003 2030 2003 2030 2003 2030 2003 1920"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_414" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2059" VPOS="1920" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2059 1920 2059 2030 2059 2030 2059 2030 2059 1920"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_415" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2116" VPOS="1920" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9989"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2116 1920 2116 2030 2116 2030 2116 2030 2116 1920"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_145" HPOS="2163" VPOS="1898" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="132"/> <String ID="segment_146" CONTENT="l'on" HPOS="2201" VPOS="1899" WIDTH="103" HEIGHT="131" WC="0.9873"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2201 1899 2201 2030 2304 2030 2304 1905"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_417" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2201" VPOS="1899" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="0.9818"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2201 1899 2201 2030 2201 2030 2201 1899"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_418" CONTENT="'" HPOS="2219" VPOS="1899" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="0.9677"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2219 1899 2219 2030 2219 2030 2219 1899 1899"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_419" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2248" VPOS="1900" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2248 1900 2248 2030 2248 2030 2248 2030 2248 1900"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_420" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2304" VPOS="1905" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2304 1905 2304 2030 2304 2030 2304 1905"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_147" HPOS="2361" VPOS="1923" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107"/> <String ID="segment_148" CONTENT="mouille;" HPOS="2389" VPOS="1904" WIDTH="359" HEIGHT="126" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2389 1923 2389 2030 2748 2029 2748 1919"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_422" CONTENT="m" HPOS="2389" VPOS="1923" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" GC="0.9948"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2389 1923 2389 2030 2389 2030 2389 1923"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_423" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2465" VPOS="1923" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2465 1923 2465 2030 2465 2030 2465 1923"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_424" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2521" VPOS="1911" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2521 1911 2521 2029 2521 2029 2521 1911"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_425" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2578" VPOS="1904" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2578 1904 2578 2029 2578 2029 2578 2029 2578 1904"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_426" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2616" VPOS="1907" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2616 1907 2616 2029 2616 2029 2616 2029 2616 1907"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_427" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2644" VPOS="1910" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2644 1910 2644 2029 2644 2029 2644 2029 2644 1910"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_428" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2663" VPOS="1912" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2663 1912 2663 2029 2663 2029 2663 1912"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_429" CONTENT=";" HPOS="2748" VPOS="1919" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2748 1919 2748 2029 2748 2029 2748 2029 2748 1919"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="b4f30b91-3204-4889-b1fd-0b5a1128afb9" HPOS="734" VPOS="2026" WIDTH="2034" HEIGHT="131" BASELINE="737 2114 2768 2127" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="737 2114 734 2144 2763 2157 2768 2127 2763 2056 2632 2056 2626 2054 2604 2037 2602 2037 2599 2037 2596 2037 2460 2051 2359 2034 2356 2034 2165 2051 2135 2054 2110 2051 1984 2034 1982 2034 1979 2034 1922 2048 1870 2032 1867 2032 1864 2032 1763 2045 1684 2032 1681 2032 1679 2032 1676 2032 1649 2048 1643 2051 1329 2051 1326 2048 1305 2029 1302 2029 1299 2029 1296 2029 1294 2029 1234 2045 1228 2048 1228 2045 1206 2029 1204 2029 1201 2029 1130 2026 1127 2026 1124 2026 1070 2045 1067 2067 2045 1062 2045 941 2032 939 2032 932 936 2032 933 2032 917 2045 914 2045 737 2045 737 2114"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_149" CONTENT="on" HPOS="769" VPOS="2045" WIDTH="57" HEIGHT="100" WC="0.9967"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="769 2045 769 2144 826 2145 826 2045"/> </Shape> <Shape> <Glyph ID="char_430" CONTENT="o" HPOS="769" VPOS="2045" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="99" GC="0.9934"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="769 2045 769 2144 769 2144 769 2045"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_431" CONTENT="n" HPOS="826" VPOS="2045" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="100" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="826 2045 826 2145 826 2145 826 2145 826 2045"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_150" HPOS="875" VPOS="2045" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="100"/> <String ID="segment_151" CONTENT="remet" HPOS="907" VPOS="2026" WIDTH="220" HEIGHT="121" WC="0.9845"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="907 2045 907 2145 1126 2147 1127 2026"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_433" CONTENT="r" HPOS="907" VPOS="2045" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="100" GC="0.9866"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="907 2045 907 2145 907 2145 907 2045"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_434" CONTENT="e" HPOS="948" VPOS="2033" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="949 2033 948 2145 948 2145 949 2033"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_435" CONTENT="m" HPOS="996" VPOS="2038" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="996 2038 996 2146 996 2146 996 2038"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_436" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1077" VPOS="2042" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="104" GC="0.9381"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1077 2042 1077 2146 1077 2146 1077 2042"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_437" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1126" VPOS="2026" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1127 2026 1126 2147 1126 2147 1127 2026"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_152" HPOS="1150" VPOS="2027" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="120"/> <String ID="segment_153" CONTENT="la" HPOS="1183" VPOS="2028" WIDTH="25" HEIGHT="119" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1184 2028 1183 2147 1207 2147 1208 2030"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_439" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1183" VPOS="2028" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="119" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1184 2028 1183 2147 1183 2147 1183 2147 1184 2028"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_440" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1207" VPOS="2030" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1208 2030 1207 2147 1207 2147 1208 2030"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_154" HPOS="1264" VPOS="2035" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="112"/> <String ID="segment_155" CONTENT="terre" HPOS="1296" VPOS="2029" WIDTH="162" HEIGHT="120" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1297 2029 1296 2148 1458 2149 1458 2051"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_442" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1296" VPOS="2029" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="119" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1297 2029 1296 2148 1296 2148 1297 2029"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_443" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1320" VPOS="2043" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1320 2043 1320 2148 1320 2148 1320 2043"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_444" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1377" VPOS="2051" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="97" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1377 2051 1377 2148 1377 2148 1377 2051"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_445" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1418" VPOS="2051" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="97" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1418 2051 1418 2148 1418 2148 1418 2051"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_446" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1458" VPOS="2051" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="98" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1458 2051 1458 2149 1458 2149 1458 2051"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_156" HPOS="1515" VPOS="2051" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="98"/> <String ID="segment_157" CONTENT="sur" HPOS="1539" VPOS="2045" WIDTH="114" HEIGHT="105" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1539 2051 1539 2149 1653 2150 1653 2045"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_448" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1539" VPOS="2051" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="98" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1539 2051 1539 2149 1539 2149 1539 2051"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_449" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1588" VPOS="2051" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="98" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1588 2051 1588 2149 1588 2149 1588 2149 1588 2051"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_450" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1645" VPOS="2045" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="105" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1645 2050 1645 2150 1653 2150 1653 2045"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_158" HPOS="1693" VPOS="2034" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="116"/> <String ID="segment_159" CONTENT="le" HPOS="1726" VPOS="2039" WIDTH="24" HEIGHT="112" WC="0.9923"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1727 2039 1726 2150 1750 2151 1750 2043"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_452" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1726" VPOS="2039" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9884"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1727 2039 1726 2150 1726 2150 1727 2039"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_453" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1750" VPOS="2043" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9962"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1750 2043 1750 2151 1750 2151 1750 2043"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_160" HPOS="1807" VPOS="2038" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="113"/> <String ID="segment_161" CONTENT="manure" HPOS="1839" VPOS="2032" WIDTH="251" HEIGHT="121" WC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1840 2035 1839 2151 2090 2153 2090 2090 2048"/> </Shape> <Shape> <Glyph ID="char_455" CONTENT="f" HPOS="1839" VPOS="2035" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="116" WC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1840 2035 1839 2151 1839 2151 1840 2035"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_456" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1871" VPOS="2032" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="119" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1872 2032 1871 2151 1871 2151 1872 2032"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_457" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1928" VPOS="2046" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1928 2046 1928 2152 1928 2152 1928 2046"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_458" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2009" VPOS="2037" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2010 2037 2009 2152 2009 2152 2009 2152 2010 2037"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_459" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2042" VPOS="2042" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2042 2042 2042 2042 2152 2042 2152 2042 2152 2042 2042"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_460" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2090" VPOS="2048" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2090 2048 2090 2153 2090 2153 2090 2048"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_162" HPOS="2139" VPOS="2053" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="100"/> <String ID="segment_163" CONTENT="en" HPOS="2163" VPOS="2047" WIDTH="49" HEIGHT="106" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2163 2051 2163 2163 2153 2212 2153 2212 2047"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_462" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2163" VPOS="2051" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2163 2051 2163 2153 2163 2153 2163 2153 2163 2051"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_463" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2212" VPOS="2047" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2212 2047 2212 2153 2212 2153 2212 2047"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_164" HPOS="2269" VPOS="2041" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="113"/> <String ID="segment_165" CONTENT="laissant" HPOS="2301" VPOS="2037" WIDTH="309" HEIGHT="119" WC="0.9798"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2302 2039 2301 2154 2609 2156 2610 2041"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_465" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2301" VPOS="2039" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2302 2039 2301 2301 2154 2301 2154 2302 2039"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_466" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2325" VPOS="2037" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9989"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2326 2037 2325 2154 2325 2154 2326 2037"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_467" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2374" VPOS="2037" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.9038"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2375 2037 2374 2155 2374 2155 2375 2037"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_468" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2406" VPOS="2042" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9398"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2406 2042 2406 2155 2406 2155 2406 2042"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_469" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2455" VPOS="2050" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="0.9973"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2455 2050 2455 2155 2455 2155 2155 2455 2050"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_470" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2504" VPOS="2046" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2504 2046 2504 2155 2504 2155 2504 2046"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_471" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2560" VPOS="2041" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9989"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2561 2041 2560 2560 2156 2560 2156 2561 2041"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_472" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2609" VPOS="2041" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2610 2041 2609 2156 2609 2156 2610 2041"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_166" HPOS="2649" VPOS="2056" WIDTH="8" HEIGHT="100"/> <String ID="segment_167" CONTENT="au" HPOS="2674" VPOS="2056" WIDTH="48" HEIGHT="101" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2674 2056 2674 2156 2722 2157 2722 2056"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_474" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2674" VPOS="2056" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="100" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2674 2056 2674 2156 2674 2156 2674 2056"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_475" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2722" VPOS="2056" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="101" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2722 2056 2722 2157 2722 2157 2722 2056"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="856ecfa3-cc52-49d3-83f0-71123d34c7c5" HPOS="734" VPOS="2154" WIDTH="2029" HEIGHT="148" BASELINE="737 2253 2763 2264" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="737 2253 734 2280 1796 2299 1799 1799 2299 2206 2285 2236 2285 2249 2285 2416 2302 2419 2302 2760 2285 2763 2264 2757 2182 2585 2187 2571 2179 2563 2174 2561 2174 2558 2174 2555 2174 2353 2176 2288 2163 2285 2163 2282 2163 2241 2179 2236 2182 2230 2179 2184 2160 2181 2160 2178 2160 1894 2176 1829 2160 1826 2160 1823 2160 1821 2160 1766 2179 1750 2184 1733 2179 1665 2157 1662 2157 1660 2157 1657 2157 1602 2174 1299 2157 1296 2157 1294 2157 1291 2157 1264 2179 971 2179 944 2154 941 2154 939 2154 936 2154 933 2154 933 2154 887 2179 884 2179 737 2179 737 2253"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_168" CONTENT="center" HPOS="765" VPOS="2162" WIDTH="228" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="765 2179 765 2281 993 2285 993 2179"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_476" CONTENT="c" HPOS="765" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" WC="0.9969"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="765 2179 765 2281 765 2281 765 2179"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_477" CONTENT="e" HPOS="813" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="813 2179 813 2281 813 2281 813 2179"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_478" CONTENT="n" HPOS="860" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="860 2179 860 2282 860 2282 860 2179"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_479" CONTENT="t" HPOS="917" VPOS="2162" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9978"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="917 2162 917 2283 917 2283 917 2162"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_480" CONTENT="r" HPOS="955" VPOS="2165" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="955 2165 955 2284 955 2284 955 2165"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_481" CONTENT="e" HPOS="993" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="993 2179 993 2285 993 2285 993 2179"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_169" HPOS="1040" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="107"/> <String ID="segment_170" CONTENT="un" HPOS="1069" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="57" HEIGHT="108" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1069 2179 1069 2286 1126 2287 1126 2179"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_483" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1069" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1069 2179 1069 2286 1069 2286 1069 2179"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_484" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1126" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1126 2179 1126 2287 1126 2287 1126 2179"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_171" HPOS="1183" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="109"/> <String ID="segment_172" CONTENT="small" HPOS="1221" VPOS="2158" WIDTH="162" HEIGHT="134" WC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1221 2179 1221 2289 1382 2292 1383 2162"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_486" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1221" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" WC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1221 2179 1221 2289 1221 2289 1221 2179"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_487" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1268" VPOS="2175" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1268 2175 1268 2290 1268 2290 1268 2175"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_488" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1315" VPOS="2158" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1316 2158 1315 2290 1315 2290 1316 2158"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_489" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1353" VPOS="2160" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1354 2160 1353 2291 1353 2291 1354 2160"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_490" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1382" VPOS="2162" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1383 2162 1382 2292 1382 2292 1383 2162"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_173" HPOS="1410" VPOS="2163" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="129"/> <String ID="segment_174" CONTENT="pelvis." HPOS="1448" VPOS="2161" WIDTH="285" HEIGHT="137" WC="0.998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1448 2165 1448 2293 1733 2298 1733 2179"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_492" CONTENT="b" HPOS="1448" VPOS="2165" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1448 2165 1448 2293 1448 2293 1448 2165"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_493" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1496" VPOS="2168" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1496 2168 1496 2294 1496 2294 1496 2168"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_494" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1543" VPOS="2171" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9864"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1543 2171 1543 2294 1543 2294 1543 2171"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_495" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1590" VPOS="2173" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1590 2173 1590 2295 1590 2295 1590 2173"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_496" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1638" VPOS="2163" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="133" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1639 2163 1638 2296 1638 2296 1639 2163"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_497" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1676" VPOS="2161" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1677 2161 1676 2297 1676 2297 1677 2161"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_498" CONTENT="." HPOS="1733" VPOS="2179" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1733 2179 1733 2298 1733 2298 1733 2298 1733 2179"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_175" HPOS="1799" VPOS="2164" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="135"/> <String ID="segment_176" CONTENT="When" HPOS="1827" VPOS="2160" WIDTH="237" HEIGHT="138" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1828 2160 1827 2298 2064 2290 2064 2166"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_500" CONTENT="Q" HPOS="1827" VPOS="2160" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="138" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1828 2160 1827 2298 1827 2298 1828 2160"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_501" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1903" VPOS="2175" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1903 2175 1903 2295 1903 2295 1903 2175"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_502" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1960" VPOS="2172" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1960 2172 1960 1960 2293 1960 2293 1960 1960 2172"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_503" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2007" VPOS="2170" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2007 2170 2007 2292 2007 2292 2007 2170"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_504" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2064" VPOS="2166" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2064 2166 2064 2290 2064 2290 2064 2164 2166"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_177" HPOS="2121" VPOS="2163" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="125"/> <String ID="segment_178" CONTENT="la" HPOS="2159" VPOS="2160" WIDTH="20" HEIGHT="127" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2160 2161 2159 2287 2178 2286 2179 2160"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_506" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2159" VPOS="2161" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2160 2161 2159 2287 2159 2287 2160 2161"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_507" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2178" VPOS="2160" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2179 2160 2178 2286 2178 2286 2179 2160"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_179" HPOS="2235" VPOS="2177" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="108"/> <String ID="segment_180" CONTENT="heat" HPOS="2263" VPOS="2168" WIDTH="294" HEIGHT="134" WC="0.9317"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2263 2170 2263 2263 2286 2557 2295 2557 2174"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_509" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2263" VPOS="2170" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2263 2170 2263 2263 2286 2263 2286 2263 2163 2170"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_510" CONTENT="h" HPOS="2311" VPOS="2168" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.8742"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2311 2168 2311 2291 2311 2291 2311 2168"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_511" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2368" VPOS="2176" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.6645"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2368 2176 2368 2297 2368 2297 2368 2176"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_512" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2425" VPOS="2175" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9842"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2425 2175 2425 2302 2425 2302 2425 2175"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_513" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2453" VPOS="2175" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2453 2175 2453 2300 2453 2300 2453 2175"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_514" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2501" VPOS="2175" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2501 2175 2501 2298 2501 2298 2501 2175"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_515" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2557" VPOS="2174" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2557 2174 2557 2295 2557 2295 2557 2174"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_181" HPOS="2614" VPOS="2186" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="106"/> <String ID="segment_182" CONTENT="est" HPOS="2643" VPOS="2183" WIDTH="95" HEIGHT="108" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2643 2185 2643 2291 2738 2286 2738 2183"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_517" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2643" VPOS="2185" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2643 2185 2643 2291 2643 2291 2643 2185"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_518" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2690" VPOS="2184" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="104" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2690 2184 2690 2288 2690 2288 2690 2184"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_519" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2738" VPOS="2183" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2738 2183 2738 2286 2738 2286 2738 2183"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="88810022-b7af-4960-b55c-6385e568abbe" HPOS="734" VPOS="2288" WIDTH="2029" HEIGHT="153" BASELINE="737 2384 2763 2397" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="737 2384 734 2419 810 2435 813 2435 1075 2424 1078 2424 1138 2438 1141 2438 1144 2441 2760 2441 2763 2397 2763 2329 2703 2302 2700 2302 2697 2302 2591 2304 2588 2304 2585 2304 2558 2324 2555 2326 2550 2324 2500 2304 2498 2304 2495 2304 2492 2304 2449 2321 2435 2326 2165 2326 2154 2315 2143 2307 2143 2304 2140 2304 2137 2304 2135 2304 2047 2313 1957 2324 1741 2324 1711 2307 1706 2304 1703 2304 1700 2304 1687 2307 1627 2321 1583 2304 1569 2299 1567 2299 1564 2299 1501 2302 1288 2318 1214 2296 1204 2294 1201 2294 1198 2294 1130 2296 862 2304 737 2288 737 2384"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_183" CONTENT="bien" HPOS="767" VPOS="2292" WIDTH="133" HEIGHT="143" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="768 2292 767 2426 899 2431 900 2303"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_520" CONTENT="b" HPOS="767" VPOS="2292" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="134" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="768 2292 767 2426 767 2426 768 2292"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_521" CONTENT="i" HPOS="818" VPOS="2298" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="137" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="819 2298 818 2435 818 2435 819 819 2298"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_522" CONTENT="e" HPOS="848" VPOS="2302" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="849 2302 848 2434 848 2434 848 2434 849 2302"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_523" CONTENT="n" HPOS="899" VPOS="2303" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="900 2303 899 2431 899 2431 900 2303"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_184" HPOS="959" VPOS="2301" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_185" CONTENT="established," HPOS="989" VPOS="2294" WIDTH="293" HEIGHT="147" WC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="990 2300 989 2428 1282 2441 1282 2316"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_525" CONTENT="e" HPOS="989" VPOS="2300" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="990 2300 989 2428 989 2428 990 2300"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_526" CONTENT="́" HPOS="1010" VPOS="2300" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1011 2300 1010 2427 1010 2427 1010 2427 1011 2300"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_527" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1040" VPOS="2299" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1041 2299 1040 2425 1040 2425 1041 2299"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_528" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1070" VPOS="2298" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1071 2298 1070 2424 1070 2424 1071 2298"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_529" CONTENT="b" HPOS="1121" VPOS="2296" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="138" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1122 2296 1121 2434 1121 2434 1122 2296"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_530" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1181" VPOS="2294" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="147" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1182 2294 1181 2441 1181 2441 1181 2441 1182 2294"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_531" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1201" VPOS="2294" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="147" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1202 2294 1201 2441 1201 2441 1202 2294"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_532" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1232" VPOS="2302" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1233 2302 1232 2441 1232 2441 1233 2302"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_533" CONTENT="," HPOS="1282" VPOS="2316" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9954"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1282 2316 1282 2441 1282 2441 1282 2316"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_186" HPOS="1312" VPOS="2315" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="126"/> <String ID="segment_187" CONTENT="on" HPOS="1343" VPOS="2309" WIDTH="60" HEIGHT="132" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1343 2314 1343 2441 1403 2441 1403 2309"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_535" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1343" VPOS="2314" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1343 2314 1343 2441 1343 2441 1343 2314"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_536" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1403" VPOS="2309" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1403 2309 1403 2441 1403 2441 1403 2309"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_188" HPOS="1464" VPOS="2304" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="137"/> <String ID="segment_189" CONTENT="plant" HPOS="1494" VPOS="2299" WIDTH="232" HEIGHT="142" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1495 2302 1494 2441 1726 2441 1726 2316"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_538" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1494" VPOS="2302" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1495 2302 1494 2441 1494 2441 1495 2302"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_539" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1555" VPOS="2299" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="142" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1556 2299 1555 2441 1555 2441 1556 2299"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_540" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1585" VPOS="2305" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1586 2305 1585 2441 1585 2441 1586 2305"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_541" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1635" VPOS="2319" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1635 2319 1635 2441 1635 2441 1635 2319"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_542" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1696" VPOS="2305" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="136" GC="0.9988"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1697 2305 1696 2441 1696 2441 1697 2305"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_543" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1726" VPOS="2316" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1726 2316 1726 2441 1726 2441 1726 2316"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_190" HPOS="1777" VPOS="2324" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_191" CONTENT="un" HPOS="1817" VPOS="2324" WIDTH="51" HEIGHT="117" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1817 2324 1817 2441 1868 2441 1868 2324"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_545" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1817" VPOS="2324" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1817 2324 1817 2441 1817 2441 1817 2324"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_546" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1868" VPOS="2324" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1868 2324 1868 2441 1868 2441 1868 2324"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_192" HPOS="1938" VPOS="2324" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_193" CONTENT="foot" HPOS="1969" VPOS="2308" WIDTH="132" HEIGHT="133" WC="0.9978"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1969 2322 1969 2441 2100 2441 2101 2308"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_548" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1969" VPOS="2322" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1969 2322 1969 2441 1969 2441 1969 2322"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_549" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2019" VPOS="2316" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2019 2316 2019 2441 2019 2441 2019 2316"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_550" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2049" VPOS="2313" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9913"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2049 2313 2049 2441 2049 2441 2049 2313"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_551" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2100" VPOS="2308" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="133" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2101 2308 2100 2441 2100 2441 2101 2308"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_194" HPOS="2150" VPOS="2312" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="129"/> <String ID="segment_195" CONTENT="au" HPOS="2180" VPOS="2326" WIDTH="61" HEIGHT="115" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2180 2326 2180 2441 2241 2441 2241 2241 2326"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_553" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2180" VPOS="2326" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2180 2326 2180 2441 2180 2441 2180 2326"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_554" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2241" VPOS="2326" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2241 2326 2241 2441 2241 2441 2241 2441 2241 2326"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_196" HPOS="2312" VPOS="2326" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="115"/> <String ID="segment_197" CONTENT="center" HPOS="2342" VPOS="2306" WIDTH="222" HEIGHT="135" WC="0.9403"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2342 2326 2342 2441 2564 2441 2564 2319"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_556" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2342" VPOS="2326" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.6802"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2342 2326 2342 2441 2342 2441 2342 2342 2326"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_557" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2392" VPOS="2326" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9619"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2392 2326 2392 2441 2392 2441 2392 2326"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_558" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2443" VPOS="2323" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2443 2323 2443 2443 2441 2443 2441 2443 2443 2323"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_559" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2504" VPOS="2306" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="135" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2505 2306 2504 2441 2504 2441 2505 2306"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_560" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2534" VPOS="2318" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2534 2318 2534 2441 2534 2441 2534 2334 2318"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_561" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2564" VPOS="2319" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2564 2319 2564 2441 2564 2441 2564 2319"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_198" HPOS="2625" VPOS="2303" WIDTH="11" HEIGHT="138"/> <String ID="segment_199" CONTENT="du" HPOS="2665" VPOS="2303" WIDTH="51" HEIGHT="138" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2666 2303 2665 2441 2715 2441 2716 2308"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_563" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2665" VPOS="2303" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="138" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2666 2303 2665 2441 2665 2441 2666 2303"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_564" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2715" VPOS="2308" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="133" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2716 2308 2715 2441 2715 2441 2716 2308"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="3582cf03-8f4c-4169-8828-369356aae3fe" HPOS="737" VPOS="2430" WIDTH="2023" HEIGHT="150" BASELINE="737 2520 2760 2531" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2757 2457 2621 2441 2618 2441 2615 2441 2612 2441 2596 2455 2591 2460 2380 2460 2369 2452 2359 2441 2356 2441 2353 2441 2266 2441 2263 2441 2260 2441 2257 2441 2247 2449 2236 2457 1968 2457 1916 2444 1889 2438 1886 2438 1883 2438 1881 2438 1878 2438 1873 2444 1853 2460 1810 2460 1791 2444 1785 2438 1782 2438 1780 2438 1635 2435 1632 2435 1630 2435 1627 2435 1621 2441 1602 2457 1452 2457 1430 2438 1427 2435 1425 2435 1422 2435 1419 2435 1400 2438 1346 2449 1307 2438 1302 2435 1299 2435 1296 2435 1294 2435 1288 2435 1242 2455 1146 2455 1122 2435 1122 2433 1119 2433 1116 2433 1113 2433 1111 2433 1105 2435 1059 2452 947 2433 944 2433 941 2433 939 2433 936 2433 936 2433 909 2455 802 2455 739 2430 737 2520 737 2566 2118 2566 2148 2566 2375 2580 2378 2580 2757 2566 2760 2531 2757 2457"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_200" CONTENT="basin" HPOS="766" VPOS="2436" WIDTH="227" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="766 2441 766 2566 993 2566 993 2441"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_565" CONTENT="b" HPOS="766" VPOS="2441" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="766 2441 766 2566 766 2566 766 2566 766 2441"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_566" CONTENT="a" HPOS="813" VPOS="2455" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="813 2455 813 2566 813 2566 813 2566 813 2455"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_567" CONTENT="s" HPOS="861" VPOS="2455" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="861 2455 861 2566 861 2566 861 2566 861 2455"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_568" CONTENT="s" HPOS="908" VPOS="2455" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="908 2455 908 2566 908 2566 908 2455"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_569" CONTENT="i" HPOS="965" VPOS="2436" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="965 2436 965 2566 965 2566 965 2566 965 2436"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_570" CONTENT="n" HPOS="993" VPOS="2441" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="993 2441 993 2566 993 2566 993 2441"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_201" HPOS="1041" VPOS="2449" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_202" CONTENT="et" HPOS="1069" VPOS="2433" WIDTH="48" HEIGHT="133" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1069 2448 1069 2566 1117 2566 1117 2433"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_572" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1069" VPOS="2448" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1069 2448 1069 2566 1069 2566 1069 2566 1069 2448"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_573" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1117" VPOS="2433" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1117 2433 1117 2566 1117 2566 1117 2566 1117 2433"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_203" HPOS="1145" VPOS="2454" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112"/> <String ID="segment_204" CONTENT="on" HPOS="1174" VPOS="2455" WIDTH="47" HEIGHT="111" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1174 2455 1174 2566 1221 2566 1221 2455"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_575" CONTENT="on" HPOS="1174" VPOS="2455" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1174 2455 1174 2566 1174 2566 1174 2566 1174 2455"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_576" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1221" VPOS="2455" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0">

<Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1221 2455 1221 2566 1221 2566 1221 2455"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_205" HPOS="1278" VPOS="2435" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="131"/> <String ID="segment_206" CONTENT="le" HPOS="1307" VPOS="2438" WIDTH="28" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1307 2438 1307 2566 1335 2566 1335 2446"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_578" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1307" VPOS="2438" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9982"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1307 2438 1307 2566 1307 2566 1307 2438"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_579" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1335" VPOS="2446" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1335 2446 1335 2566 1335 2566 1335 2446"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_207" HPOS="1373" VPOS="2441" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="125"/> <String ID="segment_208" CONTENT="borne" HPOS="1411" VPOS="2436" WIDTH="200" HEIGHT="130" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1411 2436 1411 2566 1611 2566 1611 2449"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_581" CONTENT="b" HPOS="1411" VPOS="2436" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1411 2436 1411 2566 1411 2566 1411 2436"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_582" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1459" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1459 2457 1459 2566 1459 2566 1459 2457"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_583" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1516" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1516 2457 1516 2566 1516 2566 1516 2457"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_584" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1554" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1554 2457 1554 2566 1554 2566 1554 2457"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_585" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1611" VPOS="2449" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1611 2449 1611 2566 1611 2566 1611 2449"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_209" HPOS="1658" VPOS="2435" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="131"/> <String ID="segment_210" CONTENT="d'un" HPOS="1687" VPOS="2436" WIDTH="142" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1687 2436 1687 2566 1829 2566 1829 2460"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_587" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1687" VPOS="2436" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1687 2436 1687 2566 1687 2566 1687 2436"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_588" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1744" VPOS="2437" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1744 2437 1744 2566 1744 2566 1744 2437"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_589" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1772" VPOS="2438" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1772 2438 1772 2566 1772 2566 1772 2566 1772 2438"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_590" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1829" VPOS="2460" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1829 2460 1829 2566 1829 2566 1829 2460"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_211" HPOS="1877" VPOS="2438" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_212" CONTENT="bon" HPOS="1915" VPOS="2444" WIDTH="104" HEIGHT="122" WC="0.9888"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1915 2444 1915 1915 2566 2019 2566 2019 2457"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_592" CONTENT="b" HPOS="1915" VPOS="2444" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9666"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1915 2444 1915 2566 1915 2566 1915 2566 1915 2444"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_593" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1962" VPOS="2456" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1962 2456 1962 2566 1962 2566 1962 2566 1962 2456"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_594" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2019" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2019 2457 2019 2566 2019 2566 2019 2566 2019 2457"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_213" HPOS="2057" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="109"/> <String ID="segment_214" CONTENT="mouillage," HPOS="2086" VPOS="2441" WIDTH="437" HEIGHT="138" WC="0.9946"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2086 2457 2086 2566 2523 2575 2523 2460"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_596" CONTENT="m" HPOS="2086" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9916"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2086 2457 2086 2566 2086 2566 2086 2457"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_597" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2171" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2171 2457 2171 2567 2171 2567 2171 2457"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_598" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2219" VPOS="2457" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2219 2457 2219 2570 2219 2570 2219 2457"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_599" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2276" VPOS="2441" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2276 2441 2276 2574 2276 2574 2276 2441"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_600" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2314" VPOS="2441" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="0.9821"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2314 2441 2314 2576 2314 2576 2314 2441"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_601" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2333" VPOS="2441" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="136" GC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2333 2441 2333 2577 2333 2577 2333 2441"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_602" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2361" VPOS="2444" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="0.9748"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2361 2444 2361 2579 2361 2579 2361 2444"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_603" CONTENT="g" HPOS="2418" VPOS="2460" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2418 2460 2418 2579 2418 2579 2418 2460"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_604" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2475" VPOS="2460" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2475 2460 2475 2576 2475 2576 2475 2475 2460"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_605" CONTENT="," HPOS="2523" VPOS="2460" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2523 2460 2523 2575 2523 2575 2523 2575 2523 2460"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_215" HPOS="2551" VPOS="2460" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_216" CONTENT="then" HPOS="2579" VPOS="2443" WIDTH="143" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2579 2460 2579 2579 2573 2722 2567 2722 2453"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_607" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2579" VPOS="2460" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2579 2460 2579 2579 2579 2573 2579 2573 2579 2579 2460"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_608" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2636" VPOS="2443" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2636 2443 2636 2570 2636 2570 2636 2443"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_609" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2693" VPOS="2450" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2693 2450 2693 2568 2693 2568 2693 2450"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_610" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2722" VPOS="2453" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2722 2453 2722 2567 2722 2567 2722 2567 2722 2453"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="63f4fdc7-767a-40f9-8c9b-fbfc4b6352e1" HPOS="734" VPOS="2569" WIDTH="2020" HEIGHT="128" BASELINE="734 2656 2754 2667" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="734 2656 734 2697 2752 2697 2754 2667 2749 2585 2449 2588 2440 2583 2432 2575 2429 2575 2427 2575 2424 2575 2331 2583 2249 2591 2140 2583 1982 2572 1979 2572 1976 2572 1930 2583 1908 2588 1897 2583 1873 2572 1870 2572 1867 2572 1788 2583 1766 2585 1761 2583 1747 2569 1744 2569 1741 2569 1739 2569 1736 2569 1687 2583 1673 2585 1507 2585 1504 2583 1488 2569 1485 2569 1482 2569 1479 2569 1477 2569 1436 2583 1422 2585 1403 2583 2583 1332 2569 1329 2569 1261 2583 1239 2585 734 2583 734 2656"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_217" CONTENT="on" HPOS="761" VPOS="2583" WIDTH="53" HEIGHT="114" WC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="761 2583 761 2697 814 2697 814 2583"/> </Shape> <Shape> <Glyph ID="char_611" CONTENT="o" HPOS="761" VPOS="2583" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="761 2583 761 2697 761 2697 761 2583"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_612" CONTENT="n" HPOS="814" VPOS="2583" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="814 2583 814 2697 814 2697 814 2583"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_218" HPOS="859" VPOS="2583" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_219" CONTENT="overlap" HPOS="894" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="338" HEIGHT="113" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="894 2584 894 2697 1232 2697 1232 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_614" CONTENT="r" HPOS="894" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="894 2584 894 2697 894 2697 894 2584"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_615" CONTENT="e" HPOS="939" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9988"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="939 2584 939 2697 939 2697 939 2584"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_616" CONTENT="c" HPOS="983" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="983 2584 983 2697 983 2697 983 2584"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_617" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1028" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1028 2584 1028 2697 1028 2697 1028 2584"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_618" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1081" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1081 2584 1081 2697 1081 2697 1081 2584"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_619" CONTENT="v" HPOS="1143" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1143 2585 1143 2697 1143 2697 1143 2697 1143 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_620" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1188" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1188 2585 1188 2697 1188 2697 1188 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_621" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1232" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1232 2585 1232 2697 1232 2697 1232 2585"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_220" HPOS="1277" VPOS="2578" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="119"/> <String ID="segment_221" CONTENT="la" HPOS="1312" VPOS="2570" WIDTH="27" HEIGHT="127" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1312 2572 1312 2697 1339 2697 1339 2570"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_623" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1312" VPOS="2572" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1312 2572 1312 2697 1312 2697 1312 2572"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_624" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1339" VPOS="2570" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1339 2570 1339 2697 1339 2697 1339 2570"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_222" HPOS="1410" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="113"/> <String ID="segment_223" CONTENT="terre" HPOS="1455" VPOS="2569" WIDTH="160" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1455 2576 1455 2697 1615 2697 1615 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_626" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1455" VPOS="2576" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1455 2576 1455 2697 1455 2697 1455 2576"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_627" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1482" VPOS="2569" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1482 2569 1482 2697 1482 2697 1482 2569"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_628" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1535" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1535 2585 1535 2697 1535 2697 1535 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_629" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1579" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1579 2585 1579 2697 1579 2697 1579 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_630" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1615" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1615 2585 1615 2697 1615 2697 1615 2585"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_224" HPOS="1668" VPOS="2584" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="113"/> <String ID="segment_225" CONTENT="de" HPOS="1695" VPOS="2570" WIDTH="53" HEIGHT="127" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1695 2581 1695 2697 1748 2697 1748 2570"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_632" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1695" VPOS="2581" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1695 2581 1695 2697 1695 2697 1695 2581"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_633" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1748" VPOS="2570" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1748 2570 1748 2697 1748 2697 1748 2570"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_226" HPOS="1793" VPOS="2581" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="116"/> <String ID="segment_227" CONTENT="manure" HPOS="1829" VPOS="2572" WIDTH="249" HEIGHT="125" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1829 2577 1829 2697 2078 2697 2078 2579"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_635" CONTENT="f" HPOS="1829" VPOS="2577" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1829 2577 1829 2697 1829 2697 1829 2577"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_636" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1864" VPOS="2572" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1864 2572 1864 2697 1864 2697 1864 2572"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_637" CONTENT="m" HPOS="1918" VPOS="2586" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1918 2586 1918 2697 1918 2697 1918 2586"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_638" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1998" VPOS="2573" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1998 2573 1998 2697 1998 2697 1998 2573"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_639" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2024" VPOS="2575" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2024 2575 2024 2697 2024 2697 2024 2575"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_640" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2078" VPOS="2579" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2078 2579 2078 2697 2078 2697 2078 2579"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_228" HPOS="2131" VPOS="2582" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="115"/> <String ID="segment_229" CONTENT="et" HPOS="2167" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="44" HEIGHT="112" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2167 2585 2167 2697 2211 2697 2211 2588"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_642" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2167" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2167 2585 2167 2697 2167 2697 2167 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_643" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2211" VPOS="2588" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2211 2588 2211 2697 2211 2697 2211 2588"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_230" HPOS="2256" VPOS="2590" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107"/> <String ID="segment_231" CONTENT="on" HPOS="2282" VPOS="2583" WIDTH="54" HEIGHT="114" WC="0.9909"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2282 2588 2282 2697 2336 2697 2336 2583"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_645" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2282" VPOS="2588" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2282 2588 2282 2697 2282 2697 2282 2588"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_646" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2336" VPOS="2583" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9819"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2336 2583 2336 2697 2336 2697 2336 2583"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_232" HPOS="2389" VPOS="2577" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="120"/> <String ID="segment_233" CONTENT="term" HPOS="2425" VPOS="2575" WIDTH="293" HEIGHT="122" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2425 2575 2425 2697 2718 2697 2718 2585"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_648" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2425" VPOS="2575" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2425 2575 2425 2697 2425 2697 2425 2575"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_649" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2451" VPOS="2588" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2451 2588 2451 2697 2451 2697 2451 2588"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_650" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2505" VPOS="2587" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2505 2587 2505 2697 2505 2697 2505 2587"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_651" CONTENT="m" HPOS="2549" VPOS="2587" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2549 2587 2549 2697 2549 2697 2549 2549 2587"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_652" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2629" VPOS="2586" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2629 2586 2629 2629 2697 2629 2697 2629 2529 2586"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_653" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2665" VPOS="2586" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2665 2586 2665 2665 2697 2665 2697 2665 2565 2586"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_654" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2718" VPOS="2585" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2718 2585 2718 2697 2718 2697 2718 2585"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="60aef411-e8bd-4d03-bda9-aad44a2492b8" HPOS="731" VPOS="2703" WIDTH="2023" HEIGHT="150" BASELINE="734 2795 2754 2804" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="734 2795 731 2831 753 2847 756 2847 759 2847 761 2850 1141 2850 1141 2847 1141 2847 1144 2847 1146 2847 1168 2831 1739 2831 1747 2836 1763 2850 1766 2850 1769 2850 1771 2853 2055 2853 2055 2850 2058 2850 2061 2850 2075 2842 2083 2836 2105 2842 2156 2853 2159 2853 2230 2842 2274 2836 2298 2845 2328 2853 2331 2853 2334 2853 2465 2845 2615 2836 2749 2847 2754 2804 2754 2733 2697 2711 2694 2711 2692 2711 2689 2711 2634 2730 2634 2733 2470 2733 2462 2730 2367 2708 2364 2708 2361 2708 2359 2708 2328 2727 2323 2733 2217 2733 2208 2727 2173 2708 2170 2708 2167 2708 2165 2708 2129 2727 2121 2730 2053 2725 1807 2705 1804 2705 1802 2705 1763 2722 1752 2727 1695 2722 1548 2705 1471 2705 1468 2705 1466 2705 1463 2705 1447 2719 1436 2727 1419 2719 1403 2711 1400 2711 1400 2711 1397 2711 1217 2716 1004 2725 980 2714 950 2703 947 2703 884 2703 881 2703 881 2703 879 2703 876 2703 865 2714 849 2725 734 2714 734 2795"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_234" CONTENT="en" HPOS="764" VPOS="2717" WIDTH="51" HEIGHT="133" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="764 2717 764 2850 815 2850 815 2722"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_655" CONTENT="e" HPOS="764" VPOS="2717" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="764 2717 764 2850 764 2850 764 2717"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_656" CONTENT="n" HPOS="815" VPOS="2722" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="815 2722 815 2850 815 2850 815 2722"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_235" HPOS="876" VPOS="2703" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="147"/> <String ID="segment_236" CONTENT="le" HPOS="916" VPOS="2703" WIDTH="30" HEIGHT="147" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="916 2703 916 2850 946 2850 946 2703"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_658" CONTENT="l" HPOS="916" VPOS="2703" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="147" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="916 2703 916 2850 916 2850 916 2703"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_659" CONTENT="e" HPOS="946" VPOS="2703" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="147" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="946 2703 946 2850 946 2850 946 2703"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_237" HPOS="997" VPOS="2722" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_238" CONTENT="couvrant" HPOS="1038" VPOS="2711" WIDTH="354" HEIGHT="139" WC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1038 2724 1038 2850 1392 2831 1392 2711"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_661" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1038" VPOS="2724" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1038 2724 1038 2850 1038 2850 1038 2724"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_662" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1078" VPOS="2722" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1078 2722 1078 2850 1078 2850 1078 2722"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_663" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1139" VPOS="2719" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1139 2719 1139 2850 1139 2850 1139 2719"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_664" CONTENT="v" HPOS="1189" VPOS="2717" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1189 2717 1189 2831 1189 2831 1189 2717"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_665" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1240" VPOS="2715" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1240 2715 1240 2831 1240 2831 1240 2715"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_666" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1280" VPOS="2714" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1280 2714 1280 2831 1280 2831 1280 2714"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_667" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1331" VPOS="2713" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1331 2713 1331 2831 1331 2831 1331 2831 1331 2713"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_668" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1392" VPOS="2711" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9893"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1392 2711 1392 2831 1392 2831 1392 2711"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_239" HPOS="1432" VPOS="2722" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="109"/> <String ID="segment_240" CONTENT="d'une" HPOS="1472" VPOS="2705" WIDTH="193" HEIGHT="126" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1472 2705 1472 2831 1665 2831 1665 2719"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_670" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1472" VPOS="2705" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1472 2705 1472 2831 1472 2831 1472 2705"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_671" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1523" VPOS="2705" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1523 2705 1523 2831 1523 2831 1523 2831 1523 2705"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_672" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1553" VPOS="2706" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1553 2706 1553 2831 1553 2831 1553 2706"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_673" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1614" VPOS="2713" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1614 2713 1614 2831 1614 2831 1614 2713"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_674" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1665" VPOS="2719" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1665 2719 1665 2831 1665 2831 1665 2719"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_241" HPOS="1725" VPOS="2725" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="106"/> <String ID="segment_242" CONTENT="bell." HPOS="1766" VPOS="2705" WIDTH="283" HEIGHT="148" WC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1766 2721 1766 2850 2049 2853 2049 2725"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_676" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1766" VPOS="2721" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1766 2721 1766 2850 1766 2850 1766 2850 1766 2721"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_677" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1806" VPOS="2705" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="148" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1806 2705 1806 2853 1806 2853 1806 2705"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_678" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1837" VPOS="2707" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="146" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1837 2707 1837 2853 1837 2853 1837 2707"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_679" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1887" VPOS="2712" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="141" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1887 2712 1887 2853 1887 2853 1887 2712"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_680" CONTENT="h" HPOS="1938" VPOS="2716" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="137" GC="0.998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1938 2716 1938 2853 1938 2853 1938 1938 2716"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_681" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1988" VPOS="2720" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1988 2720 1988 1988 2853 1988 2853 1988 1988 2720"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_682" CONTENT="." HPOS="2049" VPOS="2725" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2049 2725 2049 2853 2049 2853 2049 2725"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_243" HPOS="2110" VPOS="2729" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="116"/> <String ID="segment_244" CONTENT="On" HPOS="2150" VPOS="2716" WIDTH="71" HEIGHT="136" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2150 2716 2150 2852 2221 2843 2221 2733"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_684" CONTENT="O" HPOS="2150" VPOS="2716" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2150 2716 2150 2852 2150 2852 2150 2716"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_685" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2221" VPOS="2733" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2221 2733 2221 2843 2221 2843 2221 2843 2221 2733"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_245" HPOS="2312" VPOS="2733" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="118"/> <String ID="segment_246" CONTENT="donne" HPOS="2342" VPOS="2716" WIDTH="223" HEIGHT="137" WC="0.9492"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2342 2718 2342 2853 2565 2839 2565 2733"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_687" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2342" VPOS="2718" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="0.7463"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2342 2718 2342 2853 2342 2853 2342 2853 2342 2718"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_688" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2403" VPOS="2716" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2403 2716 2403 2849 2403 2849 2403 2716"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_689" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2453" VPOS="2728" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2453 2728 2453 2846 2453 2846 2453 2728"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_690" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2514" VPOS="2733" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2514 2733 2514 2842 2514 2842 2514 2733"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_691" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2565" VPOS="2733" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2565 2733 2565 2839 2565 2839 2565 2733"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_247" HPOS="2636" VPOS="2726" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="113"/> <String ID="segment_248" CONTENT="de" HPOS="2666" VPOS="2719" WIDTH="61" HEIGHT="126" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2666 2719 2666 2840 2727 2845 2727 2727 2723"/> </Shape> <Shape> <Glyph ID="char_693" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2666" VPOS="2719" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2666 2719 2666 2840 2666 2840 2666 2719"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_694" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2727" VPOS="2723" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2727 2723 2727 2827 2845 2727 2845 2727 2727 2723"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="029f1231-af13-4dca-b09b-641a79793eb30f" HPOS="737" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="2012" HEIGHT="139" BASELINE="737 2929 2749 2940" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="737 2929 737 2978 2746 2978 2749 2940 2749 2849 2869 2686 2847 2683 2847 2681 2847 2678 2847 2612 2866 2558 2866 2386 2866 2359 2864 2244 2845 2241 2845 2238 2845 2236 2845 2217 2858 2116 2845 2113 2845 2110 2845 2077 2858 2064 2864 2045 2858 1993 2845 1990 2845 1987 2845 1984 2845 1982 2845 1965 2858 1963 2861 1960 2858 1949 2850 1946 2850 1943 2850 1941 2850 1889 2855 1837 2864 1826 2855 1812 2845 1810 2845 1807 2845 1804 2845 1802 2845 1761 2855 1731 2861 1695 2853 1638 2842 1635 2842 1632 2842 1630 2842 1616 2853 1605 2864 1482 2864 1463 2850 1449 2842 1447 2842 1444 2842 1441 2842 1438 2842 1436 2842 1425 2850 1403 2864 1291 2864 1261 2847 1242 2839 1239 2839 1236 2839 1234 2839 1217 2847 1195 2861 2861 1067 2861 1045 2845 1040 2839 1037 2839 1034 2839 1032 2839 1029 2839 1007 2845 952 2858 892 2842 879 2839 876 2839 873 2839 737 2839 737 2929"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_249" CONTENT="l'air" HPOS="766" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="132" HEIGHT="139" WC="0.9978"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="766 2839 766 2978 898 2978 898 2844"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_695" CONTENT="l" HPOS="766" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="766 2839 766 2978 766 2978 766 2839"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_696" CONTENT="'" HPOS="794" VPOS="2839" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> < <Polygon POINTS="794 2839 794 2978 794 2978 794 794 2839"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_697" CONTENT="a" HPOS="822" VPOS="2839" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="822 2839 822 2978 822 2978 822 2839"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_698" CONTENT="i" HPOS="870" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="870 2839 870 2978 870 2978 870 2839"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_699" CONTENT="r" HPOS="898" VPOS="2844" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="134" GC="0.989"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="898 2844 898 2978 898 2978 898 2844"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_250" HPOS="936" VPOS="2854" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124"/> <String ID="segment_251" CONTENT="dès" HPOS="955" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="105" HEIGHT="139" WC="0.9844"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="955 2857 955 2978 1060 2978 1060 2856"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_701" CONTENT="d" HPOS="955" VPOS="2857" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9385"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="955 2857 955 2978 955 2978 955 2857"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_702" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1012" VPOS="2844" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="134" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1012 2844 1012 2978 1012 2978 1012 2844"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_703" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="1031" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1031 2839 1031 2978 1031 2978 1031 2839"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_704" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1060" VPOS="2856" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1060 2856 1060 2978 1060 2978 1060 2856"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_252" HPOS="1098" VPOS="2861" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_253" CONTENT="qu'on" HPOS="1126" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="190" HEIGHT="139" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1126 2861 1126 2978 1316 2978 1316 2864"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_706" CONTENT="q" HPOS="1126" VPOS="2861" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1126 2861 1126 2978 1126 2978 1126 2861"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_707" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1183" VPOS="2861" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1183 2861 1183 2978 1183 2978 1183 2861"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_708" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1240" VPOS="2839" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1240 2839 1240 2978 1240 2978 1240 2839"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_709" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1268" VPOS="2851" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1268 2851 1268 2978 1268 2978 1268 2851"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_710" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1316" VPOS="2864" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1316 2864 1316 2978 1316 2978 1316 2864"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_254" HPOS="1363" VPOS="2864" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_255" CONTENT="s'perceçoit" HPOS="1392" VPOS="2842" WIDTH="398" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9974"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1392 2864 1392 2978 1790 2978 1790 2848"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_712" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1392" VPOS="2864" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1392 2864 1392 2978 1392 2978 1392 2864"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_713" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1439" VPOS="2842" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="136" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1439 2842 1439 2939 2978 1439 2978 1439 2842"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_714" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1468" VPOS="2854" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1468 2854 1468 2978 1468 2978 1468 2854"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_715" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1525" VPOS="2864" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1525 2864 1525 2978 1525 2978 1525 2864"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_716" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1572" VPOS="2864" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1572 2864 1572 2978 1572 2978 1572 2864"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_717" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1629" VPOS="2842" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="136" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1629 2842 1629 2978 1629 2978 1629 2842"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_718" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1667" VPOS="2848" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1667 2848 1667 2978 1667 2978 1667 2848"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_719" CONTENT="̧"HPOS="1677" VPOS="2850" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1677 2850 1677 2978 1686 2978 1686 2851"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_720" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1715" VPOS="2858" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9785"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1715 2858 1715 2978 1715 2978 1715 2858"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_721" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1762" VPOS="2855" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1762 2855 1762 2978 1762 2978 1762 2855"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_722" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1790" VPOS="2848" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1790 2848 1790 2978 1790 2978 1790 2848"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_256" HPOS="1819" VPOS="2850" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_257" CONTENT="que" HPOS="1847" VPOS="2852" WIDTH="105" HEIGHT="126" WC="0.997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1847 2862 1847 2978 1952 2978 1952 2852"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_724" CONTENT="q" HPOS="1847" VPOS="2862" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1847 2862 1847 2978 1847 2978 1847 2862"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_725" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1904" VPOS="2854" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="0.991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1904 2854 1904 2978 1904 2978 1904 2854"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_726" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1952" VPOS="2852" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1952 2852 1952 2978 1952 2978 1952 2852"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_258" HPOS="1999" VPOS="2847" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131"/> <String ID="segment_259" CONTENT="la" HPOS="2028" VPOS="2854" WIDTH="28" HEIGHT="124" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2028 2854 2028 2978 2056 2978 2056 2862"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_728" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2028" VPOS="2854" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2028 2854 2028 2978 2028 2978 2028 2854"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_729" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2056" VPOS="2862" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2056 2862 2056 2978 2056 2978 2056 2862"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_260" HPOS="2094" VPOS="2847" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="131"/> <String ID="segment_261" CONTENT="plant" HPOS="2123" VPOS="2846" WIDTH="218" HEIGHT="132" WC="0.9675"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2123 2846 2123 2978 2341 2978 2341 2861"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_731" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2123" VPOS="2846" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2123 2846 2123 2978 2123 2978 2123 2846"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_732" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2180" VPOS="2853" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2180 2853 2180 2978 2180 2978 2180 2853"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_733" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2208" VPOS="2857" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2208 2857 2208 2978 2208 2978 2208 2857"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_734" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2255" VPOS="2847" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="0.9863"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2255 2847 2255 2978 2255 2978 2255 2847"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_735" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2312" VPOS="2856" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.8194"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2312 2856 2312 2978 2312 2978 2312 2856"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_736" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2341" VPOS="2861" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2341 2861 2341 2978 2341 2978 2341 2861"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_262" HPOS="2379" VPOS="2866" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="112"/> <String ID="segment_263" CONTENT="arepris." HPOS="2407" VPOS="2847" WIDTH="323" HEIGHT="131" WC="0.9979"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2407 2866 2407 2978 2730 2978 2730 2863"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_738" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2407" VPOS="2866" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2407 2866 2407 2978 2407 2978 2407 2866"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_739" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2464" VPOS="2866" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2464 2866 2464 2978 2464 2978 2464 2866"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_740" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2502" VPOS="2866" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2502 2866 2502 2978 2502 2978 2502 2866"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_741" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2559" VPOS="2866" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2559 2866 2559 2978 2559 2978 2559 2866"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_742" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2607" VPOS="2866" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2607 2866 2607 2978 2607 2978 2607 2866"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_743" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2654" VPOS="2854" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2654 2854 2654 2978 2654 2978 2654 2854"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_744" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2683" VPOS="2847" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2683 2847 2683 2978 2683 2978 2683 2847"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_745" CONTENT="." HPOS="2730" VPOS="2863" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9832"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2730 2863 2730 2978 2730 2978 2730 2863"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="3c0ff12f-a503-4e88-88ab-786fd3eb9692" HPOS="726" VPOS="2970" WIDTH="2026" HEIGHT="147" BASELINE="728 3066 2752 3076" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="728 3066 726 3096 2279 3117 2282 3117 2749 3104 2752 3076 2749 2997 2664 2997 2662 2995 2637 2978 2634 2978 2632 2978 2629 2978 2509 2995 2476 2997 2304 2997 2293 2992 2244 2976 2241 2976 2238 2976 2113 2992 2072 2995 2025 2989 1894 2976 1892 2976 1889 2976 1886 2976 1870 2989 1862 2997 1815 2997 1791 2989 1736 2973 1733 2973 1731 2973 1728 2973 1725 2973 1706 2986 1700 2992 1687 2986 1640 2973 1638 2973 1635 2973 1632 2973 1583 2986 1580 2986 1534 2973 1531 2973 1528 2973 1526 2973 1523 2973 1504 2986 1490 2992 1138 2992 1127 2984 1111 2970 1108 2970 1105 2970 1103 2970 1100 2970 1067 2984 1048 2992 887 2992 873 2981 862 2970 860 2970 857 2970 854 2970 728 2978 728 3066"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_264" CONTENT="Dès" HPOS="766" VPOS="2970" WIDTH="114" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="766 2976 766 3097 880 3098 880 880 2987"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_746" CONTENT="D" HPOS="766" VPOS="2976" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="766 2976 766 3097 766 3097 766 2976"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_747" CONTENT="e" HPOS="833" VPOS="2971" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9841"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="833 2971 833 3097 833 3097 833 2971"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_748" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="852" VPOS="2970" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="852 2970 852 3098 852 3098 852 2970"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_749" CONTENT="s" HPOS="880" VPOS="2987" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="880 2987 880 3098 880 3098 880 3098 880 2987"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_265" HPOS="937" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="107"/> <String ID="segment_266" CONTENT="qu'on" HPOS="966" VPOS="2970" WIDTH="190" HEIGHT="132" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="966 2992 966 3099 1156 3102 1156 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_751" CONTENT="q" HPOS="966" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="966 2992 966 3099 966 3099 966 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_752" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1023" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1023 2992 1023 3100 1023 3100 1023 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_753" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1080" VPOS="2978" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1080 2978 1080 3101 1080 3101 1080 2978"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_754" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1109" VPOS="2970" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1109 2970 1109 3101 1109 3101 1109 2970"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_755" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1156" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1156 2992 1156 3102 1156 3102 1156 2992"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_267" HPOS="1232" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="111"/> <String ID="segment_268" CONTENT="ne" HPOS="1270" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="48" HEIGHT="112" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1270 2992 1270 3103 1318 3104 1318 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_757" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1270" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1270 2992 1270 3103 1270 3103 1270 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_758" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1318" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1318 2992 1318 3104 1318 3104 1318 2992"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_269" HPOS="1375" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113"/> <String ID="segment_270" CONTENT="craint" HPOS="1403" VPOS="2973" WIDTH="229" HEIGHT="135" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1403 2992 1403 3105 1632 3108 1632 2973"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_760" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1403" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1403 2992 1403 3105 1403 3105 1403 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_761" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1451" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1451 2992 1451 3106 1451 3106 1451 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_762" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1489" VPOS="2992" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1489 2992 1489 3106 1489 3106 1489 2992"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_763" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1537" VPOS="2974" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1537 2974 1537 3107 1537 3107 1537 2974"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_764" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1575" VPOS="2985" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1575 2985 1575 3107 1575 3107 1575 2985"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_765" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1632" VPOS="2973" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="0.999"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1632 2973 1632 3108 1632 3108 1632 2973"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_271" HPOS="1679" VPOS="2984" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125"/> <String ID="segment_272" CONTENT="plus" HPOS="1708" VPOS="2979" WIDTH="133" HEIGHT="132" WC="0.9199"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1708 2984 1708 3109 1841 3111 1841 2997"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_767" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1708" VPOS="2984" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1708 2984 1708 3109 1708 3109 1708 2984"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_768" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1755" VPOS="2979" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="0.6798"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1755 2979 1755 3110 1755 3110 1755 2979"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_769" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1793" VPOS="2990" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1793 2990 1793 3110 1793 3110 1793 2990"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_770" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1841" VPOS="2997" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1841 2997 1841 3111 1841 3111 1841 2997"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_273" HPOS="1888" VPOS="2976" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="136"/> <String ID="segment_274" CONTENT="les" HPOS="1926" VPOS="2979" WIDTH="77" HEIGHT="134" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1926 2979 1926 3112 2003 3113 2003 2987"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_772" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1926" VPOS="2979" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1926 2979 1926 3112 1926 3112 1926 2979"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_773" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1955" VPOS="2982" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1955 2982 1955 3113 1955 3113 1955 2982"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_774" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2003" VPOS="2987" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2003 2987 2003 2003 3113 2003 3113 2003 2003 2987"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_275" HPOS="2060" VPOS="2994" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120"/> <String ID="segment_276" CONTENT="frosts," HPOS="2088" VPOS="2976" WIDTH="285" HEIGHT="141" WC="0.9962"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2088 2994 2088 3114 2373 3114 2373 2997"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_776" CONTENT="g" HPOS="2088" VPOS="2994" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2088 2994 2088 3114 2088 3114 2088 2994"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_777" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2145" VPOS="2988" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2145 2988 2145 3115 2145 3115 2145 2988"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_778" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2193" VPOS="2982" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="134" GC="0.999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2193 2982 2193 3116 2193 3116 2193 2982"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_779" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2221" VPOS="2978" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="138" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2221 2978 2221 3116 2221 3116 2221 2978"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_780" CONTENT="́" HPOS="2240" VPOS="2976" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="140" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2240 2976 2240 3116 2240 3116 2240 2976"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_781" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2269" VPOS="2984" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="133" GC="0.9911"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2269 2984 2269 3117 2269 3117 2269 2984"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_782" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2316" VPOS="2997" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2316 2997 2316 3116 2316 3116 2316 3116 2316 2997"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_783" CONTENT="," HPOS="2373" VPOS="2997" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9799"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2373 2997 2373 3114 2373 3114 2373 2997"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_277" HPOS="2412" VPOS="2997" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="116"/> <String ID="segment_278" CONTENT="on" HPOS="2440" VPOS="2996" WIDTH="57" HEIGHT="117" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2440 2997 2440 3113 2497 3111 2497 2996"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_785" CONTENT="on" HPOS="2440" VPOS="2997" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2440 2997 2440 3113 2440 3113 2440 2997"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_786" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2497" VPOS="2996" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2497 2996 2497 3111 2497 3111 2497 2996"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_279" HPOS="2554" VPOS="2987" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="122"/> <String ID="segment_280" CONTENT="lift" HPOS="2592" VPOS="2979" WIDTH="124" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2592 2983 2592 3108 2716 3105 2716 2997"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_788" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2592" VPOS="2983" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2592 2983 2592 3108 2592 3108 2592 2983"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_789" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2621" VPOS="2979" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="129" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2621 2979 2621 3108 2621 3108 2621 2979"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_790" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="2640" VPOS="2980" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2640 2980 2640 3107 2640 3107 2640 2980"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_791" CONTENT="v" HPOS="2678" VPOS="2997" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2678 2997 2678 3106 2678 3106 2678 2997"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_792" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2716" VPOS="2997" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2716 2997 2716 3105 2716 3105 2716 2997"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="bf0251ea-a1ac-4448-a82c-929e23562f5e" HPOS="726" VPOS="3106" WIDTH="2026" HEIGHT="140" BASELINE="728 3202 2752 3207" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="728 3202 726 3221 1829 3246 1832 3246 1963 3229 1974 3229 2465 3229 2476 3232 2514 3246 2517 3246 2520 3246 2749 3232 2752 3207 2749 3136 2653 3120 2651 3120 2591 3134 2582 3134 2577 3134 2531 3112 2528 3112 2525 3112 2522 3112 2465 3131 2454 3134 2380 3131 2184 3117 2181 3117 2069 3126 1946 3134 1769 3120 1613 3109 1542 3109 1539 3109 1537 3109 1520 3117 1490 3131 1425 3115 1392 3109 1313 3109 1310 3109 1307 3109 1305 3109 1299 3115 1280 3128 1184 3112 1160 3109 1157 3109 1130 3112 1021 3123 993 3109 993 3109 991 3109 988 3109 982 3109 865 3131 728 3106 728 3202"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_281" CONTENT="les" HPOS="756" VPOS="3111" WIDTH="74" HEIGHT="112" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="756 3111 756 3222 830 3223 830 830 3125"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_793" CONTENT="l" HPOS="756" VPOS="3111" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="756 3111 756 3222 756 3222 756 3111"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_794" CONTENT="e" HPOS="784" VPOS="3116" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="784 3116 784 3222 784 3222 784 3116"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_795" CONTENT="s" HPOS="830" VPOS="3125" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="98" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="830 3125 830 3223 830 3223 830 3125"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_282" HPOS="913" VPOS="3120" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="105"/> <String ID="segment_283" CONTENT="cloches." HPOS="950" VPOS="3111" WIDTH="333" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="950 3115 950 3226 1283 3234 1283 3126"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_797" CONTENT="c" HPOS="950" VPOS="3115" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="950 3115 950 3226 950 3226 950 950 3115"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_798" CONTENT="l" HPOS="996" VPOS="3111" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="996 3111 996 3227 996 3227 996 3111"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_799" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1024" VPOS="3123" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1024 3123 1024 3228 1024 3228 1024 3123"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_800" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1080" VPOS="3117" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1080 3117 1080 3229 1080 3229 1080 3229 1080 3117"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_801" CONTENT="h" HPOS="1126" VPOS="3112" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1126 3112 1126 3230 1126 3230 1126 3112"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_802" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1181" VPOS="3112" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1181 3112 1181 3231 1181 3231 1181 3231 1181 3112"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_803" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1228" VPOS="3119" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1228 3119 1228 3232 1228 3232 1228 3119"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_804" CONTENT="." HPOS="1283" VPOS="3126" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1283 3126 1283 3234 1283 3234 1283 3126"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_284" HPOS="1320" VPOS="3109" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125"/> <String ID="segment_285" CONTENT="La" HPOS="1357" VPOS="3109" WIDTH="65" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1357 3109 1357 3235 1422 3237 1422 3114"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_806" CONTENT="L" HPOS="1357" VPOS="3109" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1357 3109 1357 3235 1357 3235 1357 3109"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_807" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1422" VPOS="3114" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1422 3114 1422 3237 1422 3237 1422 3114"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_286" HPOS="1496" VPOS="3124" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="115"/> <String ID="segment_287" CONTENT="plantation" HPOS="1533" VPOS="3109" WIDTH="388" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9673"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1533 3111 1533 3239 1921 3234 1921 3132"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_809" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1533" VPOS="3111" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1533 3111 1533 3239 1533 3239 1533 3111"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_810" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1588" VPOS="3109" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1588 3109 1588 3241 1588 3241 1588 3109"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_811" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1616" VPOS="3109" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1616 3109 1616 3241 1616 3241 1616 3109"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_812" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1662" VPOS="3112" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1662 3112 1662 3242 1662 3242 1662 3242 1662 3112"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_813" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1718" VPOS="3116" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1718 3116 1718 3243 1718 3243 1718 3116"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_814" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1755" VPOS="3119" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1755 3119 1755 3244 1755 3244 1755 3119"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_815" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1801" VPOS="3123" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1801 3123 1801 3245 1801 3245 1801 3123"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_816" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1838" VPOS="3125" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.6838"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1838 3125 1838 3245 1838 3245 1838 3125"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_817" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1866" VPOS="3128" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1866 3128 1866 3242 1866 3242 1866 3128"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_818" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1921" VPOS="3132" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="0.9918"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1921 3132 1921 3234 1921 3234 1921 3132"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_288" HPOS="2005" VPOS="3130" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="99"/> <String ID="segment_289" CONTENT="se" HPOS="2042" VPOS="3124" WIDTH="46" HEIGHT="105" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2042 3128 2042 3229 2088 3229 2088 3124"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_820" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2042" VPOS="3128" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="101" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2042 3128 2042 3229 2042 3229 2042 3229 2042 3128"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_821" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2088" VPOS="3124" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2088 3124 2088 3229 2088 3229 2088 3229 2088 3124"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_290" HPOS="2143" VPOS="3120" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109"/> <String ID="segment_291" CONTENT="fact" HPOS="2180" VPOS="3117" WIDTH="102" HEIGHT="112" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2180 3117 2180 3229 2282 3229 2282 3124"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_823" CONTENT="f" HPOS="2180" VPOS="3117" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2180 3117 2180 3229 2180 3229 2180 3117"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_824" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2208" VPOS="3119" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2208 3119 2208 3229 2208 3229 2208 3119"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_825" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2254" VPOS="3122" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2254 3122 2254 3229 2254 3229 2254 3229 2254 3122"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_826" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2282" VPOS="3124" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2282 3124 2282 3229 2282 3229 2282 3229 2282 3124"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_292" HPOS="2328" VPOS="3127" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="102"/> <String ID="segment_293" CONTENT="en" HPOS="2356" VPOS="3129" WIDTH="46" HEIGHT="100" WC="0.9977"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2356 3129 2356 3229 2402 3229 2402 3132"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_828" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2356" VPOS="3129" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="100" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2356 3129 2356 3229 2356 3229 2356 3229 2356 3129"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_829" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2402" VPOS="3132" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="97" GC="0.9959"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2402 3132 2402 3229 2402 3229 2402 3132"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_294" HPOS="2467" VPOS="3127" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="105"/> <String ID="segment_295" CONTENT="lines" HPOS="2504" VPOS="3113" WIDTH="213" HEIGHT="132" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2504 3118 2504 3242 2717 3234 2717 3131"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_831" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2504" VPOS="3118" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2504 3118 2504 3242 2504 3242 2504 3118"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_832" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2532" VPOS="3113" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="132" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2532 3113 2532 3245 2532 3245 2532 3113"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_833" CONTENT="g" HPOS="2560" VPOS="3126" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2560 3126 2560 3244 2560 3244 2560 3126"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_834" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2615" VPOS="3128" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2615 3128 2615 3240 2615 3240 2615 3128"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_835" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2671" VPOS="3123" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2671 3123 2671 3237 2671 3237 2671 3123"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_836" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2717" VPOS="3131" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2717 3131 2717 3234 2717 3234 2717 3131"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="423b5613-f360-4e1d-8019-38bd397d7bdf" HPOS="726" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="2020" HEIGHT="142" BASELINE="728 3336 2746 3344" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape>               <Polygon POINTS="728 3336 726 3357 854 3376 857 3376 860 3376 892 3363 1075 3363 1389 3363 1395 3363 1422 3385 1425 3385 1427 3385 1430 3387 1624 3387 1624 3385 1627 3385 1630 3385 1651 3366 1676 3385 1679 3385 1681 3385 1684 3387 1758 3387 1758 3385 1761 3385 1763 3385 1782 3368 1788 3366 1823 3368 2075 3387 2077 3390 2391 3390 2391 3387 2394 3387 2397 3387 2413 3374 2419 3368 2440 3374 2506 3387 2509 3387 2743 3374 2746 3344 2743 3276 2634 3276 2632 3273 2610 3254 2607 3254 2604 3254 2602 3254 2451 3270 2427 3273 2421 3270 2405 3256 2405 3254 2402 3254 2399 3254 2271 3254 2268 3254 2266 3254 2219 3267 2200 3273 2192 3267 2176 3254 2173 3254 2170 3254 2167 3254 2110 3267 2088 3273 1785 3273 1766 3262 1741 3251 1739 3251 1736 3251 1733 3251 1731 3251 1720 3262 1706 3273 1474 3273 1433 3259 1400 3248 1397 3248 1277 3248 1275 3248 1272 3248 1269 3248 1269 3251 1261 3256 1247 3267 1204 3256 1176 3248 1174 3248 1171 3248 728 3248 728 3336"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_296" CONTENT="à" HPOS="756" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="19" HEIGHT="116" WC="0.9751"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="756 3248 756 3361 775 3364 775 775 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_837" CONTENT="a" HPOS="756" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9503"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="756 3248 756 3361 756 3361 756 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_838" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="765" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="765 3248 765 3363 775 3364 775 3248"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_297" HPOS="821" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="124"/> <String ID="segment_298" CONTENT="1m" HPOS="868" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="37" HEIGHT="125" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="868 3248 868 3373 905 3363 905 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_840" CONTENT="1" HPOS="868" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="868 3248 868 3373 868 3373 868 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_841" CONTENT="m" HPOS="905" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="905 3248 905 3363 905 3363 905 3248"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_299" HPOS="961" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115"/> <String ID="segment_300" CONTENT="50" HPOS="989" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="46" HEIGHT="115" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="989 3248 989 3363 1035 3363 1035 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_843" CONTENT="5" HPOS="989" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="989 3248 989 3363 989 3363 989 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_844" CONTENT="0" HPOS="1035" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1035 3248 1035 3363 1035 3363 1035 3248"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_301" HPOS="1100" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115"/> <String ID="segment_302" CONTENT="de" HPOS="1128" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="47" HEIGHT="115" WC="0.9841"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1128 3248 1128 3363 1175 3363 1175 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_846" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1128" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9976"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1128 3248 1128 3363 1128 3363 1128 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_847" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1175" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9706"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1175 3248 1175 3363 1175 3363 1175 3248"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_303" HPOS="1240" VPOS="3265" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="98"/> <String ID="segment_304" CONTENT="distance" HPOS="1268" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="326" HEIGHT="139" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1268 3251 1268 3363 1594 3387 1594 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_849" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1268" VPOS="3251" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1268 3251 1268 3363 1268 3363 1268 3251"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_850" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1324" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1324 3248 1324 3363 1324 3363 1324 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_851" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1352" VPOS="3248" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1352 3248 1352 3363 1352 3363 1352 3248"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_852" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1408" VPOS="3251" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1408 3251 1408 3373 1408 3373 1408 3251"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_853" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1435" VPOS="3260" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1435 3260 1435 3387 1435 3387 1435 3260"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_854" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1491" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1491 3273 1491 3387 1491 3387 1491 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_855" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1547" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1547 3273 1547 3387 1547 3387 1547 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_856" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1594" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1594 3273 1594 3387 1594 3387 1594 3273"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_305" HPOS="1668" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="112"/> <String ID="segment_306" CONTENT="et" HPOS="1696" VPOS="3252" WIDTH="47" HEIGHT="135" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1696 3273 1696 3387 1743 3387 1743 1743 3252"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_858" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1696" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1696 3273 1696 3387 1696 3387 1696 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_859" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1743" VPOS="3252" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1743 3252 1743 3387 1743 3387 1743 3252"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_307" HPOS="1789" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="93"/> <String ID="segment_308" CONTENT="en" HPOS="1817" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="47" HEIGHT="98" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1817 3273 1817 3368 1864 3371 1864 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_861" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1817" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="95" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1817 3273 1817 3368 1817 3368 1817 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_862" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1864" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="98" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1864 3273 1864 3371 1864 3371 1864 3273"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_309" HPOS="1938" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="104"/> <String ID="segment_310" CONTENT="gardant" HPOS="1975" VPOS="3254" WIDTH="317" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1975 3273 1975 1975 3379 2292 3390 2292 3254"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_864" CONTENT="g" HPOS="1975" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1975 3273 1975 3379 1975 3379 1975 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_865" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2031" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2031 3273 2031 3384 2031 3384 2031 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_866" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2087" VPOS="3273" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2087 3273 2087 3390 2087 3390 2087 3273"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_867" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2124" VPOS="3264" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2124 3264 2124 3390 2124 3390 2124 3264"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_868" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2180" VPOS="3258" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="132" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2180 3258 2180 3390 2180 3390 2180 3258"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_869" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2236" VPOS="3262" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9959"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2236 3262 2236 3390 2236 3390 2236 3262"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_870" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2283" VPOS="3254" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="136" GC="0.9992"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2283 3254 2283 3390 2292 3390 2292 3254"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_311" HPOS="2320" VPOS="3254" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="136"/> <String ID="segment_312" CONTENT="5" HPOS="2357" VPOS="3254" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2357 3254 2357 3390 2357 3390 2357 3254"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_872" CONTENT="5" HPOS="2357" VPOS="3254" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="136" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2357 3254 2357 3390 2357 3390 2357 3254"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_313" HPOS="2422" VPOS="3271" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="100"/> <String ID="segment_314" CONTENT="meters" HPOS="2459" VPOS="3255" WIDTH="261" HEIGHT="130" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2459 3269 2459 3378 2720 3375 2720 3276"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_874" CONTENT="m" HPOS="2459" VPOS="3269" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2459 3269 2459 3378 2459 3378 2459 3269"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_875" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2543" VPOS="3260" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2543 3260 2543 3385 2543 3385 2543 3260"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_876" CONTENT="̀" HPOS="2562" VPOS="3258" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2562 3258 2562 3384 2562 3384 2562 3258"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_877" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2590" VPOS="3255" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2590 3255 2590 3383 2590 3383 2590 3255"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_878" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2627" VPOS="3269" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2627 3269 2627 3380 2627 3380 2627 3269"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_879" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2664" VPOS="3276" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2664 3276 2664 3378 2664 3378 2664 3276"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_880" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2720" VPOS="3276" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="99" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2720 3276 2720 3375 2720 3375 2720 3375 2720 3276"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextLine ID="eb53fb49-0838-4f83-a5cb-2bd393203203ceb" HPOS="720" VPOS="3382" WIDTH="2029" HEIGHT="147" BASELINE="723 3467 2749 3480" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="723 3467 720 3502 731 3513 731 3516 734 3516 737 3516 739 3516 1059 3505 1182 3521 1184 3521 2331 3513 2659 3529 2662 3529 2746 3513 2749 3480 2746 3415 2178 3390 2176 3390 2173 3390 2110 3406 1933 3406 1864 3387 1862 3387 1777 3387 1774 3387 1771 3387 1769 3387 1741 3406 1638 3406 1619 3387 1616 3387 1613 3387 1610 3387 1163 3401 1122 3382 1119 3382 1116 3382 1113 3382 1059 3398 917 3382 914 3382 832 3398 748 3382 748 3382 745 3382 742 3382 739 3382 723 3393 723 3467"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_315" CONTENT="d'entre-two" HPOS="751" VPOS="3383" WIDTH="503" HEIGHT="138" WC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="752 3383 751 3516 1254 3521 1254 3398"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_881" CONTENT="d" HPOS="751" VPOS="3383" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="133" GC="0.995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="752 3383 751 3516 751 3516 752 3383"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_882" CONTENT="'" HPOS="807" VPOS="3393" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="807 3393 807 3514 807 3514 807 3393"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_883" CONTENT="e" HPOS="835" VPOS="3397" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="835 3397 835 3513 835 3513 835 3397"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_884" CONTENT="n" HPOS="881" VPOS="3388" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="882 3388 881 881 3511 881 3511 882 3388"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_885" CONTENT="t" HPOS="937" VPOS="3384" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="938 3384 937 3509 937 3509 938 3384"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_886" CONTENT="r" HPOS="974" VPOS="3388" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="975 3388 974 3508 974 3508 975 3388"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_887" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1012" VPOS="3393" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1012 3393 1012 3507 1012 3507 1012 3393"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_888" CONTENT="-" HPOS="1058" VPOS="3398" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" GC="0.9982"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1058 3398 1058 3505 1058 3505 1058 3398"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_889" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1095" VPOS="3387" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1096 3387 1095 3510 1095 3510 1096 3387"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_890" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1142" VPOS="3391" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1142 3391 1142 3516 1142 3516 1142 3391"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_891" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1198" VPOS="3400" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1198 3400 1198 3521 1198 3521 1198 3400"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_892" CONTENT="x" HPOS="1254" VPOS="3398" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1254 3398 1254 3521 1254 3521 1254 3398"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_316" HPOS="1309" VPOS="3396" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="124"/> <String ID="segment_317" CONTENT="pour" HPOS="1337" VPOS="3390" WIDTH="169" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9977"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1337 3396 1337 3520 1505 3519 1506 3390"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_894" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1337" VPOS="3396" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="0.9909"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1337 3396 1337 3520 1337 3520 1337 3396"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_895" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1393" VPOS="3394" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1393 3394 1393 3520 1393 3520 1393 3394"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_896" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1449" VPOS="3392" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1449 3392 1449 3519 1449 3519 1449 3392"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_897" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1505" VPOS="3390" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1506 3390 1505 3519 1505 3519 1506 3390"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_318" HPOS="1542" VPOS="3389" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="130"/> <String ID="segment_319" CONTENT="two" HPOS="1570" VPOS="3388" WIDTH="158" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1571 3388 1570 3518 1728 3517 1728 3406"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_899" CONTENT="d" HPOS="1570" VPOS="3388" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1571 3388 1570 3518 1570 3518 1571 3388"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_900" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1626" VPOS="3394" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="124" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1626 3394 1626 3518 1626 3518 1626 3394"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_901" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1672" VPOS="3406" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1672 3406 1672 3518 1672 3518 1672 3406"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_902" CONTENT="x" HPOS="1728" VPOS="3406" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1728 3406 1728 3517 1728 3517 1728 3406"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_320" HPOS="1784" VPOS="3387" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="130"/> <String ID="segment_321" CONTENT="lines." HPOS="1812" VPOS="3387" WIDTH="270" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9977"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1813 3387 1812 3517 2082 3515 2082 3406"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_904" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1812" VPOS="3387" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1813 3387 1812 3517 1812 3517 1813 3387"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_905" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1840" VPOS="3387" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="129" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1841 3387 1840 3516 1840 3516 1841 3387"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_906" CONTENT="g" HPOS="1877" VPOS="3391" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1878 3391 1877 3516 1877 3516 1878 3391"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_907" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1933" VPOS="3406" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="110" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1933 3406 1933 3516 1933 3516 1933 3406"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_908" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1989" VPOS="3406" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1989 3406 1989 1989 3515 1989 3515 1989 3515 1989 3406"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_909" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2035" VPOS="3406" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2035 3406 2035 3515 2035 3515 2035 3406"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_910" CONTENT="." HPOS="2082" VPOS="3406" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9862"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2082 3406 2082 3515 2082 3515 2082 3406"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </String>             <SP ID="segment_322" HPOS="2110" VPOS="3404" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="111"/> <String ID="segment_323" CONTENT="A" HPOS="2147" VPOS="3396" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2147 3396 2147 3514 2147 3514 2147 3396"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_912" CONTENT="A" HPOS="2147" VPOS="3396" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2147 3396 2147 3514 2147 3514 2147 3396"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_324" HPOS="2212" VPOS="3392" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="122"/> <String ID="segment_325" CONTENT="measure" HPOS="2240" VPOS="3393" WIDTH="279" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9768"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2241 3393 2240 3514 2519 3522 2519 3405"/> </Shape> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_914" CONTENT="m" HPOS="2240" VPOS="3393" WIDTH="1" HEIGHT="121" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2241 3393 2240 3514 2240 3514 2241 3393"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_915" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2324" VPOS="3396" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.8902"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2324 3396 2324 3513 2324 3513 2324 3396"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_916" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2370" VPOS="3398" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9708"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2370 3398 2370 3515 2370 3515 2370 3398"/> </Shape> </Shape> </Glyph> </Glyph ID="char_917" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2426" VPOS="3401" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9997">

<Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2426 3401 2426 3518 2426 3518 2426 3401"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_918" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2482" VPOS="3403" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2482 3403 2482 3520 2482 3520 2482 3403"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_919" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2519" VPOS="3405" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2519 3405 2519 3522 2519 3522 2519 3405"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_326" HPOS="2575" VPOS="3407" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="118"/> <String ID="segment_327" CONTENT="que" HPOS="2612" VPOS="3409" WIDTH="103" HEIGHT="119" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2612 3409 2612 3527 2715 3519 2715 3414"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_921" CONTENT="q" HPOS="2612" VPOS="3409" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2612 3409 2612 3527 2612 3527 2612 3409"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_922" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2668" VPOS="3412" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2668 3412 2668 3528 2668 3528 2668 3412"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_923" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2715" VPOS="3414" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2715 3414 2715 3519 2715 3519 2715 3414"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="54821d7f-9bde-4b1d-a5cd-fa1836a597db" HPOS="723" VPOS="3510" WIDTH="2023" HEIGHT="145" BASELINE="723 3608 2746 3617" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="723 3608 723 3641 2421 3641 2432 3641 2503 3655 2506 3655 2743 3641 2746 3617 2741 3540 2465 3543 2405 3535 2326 3524 2323 3524 2320 3524 2318 3524 2307 3535 2298 3540 2023 3529 1903 3527 1900 3527 1897 3527 1892 3529 1867 3540 1853 3529 1837 3513 1834 3513 1832 3513 1605 3513 1602 3513 1599 3513 1597 3513 1583 3524 1572 3535 1425 3535 1359 3521 1299 3510 1296 3510 1171 3521 1018 3532 996 3518 988 3510 985 3510 982 3510 920 3510 917 3510 914 3510 892 3516 832 3535 723 3516 723 3608"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_328" CONTENT="le" HPOS="751" VPOS="3521" WIDTH="28" HEIGHT="120" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="751 3521 751 3641 779 3641 779 3526"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_924" CONTENT="l" HPOS="751" VPOS="3521" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="751 3521 751 3641 751 3641 751 3521"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_925" CONTENT="e" HPOS="779" VPOS="3526" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="779 3526 779 3641 779 3641 779 3526"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_329" HPOS="854" VPOS="3525" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="116"/> <String ID="segment_330" CONTENT="plant" HPOS="892" VPOS="3510" WIDTH="187" HEIGHT="131" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="892 3516 892 3641 1079 3641 1079 3528"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_927" CONTENT="p" HPOS="892" VPOS="3516" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="892 3516 892 3641 892 3641 892 3516"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_928" CONTENT="l" HPOS="948" VPOS="3510" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="948 3510 948 3641 948 3641 948 3510"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_929" CONTENT="a" HPOS="976" VPOS="3510" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="976 3510 976 3641 976 3641 976 3510"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_930" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1023" VPOS="3532" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1023 3532 1023 3641 1023 3641 1023 3532"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_931" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1079" VPOS="3528" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1079 3528 1079 3641 1079 3641 1079 3528"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_331" HPOS="1126" VPOS="3524" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_332" CONTENT="lengthens," HPOS="1154" VPOS="3511" WIDTH="403" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1154 3522 1154 3641 1557 3641 1557 3535"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_933" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1154" VPOS="3522" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1154 3522 1154 3641 1154 3641 1154 3522"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_934" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1201" VPOS="3518" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1201 3518 1201 3641 1201 3641 1201 3518"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_935" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1229" VPOS="3516" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1229 3516 1229 3641 1229 3641 1229 3516"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_936" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1285" VPOS="3511" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1285 3511 1285 3641 1285 3641 1285 3511"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_937" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1313" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1313 3513 1313 3641 1313 3641 1313 3513"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_938" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1341" VPOS="3518" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1341 3518 1341 3641 1341 3641 1341 3518"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_939" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1388" VPOS="3527" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1388 3527 1388 3641 1388 3641 1388 3527"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_940" CONTENT="g" HPOS="1454" VPOS="3535" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1454 3535 1454 3641 1454 3641 1454 3535"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_941" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1510" VPOS="3535" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1510 3535 1510 3641 1510 3641 1510 3535"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_942" CONTENT="," HPOS="1557" VPOS="3535" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1557 3535 1557 3641 1557 3641 1557 3535"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_333" HPOS="1603" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_334" CONTENT="on" HPOS="1641" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="56" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1641 3513 1641 3641 1697 3641 1697 3513"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_944" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1641" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1641 3513 1641 3641 1641 3641 1641 3513"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_945" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1697" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1697 3513 1697 3641 1697 3641 1697 3513"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_335" HPOS="1753" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="128"/> <String ID="segment_336" CONTENT="enterre" HPOS="1781" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="272" HEIGHT="128" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1781 3513 1781 3641 2053 3641 2053 3530"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_947" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1781" VPOS="3513" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1781 3513 1781 3641 1781 3641 1781 3513"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_948" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1838" VPOS="3514" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="127" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1838 3514 1838 3641 1838 3641 1838 3514"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_949" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1894" VPOS="3528" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1894 3528 1894 3641 1894 3641 1894 3528"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_950" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1922" VPOS="3527" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1922 3527 1922 3641 1922 3641 1922 3527"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_951" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1969" VPOS="3528" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1969 3528 1969 3641 1969 3641 1969 3528"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_952" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2015" VPOS="3529" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2015 3529 2015 3641 2015 3641 2015 3529"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_953" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2053" VPOS="3530" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2053 3530 2053 3641 2053 3641 2053 3530"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_337" HPOS="2137" VPOS="3534" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="107"/> <String ID="segment_338" CONTENT="les" HPOS="2175" VPOS="3535" WIDTH="75" HEIGHT="106" WC="0.9808"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2175 3535 2175 3641 2250 3641 2250 3538"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_955" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2175" VPOS="3535" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2175 3535 2175 3641 2175 3641 2175 3535"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_956" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2203" VPOS="3536" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2203 3536 2203 3641 2203 3641 2203 3536"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_957" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2250" VPOS="3538" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="0.9425"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2250 3538 2250 3641 2250 3641 2250 3538"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_339" HPOS="2296" VPOS="3535" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="106"/> <String ID="segment_340" CONTENT="bras," HPOS="2334" VPOS="3525" WIDTH="197" HEIGHT="129" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2334 3525 2334 3641 2531 3654 2531 3542"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_959" CONTENT="b" HPOS="2334" VPOS="3525" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="116" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2334 3525 2334 3641 2334 3641 2334 3525"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_960" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2390" VPOS="3533" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9976"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2390 3533 2390 3641 2390 3641 2390 3533"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_961" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2428" VPOS="3538" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="103" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2428 3538 2428 3641 2428 3641 2428 3538"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_962" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2484" VPOS="3543" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2484 3543 2484 3651 2484 3651 2484 3543"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_963" CONTENT="," HPOS="2531" VPOS="3542" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2531 3542 2531 3654 2531 3654 2531 3542"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_341" HPOS="2587" VPOS="3542" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="108"/> <String ID="segment_342" CONTENT="who" HPOS="2615" VPOS="3540" WIDTH="112" HEIGHT="109" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2615 3541 2615 3649 2727 3642 2727 3540"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_965" CONTENT="q" HPOS="2615" VPOS="3541" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2615 3541 2615 3649 2615 3649 2615 3541"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_966" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2671" VPOS="3541" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="104" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2671 3541 2671 3645 2671 3645 2671 3541"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_967" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2727" VPOS="3540" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="102" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2727 3540 2727 3642 2727 3642 2727 3540"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="720ca04f-d801-4b1e-be43-c109d30019bc" HPOS="723" VPOS="3657" WIDTH="2020" HEIGHT="142" BASELINE="723 3747 2743 3753" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="723 3747 723 3791 824 3772 1834 3772 1853 3788 1862 3797 1864 3797 1867 3797 1870 3799 1952 3799 1952 3797 1954 3797 1957 3797 1968 3788 1990 3775 2009 3788 2020 3797 2023 3797 2025 3797 2028 3799 2345 3799 2345 3797 2348 3797 2367 3788 2397 3775 2427 3788 2446 3797 2449 3797 2451 3797 2741 3786 2743 3753 2743 3682 2686 3660 2683 3660 2681 3660 2678 3660 2610 3679 2607 3682 1993 3682 1982 3674 1965 3660 1963 3660 1960 3660 1897 3660 1894 3660 1892 3660 1889 3660 1875 3674 1867 3679 1856 3674 1834 3660 1832 3660 1829 3660 1826 3660 1793 3671 1771 3679 1692 3671 1564 3657 1561 3657 723 3660 723 3747"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_343" CONTENT="take" HPOS="751" VPOS="3659" WIDTH="361" HEIGHT="127" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="751 3660 751 3786 1112 3772 1112 3659"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_968" CONTENT="p" HPOS="751" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9987"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="751 3660 751 3786 751 3786 751 3660"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_969" CONTENT="r" HPOS="808" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="808 3660 808 3775 808 3775 808 3660"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_970" CONTENT="e" HPOS="846" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="846 3660 846 3772 846 3772 846 3660"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_971" CONTENT="n" HPOS="894" VPOS="3659" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="894 3659 894 3772 894 3772 894 3659"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_972" CONTENT="n" HPOS="951" VPOS="3659" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="0.9994"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="951 3659 951 3772 951 3772 951 3659"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_973" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1008" VPOS="3659" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1008 3659 1008 3772 1008 3772 1008 3659"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_974" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1055" VPOS="3659" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1055 3659 1055 3772 1055 3772 1055 3659"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_975" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1112" VPOS="3659" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1112 3659 1112 3772 1112 3772 1112 3659"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_344" HPOS="1150" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_345" CONTENT="thus" HPOS="1178" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="190" HEIGHT="114" WC="0.9944"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1178 3658 1178 3772 1368 3772 1368 3658"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_977" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1178" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1178 3658 1178 3772 1178 3772 1178 3658"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_978" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1235" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9974"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1235 3658 1235 3772 1235 3772 1235 3658"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_979" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1264" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1264 3658 1264 3772 1264 3772 1264 3658"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_980" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1320" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.975"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1320 3658 1320 3772 1320 3772 1320 3658"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_981" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1368" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1368 3658 1368 3772 1368 3772 1368 3658"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_346" HPOS="1387" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_347" CONTENT="root:" HPOS="1415" VPOS="3657" WIDTH="294" HEIGHT="115" WC="0.9784"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1415 3658 1415 3772 1709 3772 1709 3673"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_983" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1415" VPOS="3658" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="0.9786"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1415 3658 1415 3772 1415 3772 1415 3658"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_984" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1453" VPOS="3657" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.8793"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1453 3657 1453 3772 1453 3772 1453 3657"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_985" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1501" VPOS="3657" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="115" GC="0.995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1501 3657 1501 3772 1501 3772 1501 3657"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_986" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1548" VPOS="3657" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="115" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1548 3657 1548 3772 1558 3772 1558 3657"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_987" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1586" VPOS="3659" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1586 3659 1586 3772 1586 3772 1586 3659"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_988" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1643" VPOS="3666" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="106" GC="0.9956"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1643 3666 1643 3772 1643 3772 1643 3666"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_989" CONTENT=":" HPOS="1709" VPOS="3673" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="99" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1709 3673 1709 3772 1709 3772 1709 3673"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_348" HPOS="1738" VPOS="3676" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="96"/> <String ID="segment_349" CONTENT="it's" HPOS="1776" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="170" HEIGHT="139" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1776 3677 1776 3772 1946 3799 1946 3660"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_991" CONTENT="c" HPOS="1776" VPOS="3677" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="95" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1776 3677 1776 3772 1776 3772 1776 3677"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_992" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1814" VPOS="3664" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1814 3664 1814 3772 1814 3772 1814 3664"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_993" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1842" VPOS="3665" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1842 3665 1842 3779 1842 3779 1842 3665"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_994" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1889" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1889 3660 1889 3799 1889 3799 1889 3660"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_995" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1946" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1946 3660 1946 3799 1946 3799 1946 3660"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_350" HPOS="1984" VPOS="3676" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="103"/> <String ID="segment_351" CONTENT="ce" HPOS="2013" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="47" HEIGHT="117" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2013 3682 2013 3791 2060 3799 2060 3682"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_997" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2013" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2013 3682 2013 3791 2013 3791 2013 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_998" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2060" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2060 3682 2060 3799 2060 3799 2060 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_352" HPOS="2108" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="117"/> <String ID="segment_353" CONTENT="that we" HPOS="2136" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="199" HEIGHT="117" WC="0.9935"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2136 3682 2136 3799 2335 3799 2335 3682"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1000" CONTENT="q" HPOS="2136" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2136 3682 2136 3799 2136 3799 2136 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1001" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2193" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2193 3682 2193 3799 2193 3799 2193 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1002" CONTENT="'" HPOS="2250" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9989"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2250 3682 2250 3799 2250 3799 2250 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1003" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2278" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2278 3682 2278 3799 2278 3799 2278 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1004" CONTENT="n" HPOS="2335" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.969"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2335 3682 2335 3799 2335 3799 2335 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_354" HPOS="2402" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="99"/> <String ID="segment_355" CONTENT="call" HPOS="2440" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="265" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2440 3682 2440 3794 2705 3787 2705 3667"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1006" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2440" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="112" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2440 3682 2440 3794 2440 3794 2440 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1007" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2487" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2487 3682 2487 3796 2487 3796 2487 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1008" CONTENT="p" HPOS="2544" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2544 3682 2544 3793 2544 3793 2544 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1009" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2601" VPOS="3682" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2601 3682 2601 3791 2601 3791 2601 3682"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1010" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2648" VPOS="3668" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2648 3668 2648 3790 2648 3790 2648 3668"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1011" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2677" VPOS="3660" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2677 3660 2677 3788 2677 3788 2677 3660"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1012" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2705" VPOS="3667" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2705 3667 2705 3787 2705 3787 2705 3667"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="0b30c78c-0e44-4c7e-a794-ef87da605456" HPOS="718" VPOS="3788" WIDTH="2017" HEIGHT="140" BASELINE="720 3881 2735 3887" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="720 3881 718 3911 830 3928 832 3928 2733 3917 2735 3887 2733 3813 2222 3791 2219 3791 2217 3791 2214 3791 2200 3805 2195 3807 2184 3805 2146 3797 2143 3797 2140 3797 2124 3805 2110 3810 2088 3805 2045 3791 2042 3791 2039 3791 2036 3791 2034 3791 2020 3802 2006 3813 1853 3813 1815 3799 1782 3791 1780 3791 1777 3791 1774 3791 1752 3799 1728 3810 1654 3810 1638 3799 1624 3788 1621 3788 1619 3788 1616 3788 1474 3797 1277 3807 1195 3794 1165 3788 1163 3788 1160 3788 1149 3791 1116 3807 1078 3791 1070 3788 1067 3788 1064 3788 1032 3791 922 3802 879 3788 876 3788 873 3788 870 3788 868 3788 865 3788 827 3807 799 3788 797 3788 794 3788 720 3788 720 3881"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_356" CONTENT="marcotter" HPOS="749" VPOS="3788" WIDTH="390" HEIGHT="140" WC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="749 3788 749 3916 1139 3926 1139 3796"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1013" CONTENT="m" HPOS="749" VPOS="3788" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="749 3788 749 3916 749 3916 749 3788"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1014" CONTENT="a" HPOS="834" VPOS="3803" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="125" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="834 3803 834 3928 834 3928 834 3803"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1015" CONTENT="r" HPOS="882" VPOS="3789" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="882 3789 882 3928 882 3928 882 3789"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1016" CONTENT="c" HPOS="920" VPOS="3801" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="920 3801 920 3927 920 3927 920 3801"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1017" CONTENT="o" HPOS="967" VPOS="3797" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="967 3797 967 3927 967 3927 967 3797"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1018" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1025" VPOS="3792" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1025 3792 1025 3927 1025 3927 1025 3792"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1019" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1053" VPOS="3789" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="138" GC="0.9989"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1053 3789 1053 3927 1053 3927 1053 3789"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1020" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1091" VPOS="3797" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1091 3797 1091 3927 1091 3927 1091 3797"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1021" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1139" VPOS="3796" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1139 3796 1139 3926 1139 3926 1139 3796"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_357" HPOS="1177" VPOS="3790" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="136"/> <String ID="segment_358" CONTENT="les" HPOS="1205" VPOS="3796" WIDTH="76" HEIGHT="130" WC="0.9932"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1205 3796 1205 3926 1281 3925 1281 3807"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1023" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1205" VPOS="3796" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9795"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1205 3796 1205 3926 1205 3926 1205 3796"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1024" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1234" VPOS="3800" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1234 3800 1234 3926 1234 3926 1234 3800"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1025" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1281" VPOS="3807" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="118" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1281 3807 1281 3925 1281 3925 1281 3807"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_359" HPOS="1348" VPOS="3803" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="122"/> <String ID="segment_360" CONTENT="pumpkins." HPOS="1377" VPOS="3789" WIDTH="371" HEIGHT="136" WC="0.9948"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1377 3802 1377 3925 1748 3923 1748 3801"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1027" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1377" VPOS="3802" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1377 3802 1377 3925 1377 3925 1377 3802"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1028" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1434" VPOS="3799" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1434 3799 1434 3925 1434 3925 1434 3799"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1029" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1491" VPOS="3796" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1491 3796 1491 3924 1491 3924 1491 3796"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1030" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1519" VPOS="3794" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="130" GC="0.9548"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1519 3794 1519 3924 1519 3924 1519 3794"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1031" CONTENT="r" HPOS="1548" VPOS="3792" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="132" GC="0.9986"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1548 3792 1548 3924 1548 3924 1548 3792"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1032" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1595" VPOS="3789" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="135" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1595 3789 1595 3924 1595 3924 1595 3789"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1033" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1643" VPOS="3803" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1643 3803 1643 3923 1643 3923 1643 3803"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1034" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1700" VPOS="3810" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1700 3810 1700 3923 1700 3923 1700 3810"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1035" CONTENT="." HPOS="1748" VPOS="3801" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1748 3801 1748 3923 1748 3923 1748 3801"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_361" HPOS="1786" VPOS="3792" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="130"/> <String ID="segment_362" CONTENT="The" HPOS="1824" VPOS="3802" WIDTH="66" HEIGHT="120" WC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1824 3802 1824 3922 1890 3922 1890 3813"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1037" CONTENT="L" HPOS="1824" VPOS="3802" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="120" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1824 3802 1824 3922 1824 3922 1824 3802"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1038" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1890" VPOS="3813" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="109" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1890 3813 1890 3922 1890 3922 1890 3813"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_363" HPOS="1938" VPOS="3813" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="109"/> <String ID="segment_364" CONTENT="sol" HPOS="1966" VPOS="3800" WIDTH="105" HEIGHT="121" WC="0.9988"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1966 3813 1966 3921 2071 3921 2071 3800"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1040" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1966" VPOS="3813" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="108" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1966 3813 1966 3921 1966 3921 1966 3813"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1041" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2014" VPOS="3807" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="114" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2014 3807 2014 3921 2014 3921 2014 3807"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1042" CONTENT="l" HPOS="2071" VPOS="3800" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9965"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2071 3800 2071 3921 2071 3921 2071 3800"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_365" HPOS="2109" VPOS="3807" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_366" CONTENT="doit" HPOS="2138" VPOS="3792" WIDTH="152" HEIGHT="128" WC="0.9737"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2138 3798 2138 3920 2290 3920 2290 3794"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1044" CONTENT="d" HPOS="2138" VPOS="3798" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2138 3798 2138 3920 2138 3920 2138 3798"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1045" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2195" VPOS="3807" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2195 3807 2195 3920 2195 3920 2195 3807"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1046" CONTENT="i" HPOS="2252" VPOS="3792" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="128" GC="0.9988"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2252 3792 2252 3920 2252 3920 2252 3792"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1047" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2290" VPOS="3794" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="126" GC="0.8961"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2290 3794 2290 3920 2290 3920 2290 3794"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_367" HPOS="2318" VPOS="3795" WIDTH="10" HEIGHT="124"/> <String ID="segment_368" CONTENT="be" HPOS="2347" VPOS="3796" WIDTH="124" HEIGHT="123" WC="0.9993"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2347 3796 2347 3919 2471 3919 2471 3802"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1049" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2347" VPOS="3796" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="123" GC="0.9968"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2347 3796 2347 3919 2347 3919 2347 3796"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1050" CONTENT="̂" HPOS="2366" VPOS="3797" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="122" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2366 3797 2366 3919 2366 3919 2366 3797"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1051" CONTENT="t" HPOS="2394" VPOS="3798" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="121" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2394 3798 2394 3919 2394 3919 2394 3798"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1052" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2432" VPOS="3800" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="119" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2432 3800 2432 3919 2432 3919 2432 3800"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1053" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2471" VPOS="3802" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="117" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2471 3802 2471 3919 2471 3919 2471 3802"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_369" HPOS="2528" VPOS="3804" WIDTH="9" HEIGHT="114"/> <String ID="segment_370" CONTENT="cou¬" HPOS="2556" VPOS="3805" WIDTH="162" HEIGHT="113" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2556 3805 2556 3918 2718 3917 2718 3812"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1055" CONTENT="c" HPOS="2556" VPOS="3805" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="113" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2556 3805 2556 3918 2556 3918 2556 3805"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1056" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2604" VPOS="3807" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="111" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2604 3807 2604 3918 2604 3918 2604 3807"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1057" CONTENT="u" HPOS="2661" VPOS="3810" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="107" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2661 3810 2661 3917 2661 3917 2661 3810"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1058" CONTENT="¬" HPOS="2718" VPOS="3812" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="105" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2718 3812 2718 3917 2718 3917 2718 3812"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> <TextLine ID="37377e6-c28b-45bd-bf18-6c6b53f1ab64" HPOS="728" VPOS="3917" WIDTH="2002" HEIGHT="188" BASELINE="731 4015 2730 4020" TAGREFS="LINE_TYPE_1"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="731 4015 728 4099 764 4102 767 4102 769 4102 772 4102 772 4099 821 4069 868 4083 870 4083 873 4083 876 4083 914 4069 1234 4069 1294 4099 1302 4102 1305 4102 1307 4102 1430 4099 1433 4099 1436 4099 1452 4086 1471 4099 1474 4102 1477 4102 1479 4102 1482 4105 1542 4105 1542 4102 1545 4102 1548 4102 1550 4099 1591 4069 1741 4069 1777 4097 1782 4102 1785 4102 1788 4102 1791 4102 1793 4102 1807 4097 1848 4083 1875 4097 1889 4105 1892 4105 1894 4105 1897 4105 1924 4097 1984 4080 2094 4097 2148 4105 2151 4105 2154 4105 2156 4105 2167 4097 2200 4072 2236 4088 2238 4088 2241 4088 2244 4088 2285 4078 2320 4097 2337 4105 2339 4105 2342 4105 2345 4105 2348 4105 2356 4097 2369 4086 2405 4097 2435 4105 2438 4105 2440 4105 2727 4094 2730 4020 2730 3941 2678 3919 2675 3919 2672 3919 2566 3941 2460 3941 2342 3941 2339 3938 2301 3919 2298 3919 2296 3919 2293 3919 2219 3938 2217 3941 2006 3941 2004 3938 1971 3922 1968 3922 1965 3922 1867 3938 1856 3938 1640 3938 1632 3938 1608 3917 1605 3917 1602 3917 1509 3917 1507 3917 1504 3917 1466 3936 1422 3936 1242 3936 1223 3917 1220 3917 1217 3917 1214 3917 731 3933 731 4015"/> </Shape> <String ID="segment_371" CONTENT="green" HPOS="757" VPOS="3928" WIDTH="127" HEIGHT="173" WC="0.9989"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="757 3932 757 4101 884 4080 884 3928"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1059" CONTENT="v" HPOS="757" VPOS="3932" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="169" GC="0.9963"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="757 3932 757 4101 757 4101 757 3932"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1060" CONTENT="e" HPOS="795" VPOS="3931" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="154" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="795 3931 795 4085 795 4085 795 3931"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1061" CONTENT="r" HPOS="846" VPOS="3929" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="147" GC="0.9996"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="846 3929 846 4076 846 4076 846 3929"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1062" CONTENT="t" HPOS="884" VPOS="3928" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="152" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="884 3928 884 4080 884 4080 884 3928"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_372" HPOS="922" VPOS="3926" WIDTH="13" HEIGHT="143"/> <String ID="segment_373" CONTENT="of one" HPOS="961" VPOS="3921" WIDTH="140" HEIGHT="148" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="961 3925 961 4069 1101 4069 1101 3921"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1064" CONTENT="d" HPOS="961" VPOS="3925" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="144" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="961 3925 961 4069 961 4069 961 3925"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1065" CONTENT="'" HPOS="1012" VPOS="3924" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="145" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1012 3924 1012 4069 1012 4069 1012 3924"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1066" CONTENT="u" HPOS="1050" VPOS="3922" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="147" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1050 3922 1050 4069 1050 4069 1050 3922"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1067" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1101" VPOS="3921" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="148" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1101 3921 1101 4069 1101 4069 1101 3921"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_374" HPOS="1152" VPOS="3919" WIDTH="13" HEIGHT="150"/> <String ID="segment_375" CONTENT="good" HPOS="1190" VPOS="3918" WIDTH="115" HEIGHT="184" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1190 3918 1190 4069 1305 4102 1305 3936"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1069" CONTENT="b" HPOS="1190" VPOS="3918" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="151" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1190 3918 1190 4069 1190 4069 1190 3918"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1070" CONTENT="o" HPOS="1241" VPOS="3935" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="137" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1241 3935 1241 4072 1241 4072 1241 3935"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1071" CONTENT="n" HPOS="1305" VPOS="3936" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="166" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1305 3936 1305 4102 1305 4102 1305 3936"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_376" HPOS="1369" VPOS="3936" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="164"/> <String ID="segment_377" CONTENT="mulch," HPOS="1407" VPOS="3917" WIDTH="280" HEIGHT="188" WC="0.9991"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1407 3936 1407 4100 1687 4069 1687 3938"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1073" CONTENT="p" HPOS="1407" VPOS="3936" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="164" GC="0.9957"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1407 3936 1407 4100 1407 4100 1407 3936"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1074" CONTENT="a" HPOS="1458" VPOS="3936" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="154" GC="0.9984"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1458 3936 1458 4090 1458 4090 1458 3936"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1075" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1509" VPOS="3917" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="188" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1509 3917 1509 4105 1509 4105 1509 3917"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1076" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1534" VPOS="3917" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="188" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1534 3917 1534 4105 1534 4105 1534 3917"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1077" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1573" VPOS="3917" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="165" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1573 3917 1573 4082 1573 4082 1573 3917"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1078" CONTENT="i" HPOS="1598" VPOS="3917" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="152" GC="0.9985"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1598 3917 1598 4069 1598 4069 1598 3917"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1079" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1636" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="131" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1636 3938 1636 4069 1636 4069 1636 3938"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1080" CONTENT="," HPOS="1675" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="12" HEIGHT="131" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1675 3938 1675 4069 1687 4069 1687 3938"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> <SP ID="segment_378" HPOS="1713" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="13" HEIGHT="131"/> <String ID="segment_379" CONTENT="et," HPOS="1751" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="89" HEIGHT="161" WC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1751 3938 1751 4077 1840 4086 1840 3938"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1082" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1751" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="139" GC="0.9998"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1751 3938 1751 4077 1751 4077 1751 3938"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1083" CONTENT="t" HPOS="1802" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="161" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1802 3938 1802 4099 1802 4099 1802 3938"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1084" CONTENT="," HPOS="1840" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="148" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1840 3938 1840 4086 1840 4086 1840 3938"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_380" HPOS="1853" VPOS="3938" WIDTH="13" HEIGHT="154"/> <String ID="segment_381" CONTENT="les" HPOS="1891" VPOS="3922" WIDTH="77" HEIGHT="183" WC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1891 3934 1891 4105 1968 4085 1968 3922"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1086" CONTENT="l" HPOS="1891" VPOS="3934" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="171" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1891 3934 1891 4105 1891 4105 1891 3934"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1087" CONTENT="e" HPOS="1917" VPOS="3930" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="169" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1917 3930 1917 4099 1917 4099 1917 3930"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1088" CONTENT="s" HPOS="1968" VPOS="3922" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="163" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="1968 3922 1968 4085 1968 4085 1968 3922"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_382" HPOS="2044" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="13" HEIGHT="150"/> <String ID="segment_383" CONTENT="watering" HPOS="2083" VPOS="3924" WIDTH="395" HEIGHT="180" WC="0.9931"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2083 3941 2083 4095 2478 4104 2478 3941"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1090" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2083" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="154" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2083 3941 2083 4095 2083 4095 2083 3941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1091" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2134" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="162" GC="0.9511"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2134 3941 2134 4103 2134 4103 2134 3941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1092" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2185" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="142" GC="0.9909"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2185 3941 2185 4083 2185 4083 2185 3941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1093" CONTENT="o" HPOS="2223" VPOS="3937" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="145" GC="0.9968"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2223 3937 2223 4082 2223 4082 2223 3937"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1094" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2274" VPOS="3924" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="157" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2274 3924 2274 4081 2274 4081 2274 3924"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1095" CONTENT="a" HPOS="2325" VPOS="3931" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="168" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2325 3931 2325 4099 2325 4099 2325 3931"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1096" CONTENT="g" HPOS="2376" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="147" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2376 3941 2376 4088 2376 4088 2376 3941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1097" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2427" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="162" GC="0.9995"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2427 3941 2427 4103 2427 4103 2427 3941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1098" CONTENT="s" HPOS="2478" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="163" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2478 3941 2478 4104 2478 4104 2478 3941"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String>             <SP ID="segment_384" HPOS="2554" VPOS="3941" WIDTH="13" HEIGHT="160"/> <String ID="segment_385" CONTENT="fré¬" HPOS="2593" VPOS="3920" WIDTH="127" HEIGHT="179" WC="0.9988"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2593 3935 2593 4099 2720 4094 2720 3937"/> </Shape> <Glyph ID="char_1100" CONTENT="f" HPOS="2593" VPOS="3935" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="164" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2593 3935 2593 4099 2593 4099 2593 3935"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1101" CONTENT="r" HPOS="2631" VPOS="3927" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="171" GC="0.9999"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2631 3927 2631 4098 2631 4098 2631 3927"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1102" CONTENT="e" HPOS="2669" VPOS="3920" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="176" GC="0.9997"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2669 3920 2669 4096 2669 4096 2669 3920"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1103" CONTENT="́" HPOS="2682" VPOS="3921" WIDTH="13" HEIGHT="175" GC="1.0"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2682 3921 2682 4096 2695 4095 2695 3926"/> </Shape> </Glyph> <Glyph ID="char_1104" CONTENT="¬" HPOS="2720" VPOS="3937" WIDTH="0" HEIGHT="157" GC="0.9947"> <Shape> <Polygon POINTS="2720 3937 2720 4094 2720 4094 2720 3937"/> </Shape> </Glyph> </String> </TextLine> </TextBlock> </PrintSpace> </Page> </Layout> </alto> Pear is a chenopod native to the Alps. Two varieties are grown: poirée blonde and poirée à cardes. Poirée blonde can be sown from March to July in rows or broadcast. It can be thinned out if sown too thickly, which is detrimental to leaf development. It likes water and well-smoked soil, and requires good topdressing when sowing. It can be warmed in winter in the same way as sorrel. Sow in June in a nursery. As soon as it has developed, it is counter-planted 30 to 40 centimetres apart in other half-planted plants. It requires a lot of water. In winter, we cover it with manure, and in spring, we uncover it and remove the spoiled leaves. It is also mounded like artichokes, according to the method used around Lyon. Ordinary pear plants are harvested two or three times, leaf by leaf, and then stored for the following spring, with a good covering of compost for winter. This leaf is used to sweeten sorrel. Chard is harvested the year after planting, in April and May, and used in the same way as cardoons. The seed is harvested from second-year plants that are left to grow in the spring and harvested in July and August; this seed lasts five years. Cultivated pea. See Agricultural crops. Potatoes. The potato is a solanaceous plant native to America. Market gardeners only cultivate this plant on hot beds, as an early crop. The variety of choice is the earlier-ripening marjoram. Tubers chosen for sowing must be of medium size and well differentiated. They are planted in January at a rate of nine to twelve tillers per frame in three rows. As soon as the leaves have developed, the plant is ridged and harvesting begins in late March or April. To harvest the potatoes, we dig the mounds by hand without pulling out the stalks, and we take care to cover any that are not at their full size. The plantation is ruined before full maturity, as this species, grown in this way, can be eaten before the tubers have fully expanded. Frames should be covered when frost is feared; air should be provided as often as possible, and water in small quantities if the drought is too severe. Market gardeners who have a greenhouse can put some in pots, and obtain them free of charge. For open-ground potatoes that market gardeners don't grow, see the Agricultural Crops chapter. 1i This is a portulaceous plant native to America, of which two varieties are grown: green purslane and golden purslane. Purslane is sown on a bed in January, but on its own. It is cut with a knife, and if the bed is immediately cleaned and the paths reworked, a second harvest can be obtained immediately. Sow in the ground from March to August; in summer, sow in the shade. A few seeds can be sown in the ground with other water-loving plants, but must be pulled up before it interferes with other plants. It's always best to sow it alone. After each sowing, cover with potting soil. As the seed is very fine, we mix it with fine compost to avoid sowing too thickly. We let spring-sown seedlings go to seed. Harvest a little before maturity, as the fine seed could be lost. This seed lasts eight years. This plant can be eaten as a salad or cooked. Raadis. The radish is an indigenous cruciferous plant. The preferred varieties are: the scarlet red radish, which is the best of all, because it doesn't take on leaves like other radishes during hot cultivation; on soil, it digs in less quickly and gives more time for harvesting; during the summer, the white-tipped radish is preferred. We still grow the early pink half-long and long radish, the white half-long and long tip, the round purple, the early yellow and the white radish. Turnips, which differ from radishes only in their more elongated roots and are divided into white, early purple and pink, and black radishes are also grown by market gardeners. Radishes can be sown all year round; their seeds are combined with other seeds; sometimes they are sown on their own, in rays in summer, or in ados in spring and autumn. In spring, those that have been sown overados should be covered with straw mats. The first sowings take place in January and the last on October 9. The boxes are placed first, the seed is sown in them and, as soon as the frosts appear, the frames are placed and covered with straw mats if the frosts are severe. These radishes are sold while waiting for the new ones, which are sown in layers in December and January for harvesting in February and March. We sow them in carrots and take care to give them a little air when they start to develop. In January and February, carrot seedlings continue to be sown in trays, cloches and in the air. Give them as much air as you can without danger, and only cover them if it freezes. On airy beds, radishes are covered flat in frosty weather, but if there are plants to be secured like lettuces, a trellis is set up to support the mat. Otherwise, this precaution is not necessary, as radishes are not afraid of being trodden on by straw mats. In late January and February, radishes are sown in the ground on the ridge and on the counter-ridge. In March, they are sown in the open, always in other seeds, and successively throughout the summer. Radishes require a lot of potting soil; the thicker the layer, the longer and more beautiful they become. If radishes are to be sown on their own, they should be sown in rows. Radishes need a lot of water. In summer, harvest twenty or twenty-five days after sowing. Black radish. - This plant is broadcast in June in association with other radishes, and can be planted with romaine or lettuce. As soon as the seed has emerged and the radishes are starting to develop, they are thinned out to give those left enough room to grow. They are harvested in autumn. As radishes are sold all winter long, those that are only sold at this time are put in gauges after the tops have been cut off. They must be covered with bedding in frosty weather. They are sold in bunches or by the dozen. Two varieties are grown: violet de Gournay and black. Like all crucifers, radishes are very unhealthy. Seeds are harvested from plants sown in the spring and transplanted into prepared soil, 20 to 25 centimetres apart in all directions. They grow rapidly, and when the seeds are fully developed, we pull them out and dry them, either by hanging them from poles or trellises, or by leaving them on the ground, taking care to turn them over. The stalks are beaten to isolate the seed, which lasts for five years. Horseradish. See Agricultural crops. Rapunzel. Rapunzel is a native campanulaceae. It is broadcast in June and July. The seed should be mixed with a little dry soil or compost, as it is very fine. You can combine the seed with carrot seed and plant romaine or lettuce in the seedbed, but if you sow it with radishes or spinach, don't plant it. Give it a light mulch and plenty of watering when it sprouts, so that the heat doesn't burn it. Harvesting begins in February or March and continues throughout the winter; the plant is pulled up with its root, as the root and leaf are edible and eaten in salads with lamb's lettuce. This plant doesn't need to be protected in winter, as it doesn't fear frost. Riponce seeds are harvested in the year following sowing; a few are left to rise in a piece of planking, the least attractive being removed, and the seed is harvested in July; it lasts five years Rhubarb is a polygonaceous plant native to Asia. This plant is rarely grown by Parisian market gardeners, but almost all of those in London cultivate it. It is sown in June, or propagated in spring by separating plants. Each plant is spaced one meter apart. The plantation is hoeed in spring, the weeds and bad leaves are cut off, and the petioles are harvested in May, the year after sowing. They are used as a condiment in some dishes and pastries. Two varieties are grown: wavy rhubarb and Nepaul rhubarb; the latter is preferred. The seed lasts four years and is harvested from the best plants of each variety. White Salsisis and Scorsonère. See Agricultural crops. A labiate native to southern Europe, savory is sown in spring in a reserved spot, where it reproduces itself in subsequent years without requiring any care. Used to season sauces. Tetra one. New Zealand spinach is a ficoid native to Oceania. It is sown in March in layers, after soaking the seeds because of their thick skin. As soon as frost is no longer a concern, plant tetragonia in light, well-tilled soil, 40 to 50 centimetres apart. They can be sown on site in April. When the stems cover the ground, cut off the leaves at the tips of the young shoots. It's these leaves that are used as 1. spinach. It's more of a vegetable than a market-garden plant. To harvest the seed, plant a few stalks in a corner of the garden. It is dried in the shade. It lasts for five years. Tomato. The tomato is a solanaceous plant native to South America. It can be grown in hot pots from November in pineapple greenhouses, but market gardening is done in beds or trenches. Sowing takes place in January under warm conditions, as does transplanting. Between 200 and 300 plants are placed in each frame, which are then planted in March and April in a warm environment on a bed or trench 1.33 m wide, with frames or cloches. Nine tomatoes are planted under each frame, 40 centimetres apart, but only one per bell, leaving 46 centimetres between each plant. Two or three rows of bells are planted, but if only two rows are planted, the trench should be reduced to 1 meter wide and 30 to 35 centimeters thick. The tomato is given air as soon as it is picked up. If you don't want to cover it with mats, it's essential to do so; however, you should cover it in the early stages to speed up recovery. This plant is very voracious and can be carried away in wood; it needs a lot of air, but is very sensitive to frost: these precautions require assiduous care. For the first method, tomatoes require topping, after which three or four stems are left to grow from the base. Care should be taken to remove any eyes that appear on the stems in the leaf axils, and as soon as the bunch has developed, it can be stopped immediately if you are sure of the temperature. But most of the time, as we're still afraid of the cold, which could cause the first flowers to abort, we leave a second bunch to develop to avoid any accidents that could happen to the first. In this way, six bunches will have developed instead of three, if the temperature remains favorable, since the two left behind will bear fruit. It's true that leaving only one bunch per stem will result in a slightly earlier harvest, but with six bunches you'll have almost a double crop. The six bunches are placed on two rows of wire, the lower supporting the first bunches and the upper the second bunches. In the second method, the tomato is not topped, but only two stems are left with the head, on which two bunches are allowed to develop, and, with the head forming a central bunch, there are five bunches per plant. This process produces fruit for sale a little earlier than the previous one; as the head bunch absorbs almost all the sap, the lateral stems develop only slowly and produce little fruit, whereas in the previous process, the stems all develop equally and the fruit sets almost all at the same time. Market gardeners who use the second method only sell a small quantity of tomatoes harvested from the top bunches, eight days earlier than other market gardeners, and only sell the rest three weeks later. This plant requires great care. All shoots should be removed as soon as the bunches are well tied. If the weather is hot, water abundantly, even when in full bloom; but if it's humid, even without much rain, stop watering. Cold damp weather makes tomatoes sick, but it's essential to keep them wet during hot weather. Harvesting takes place in July and August. To trellis tomatoes, plant a good stake every four feet in each row. Galvanized wire (No. 9 or 10) is stretched and tied to the first stake, then to the second stake, making a turn after tightening the wire, and from there to the third, doing the same, and so on to the end of the row. Care is taken not to cut this wire, which will still be used for the same purpose in subsequent years, but to wrap it around the stake to raise the second row to the required height, and so on to the end. Instead of doing all three rows at once, wait a few days after doing the first row before doing the second, which is then placed at the same height as the heads, making for more regular trellising. This trellising is done with good rye straw. This work makes it easier to care for the plant; the fruit develops more quickly, and the harvest ripens faster and better. Hot tomatoes are also planted in layers of chicory, half of which is hot. Field-grown tomatoes are sown hot in February and March and transplanted hot in the same way. The plants require the same care and labor as the first tomatoes. We believe there is a benefit in topping, but there is less inconvenience in not topping than with the first crop. Tomatoes must also be trellised and leaf buds removed. Tomatoes are also grown under cold frames and cloches; they can be planted in half or even three-quarters-ripened chicory, but experience has shown that it is preferable to plant them on their own in both hot and cold conditions. Among cultivated varieties, it's the small, early variety that's planted in the hot season; the medium-sized variety is planted in both the hot and cold seasons; the large variety is planted in pots. Tomatoes are planted in the ground, 50 to 60 centimeters apart, in three rows, in a standard bed 2.35 meters wide; for this purpose, a good exposure is always chosen, either on a ridge or a counter-bed. You can start planting as early as May 15th, but you risk losing the planting if there is a late frost, which happens all too often. Under frames and cold cloches, planting can start as early as the first half of April. Field tomatoes can be tied around a sturdy stake rather than trellised, although the latter method is preferable. Cold harvesting follows hot harvesting in August and September, and ground harvesting takes place in September and October. Care is the same for all. As soon as the fruit begins to redden, the leaves can be removed, provided the sun is not too hot. The seed is harvested by picking the earliest and best-formed fruits each season, as soon as they are fully red. They are left to ripen in the shade and in the open air. Then we open them and drop the seed and pulp into a bucket full of water. - The seed is then collected in a colander, with the pulp carefully separated, and the cleaned seed falls to the bottom of the bucket. After changing the water several times, the seed is collected and dried as quickly as possible, as it germinates easily if it retains a little moisture. It should therefore be stirred every day, or spread out very widely on a cloth. - Tomato seeds germinate over a period of five years. The tomato fruit is a highly prized edible whose pulp is used as a condiment in a host of culinary preparations. Thyme. A labiate plant native to southern Europe, thyme is sown in spring, but is generally propagated by separating its large clumps into smaller ones, which are usually planted in rows or borders. The seed is harvested a little before maturity and dried in the shade, lasting three years. Thyme branches are used as seasoning in sauces. Seed-bearing plants of the same family and of different varieties should not be placed close together, as hybridization could easily occur through the effect of the wind or the travels of butterflies and bees. Almost all seed harvesting takes place in July and August. Only squeeze the seeds when they are completely dry, seal them in bags with labels, keep them dry and out of the reach of mice, which are very fond of them. SPECIAL CROPS. We have grouped together under this heading the crops that some horticulturists have made a specialty of, either because they require special equipment, as in the case of pineapples, strawberries and forced asparagus; or because they require special conditions in the building where they are grown, as in the case of mushroom and watercress plants. The cultivation of these plants for the hall trade would be unprofitable if done on a small scale; market gardeners therefore have no interest in indulging in it; it is found, apart from specialties, in the kitchen gardens of large houses, at least for certain plants, and it is with the aim of being useful to the gardeners of these large houses that we are writing this chapter. We will deal here with the cultivation of pineapple, edible mushroom, watercress and thermosiphon forced strawberry. Pineapple. The pineapple is a bromeliad native to South America, whose fragrant fruit is much sought-after on opulent tables. The high price of these cone-shaped fruits, which are comparable to pine cones, has led some horticulturists to specialize in this crop, despite the assiduous care it requires. Pineapples are generally propagated by eyelet. - Sowing is a slow process, but it is sometimes rewarded with the creation of a new variety. Carnations are planted in the first fortnight of October. They are best taken from the leaf axils, where they are always strongest; only keep the old plant if you're short of seedlings. Before planting, remove 5 or 6 centimetres of the leaves from the part of the plant to be planted, and after this cut has been made cleanly and clearly, place each eyelet in a 10 to 12-centimetre diameter pot in heather soil. You can also multiply pineapples by crowns, in the same way, and even keep them for a month in the shade in a dry place, to be used if the need arises. Towards the end of September, a 60-centimeter-high layer of mixed manure, half new and half old, is applied. If the latter is not available, leaves can be used; this is covered with 20 to 30 centimetres of tannin and the pots are placed on top, spaced according to their strength and as close as possible to the glass. The frames are covered with straw mats overnight. As soon as vegetation starts to appear, air is supplied in small quantities and from the opposite side to the wind; the pineapples are watered at the base when they need it, taking care that the water does not penetrate into the horns of the leaves. Warm up the bed with hot manure whenever necessary. In spring, we multiply the watering, as this plant only fears humidity during the winter; we put the pots on another layer where the tannin has been replaced by soil. This layer should be of medium strength, given the temperature of the season. The plants are taken out of the pot to inspect the roots and remove any rotten ones; a few leaves are removed from the bottom, then replanted in clods on the new layer, where they remain until September. Continue to provide frequent air and watering. In September, the roots are examined again, as they renew themselves every year; the pineapples are tied with a straw tie to facilitate repotting, which takes place in 24-centimetre pots. They are then placed back on the bed and cared for in the same way as carnations, until they put down roots. In January, they are returned to the greenhouse, where a thick layer of earth or moss has been prepared, so that the pots can be easily hidden and placed 50 centimetres apart. The pineapples are left in this position until the fruits appear. In July, after reshuffling the layer, we replace the tan or moss we've used with soil. Once the pineapples have been placed in the greenhouse, instead of making a layer, the pots can be buried in tannin or moss and placed on a tarpaulin, under which a thermosiphon circulates. The heating should be regulated so as not to exceed 25 to 30 degrees centigrade, whatever the season. The water used to water the plants must also be at greenhouse temperature. Basins are also useful. Water laden with animal or plant detritus is preferable to pure water for watering at the foot. As second-season plants need less heat than first-season plants, the pineapple greenhouse is usually divided into two parts by a glass partition. First-season fruit ripen from July to September. Second-season fruit, obtained from plants where the temperature has been maintained at 12 degrees until March, when they receive the same care as the others, are harvested from September to December. The Cayenne, Martinique and Providence pineapples are among the most popular varieties, while the Mont-Serrat, Enville and Comte de Paris varieties are among those obtained from seed. It takes two years to produce a few pineapples, and it's easy to see how much material, fertilizer and manpower this small amount of fruit required. It's not surprising, then, that they continue to fetch a very high price, far higher than that of the pineapples from the West Indies that steamers now bring rapidly to our ports and that the railroads bring to Paris. These latter fruits, cut before they are fully ripe, do not retain their bouquet and are far inferior in flavor to the products of the greenhouses of our skilled specialists. Edible mushroom. The edible mushroom is an acotyledonous plant of the agaric family. It grows spontaneously in meadows, in crops and mainly in diaper debris, which has earned it the name "diaper mushroom". This plant does not reproduce from seed, and the sporules it leaves to the wind in its natural state cannot be collected or preserved. Before any cultivation, it is necessary to obtain a greyish-white, mould-like material called "blanc de champignon", which generally develops during the fermentation of horse manure, and which is entwined in this manure by numerous, intertwined fibers and radicles. Recent observations tend to prove that bran and oats are necessary for the 12 feeding of animals in whose manure the white fungus develops. It would also seem useful for this manure to come from male animals. In any case, spawn is distinguished from mold by its pronounced mushroom odor. It is collected and stored in a dry place. Mushrooms are grown either in the open air, or in underground quarries or cellars with low humidity. To grow in the open air, unload a wagon or two of good whole horse manure, fork it over and wet it. This manure is then wetted with a pitchfork, and mixed twice more at eight-day intervals, wetting only if the manure is too dry. Before using this manure, it must be well made and have lost none of its heat. The land is then prepared by ploughing, and the manure is laid out in 60-centimeter-wide stacks, with a path of equal width between each. A layer of manure 60 centimetres wide at the base and 8 or 10 centimetres at the top, over an indefinite length, is called a millstone. To make the grindstone, the manure is placed on the base width, piled up with the hands and squeezed with the feet and knees; the finished grindstone has the shape of a 60 to 70-centimeter-high speed bump. Once the wheel has been completed, the manure is left to ferment for a further eight days, then a pinch of mushroom spawn is introduced on each side and in the middle of the body of the wheel. This work is called larding the wheel. The pinch of spawn thus introduced is called a mise. Each bet should be spaced 20 to 25 centimetres apart. When you see that the white is developing, you plow the bottom of the paths, between the millstones, and bring in good free soil. When you don't have enough, you use small wooden shovels to cover the millstones with earth to a thickness of 2 or 3 centimetres. This is called gobeting the millstones, and then you cover them with a layer of litter called a chemise, and put 2 or 3 centimetres of manure on top. The next steps are: 1° in the event of frost, to cover the millstones with manure or straw mats; 2° during mushroom picking, to keep the millstones warm by occasionally placing a few hottées of good manure in the paths. Picking is done every other day, whatever the weather. You take a smooth, sharp fork, so as not to remove the liner from the millstone; you put the manure on either side of you; then you take two mannes, one empty to receive the harvest, the other full of clean earth to fill in the holes of the mushrooms you've picked and sprinkle over those that have just sprouted. To pick the mushrooms, you take the shirt from the millstone with both hands, turn it over on your knees, pick the mushrooms, fill in each hole and carefully replace the shirt. Once the mushrooms have been picked, the liner is covered with manure, and if the millstone needs heat, a small quantity of hot manure is brought in and placed only in the foot of the millstone. If the millstone is too dry, two or three watering cans are poured over the liner before replacing the manure. The fungus fears excess drought, but is no less afraid of excess humidity. Mushrooms can only be grown in the open air from October to December, as the electrical state of the air seems to have an unfortunate influence on their cultivation. To grow mushrooms in a cellar, the moulds are prepared in the same way as for cultivation in the open air; however, they are not covered with shirt or manure. All exits are sealed to intercept light and prevent the outside temperature from penetrating, as this is the key to the mushroom's whiteness. The same precautions are unnecessary in the quarries. The great depth of these 12 underground quarries means that they maintain a uniform temperature and that the electricity of the outside air has no effect below the 40 to 50 meters separating them from ground level. As a result, mushrooms can be grown in any season. Mushroom growers are convinced that syphilis exerts an unfortunate influence on the mushroom when it comes into contact with people suffering from this disease. Nor do they allow women near or in contact with their millstones. They support these beliefs with observations that may be poorly made. It would be useful for a scientific commission to study their value. We have already spoken of the influence of syphilis on the cultivation of melons; we have often heard these beliefs, which are based on fact, treated as absurd without proof. If a commission wanted to prove the absurdity of these beliefs, we would be happy to provide them with a few melons that could be touched by patients from the Hôpital du Midi, on condition that we would be compensated if the harvest was lost. The white that develops spontaneously in trenches or in manure is called blanc vierge. Mushrooms are prized as a delicacy and seasoning. A conscript who had taken refuge in a quarry and was trying to grow some vegetables is credited with discovering that mushroom spawn can grow in the dark and at a constant temperature. Open-air cultivation was practiced as early as the 16th century. Watercress. Watercress is a native cruciferous plant that grows spontaneously in shallow watercourses near the springs that feed them. As this plant has depurative properties and, at the same time, a pleasant, aperitive flavor that makes it highly sought-after as a food and seasoning, spring water has been used to cultivate it, which began around Senlis, on the banks of the Nonnette, at the beginning of this century. The land where watercress is grown is called a créssonnière. It is located below the spring that feeds it. A series of interconnected pits or ditches is dug across the slope, and the flow of water is regulated by valves set up at the points of communication. Once the ditches have been prepared and communication with the springs has been interrupted by a first valve, a seedling of watercress is planted in the spring at the bottom of each ditch, which has been thoroughly cleaned and from which any aquatic plant that might hinder the development of the watercress has been removed. Instead of seedlings, cuttings taken in August can be planted at the bottom of ditches, after running a trickle of water to moisten the soil. The cuttings are placed 12 to 15 centimetres apart. After a short time, the cuttings are rooted and the cress soon covers the soil. At this point, 12 to 18 centimetres of water are allowed to flow in, a sufficient quantity for this crop. If the plant has been well cared for, well chosen and well cleaned of any parasitic weeds, once established the cress bed requires no further care other than precautions against frost. To this end, water is left to rise above the cress for as long as the frost lasts, but this water must be drained off as soon as the temperature eases, as this submersion tires the plant. During thaws and rainstorms, the mother spring must be given special drainage to prevent the pits from silting up, which would kill the cress. A discharge pipe with no connection to the watercress bed is therefore essential. It is useful to protect the pits from the cold and heat by planting hedges between the pits, but it is important to prevent leaves from falling into the pits, as they prevent the cress from growing. This can be achieved by securing them with a trellis or straw mat. Watercress can be harvested using a large plank laid across the ditch; it can be cut off with a serpette, but it is preferable to detach it with the toenail to avoid loosening the plant. During the summer, as long as the season is favorable, a pit can be cut every three weeks, but if the season is cold, wait two months before making a second cut. When the year's harvest is finished, the pit is dried out and a light layer of well-consumed cow manure is spread over the entire surface, then the cress is pushed back into the pit with a long-handled board. Two workers armed with this instrument walk along the edge of the pit and push back the feet of cress lifted during cutting. A watercress plantation can last a long time if it is carefully tended, but as soon as you realize that it is withering away, you need to think about renewing it. To this end, we pull up the watercress with its roots, lay it on the banks between the ditches, plough the pit, smoke it with well-consumed cow manure and replant the watercress as we did at the beginning. Some growers pull up the plant every year, have the mud removed from the ditch, smoke the bottom after a good ploughing and replant the old plant. Sandstone pipes 8 centimeters in diameter are used for both water intake and drainage. If you want good-quality cress, let them flow freely. Valves are used only to stop the water flowing in times of frost, and to divert it in times of thaw and storms. Watercress seed is harvested from the best plants in each pit in August. It lasts four years. In addition to its use as a food, watercress is the basis of all antiscorbutic preparations; used alone, it is enough to cure sailors of scurvy. It is grown in the Paris area, wherever it has been possible to use a spring or stream located at the base of a plot of land where a watercress bed can be established. Thermosiphon forced strawberries. After having grown strawberry seedlings as described in the chapter on Cultivation, instead of planting them in September in the ground, they are planted in 15-centimeter diameter pots filled with good soil, into which each strawberry plant is placed with its root ball. Boxes are made to hold the frames, and the pots are placed tightly together inside, covered to protect them from frost. They should be given a few basins to encourage recovery. In December or January, place a tier of four shelves above the thermosiphon pipes and cover them with tarpaulins lined with stretchers. These tarpaulins are secured with good supports on each side, and the pots are placed tightly together on this tier, after removing dead leaves and refreshing the soil. Cover at night with straw mats and maintain a temperature of 12 to 15 degrees under the tarpaulins. The plants are given frequent basins and air when the temperature permits. This costly method produces strawberries in March, whereas other methods only produce strawberries in April and May. Pineapple growers take advantage of the temperature in their greenhouses to harvest strawberries forced by this process. Potted strawberry plants can produce a second crop if they are put back in the ground and watered. Sweet potato. The sweet potato is a convolvulaceae native to tropical America. Although this plant requires no more care than the potato to thrive in the south of France, in the climate of Paris it becomes delicate and difficult, and can only be raised successfully by the following means. Multiply it by its starchy tubers, similar to those of the potato. Choose the healthiest ones and plant them on a warm bed covered with soil or compost. Boxes and frames are placed over this layer, and it is covered at night with straw mats. The eyes develop and soon reach 6 to 8 centimetres in length. At this point, they are removed and transplanted into 6-centimeter diameter pots, which are then buried in another layer. Each cutting is covered with a bell, given a few basins and air to firm up the plant when it is well established. A third layer of good soil mixed with compost is then prepared, and three potato plants per frame are planted, stoves are placed in the paths and mats are laid down overnight. Instead of potting the potato plant, you can put it in place straight away by cutting off part of the tuber with each bud, which will serve to nourish the plant and facilitate its recovery. As the tubers grow, they rise above the soil and need to be replenished with soil, air and frequent watering. Harvesting begins in May or June. The largest ones are removed, and the others are covered with soil. Vegetation lasts until autumn. In April, potatoes can be planted on old carrot beds, one per cloche, and covered with manure until they recover. Then remove the manure and give them some air. In May, we make square holes 40 to 50 centimetres square, 50 to 60 centimetres apart. These holes are 35 to 40 centimetres deep. Fill them with good manure, cover with a good thickness of soil and plant three potato vines in each hole. They are covered with a shaded cloche, and when the plants are well established, they are uncovered and left in the open air. Harvesting takes place in October; the tubers must be handled with care, as they rot easily if bruised or crumpled. To preserve them, let them dry carefully, then put them in a crate on a bed of tannin, cover the first bed with tannin and place a new layer of potatoes on top, and so on until the harvest is tight. If tannin is not available, dry soil can be used. These boxes should be kept in a warm, dry place. They can also be kept in place by covering them with frames or dry manure, to protect them from humidity and frost. This is probably the best way to preserve them, as the little vegetation they can retain tends to make them healthier. They can be stored in this way until February and March. This plant rarely produces ripe seeds, even in the south of France. In fact, we don't try to obtain any, since it can be taken from cuttings. Potato tubers are used in the same way as potato tubers; there's nothing more delicate about them than the good varieties of the latter plant, so in Paris, potatoes are only grown as an object of fantasy and curiosity. The same is true of the Chinese yam, which is easier to cultivate and, for this reason, will probably compete seriously with Parmentier's tubers in a few years' time. AGRICULTURAL GROWING High rents, limited space in Paris and its suburbs, rising labor costs and all kinds of overheads have forced market gardeners to banish vegetable plants from their gardens, as they take up too much soil, require too much space and do not require constant care. On the other hand, the same causes produced the same effects: farmers in the greater suburbs were forced to give up growing cereals, as they could not compete with distant producers whose rent and labor costs remained relatively low. As a result, they gave themselves over on a large scale to the cultivation of vegetable plants neglected by market gardeners, so that the outskirts of Paris, for several leagues around, present, almost without interruption, the appearance of an immense vegetable garden. We won't go back over the plants we've already discussed in depth in the section on market gardening; this chapter will only deal with those plants for which we've reserved it, as indicated by the cross-references in chapter v. Artichokes, asparagus and beet are grown by suburban growers using the methods we have described, so we won't return to them here. Carrots. Growers only produce large, long red and long yellow carrots for market in winter. They are sown at the same time as market garden carrots for winter consumption, and require the same care. These carrots can be recognized at the market by their short heads and the tie that runs through them. Others are sold as Crécy carrots in bunches with their tops. Cabbage. Quintal cabbage. - Requires deep plowing and abundant manuring. It is sown in the first half of March, a little light, in nurseries, thinned out as needed and planted in April, very light, as this type of cabbage produces enormous apples. It's the most prized cabbage for making sauerkraut. Harvesting takes place in October and November. Early Savoy cabbage. - It is sown in May, planted in June and July, and starts to grow in late autumn; it is kept until March. Ordinary Savoy cabbage. - Sown in February and March, planted in April, harvested in June, July and August. Savoy cabbage, known as Vertus. - Sow from April to June, 60 cm apart. They need to be edged and watered. When winter arrives, we pull up all the cabbages and put them in a trench with their heads facing north, avoiding the sun, which is destructive after the frost. However, if the frost is very severe, cover the plants with manure or straw mats. Another method is to place the cabbages, root up, in a plough furrow, which is then covered by tracing a parallel furrow. However, the soil must be covered in frosty weather. Brussels sprouts. - Sow from February to June. They are planted in areas where early potatoes have been harvested, and the small apples that sprout from the leaf axils are harvested from October through the winter. Non-headed and large-ribbed cabbage - Sowing takes place in June, planting in July and August, and harvesting of leaves 18. takes place throughout the winter until May.

Kohlrabi and turnip cabbage. - They are sown in May and June, and planted in July, with 35 to 40 centimetres between plants. Like all cabbages, they need water, deep ploughing and good manuring. As soon as frost approaches, these root cabbages should be placed in a greenhouse. Crambé, or sea cabbage. - Sow in March, or transplant. It can be planted with cuttings, which speeds up harvesting. Cuttings are taken in pots under a frame. For this purpose, the roots are cut to 6 or 8 centimetres in length and planted again in pots on a warm layer. They are treated like any other plant reproduced in this way, and then planted out. We've already talked about forced cultivation. When we leave it in the open air, we have to butter it. We start this operation at the end of January and continue it every fortnight, in order to have several successive harvests. To butter each plant, pour a 16-centimeter-thick pile of potting soil or light earth over it, and cover it with a good bed of manure or leaves to stimulate vegetation. A month later, when the leaves begin to appear, we cut them off at ground level, taking care to spare the eyes below. The plant is ridged again, and a second harvest is made in the same way, after which the ridges are removed. This plant can then be forced like asparagus, as mentioned above. Shallot. The shallot is a lily native to Palestine. It is propagated by planting bulbs in February or March, 6 to 8 centimetres apart and almost flush with the ground. Choose the thinnest and longest bulbs for planting. This plant does not like water. It requires some hoeing in summer. The largest bulbs are sold. Those reserved for planting should be put in a dry place after being exposed to the sun for two or three days. Shallots are used for seasoning. Broad beans. Julienne, marsh, Windsor and green beans are grown in the open ground. Sowing takes place in February, March and April in well-tilled soil that has been smoked or amended by a previous crop. Sowing is done in clumps or in rays; hoeing and pinching are used, as described for the early cultivation of bog beans. Beans. Field seedlings are sown in April and May at the bottom of hills and in good exposure. Siliceous soils are preferred for this crop. Laon hâtif, flageolet, soissons nain, Massy, Suisse and Bagnolet varieties are sown. Once the soil is well loosened, amended and sufficiently dry, sow in clumps using a spade, rake or hoe. Two people can do the sowing quickly. One makes the hole, the other puts in the seed, which the second covers with the soil removed for the second hole. Five or six beans are placed in each hole, spaced 25 to 30 centimetres apart in all directions. Careful growers take a little longer and cover each hole with a small shovelful of compost. Beans are also sown in rays 4 to 5 centimetres deep, in twos or threes 12 to 15 centimetres apart. Cover with 2 or 3 centimetres of soil or compost. As soon as they have developed, the rays are folded back and hoeing is carried out as needed. All these beans are harvested green. If the soil is damp, don't sow before May 15. Beans to be harvested dry are sown in May and early June. The varieties used are the Soissons bean, the sabre bean, the Prague bean, the butter bean and the predomme. They are sown in clumps 25 to 30 centimeters apart, and raked before they are rowed. Rakes are small poles, sharpened at one end to rest on the ground, and one is spiked between two clumps. Beans climb after the oars, which are brought in after harvest for use in subsequent years. You can use twigs from faggots for the reams, but harvesting is not as easy and you gain nothing, apart from the fact that it's not as pleasant to look at. As all the beans are not dried at the same time, they have to be picked one after the other, and the pods have to be dried in the shade. When the crop occupies a very large area, we don't take so many precautions: we pull up the plant with its seeds, dry it in clumps by suspending it by the foot in the air or in attics, and in many localities we beat it with a flail. It's a good idea to hull only those that you reserve for personal use, as they cook more easily and taste better... Turnip. This native cruciferous plant is broadcast from March 15th to September 1st, at a rate of 30 grams per acre. Turnips for winter consumption should be sown in the first half of August. When they are strong enough, they are thinned out. Seedlings sown during the summer should be watered; otherwise they set seed without taproot. Turnips start selling in June and continue until April. We pull them up before the frosts and pile them in a pit 1 meter wide and 80 centimeters deep, after cutting off the head. We cover the pit with straw to protect it from the frosts. The following varieties are grown: Long des Vertus, Croissy turnip, Rose du Palatinat, Freneuse, Morigny and Meaux gray turnips, early flat white, early flat red, Scottish yellow, Stone spherical yellow, Golden ball turnip and Astringham turnip. Onions. We have dealt elsewhere with the cultivation of white onions. Red and yellow onions are grown as agricultural crops. Field onions are sown in the first half of March at a rate of 100 grams of seed per acre. The seedbed is harrowed with a fork. The soil must have been well ploughed and smoked, or only amended with previous crops. It would be a good idea, which is almost never done, to cover the seed with a good layer of compost. The expense would certainly be amply covered by the product of the seed, which the wind would not scatter. It's a mistake to smoke when sowing; the land set aside for this crop should be smoked after harvest. Onions should be weeded frequently, and thinned out if they are too tightly packed. If water is readily available, it's a good idea to water in dry weather, and as soon as they have reached maturity, you can speed them up by passing a roller or an empty barrel over the tops. Onions are harvested as much as possible in dry weather, and left to mature on the ground. They can be stored in a well-ventilated attic, laid out on the ground or suspended in bunches from the ceiling, after the tops have been woven. Pale red onions are sown very thickly in May or June, to produce small onions that can be harvested in October or November. Onions stored in the attic are transplanted in February, 10 or 11 centimetres apart in all directions. They are harvested in July and August. Growers also sow large white onions in February and March, treating them in the same way as red onions. Red onions are harvested from seed in exactly the same way as white onions. Preserved onions must be protected from frost, although they are not very sensitive to it. They should be covered if it freezes hard, or placed in a room with a fire. They should also be protected from humidity, which causes them to sprout. Dandelion. Dandelion grows spontaneously in meadows, and is sought after as a healthy, refreshing salad at a time when others are largely lacking. Growers around Paris sow dandelions in spring in ploughed and amended soil. They transplant them in June and July and cover them with soil or compost in autumn. The leaves are then white and more attractive than those of wild chicory. If you're not transplanting, it's a good idea to cover spring seedlings in the autumn with good soil or even potting compost, for a better harvest. The winged seed of the dandelion flies away at the slightest breeze, so harvest it in the morning when the dew falls, and dry it. It lasts three years. Eultivated corn. A legume native to southern Europe. Since the railroads have brought produce from the south to Paris in a matter of hours, market gardeners have abandoned the early cultivation of peas, which they used to do in the following way, which is still well known to those with kitchen gardens. Sow in November in two or three cold frames. Once the plant has emerged, prepare as many frames as you want to keep. Place them with their boxes in a well-exposed spot; in a "costière" for example, make shelves and spade the peas with their clods. As the vegetation develops, the peas are laid down, as is done for early beans, and they soon flower, so they are pinched off above the fourth flower. Be careful not to throw away the pinched ends, as they make excellent soup. Ventilate as needed, water if the weather is too dry, and harvest as soon as the seed has formed. Sowing can continue under a frame or on a warm bed in February for replanting in the open air. These plantings should be covered with mats or litter in frosty weather. Pinching and watering are essential. Species grown in this way are : Prince Albert, the early dwarf, the ordinary Michaux pea and the Michaux de Hollande, which is the earliest. Growers sow the Michaux de Hollande, Michaux de Rueil and petits pois de Paris varieties in November and December at midday exposure. They choose siliceous soils and sow two liters per acre. These seedlings are sown in rays and covered with potting soil, which can be bought from market gardeners at this time of year. Once the seedlings have sprouted, the rays are filled in by hoeing; ripening is activated by pinching. The last sowings, in February and March, are of Clamart peas and wrinkled peas. In July, Auvergne peas and peas without parchment are sown. The land occupied by the first peas is then used to grow carrots, turnips, potatoes, savoy cabbage and so on. The plants to be used as seedbeds are sown in the field, pulled out before they are completely dried out, placed in heaps and, once they have begun to ferment, dried out. The seed lasts five years. The first field potato season takes place in February and March in good exposure and includes the following varieties: marjoram, Schaw, early dwarf, Abstone Quidney, etc. Planting is done with a spade, using healthy, medium-sized tubers. Plant in a checkerboard pattern, 30 to 35 centimetres apart in all directions, place a little soil on top and fill in with potting soil or well-made slurry. Cultivate and hoe as needed. This first season's produce is harvested before full maturity. These potatoes are replaced by Michaux peas for sale in September, or by a planting of savoy cabbage. Only those plants reserved for seed are left to ripen. The second season is planted a little lighter in March and April and receives the same care. They are also harvested before maturity. These potatoes are for winter consumption and for sowing. Those destined for the latter must be weeded and hoeed, and the land must have been ploughed several times and well fertilized with manure. Only those potatoes that have been harvested from seed should be harvested. The berry is left to ripen on the stalk, then, after picking, it is crushed in water to separate it from the pulp and left to dry in the shade. The seed lasts for three years. Tubers for planting must be harvested when ripe. They are left on the ground and in the air, where they turn green; they are then brought in dry and placed in crates without being pressed. They must be protected from humidity and frost, but not deprived of air, otherwise they would grow. These are the care requirements for early varieties. Winter potatoes are harvested in September and October. When they are fully ripe and the tops have dried out. If the weather is dry, it's a good idea to leave the tubers in the air for a while. As soon as they are dry, we pile them up and lock them in airless cellars, where they are shuffled every ten or twelve days when frost threatens. When frosts are no longer to be feared, it's a good idea to take them out of the cellars, where they would grow, and put them under cover in a dry, well-ventilated place such as an attic. Horseradish. Horseradish is a cruciferous plant that can be propagated by planting sections of its root in autumn in well-ploughed, well-smoked soil. This plant requires frequent hoeing and weeding, and is only harvested after three years. It's the roots that are in demand. Grated, they are used as mustard and are known as German mustard or capuchin mustard. This plant is not allowed to go to seed; it would take too long to grow from seed. Salsify and scorzonera. These plants are native composites that grow spontaneously in meadows and whose succulent root, sought-after for food, has led to the introduction of cultivation in the Paris area. Sowing takes place in March, April and May, either broadcast or in rows, and requires 120 to 130 grams of seed per acre. The soil must be well fertilized and deeply ploughed to accommodate the taproot of these plants; however, it is preferable for the fertilizer to come from a previous harvest. These plants would benefit from a good basinage if water were available nearby at the time of emergence. If the seedbed is too thick, it should be thinned out. Sales take place from October to spring. In winter, pull out all the roots, put them in gauges and protect them from frost with a layer of dry manure. To harvest from seed, the best roots are selected in autumn and replanted; in spring, the salsify flowers and the seed is harvested in July, in the morning with the dew, because its wings blow away in the slightest wind. The seed lasts for two years. Scorzonera differs from salsify in its black bark, and is sown less thickly, needing only 100 to 110 grams of seed per acre. It flowers as early as the first year, so seeds can be obtained at this time; however, it is generally treated in the same way as salsify. Engrals for agricultural crops. We have seen that market gardeners use only horse manure, and cow manure when they cannot obtain sufficient quantities of the former. Farmers use all types of manure, and in the Paris area, they mainly use the fertilizer known as slurry. Sludge is the product of street sweeping. This product, used in Paris for two centuries by contractors, is the most widespread fertilizer for crops in the greater suburbs. What is swept up each day is collected in piles and left to ferment. This consists of plant and animal products, in the center of which considerable heat soon develops, while an enormous mass of hydrogen sulfide is released from the detritus. To preserve its value, the sludge must be prevented from losing this gas, which is why it is handled with a pitchfork when putrid fermentation becomes too much of a problem. It is even sometimes necessary to stop it, especially in hot, humid weather; this is achieved by adding plaster to the mass. We call green sludge that which has been recently collected, and made sludge that which has been fermenting for six months to a year. The average price of sludge is 9 francs per cubic meter, delivered 15 kilometers from Paris. Its useful effect is said to last four years. It is mainly to turnip, cabbage and other cruciferous crops that slurry manure is applied, with good reason, as this sulfurous fertilizer is perfectly suited to plants that owe their properties to the presence of sulfur in their tissues. These properties of sludge had given rise to hopes that detritus deposited in sewers, and even sewage containing suspended organic matter, could be put to good use in cultivation. We will give a brief history of the experiments carried out to this end, as we intend to discuss them in greater depth in a special monograph. Sewage and sewage deposits. A few years ago, it was reported in France that, in response to a complaint from the residents of the Thames, an attempt had been made in England to use sewage water to rid the river of the foul, foul stench whose emanations had disturbed the very sittings of Parliament. It was said that sewage was a rich and powerful fertilizer that had been neglected for too long, and that was left to the tides, which distributed it charitably to both banks of the Thames, where it maintained the green meadows. Immediately, the Parisian city council conceived the idea of ridding the people living along the Seine of the emanations of the collector sewer, by using the waters of this vast cesspool in the same way as the people living along the Thames use the waters of London. An experimental field was set up in Clichy, and two vast reservoirs were dug in the middle of the field to receive some of the sewer water. This water, treated in the same way as sewage, is received in the two basins, where it deposits the solids it holds in suspension. The experimental field covers a 14. vast area where market garden plants are grown in the open ground, with no fertilizer other than Paris sewage water and the deposits it leaves behind. The water is distributed to the plants by means of gutters running between the rows of plantations; this is more or less the method used by the Amiens hortillons. Deposits are used as manure and buried. In our opinion, two years of experimentation have not yet produced conclusive results, the land occupied by the field having been previously smoked and covered in the first year with a thick layer of fertilizing silt by two successive floods of the Seine. The water and deposits seemed to contain a certain number of nitrogenous products, but the alumina and iron salts, either from the soil or from the materials used for disinfection, by opposing the decomposition of these products, are, in our opinion, detrimental to this fertilizer, to which we attribute an intermediate value between the pitch and the pond silt, i.e. the value of a good soil improver. We hope that longer experience will disprove our initial impressions, and it may well be that it will, once the Bièvre has poured the quota of its highly nitrogenous products into the sewer. If we consider the two methods of removing products useful to agriculture, in France and England, it will be easy to see the different results obtained in these two countries. In London, no emptying is carried out; all products are carried away by the water in the cabinets, aptly named water-closets, and thrown into the nearest sewer. Hence the high nitrogen content of London's sewage. In Paris, none of this happens. The sewers used to receive all the black water from cesspools, but this is now the exception. The quantity of nitrogen can therefore only result from the urine, diluted in a large quantity of water, of men and horses, and the sewage, cleaned by devices, of the silica it contains and the organic debris that floats at its snrface, In addition to a few insoluble parts in suspension, the water now contains only a dissolution of a triple salt, a kind of ammoniacal alum containing iron, in short, a triple sulfate of alumina, ammonia and iron. The deposit has no odour, or a simple mouldy smell, as the aforementioned salts prevent fermentation; however, the larvae feast on it, as we have seen, proving that there are fermentable parts, but they are in an environment where the plant roots don't like to go looking for them. When watering with a hose or ordinary watering can, the water itself retains enough soapy or aluminous matter in suspension to obstruct the pores of the green parts of the plants and harm their vegetation. The pages we have just read were already written, when we learned that, on the basis of a favorable report from a committee of the Horticultural Society, the municipal administration of Paris intended to carry out cultivation trials on a larger scale on the Gennevilliers plain, using fertilizer from its sewage system. We would therefore like to give more detailed information on the trials carried out in Clichy, and to publish the results of our personal and unofficial observations. As we suspected, the separating fiquid is alumina sulfate. The deposit is therefore indeed the sulfate we mentioned, and the traces of iron we found there can be sufficiently explained by the wear and tear of horse shoes on the Paris pavement. We have often visited the Clichy experimental field, and, it must be said, not in a spirit of disparagement, but with a desire to learn from it. Our observations cover three years. The soil of this now-destroyed field comprised: 1° a market-gardening part, following the methods of the Amiens hortillists; 2° an agricultural part, including cereals and field crops; 3° a fence planted with espaliered fruit trees. We don't have to count the first year of installation, but by the second year the land was being fully cultivated according to the procedures adopted, and the results were beginning to be recorded. Whenever we visited the field during this year (1867), we were struck by the difference in the produce compared with their similar market gardens. Vegetables were half as developed as their marsh-grown counterparts. The same was true of agricultural produce, especially beet and corn. It was a wet year, and experience dictated that the fertilizer had to be applied wet, so we did not comment on the value of the sewage water. In 1868, Clichy's cultivation engineers were favored by an exceptional summer, and were able to rival the best-understood market gardeners for pumpkin and cardoon. What's so surprising? These are plants that like plenty of sun for their stems and water for their roots. Salads, despite an apparent state of prosperity in their youth, have almost all melted by harvest time. Cabbage and apples produced only very ordinary produce. Leeks and carrots were very mediocre. Tomatoes produced little, although the fruit was quite beautiful, but ripened very late. Three-quarters of the melons planted were destroyed, the remaining quarter surviving only because of the year's exceptional heat. White celery performed fairly well, while celeriac was less successful. We noted a fine and good crop of corn as an agricultural crop, and the year was exceptional for this crop; but beet was inferior to that of the plain. Potatoes were largely lost, as was the case everywhere. The bizarre and poorly formed tubers, and the numerous welds, prove that the cultivation method used is unfavorable to them. Here is the most serious of our observations: On a 4-metre surface of beans, we counted twenty clumps; a market gardener would have put in forty to forty-five clumps. On the same surface area of celeriac: eighteen plants; in a market garden there would have been forty-eight plants, which would have been double in size. In white celery, we counted twenty plants on the 4-metre surface, where we put fifty-six plants, certainly more beautiful. For the same measure of land, we counted twenty-four feet of escarole, we put forty-eight; eight feet of apple cabbage, we put thirty-six; and so on. That's where the whole crop comes in, with the gutters taking up half the land. There is no possibility of establishing seedlings and counterplants in crops grown in this way, and despite this, the produce obtained is very mediocre. Only fifteen or twenty leagues from Paris could sewage water compete with Amiens hortillons. As for the market gardeners of Paris, these experiments have taught them nothing, except that they are equal to their mission, and that this over-praised fertilizer is not the way forward. The agricultural section of the experimental garden gave us no better results. We counted eighteen plants of maize on a 9-metre surface, where ordinary cultivation would put in twice as many. We counted twenty-one very mediocre beet plants on 9 meters of surface area, a space occupied by at least sixty-three beet plants and at most eighty-one on the plain, with better quality roots. It was all there. But could the 48 hectares of land rented for 15 or 1,800 francs per hectare, which would have equalled those of the market gardeners, get by if such a considerable amount of space were required for the plants grown? Obviously not, since engineers have not been more successful in an exceptional terrain and in an exceptional year. So market gardeners will probably be sticking to their good horse manure for a long time to come. We've been told that sewage is a first-rate fertilizer. We took a certain quantity of the material made available to us, and dried it by spreading it out in thin layers; it lost 20 p. 0/0 of its weight and gave off no odor during this drying process. One kilogram of this desiccated material calcined in a roasting kiln lost 200 grams of organic matter, while potting soil lost 800 grams under the same conditions. Leaching followed by further desiccation resulted in a loss of only around 50 grams of soluble matter, while the potting soil residue lost a further 100 grams. Between this so-called fertilizer and potting soil, which for us is little more than an amen dement, decide and choose; as for us, our choice is made. THE MARKET GARDEN YEAR. We think it would be useful to set out here, in the form of a memento, the work to be carried out each month on a market-gardening farm. We have accompanied our prescriptions with plates showing the author's garden and the crops it contains at each monthly period. Under the heading of particular observations, we give the changes that can be made to crops at the same time by preferring other plants to those we have adopted. The market-gardening year begins in October. By this time, almost all the summer crops have disappeared, and we start preparing the crops that will produce a harvest in the spring. Work in October. All cold and hot cultivation equipment must be in working order. We start unpacking the bells, setting aside the small wooden cleats we've placed at the top of each one. The bells are prepared, covered with 1 or 2 centimetres of potting soil spread with a rake, knocked into the planking and three rows of bells per bells are placed, 2 or 3 centimetres apart. The compost is broken and formed into banks, with any excess removed. Mushroom growers prepare their wheels. Sowing - Lamb's lettuce and regency in white onion beds and in beds reserved for next spring's melons. - Spinach in nurseries, to be replanted between warm lettuces. - Chervil broadcast among escarole and chicory. - Cover wild chicory with a frame. - Chives, pink and red radishes, in teens until the 9th, then under cloches. - Black and green romaine lettuces until the 10th - Gotte and Georges lettuces, blond romaines, red and gray lettuces until the end of the month. - White onions and leeks to remain in place until the end of the month. Planting. - Transplanting in cloches, 1° by twenty-four black lettuces for stretcher beds, 2° by twelve green romaines when hot, 3° by twenty-four of the same when cold, 4° by twenty-four or thirty blond romaines, Georges, Gotte, gray and red lettuces. -Transplanting cauliflowers under frame by two or three hundred. - Planting white onions in the previous month's lamb's lettuce seedlings. - Planting of black lettuces under cloches for cold work, four or five per cloche and forty to fifty per frame. Care for growing crops. - If the weather is dry, continue to water celery and cauliflower, and cabbage and onion plantations. If the sun is too strong afterwards, cover with straw mats for one or two days. Don't put in potting soil or cloches until everything is ready for transplanting, otherwise the sun will dry out the potting soil. White celery is covered with mulch or bedding to blanch it, escarole, chicory and romaine are tied, cardoons are stuffed, white celery is started to deepen and given good wetting, and weeding is carried out thoroughly. Harvesting. - Last artichokes, red beet, spinach, cardoons, celeriac and white celery, carrots, chervil, mushrooms, curly endive, cauliflower, broccoli, apple cabbage, savoy cabbage, Brussels sprouts, pumpkin, cress, watercress, tarragon, lettuces, lamb's lettuce, sorrel, turnips, parsnips, parsley, peppers, pimiento, leeks, pear, pink, red and black radishes, purslane, saisifis, scorzonera, tomatoes, green asparagus (early). Special observations. - Instead of the crops shown on this month's plan, another market gardener could have grown the following, which might have been more advantageous to him from the point of view of his clientele, as each one directs his work so as to meet the needs of those who buy from him, so that the halls are always supplied with all vegetable plants. We could have replaced celery on soil with cauliflower, escarole with celeriac, cauliflower with cardoons, white celery on beds with escarole, spring onions with spinach, celeriac with carrots, endives with curly endive, outgoing cauliflower with endives or white celery, civet with lamb's lettuce, white onions with escarole, chervil and lamb's lettuce with white celery. 8° ;. . des V 44 K R.HII "===-- LR pi e A S CTI FN * be "---: l. E E Tie E R L erliante du err D RIORN pu E ~ Ro t telert blare. Tacenene * 4 2 21 Mas 3 hi E M tt M i M Mileiia ~ ii E8* M 4 ceteaa..art PLAN 2 3 1 ET DISTRIBUTION du Mlataie exploité Route de la Révolte N°53 A CUCNYIA CARENNt a I.PONCE Mastieultar Maaibꝯ bigoaux 114 DU MOIS D'OCTORRE Ranuan d Rnut la môue callure Ador ec 14 * l FiERR 3 to3e ssag 3 tll Route de Entrée la Rérolte. P.260CUITURE MARATCHÈRE E 2. 1 Depõ des E 2 PL.H. Ma Ghade reje E currle Maichel Ban Manie ayineo RE Epenands EChiceree mpaine E 1 3 421 V 1 LR e Eaya Ria Ne V INUR MTE LETN Ei dinda a Macles E I E FR RERT E Riielle F C ELE T 3 M I a-ss b ETEN S EMEOLEM 4 3 8 EEEA la u E 4 t me aerei l tuu 7 a PLAN EE VEs 4 ET DISTRIBUTION du Marαio exptoiti MMIE Route de la Révolte N°53 A CUCMYAACARENNt "4 F.PONCE Nomiultaur Marateb Qureaux *Le 22 RE3 DU MOIS de NOVEMBRE 8 -Cancharà Charsis d Clocher Rérolte. 2 terten 03t sàc O Route de vut Entrée P. 261. Work in November. Potting soil is broken and formed into chains from which the extra is removed. Manure is carried. The first layers of black lettuce are turned over in January, followed by carrots and lettuce. We smoke the plots reserved for oxheart cabbage, set up the mushroom wheels, warm up the asparagus, sorrel and tarragon, start taking out the frames and trunks and wash the bells. Sowing. - On beds: early round short carrots, combined with a few spinach seedlings or transplants. - Spinach or small lettuces on cabbage racks and in empty lots for May melons. - Cauliflower Sainte-Thérèse under cloches. - Peas under frames. Plantations. - Black lettuce and spinach, sorrel roots to warm up. - On shelves: beef heart cabbage. 15. - Along walls: Passion lettuces. Care for growing crops. - Butter artichokes, cellar beet, recess white celery before the 10th and pour the soil into the recess before the 20th for fear of frost; frozen celery is lost if touched; uproot celeriac and gauge it under 10 centimetres of soil; give air to the romaine and lettuce cloches, using forks made from barrel staves with three notches cut in them; push the romaine plants back in at the end of the month, put back in at nineteen for those at twenty-four, put back in at six or eight for those at twelve, weed, cover the plants with straw mats if the temperature drops to 3 or 4 degrees below zero. Monthly harvests. - Warmed white asparagus, layered green asparagus, layered sorrel, cardoons, carrots, white celery, celeriac, chervil, mushrooms, curly endive, wild chicory, cauliflower, savoy cabbage, Brussels sprouts, Brussels sprouts, spring onions, pumpkins, watercress, black lettuces, lamb's lettuce, turnips, parsley, leeks, periwinkle, pink, red and black radishes, raiponce, salsify, scorzonera. Special remarks. - Layers do not change place. We can replace (see monthly plan) escarole by white celery, white celery by apple cabbage, spinach by lamb's lettuce in teens, lamb's lettuce by chicory bays, white celery by celeriac, apple cabbage with sorrel, parsley or spring onion, the latter with civet, white onions with chervil, the latter with spinach, civet with lamb's lettuce, apple cabbage with chervil. III Work in December. We continue to plow and smoke the apple-cabbage fields. Layers are actively made. Potting soil banks and manure chains are prepared, and the soil is covered to protect it from frost and keep it in good condition for working in due course. We take out the frames and bells, and prepare the asparagus, sorrel and tarragon stoves. Cloche layers for romaine and mushroom millstones are made. The necessary plowing for cold work is done. Sowing. - In layers: carrots and spinach, pink and red radishes. Under cold frames: parsley, sorrel, celery, parsnips, carrots. Layered at the end of the month: wild chicory, peas. Planting. - Plant thirty to thirty-six black lettuces under each frame with a spinach transplant, one green or blond romaine per cloche on layers, press green and blond romaines under cloches, pull out cauliflower plants under frames and press them in, transplant Sainte-Thérèse cauliflowers under cloches or under frames, cold-plant twenty green romaines, thirty Georges lettuces, thirty Gotte lettuces under frames, plant apple cabbages. Care for growing crops. - Butter cardoons, cover them in times of frost, cover artichoke buttages with dry manure, rework asparagus paths and warm them up, make good accots around the layers, fill paths as needed with dry manure, peel black lettuces under frames, cover these frames with mats every evening. Stuff cardoons, take them down to the cellar if possible, bury carrots and cover them with dry manure, warm up mushroom wheels, cover beds with straw mats if the temperature drops to 4 or 5 degrees below zero, put cauliflowers in gauges under frames or take them down to the cellar, put pumpkins and giraumons in greenhouses, cover watercress beds with water, protect turnips, kohlrabi, onions and parsnips from frost, mulch parsley and sorrel, cover potatoes with a large layer of bedding, protect salsify, scorzonera, broccoli and savoy cabbage from frost, turn down frames and cloches in times of frost, reinforce apple-cabbage plants on teens. Harvest of the month. - White and green asparagus, cardoons, carrots, celery and celeriac, chervil, mushrooms, black lettuce, lamb's lettuce, sorrel, parsley, pear, pink, red and black radishes, raiponce, salsify, scorzonera. Specific comments. - Plan transformation. - Layers occupy the same position. - Cold lettuces can be replaced by white celery, white celery by lamb's lettuce and white onion, apple cabbage by spring onions and lamb's lettuce, teenagers by cold frames, celeriac by teenagers, white onion by apple cabbage or spinach, lamb's lettuce and chervil, chervil by lamb's lettuce. Work in January. All frames and bells are in active service, repairs are made at S ~ 4 6 2 6. E 1 des E 2 2L. rler t derta 2 Den Manc l Crenfonce Spinach Chpore EL pétare --- l 3 ES e CET* e b MM I laurra lalm y 4 liiz l EU Route de Caleri Renfahce la Lalec Reille .ou Er aete afro Fautue bharyarr doite Ueulte Terci. b Entrée E ENN N I E E 2 M 3 4 M A ~ R 1 ti C FFVNEN iy VI U te Fulert. 1 Y Ele BnE TE re N 3 C L T lla29R F I PLAN ET DISTRIBUTION du Jlazaio exploité 44 ate Route de la Révolte N°53. A CUCMYALA CARENNt ~ LPONCE scartieusteur Dtaraicberꝯ Crasaux du Meis de Oeceutbre. la Renolte. P.266. a - 69t ses. A D e CUITURE RARAICHÈRE 20 E. 6- 1 des* e 2 PL.P L M once el cabea H Mou de 3 E a S E Dr MU MTTMTRT D e tae i'octeree y iloictex δωτ εαιλσιlα la rlal nent luda dette caodin Latue dedra ERomuede Radi E C q ari di E. -- o E ha 1 C * N ~ HEPAX. F D geraitiene ymego- 2 eliii EES ETE Route de -i E E 2 FII Entrée 7 O 54 4 nen lla, S PLAN * * 4 AL X " 2 ET DISTRIBUTION du Mlatαi eæploite " La 22 229 e Route de la Révolte. N° 53. A CUCHYLAGARENNE 4 LPONCE Moitieusteur Sarateb¬ꝯ Graeaux du Jlloio de Jauvier. la -Rerolte. P. 267. 4 20 a à faire les couches à châssis, à cloches et à air. We start ploughing the costières. Care must be taken to break up the clods, smoke well and never plow in rainy weather. Sowing. - Short carrots, radishes, leeks, first melons, first tomatoes, turnips. - Under cold frames and cloches: carrots, radishes; they can also be sown in layers in the air. - In costières: carrots, radishes, peas. - On hot beds: spinach and curly endive. - Under cold cloches or on small frames: second-season romaine, Bonneuil cabbage, cauliflower; in open ground, spring onions. Planting. - In the ground: apple and beef cabbage. - On stretcher beds: black lettuces. - Under cloches: three lettuces and one romaine - Under cold cloches: three romaines or four Georges or Gotte lettuces, three red or gray lettuces - In the costiere at the end of the month: romaines and lettuces. Care for growing crops. - In frosty weather, same care as in December. When the thaw arrives, uncover the plants, remove the manure, provide air under the frames on the opposite side to the wind; uncover the celery, otherwise it will rot, reshape the paths, peel the lettuces, pull out the weeds, dry the mats, care for the mushroom wheels, put on new shirts and warm up the paths if necessary. Harvesting. - Asparagus (white and green), cardoons, carrots (callets), celery (white and celeriac), chervil, mushrooms, chicory (wild), kale, kohlrabi, spring onions, watercress, spinach, tarragon, black lettuce, lamb's lettuce, turnips, sorrel, parsnips, parsley, leeks, pumpkins (yellow and green), radishes (red and pink), radishes (black), raiponce, salsify, scorzonera. Special notes. - The lettuce frames to be turned over will become air radishes or cloche layers. The other layers will be at the same points. Squares of lettuce and cold romaine can be replaced by ados, celery and spinach by mâches, ados by lettuce or cold romaine, celery by ray spinach and baby lettuce, apple cabbage by white onion, civet by spring onion, and vice versa, onion by apple cabbage and mâches by onion. The costières could be planted with romaine and lettuce. Work in February. The same care is given to the frames and bells as in the previous month; all the glass is outside. Air is supplied to the sashes on the opposite side to the wind, and to the bells, always on the south side. All sash layers must be finished; only bell or air layers remain. All the previous year's melon trenches are emptied, and used to top the beds. All the land is ploughed and smoked. Rake and spread potting soil over the potting soils. Sowing. - Carrots, pink and red radishes are sown in cloaca and air layers. - Carrots and radishes are sown on costières and counter-planks. - Under cold frames and cloches: sorrel, parsley, chervil, curly endive, wild chicory, cauliflower, Bonneuil cabbage, savoy cabbage, red cabbage, Brussels sprouts, eggplant, asparagus, borage, bulbous chervil, celery. - On hot layers: curly endive, celery, broad beans, watercress, beans, lettuce, romaine, melons, potatoes, pepper, purslane, tomatoes. - On soil: red onions, peas. Planting and transplanting. - Black and green romaine lettuces are planted on trays or cloches; Georges and Gotte lettuces on air beds, green romaine and Georges lettuces on cold trays and cloches, gray and red lettuces in pots or on counter-plates. Flageolet beans are planted on hot beds, and melons sown the previous month are transplanted. Transplant nursery seedlings from the previous month, such as apple cabbage and white onions; plant garlic, shallots and civets. Care for growing crops. - Asparagus and mushroom stoves continue. We fill in the paths, reshape the beds, wet the layer manures if they are too dry, peel the lettuces and romaine, weed, ventilate the frames during the day and cover them at night. Harvesting. - This is the start of harvesting the layers that provide abundant lettuces, black and red radishes, spinach, green romaine, white and green asparagus. Cardoons, callet carrots, celery and celeriac, chervil, mushrooms, wild chicory, savoy cabbage, spring onions, green pumpkins, watercress, spinach and tarragon, lamb's lettuce, turnips, sorrel, parsnips, parsley, dandelions, leeks, pink, red and black radishes, raiponce, salsify and scorzonera are, as in January, the main crops of the month. Special observations. Air beds can be replaced by bell beds, and vice versa; cold frames can be replaced by a square of raipons, celery by apple cabbage, spinach by onions, teens by a square prepared for the first melons, white celery and celeriac by flageolet beans, white celery and celeriac with flageolet beans, apple cabbage with white celery, chives with melon and tomato plants, white celery with chives, white onions with spinach seedlings and baby lettuces. Early apple cabbage could be planted in the costières, and white onions in the counter-planting. VI Work in March. The frames for melons, beans and tomatoes are moved to their rightful place. The same applies to the bells. We plow len Ee Nmey 6. E hale dmle E ti sep S Pi. FiL lue Mine qu renfonce Luer Enterre pinardo ....... E EM E 3 e lo rirdon e ROR U u lne Route a C V 2 2 F Entrée Hymar3 dochen "cande dfava Iailue T Tla LAamainey (tartes CA ~ L8 B M 3 R A 4 L LE la mi FYNTEN EE 3 VI R R 2e2 lla S2 3 ~ edt a Padeterte MINENEEREE PLAN ME ET DISTRIBUTION du Mlataio expfoité Route de la Révolte. N°53 A CUCHVLA-GARENNE naLPONCE Mouieulteur Starateb,ꝯ Q Ri3 Qκαραux du Moiꝯ de Segrιer. la Rerolte. P.272. Marder * E aco ssag Aetile ca G D * miue " PL. VIT E 4. uO say 9 A Tomaler a chasrit ~chau a ERN - - bse M ia FS EN EE -- I CR V TL e e mne 4 umyo nlu ELE Mi Homatite Pa clpales E Y cold - Homaime Hadi d ENR E Ce Route de Entrée P EA 8 mr E t - u 4 3 M EN 3 e 3 I Numarcisn RoETana E la 2 28 u Ha - E ETOATERE PLAN ET DISTRIBUTION Du Mlatate expleité I Route de la Révolte. N°53 A CUCNYLAGARENNE 4 LPONCE RPœ n Lai Mortieulteur Maraicba Gracaux Ou licio d Jllats. Rérolte. P.278. 8 51 bes a- land for ados, celery, melons, tomatoes, cucumbers, beans. The manure is used to make the beds for these plants. If the manure is dry, it is used to make well-manicured beds, which are wetted for a few days before use. If not, chains are made immediately, and the beds continue to be earthworked and the old trenches emptied. Sowing. - March is sowing month. Each part of the garden gets its own seedbed. Pink and red radishes, carrots, leeks, spring onions, spinach, asparagus and arrowroot are sown in full squares and other seedbeds. In warm conditions, sow eggplants, basil, borage, baselle, white celery, Rouen chicory, flageolet beans, melons, chillies and potatoes. - Sow beans in cold frames. Old bed: beans, white mustard. In open ground: strawberries, fennel, chervil, bulbous chervil, savoy, quintal, Bonneuil, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, broccoli, crambe cabbage, turnips, red onions, sorrel, salad burnet, dandelions, leeks, peas, purslane, salsify, scorzonera, savory, tetragona, tomato, thyme. Artichokes are propagated by suckers, and oxalis by cuttings. Planting, transplanting and disadvantages. - All plants sown during the previous month are transplanted by cuttings: melons, cucumbers, eggplants and others. Blonde romaines, grey and red lettuces are planted in full squares; Rouen chicory, melons, cucumbers and beans are bedded. Cauliflower is counter-planted on layers, cold bays and soil. We plant garlic, shallots and leeks on layers, civets, asparagus, tarragon, potatoes in good shelter; we multiply Chinese yams by their bulbils. Care for growing crops. - If the season continues to be rigorous, we give the same care to beds and forced crops as in previous months. Air beds should be fitted with mats. When the sun is too hot, cover all new plantings for a few days from 11 a.m. to 2 a.m.. The plantations are given a few drops of water. Watering starts at the end of the month if the weather is hot and dry, and is carried out under cover when necessary. Harvesting. - See previous month, and add purslane and potatoes to the new Special Observations. - The air layers of the plan would become cucumber layers, those with frames cloche layers and vice versa. Lettuces would be replaced by melons, tomatoes by beans, melons would be replaced by onions, apple cabbages, lamb's lettuce, raipons, civets and apple cabbages by preparations for melons; spring onions by blond romaines and cauliflowers; white onions by sedges or romaines, cauliflowers, radishes and spinach. All costières would be planted with green romaine or lettuce. VII Work in April All the equipment has to change places, with frames and cloches reserved for melons, cucumbers, beans and tomatoes. Work on the beds and trenches is in full swing, with ploughing and manuring completed. Mushroom millstones begin to be shredded for mulch. Seedlings. - Arrochokes, eggplants and basil on old layers, nasturtiums at the foot of the walls, borage, baselle, carrots, white celery, cardoons on old layers and on soil at the 25th, chervil, wild chicory, curly endive, Milan cabbage, Vertus cabbage, broccoli, spring onions, yellow cucumbers, pumpkins on old layers, watercress and perennials on soil, spinach in other seflageolets on soil in good exposure. Layered melons, white mustard, turnips, parsnips, parsley, layered chillies, salad burnet, leeks, leeks, peas, potatoes, purslane, pink and red radishes; in other seeds, salsify, scorzonera, savory, layered tomatoes, old corn. Planting, transplanting and disadvantages. - All the previous month's seedlings are transplanted into the nursery. Asparagus and eggplant are planted in hot cloches. We start planting cold chicory in trays and cloches. Bonneuil cabbage, cauliflower and broccoli are counter-planted with romaine and lettuce. We plant ordinary savoy cabbages, quintal cabbages, Brussels sprouts, cucumbers on layers, cold flageolet beans under frames and cloches, romaine, lettuces, melons on layers or trenches, leeks, tomatoes on trenches under frames and cloches as well as on soil under frames and cloches. Thyme borders, tarragon 16. clumps and Chinese yam bulblets can be propagated. Care for growing crops. - Care should be taken to weed, ventilate the frames and cloches, and cover them with mulch or light mulch when the sun is hot. All plantings under glass require constant care during this month. Plants are wetted immediately after planting. If the weather is dry, start watering carrot beds, cauliflowers, onions and apple cabbages. Salads should be watered moderately, mainly in the morning if the weather is dry and warm. If it's cold, they'll rust. Radishes need plenty of water. Layers and trenches for melons should be made of well-wetted manure. Start pruning and topping young melon and cucumber plants. Harvesting. - Early crops are beginning to produce. We finish harvesting white and green asparagus, and start cutting open-ground asparagus in good exposure. The same is true of artichokes under chassis and those with good exposure. We harvest bedding carrots, new chervil, early apple cabbage, new cauliflower at the end of the month, green cucumbers, spring onions, civets, watercress, spinach, tarragon, broad beans, forced strawberries, beans, lettuces, romaine, lamb's lettuce, regency, white mustard, turnips, white onions towards the end of the month, sorrel, parsnips, parsley, leeks, peas, new potatoes, purslane, pink and red radishes, raiponce, salsify, scorzonera, sea cabbage. Special remarks. - Tomatoes can be replaced by carrots, cauliflower by carrots, and cloche layers by tomatoes, which would also replace romaine and cold lettuces. Tomatoes would be replaced by melons, the latter by cold-grown chicory and beans. Cabbages would be replaced by cucumbers, chives by chervil, and vice versa. Apple cabbages would take the place of white onions, red lettuces that of romaine; blondes, and the costières would be occupied by early apple cabbages or onions. VIII Work in May. All the glass is out and used. There must not be a single unoccupied spot in the field. Frame and bell trenches are completed. The sash layers are turned over, a job to be done during the month. The horse harnesses are repaired or replaced, the carriage repaired or repainted, or a new one purchased. Doormats are brought into the shed, repaired if necessary and sprinkled with ash. Sowing. - Most of this month's planting is done in the ground. We sow arroche in other seedbeds, eggplant in old beds, beets, borage, cardoons, in old beds or in the ground, carrots, white celery up to the 4th, - chervil, curly endive and Rouennaise endive hot, early savoy cabbage, Vertus savoy cabbage, Brussels sprouts, kohlrabi; kohlrabi, cauliflower, broccoli, spring onions, cucumbers and gherkins on old layers; pumpkins, squash, giraumons, watercress and spinach in other seedbeds; broad beans, fennel, beans of all kinds, lettuces, romaine, hot escarole, hot melons, white mustard, turnips, oxalis multiplied by cuttings, parsnips, parsley, chili pepper, salad burnet, leeks, peas, potatoes, purslane, radishes in other seedbeds, periwinkle, salsify, scorzonera, tomatoes, corn. Planting, transplanting and counter-planting. - The previous month's 16. seedlings are transplanted into the nursery. By adding manure, we plant melons on soil and on old layers, we plant them on new trenches with frames and cloches, we plant cucumbers, gherkins, eggplants and cardoons on old carrot layers without turning them over. We transplant beet, white and celeriac in nurseries; we plant Milan des Vertus cabbage, Brussels sprouts and cauliflower as counterplants to chicory, romaine and lettuce. Pumpkins are planted in holes or trenches, while beans are planted in pots with lettuce, romaine and curly endive. Scarole counterplanting takes place in lettuces and romaine: On old beds and in costières, piment̂s and tomatoes are planted. Corn is transplanted. Care for vegetating plants. - When the weather is dry, water abundantly in the morning and evening, preferably during daylight hours. Great care should be taken when removing plants from among the others. All new plantings should be wetted first, then watered for a few days. Planting plots should be well mulched and wet before planting. Young plants should be watered sparingly. Only water plants that are three-quarters mature should be watered abundantly. Never wet romaine, lettuce, spinach, chicory or escarole in the sun, as this heats up the plants and exposes them to rot. The strongest under-frame melons are bathed until the fruit has stopped. Cucumbers and gherkins need very little water during harvesting, and only need to be basked. Melons are pruned morning and evening, which is the most favorable time, as are cucumbers, eggplants and tomatoes. Tomatoes are potted. As in the previous month, care must be taken with planting under glass. While the sun is shining, the windows are covered with a light mulch or Spanish white washed down with water, and frequent weeding and raking are carried out in plantations where there are no seedlings. A weed-free garden is every gardener's badge of excellence. Harvesting. - This is the best time to harvest. Here's an approximate list: Asparagus, artichokes, belles-dames, eggplants, borage, carrots, chervil, cellar and quarry mushrooms, chicory, kale, cauliflower, spring onions, civet, cucumbers, watercress, spinach, tarragon, broad beans, strawberries, spinach, tarragon, broad beans, green beans, lettuces, romaine, melons, white mustard, turnips, white onions, parsnips, parsley, burnet, leeks, peas, pears, parsnips, parsnip, red and pink radishes, rhubarb, savory, thyme, strawberries. Special remarks. - Tomato beds can be replaced by cloaked melons, as can carrots. Tomatoes in cloches can be replaced by cucumbers and eggplants, cauliflowers by melons in trenches, and tomatoes in frames by beans. Melons would be replaced by tomatoes, seed radishes by carrots and seed onions, spring onions by apple cabbage, apple cabbage by carrots, romaine or lettuce, white onions by chicory or cauliflower. The romaines would receive lettuces, chervil, civet, spring onions and leeks. The costières would receive cauliflower, beans or marjoram potatoes. IX Work in June. Glass is becoming less useful. From the 15th, the frames covering the already large melons are removed. As the melons are sold, the frames are transferred to melons with bells that have been prepared for this crop. Frames that are not intended for this purpose are taken into the shed and placed in stacks of fifty. Care should be taken to leave a space between the rows for any repairs that need to be made. As for the bells, don't leave them three inside each other, as is the bad habit when removing them. It's better to prepare a stretcher and stack them six high, separated by a small cleat at the top of each one. They are then transported to the place where they are to be kept. Care should be taken to remove the forks at the same time and put them under cover, and the same precaution should be taken for the cleats to give air to the frames: there is no small saving. The trunks remain on the ground until July. The empty cabbage and onion beds are ploughed, and smoked if necessary, but it's best to have taken this precaution in spring or autumn. We finish turning over the cloches for the last melons. Sowing. - All this month's seedlings are sown in the open ground, but it's safer to sow on an average turned-over bed. Seedlings include : arrowroot, carrots, chervil, chicory, escarole, savoy, Vertus, Brussels, cabbage, kohlrabi, kohlrabi kohlrabi, cauliflower up to the 10th, spring onions, watercress, perennial watercress, spinach, green and dry beans, lettuces, romaine, white mustard, turnips, sorrel, parsnips, leeks, peas, purslane, pink and red radishes in other seedlings, black radishes, raiponce, rhubarb. Planting and disadvantages. - In the first days of the month, we finish planting melons on old layers turned over from cucumbers and gherkins, we plant eggplants and long pepper on old layers and in costières, we do the same for cardoons. White celery is counter-planted in chicory, lettuce and romaine, celeriac in carrots and escarole, and chicory in land emptied by apple cabbage and onions. Milan, Brussels and broccoli sprouts are planted. We continue to counterplant cauliflower with melons, romaine, lettuces, chicory and escarole. Finally, lettuces, romaine, leeks and the last tomatoes are planted. Care for growing crops. - Melons should be pruned and drenched morning and evening if the weather is dry. All plants at three-quarters of their growth need plenty of water. Tomatoes await pruning and trellising, which should not be neglected; the same applies to cucumbers and eggplants. Gherkins need to be spread out properly. Melons still in frames and cloches require a great deal of care; during the heat of the sun, they must be given plenty of air. All new plantings require a lot of water, and others need frequent watering, especially when the sun is hot. Weed frequently, cover cauliflower heads with healthy leaves torn from the mother plant, mulch plants intended for planting, prune and pick pumpkins. Harvesting. - These consist of field asparagus, arugula, eggplant, basil, borage, nasturtium, carrot, cerfiul, quarry mushroom, chicory, escarole, apple cabbage, cauliflower, spring onion, civet, cucumber, garden cress, perennial cress, watercress, spinach, tarragon, broad bean, strawberries, green beans, lettuces, romaine, melons, white mustard, turnips, white onions, sorrel, parsnips, potatoes, stonewort, parsley, salad burnet, pepper, pear, pear, peas, potatoes, purslane, pink and red radishes, rhubarb, savory, tetragona, tomatoes, bulbous chervil. Special remarks. - Tomatoes can be replaced by long pepper squares; gherkins by melons, eggplants and cucumbers; cauliflowers and carrots by melon squares. Tomatoes can be replaced by chicory and melons by tomatoes and beans; cabbages by celeriac, spring onions by escarole, seedlings by long pepper, chicory and romaine by carrots, leeks by escarole, chico18 rées or cauliflower, and tomatoes, eggplants or gherkins can be planted in the costières. 8 Work in July. All equipment must be stored in the shed, the frames stacked as previously mentioned, the bins packed and covered with old straw mats or litter. Those that are broken and can be repaired are set aside. All broken glass is collected in a barrel and sold when out of use. Only glass used to make pins should be kept. All trunks must be removed; those on foot are stacked outside. It would be a good idea to cover them with litter or canvas intended for this purpose; those that can be dismantled are put under the shed piece by piece, or in piles outside, with the same precautions as for the former. As much as possible, take advantage of this S 5. 1 1sep - 2 PI.XI Pa ue L e FUTT E Y E El Fe HEREE P d RZ iia P AI vre leng UNI u omoco H II I C 4 1 En ELRI E E *n i FFRN 3 " Has dlotuι e E A a Renena Mii qi hre- 18 Msu MS CiOr E TISSOR. 3 4 4 7 D ESrrrel Lanatal y aervor udinte crrcche EN RI 3 1 ATNAT TERO PLAN 2 ET DISTRIBUTION du lllatais expleité Route de la Révolte N° 53 A CUCRYLA CARENRt "aL.PONCE Mortieulteur Dltarat-ba? 3 Ciacaux du Moide Datii P. 290. PE Route de Entrée la Rérotte. R 2 221 ssag a * CUITURE MARAICHERE omad 3 2. 3. des E L- pe 8 PL.XIT toierta E m F Pe E E D (eV Curlα h UNn EN Niea i RER t: E P R EnS M EE HIS FLII b OTTTTT E HS M i lquee El Ceeaes e er aasge aetaddo ma veyim L Route de 3 LSI ER E Entrée la a 4aa 3 2 dotαllag 8 ACrt Gtazheg. PLAN 3 ET OISTRIBUTION Du Mlargio egptoité Route de la Révolte, N° 83 A CUCIVY LA CARENNt 4 L.PONCE Mortieulteu- MaraibGragaux du Mot d Juile Rérolte. P.291. 44 P n. S 2 :ag A FIFIEFIZI time to make repairs or set aside those that need them so that they can be done as soon as possible. If there's time, it's a good idea to scrape the frames before painting them, remasking them, and replacing broken windows, as it's useful to be ahead on these jobs. Loaders, stretchers and other tools and utensils not currently needed should also be inspected, repaired and sheltered. Empty plots of Bonneuil cabbage and cauliflower are ploughed. If they are to be smoked, only very good manure should be used, the clods should be broken up well, and even moistened if necessary before ploughing. If there is too much drought, all the trouble caused by this can be regained. Ploughing should be done early in the morning, so that you can rest during the heat of the day. Sowing. - You can sow arroche in other plants or crops, carrots, chervil, curly endive, escarole, spring onion, watercress, spinach in other plants; lettuces, romaine, white mustard, turnips, parsnips, leeks, peas, purslane, pink and red radishes in other plants, or on their own, black radishes, raipons. Planting and disadvantages. - The last cardoons are planted, white celery is counter-planted with chicory, lettuce and romaine, and the last celeriac is counter-planted with melons in trenches and potting soil. Curly endive and escarole are planted, cauliflowers are counter-planted in trenches and salads, and melons, gherkins and cucumbers are grown on soil. Milan, Vertus and other large-ribbed cabbages, kohlrabi and turnip cabbages, broccoli, strawberry plants transplanted in May and leeks can all be planted in the ground at this time. Care for growing crops. - Finish pruning melons, cucumbers and pumpkins. Depending on how dry the atmosphere is, they are wetted. Weeds are destroyed, caterpillars attacking all varieties of cabbage are hunted down; the ground is covered with growing plants, and watering is the main care they require. Cucurbits need a lot of water; pumpkins, squash and giraumonts are pruned and pickled. Tomato pruning and trellising is one of the month's major occupations. Harvesting. - Arrochokes, artichokes, basil, borage, nasturtiums, carrots, chervil, quarry mushrooms, curly endive, escarole, Bonneuil cabbage, ordinary Milan cabbage, cauliflower, spring onion, civet, cucumbers, gherkins, watercress, watercress, shallots, spinach, tarragon, broad beans, bulbous chervil, lettuces, romaine, melons, white mustard, turnips, white onions, parsnips, potatoes, stonewort, parsley, long and square peppers, salad burnet, leeks, periwinkle, peas, potatoes, purslane, pink and red radishes, tetragona, strawberries, spinach, tomatoes. Seeds are starting to be harvested, so now is the time to look after seed carriers. Special observations. - Tomato beds will be replaced by eggplants; melons will be replaced by gherkins, cucumbers or white celery; tomatoes will replace key melons; escarole, cauliflower and carrots. Melons would give way to cauliflower and carder-pear; chicory and romaine, to carrots and leeks; civet, to pear; seed radishes, to chervil; seedlings, to tomatoes; chicory and white celery, to Bonneuil and red cabbages; escarole and chicory, to toma es; costières would receive chicory, escarole and carrots. XI Work in August. Repairs to frames and bells continue. The land is largely occupied, so there is little plowing to be done. The drought requires some wetting, but this is nothing compared to the previous month. We empty the melon trenches as soon as the fruit is sold, if we don't counter-plant in them. Sowing. - Sowing is infrequent. They are limited to arrowroot, chervil, spring onion, spinach, lettuce, romaine and lamb's lettuce from the 15th; turnips, leeks and late peas, which you can't be sure of harvesting; pink and red radishes, and white onions in nurseries, from the 10th. Planting and disadvantages. - White celery is still planted with radish and spinach seedlings. We counter-plant chicory and escarole, lettuce, romaine and cauliflower. Leeks and watercress are planted with cuttings; escarole and chicory are transplanted with plugs in September. Care for growing crops. - Watering continues; in fact, it is very necessary, as the soil has suffered from the drought. Melon pruning is nearing completion, with only one fruit left. Tomato trellising and pruning require great care. Weeding must be repeated. Plenty of water must be applied when planting, and young plants must be supported by frequent basking. Pumpkins and cauliflowers need to be pruned and wetted every other day, and caterpillars need to be kept at bay. Harvesting. - Arrochokes, artichokes, eggplants, basil, borage, baselle, nasturtiums, carrots, white celery, chervil, bulbous chervil, quarry mushrooms, curly endive, escarole, Bonneuil cabbage, red cabbage, ordinary Milan cabbage, spring onions, pumpkins, cucumbers, gherkins, watercress, perennial and watercress, shallots, garlic, tarragon, broad beans, green and shelled beans, lettuces, romaine, corn, melons, white mustard, turnips, red and yellow onions, sorrel, burnet, leeks, peas, potatoes, purslane, pink and red radishes, tomatoes, thyme. - Most seeds are harvested during this month. Special observations. - Tomato, melon and gherkin beds will contain cardoons and cauliflowers; 8 5. F F Depõ 3 e PLXIIT IAT FUS b- QNA EI 3 EIN RE I V Eiii U el E N E F eea IITNRU a ed b L H ENN E SIa Fim I 1 C Entrée 1 L ~ ELEAa tnSe....I.. dotto lla, I la RE EEEN LEEEIRTT ES t Roule saervoide ta 3 3 MINENLEEI PLAN E ET DISTRIBUTION du Marαio exptoité Route de la Révolte, N° 53. A CUCRY-IA CARERNt 4 LPONCE Moruieultaur Staraieb Gtasaux Ou Mioio d'Couit. Rérolte. 22 2 P. 296. S uns S 658 A D CUHTURE MARAICHERE E 3 * e des Y R.XIV e lcampee acacole u E e EUITETY lii Faerecce hi M U0 atrara E F b RQ rre Route E bii d F.-.T t e ra EER P a la Nimi 4 R HUTEU ~ ~ ENI Csproir de Rerl *13 Entrée E * 1 ". la 2 d men la, I PLAN ET DISTRIBUTION du Mlataie exptoite ate-RA- Route de la Révolte, N°53. A CUCHY-LA-GARENNE paI.PONCE Mariulteur Marateb4. Gεαοαux du Mtoiς de Septeubte. Rérolte. P. 297. 3 S aco 29 A escarole and romaine will be replaced by celeriac and the latter by carrots. - Tomatoes will be replaced by chicory and melons by white celery; cauliflowers by melons, seeded spring onions by chervil, seeded radishes by spring onions, burnet or cress, white celery by red and Bonneuil cabbage, escarole and leeks, the latter by chicory, chervil or lamb's lettuce. Chili will be replaced by tomatoes, white celery by escarole, chicory and cauliflower, the latter by leeks; all costières will contain only white celery, escarole or chicory. XII Work in September. We are finishing repairs to the frames, chests and bells, which are due to come into use the following month. There is almost 17. no plowing to be done, as the garden should be fully occupied or nearly so. Sowing. - This is the month when we do the least. We still sow chervil and borage to have them available at all times, bulbous chervil, Rouen chicory and escarole for replanting under frames, apple and beef cabbage for spring, cauliflower, spring onions, spinach and black lettuce in the first few days of the month and later for cold work under frames or cloches, and at the end of the month for hot work. Lamb's lettuce, turnips, pink and red radishes and stone drills are also sown in the early days. Planting and counter-planting. - Almost everything is finished by the previous month. Rouen chicory is transplanted under cloches, to be put under frames the following month at the same time as escarole. We plant strawberry plants from nets and prepare well-smoked ground for planting seedlings to be put under frames over winter. At the end of the month, black lettuces are transplanted cold or placed indoors. Leeks, escarole and lump chicory are planted in empty plots. Start transplanting white onions and sow them in the first few days to keep them in place. Care for growing crops. - Give celery and cauliflower abundant watering, weed frequently and rigorously hunt for caterpillars, cover cauliflower with a leaf from the mother plant, cut down manure to make mushroom wheels, wet the manure, make a floor of it, and reshuffle it. Cover celery to blanch it, stuff the oldest cardoons planted for the same purpose. Harvesting. - Garlic, arrowroot, artichokes, eggplants, borage, nasturtiums, carrots, white celery, celeriac, chervil, bulbous chervil, quarry mushrooms, curly endive, escarole, red cabbage, savoy cabbage, broccoli, cauliflower, spring onions, the last cucumbers and gherkins, pumpkins, watercress, watercress, shallots, spinach, tarragon, broad beans, strawberries, green, shelled and dried beans, lettuces, romaine, lamb's lettuce, melons, white mustard, turnips, red and yellow onions, sorrel, parsnips, potatoes, stonewort, parsley, pepper, salad burnet, leeks, peas, potatoes, purslane, pink and red radishes, tomatoes, thyme. Special observations. - White celery and cabbage can be replaced by carrots and celeriac; escarole by parsley and sorrel; white celery by chicory or the last of the bell melons. Tomatoes would replace celeriac and celery root; lamb's lettuce, chervil; spring onions and civets would be replaced by spinach, radishes, celery and cardoons; escarole by cauliflower, peppers by escarole, the rest of the celery by transplanted onions and lamb's lettuce. In the costières, there would be chicory, escarole, lamb's lettuce and chervil. VEGETABLE GROWING. Under this heading, we understand the cultivation of vegetables that people outside the profession can grow for their own personal use; we will not describe again the methods set out in this book, we refer to the special chapters for details: we will only give here the distribution of the soil and the advice necessary for success. The average family is made up of 5 or 6 people. If this family lives in the country, and if one of its members can devote an hour a day to cultivating a garden of 400 to 500 meters, this family can be sure of having vegetables for its consumption throughout the year, by putting into practice the rules we are about to explain. Similarly, a teacher training college, a seminary, a college, a community of 50 to 60 people will find its vegetable consumption on an area ten times larger, i.e. 4 to 5,000 surface meters. To achieve this, it's absolutely essential to ban all open-air fruit trees from the kitchen garden, and to plant only espaliers. - Cordon or cattail trees should also be banned; only then will you be able to grow good, beautiful vegetables. - Manure and potting soil must be available in sufficient quantities for the area to be cultivated. In the absence of pure horse manure, cow, chicken, rabbit, pig and other types of manure can be used, mixed with sweepings, peelings and weeding residues to form a compost; shrub leaves and any decomposing organic products that may be available can also be added. However, to make the layers, you'll always need a supply of horse manure, a supply of potting soil for spring sowing and planting, and a supply of mulch for summer covering. A vegetable garden for 5 or 6 people requires 7 frames and 50 bells, which, with tools, requires an expenditure of around 200 francs. For a gathering of 50 or 60 people, you'll need 70 frames and 500 bells, the cost of which, combined with the rest of the equipment, comes to around 1,250 francs. In such cases, it's a good idea to adopt the watering system we've described. The cost can be appreciated by the following estimate, made for the model of vegetable garden whose plan we present to our readers: A manege pump........ 1,200 fr. 300 meters of lead pipes. 1,000 42 water outlets or taps.... 15,000-liter tank, 3-millimeter sheet metal....... Tank assembly......... 14 meters of rubber and lance..................... 1 stopcock...........- 500 600 400 160 30 A small steam engine... 2,000 Total................ 5,890 It would be a good idea to obtain 300 meters of potting soil in the first year, at an estimated cost of 1,200 francs, excluding transport costs. It is essential to secure manure for a stable of 15 to 20 horses, which costs an average of 3 francs per month per horse. There's nothing frightening about these figures if you consider that, in a house of this kind, the steam engine and the water from the reservoir can meet needs other than watering the vegetable garden, that the initial costs are quickly reimbursed by the savings resulting from the abundant vegetables harvested, and that the permanent expense is reduced after a short time to an annual sum of 600 to 700 francs for the purchase of manure. With this in mind, we'll now give a table of the plants to be grown for the two potacers we've taken as types, asking the reader to look up the details of their cultivation in chapters V, VI and VII. Table showing the surface area occupied by each Lar 1 2 3 vegetable during the two growing seasons. VEGETABLES IN CROP 1st season. 7 8 9 10 11 12 118 2nd season. Artichokes...................... (Chicory, escarole, mâ- ches............... (Romaine and lettuce? Baselle................................ Layered carrots. (Gherkins.......... Carrots on the ground... (Celery B., spinach... Bulbous chervil....!.................... Kohlrabi and turnips............. Curly endive...... White celery.......... Scarole............ Kohlrabi.......... Apple kale..... Brussels sprouts... 14 (Bonneuil cabbage.. (Chard, pear........ 18 POTAGERS DE Spemson. SOperson (seedlings)..... Cardoons (4 rows)...).................... Wild chicory... 45 Milan.... 16 17 mq. mq. 20.931209. 30 Asparagus...........!....................27.89/278.88 Aubergines......... 4 (Beetroot R........ 5 6 Carrots, romaine, lettuces............... Red cabbage...... Regency, B onions...) Quintal cabbage.... (York sprouts........ Choux-brocolis......................... 19 (Sea cabbage.......................... 3.48 6.97 3.49 34.80 69.72 34.86 13.951139.44 13.951139.44 13.951139.44 3.48 3.48 34.86 34.86 6.971 69.72 6.97 69.72 13.95139.44 13.95139.44 13.95139.44 6.971 69.72 6.911 69.72 13.95139.44 3-481 S4-86. 20 21 22 23 24 25 GROWING VEGETABLES. 1st season. 2nd season. 28 29 30 32 33 Cucumbers........................... Pumpkins........... (Scarole.............. POTAGERS DE 5person. SOpersent Seedlings and transplants.).................... mq. 3.48 mq. 34.86 13.95l139.44 13.95139.44 Spinach...........!....................13.95139.44 Broad beans.............. Chicory, escarole and cauliflower........ Strawberries............................... 26 IFenouil................................ 27 31 Green beans...... (Chervil bulbous and épi¬) nards............. Melons............. (Cauliflower......... Early turnips........................... White onions...... (Choux des Vertus.... Onions R. and J. ... (Mushrooms........ Sorrel................................. Oxalis................................. 6.971 69.72 6.97 3.48 69.72 34.86 13.951139.44 13.95139.44 13.93139.44 6.97 69.72 13.951139.44 6.97 3.48 69.72 34.86 34 (Field peas........ (Large headed cabbage.....) 13.94139.44 35 36 37 38 29 40 11 42 43 44 (Black radishes, romaine, Potatoes...) lettuces, raiponces and carrots.......... 13.21139.44 Pink and red radishes....................] 3.48 Salsify.............................. Scorsonera............................. Tetragonia............................. Tomatoes........... Celery B., lamb's lettuce.... Borage.............................. Arroche............................... Pear................................. Garlic................................... 34.86 13.95139.44 13.95l139.44 3.48 6.97 " 44 " 87 " 87 " 671 34.86 69.72 4.35 8.71 8.71 6.71 145 Celery with knife...!....................1 " 431 4.35 CULTIVATED VEGETABLES. 1st season. 2nd season. 46 (Chervil................................ 47 48 49 50 31 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 89 60 61 62 Basil.............).................... Chives.....).................... Nasturtiums.............................. Cresson alénois..... (Perennial cress....... Tarragon............................... Parsnips.............)..................... Parsley.................................. Peppers................................ Leek............................... salad burnet............................ Purslane................................ Rhubarb............................. Horseradish................................ Savory................................ Thyme................................. Shallots..........).................... POTAGERS OF 5 person. SOperson mq. 1.4 " 43 " 87 " 43 " 43 " 43 6.97 " 43 " 43 6.97 " 43 " 43 " 43 " 43 " 43 " 43 " 43 mq. 17.43 4.35 8.75 4.35 4.35 4.35 4.35 69.72 4.35 4.35 69.72 4.35 4.35 4.35 4.35 4.35 4.35 139 See attached lithographed plan for crop locations. 3b ne ddog S t O- OO CO - S O CO E O G . 0 ta - . A 9 2 set ... ..:A 8 ◊..4 E .... .. "... ... 11 -4 Fa- 12 . *. ... r . *111. .... ". u ar.... Market gardening- PLXV. NNNNYNINTNNNNNN A NIENNN NNA NE PANN 5.2 F ei ar. Luia 34 a . T1S ---:27; t-i E T *7***=- AT: E 3 --- E 2 4 M CEEL 3 22 au E ( 2 4 2.--- - -- 4 :.2 CS E Etito .. 8 33 Ei 29 ... Iii Et 51 E li Ei - EB 47 F-... EO e t L fisiiri--aii EN LLEER EEmR E t0r68 1 9 4 2 1 2 S 3 " 0 Y0 * 5 & * e CETMISRMCTCE Grand Potager-Superficie 4269m.139 cour et habtation476, 65 1T. I v io 3 ea DÉPOT 5 des Fumiers 5 c- 3 3 3 2 1809 Era of seed sowing and planting of bulbs, bulbils, cloves, tubers, roots, cuttings, eyelets, nets, etc. Vegetable plants. MODE of reproduction. TIME of sowing and planting. NATURE of soil. Garlic........... cloves... February, March...... full soil. Arroche....... sowing.... March to October.... Artichoke..... eyelets. April, September... Asparagus....... sowing.... march............. Eggplants... Basil....... Beetroot..... Borage.... Nasturtium...... Cardoon....... Carrot....... White and Turkish celery........ Celery hollow... Celeriac.... Chervil....... Bulbous chervil. id. id. id. id.... january and february. ]layer with frame id....march, april....... Ivieille couche. id.... avril, mai........ pleine terre. (septembre, janvier, id.... avril........... id.... avril............. id id. (avril............. Icouche. id.... ¡mai............. full soil. (december, janvicr. Icouche chassis id....february, march..... Icouche à l'air. id... id... (juillet............pleine terre. (février, mai...... (couche à l'air. mai.............pleine terre. (février, mars..... [couche. lavril à juin...... pleine térre. id.... (February, March..... [layer. id.... march to october... Ipleine terre. id.... February and October..] id. (Mushrooms. Imycelium all year round..... Imeule ssouterr. vegetables. MODE of reproduction. Chicorée sau-Isemis... vage.......) Curly chicory York sprouts) and oxheart....... Red cabbage) Green cabbage... Bonneuill cabbage Quintal cabbage) Early savoy cabbage....... Savoy cabbage) ordinary...) Savoy cabbage) des Vertus...) Brussels sprouts! Cabbage) large) ribs....... Fringed cabbage. Kohlrabi... Savoy) cabbages.) Tender) cauliflowers..... Cauliflower) spring...) id... TIME for sowing and planting. NÁTURE of soil. april to october.... plein terre. february and march,... layer. (september.......under chassis. january to march.... (hot frame. Javril-mai......... couche à l'air. (juin-juillet........ pleine terre. id...../25 août au 8 sept.) id. id.... février, mars...... vieille couche. id.... juin..............pleine terre. id. (janvier-févier..... sous cloche. id.... mars............. id. id.... (mai-juin..........) id. id.... février-mars... . id. id.... april to june....... id. id.... (February to June.....] id.... juin............. id. id. id....Ijuin............. id. id.... Imai-juin.........) id... juin-juillet........] id.... septembre........) id. id. id. id.... Ijanvier........... (layer. Summer cabbage] id.... lavril-mai ........ lvieille couche. vegetables. Reproduction method. TIME of sowing and planting. NATURE of soil. Autumnal cabbage-fl. sowing... June.............Iplein soil. Kale-brocolis id....march and may......1 id. Cabbage cuttings. [February...........Warm layer. Ciboule....... Isemis... (February to July...Ipleine soil. Civet.....[civets.. (February-March......] id. Cucumbers...Isemis.... February to May....]layer to frame Gherkins.... Squash....... Cresson alénois, Cresson de fonte. id.... mai............. id. id. id. id... sowing (march............. couche chaude. (april............. couche tepiède. (January to March.... Icouche. (all summer.........]plein terre. cuttings march and august..... ditch. Perennial watercress. Isemis....)March.............plain soil. Shallots..... Ibulbes... February, March..... Spinach...... sowing... id. december, january. [February to October...full soil. Tarragon......Choke... spring, autumn! id. Beans......... Isemis.... January to March.... [Id..........1 Strawberries....... id....[February to April.... Ipleine terre. id.... Imars.............Earth in the shade. Id..........filets...June, July, August. Iterre. Fennel....... seedlings... [March, June........ in the ground. Beans...... Id..........1 id.... February........... warm layer. id.... Javril............ cold frame and cloches. Id..........I id.... Imai, juin.........pleine terre. Yam....... Ibulbils. Iprintemps........ id. Black lettuce. [sowing.... september........ (under cloche. vegetable. MODE of reproduc- tion. TIME of sowing and planting. NATURE of so1. Lettuce Georges.... loctobre........... under cloches. and Gotte..... Red, gray and palatine lettuces. Lettuce de Pasion] Lettuce au couteau Romaine verte. Romaine blonde. and grey....... Lamb's lettuce....... Corn.......... Melon......... White mustard Turnip........ White onion. Red and yellow onion....... Sorrel.......) id.... March to November. in the ground. id.... Jaoût, septembre...) id. id.... mai à janvier.... id.... octobre, 1er au 10. sous cloches. id..../1er nov. à Juillet. id.... août à octobre.... [in other plants. id.... april............. layer. id....Ijanv., feb., march layer to frame. id....[all summer......... full soil. id.... march to september.] id.... august, september...] id. id....Imars............. id.... march to july.....) tubers) Oxalis........ id. id. id. or cuttings april, may........ Parsnips....... seedlings.... [February to July... id. id. id. id. Potato........ tubers February...........chassis layer. Id......... Id......... id.... Javril.............vieilles couches. id....mai.............Itrous fumés. Perce-pierre... semis....]printemps........pleine terre. Parsley......... Parsley root. Pepper....... Pimprenelle... id....february to april.... id. id....[march, april.......! id. id.... février, mars...... couche à châssis id.... mars, avril....... pleine terre. (Fissentit-----.I id.--lprintemps.-..--1 id. potagères. Mode of reproduction. TIME of sowing and planting. NATURE of soil. Leek....... Isemis.... january........... frame layer. Id......... Pear........ Pear shard. Pea.......... Id.......... Auvergne peas..) id.... February to June..... Ipleine terre. id.... Imars to july..... id.... [June.............. id. id. id.... novembre........ Ichâssis à froid. id.... novemb. et décemb. Icostière. id... (February, March..... Ipleine terre. fjuillet............ id. Pommes de ter.Jtubercules) janvier..........Icouche à châssis. Id..........1 id.... ffebruary, march, aprilFull earth. Purslane...... Isemis.... Imars to August..... Pink, red and white radishes......) Id.......... Id.......... Black radish... id.... Hianvier...........Cold frame. id.... December, January. Icouche à châssis id.... ffévrier...........couche à l'airlibre id.... Imars to october... full soil. id.... Ijuin.............. Horseradish....... root.. Jautomne......... Rapunzel..... Isemis.... Ijuin, juillet....... Rhubarb..... id....juin.............. Id..........Itouffe...Iprintemps........ Salsify....... Isemis... [March to May....... Scorsonere.... Savory...... Tetragon..... Id.......... Tomato....... Id.......... Thyme........ id. id....[march to may...... id.... Iprintemps........ id. id. id. id. id. id. id. id. id.... Imars............. Icouche à châssis id....Javril.............Ipleine terre. id.... Inovembre........ en pots et en serre id.... janvier........... [under frame id.... spring........ full soil. lderreeee-Ioudtes--Iprintempe id. MSTORY OF MARKET GARDENING, ITS PROGRESS AND IMPROVEMENTS. Until the sixteenth century, we know nothing precise about market gardening; vegetables native to France or long-acclimatized there were grown only on soil or on beds in the open air. 16th century. Rabelais sends the first lettuce and romaine seeds from Rome to Cardinal d'Estrées (1540). 17th century. Work on vegetable plants by Dr. Mizauld. (1605.) First mention of the use of bells by Olivier de Serres. (1623.) Cultivation of melons using rolling boxes retracted into the greenhouse during frost and at night: Olivier de Serres. (1623.) Cultivation of melons on beds and cauliflowers; Théâtre du Jardinier, by Claude Mollet, gardener to Louis XIII. (1643.) Cultivation of early vegetables, use of frames by La Quintinye, head gardener of the Versailles kitchen garden. (1688.) 18th century. Cultivation of pineapples and potatoes using hot greenhouses by Gondoin, gardener at the Château de Choisy-le-Roi under Louis XV. First greengrocers: - Tassère, gardener to the Régent in Bagnolet. - Debille, Ébrard, Valette, François, Fournier, Heude, Jaulin, Marie, market gardeners in Paris, start using frames for industrial cultivation. (1780 to 1800.) Forced strawberry plants, by Legrand (1776). - Hot cultivation of peas, beans and carrots, by Decouflé. (1788.) - Hot cultivation of curly endive, by Stainville, (1791.) - Invention of the watering crank, first use, by Bourgeois, market gardener in Grenelle. (1792.) Heated white asparagus, by Quentin. (1792.) Green asparagus, by Marie. (1800.) 19th century. Hot cauliflower, by Besnard. (1811.) Cold Romaines under cloches: Dulac, Chemin, Fanfan Quentin. (1812.) Founding of the Horticultural Society. (1827.) Adoption of the fulling pump. (1836.) Adoption of lance watering, by 1. Ponce (1859. END. PagesPREFACE.............................................. II CHAPTER ler General considerations...............................1 CHAPTER II Composition of a market garden..................... 14 Distribution of work................................. 24 CHAPTER III Fertilizers and working the land..................... 34 Preparatory work and ploughing....................... 42 CHAPTER IV Tools and instruments of cultivation......................... 54 Frames and chests.................................... 57 Care of chests and bells.............. 64 CHAPTER V Cultivation................................................ Garlic................................................... Arroche or Belles-Dames.............................. Artichoke............................................ Asparagus............................................. Eggplant............................................ Basil............................................... Beetroot............................................. Borage............................................ 70 73 74 3 78 9 78 84 86 86 3 82 Baselle or American Spinach.........................s Nasturtium.............................................89 Cardoon...............................................89 Carrot.............................................. 91 Early layers....................................92 White celery..........................................100 - turnip........................................... 102 hollow......................................... 103 Chervil...............................................104 bulbous.......................................104 wild chicory..................................... 105 nasturtium...............................106 curly leaf..........................................108 escarole........................................110 Cabbage................................................ 112 early...........................................113 Bonneuil.................................... 114 Chou rouge...........................................114 Chou-fleur............................................ 118 Chou-brocoli.........................................119 Chou maiin.........................................120 Ciboule..............................................120 Civette...............................................121 Concombre...........................................122 Cornichons..........................................122 Courges, giraumonts, pumpkins......................... 125 Cresson alénois....................................... 127 Cresson vivace.......................................128 Épinard.............................................. 199 Estragon............................................. 130 Fève de marais...................................... 132 Fraise................................................ 133 Fenouil.............................................. 136 Haricots en primeur...................................137 Igname de

Chine...................................... 140 Laitue................................................ 141 Laitues proprement dites............................... 142 noire.......................................... 143 Georges et Gotte................................. 144 rouge, grise, palatine.......................... 145 de Passion.....................................145 romaines....................................... 146 romaines vertes................................ 147 romaines blondes et grises..................... 148 Soins à donner aux laitues et aux romaines.............. 150 Mâches et régence..................................... 152 Maïs................................................., 154 Melon................................................ 155 Moutarde blanche...................................... 165 Navet en primeur..................................... 166 Oignon blanc.......................................... 166 Oseille.............................................. 168 Oxalis...............................................171 Panais............................................... 111 Perce-pierre........................................... 173 Persil...............................................173 Persil racine..........................................174 Piment............................................... 175 Pimprenelle........................................... 176 Poireau............................................... 177 Poirée et poirée à cardes...............................179 Pomme de terre en primeur......................... 180 Pourpier............................................. 182 Radis roses, rouges et blancs...........................183 - noirs........................................... 185 Raves................................................ 185 Raïponce............................................. 186 Rhubarbe.............................................188 Sariette.............................................. 189 Tétragone............................................. 189 Tomate...............................................190 Thym.................................................197 Soins relatifs aux graines..............................198 CHAPITRE VI Cultures spéciales..................................... 199 Pineapple...............................................200 Champignon comestible............................... 205 Cresson de fontaine..................................211 Fraisiers forcés au thermosiphon........................ 216 Patate douce.......................................... 217 CHAPITREVII Cultures agricoles..................................... 222 Carottes de pleine terre................................ 223 Choux de quintal..................................... 224 - de Milan hâtif..................................224 - - ordinaire............................224 - des Vertus............................ 224 - de Bruxelles...................................225 - à grosses côtes................................. 225 Choux-raves et choux-navets...........................226 Crambé..............................................226 Échalotte.............................................227 Fèves................................................228 Haricots..............................................229 Navet................................................ 231 Oignons jaunes et rouges.............................232 Pissenlit.............................................. 234 Pois cultivé...........................................235 Pomme de terre......................................238 Raifort.............................................. 240 Salsifis et scorsonère...................................241 Engrais des cultures agricoles..........................242 Eaux des égouts et dépôt des eaux d'égout.............. 214 CHAPITRE VIII L'année maraîchère...................................256 Travaux du mois d'octobre...........................257 - - - - - - de novembre..........................261 - décembre.......................... 263 - janvier............................266 - février............................ 269 - mars.............................. 272 - avril.............................. 276 - mai............................... 280 - juin.............................. 285 - juillet............................. 290 - août.............................. 294 - septembre........................ 297 CHAPITRE IX Culture potagère...................................... 302 Tableau de la surface occupée......................... 306 Tableau des semis et plantations........................309 CHAPITRE X Historique de la culture maralchère.................... 314 -mA Clichy. - Imp. MaURiCE Loienon, 12, rue du Bac d'Asnières.   D D 4 Journal d'agriculture pratique, rédacteur en chef M. E. LECOUTEUX. - Une livrafson de 40 pages in-4e, páraissant chaque semaine, aver de nombreuses gravures noires. - Un an (France et Algérie)... . . . . . . . . . .s. Revue horticole, rédacteur en chef M. E. A. CaRRiÈRE. Un numéro de 24 pag. in-4°, avec gravure coloriee et gravures noires, paraissant les 1er et 16 du mois. - Un an.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Gazette du village, fondée par VICTOR BORIE, paraissant tous les dimanches - Un an. . . . . Almanach du jardinier, par les rédacteurs de la Maison rustique. 192 pages et 40 engravings. Une nouvelle édition de cet Almanach est publiée chaque année. BONCENNE. . . Jardinage pour tous (Traité de). 2° édition 1 vol. in-12 de 440 pages. BON JARDINIER (LE). Bon sardinier (Le), par PoirEAU, VILMORIN. BAILLY, DECAISNE, NAUDIN, NEUMANN. PÉPIN. 1,650 pages in-12. . Une nouvelle édition du Bon Jurdinier est pubtiée chaque année. Cet ouvrage a été couronné par la Société impériale d'horticulture. . . . . . . Bon Jardinier (Gravures du), 22e édition. 1 vol. in-12 de 648 pages avec 680 engravings et planches. CARRIÈRE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204 20 6 .30 2 50 Entretiens familiers sur l'horticulture. 1 volsin-12 de 384 pages. . . 3 50 DUMAS (A.). Culture maraîchère pour le midi de la France, contenant le calendrier horticole. 2e edit. 1 vol. in-18 de 144 pages. (Bibliothèque du Jardinjer.). JACQUIN. Mclon (Monographie complète du). 1 vol. in-8° de 200 pages et 33 planches sur acier. Prix. . . . . P. JOIGNEAUX. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Conférences sur le jardinage (légumes et fruits). 2e édition. (Bibliotheque du Jardinier.) 152 pâges. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . Le jardin potager. Ouvrage illustré de e5 dessins en couleur Intercalés dans le texté. 1 beau vol. in-18 de 442 pages... . . . . . . Choux (culture et emploi), par JoIGXEaUX. 1 vol. in-18 de 180 pages et 14 grav... LOISEL. Asperge. Culture. (Bibliothèque du Jardinier), 2e édition. 1os pages et Sgravures. Meion. Culturc. (Bibliothèque du Jardinier), 5e édition. 108 pages et 7 gravures NAUDIN. Potager (Le), jardin du cultivateur. (Bibliothèque du Jardinier). 187 pages et 31 engravures. . . . . . . . . . ". . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .-. . . NOISEITE. Jardinier (Manuel complet du). 4 vols. in-8e et un supplément formant ensemble 2,170 pages et 25 planchés.... . . .... . . . . . . . 125 3 1 25 6 1 25 2 2. 155 25 deur Rue n toren Pel parm e Cene a eam u 2 2 maren * Ia S - 12 1.°2 47 A 12 71c * T Ye P. Mg 13 M A " F1 74 ERra "aiea z Pu 1 1 F. 2.n ern 2 122 2 M SIBL JOIHEQUE NATIONALE DE FRANCE 4 - i 3 753103788216 8 ★R 14 mcanncie. --a