Troncet..... 1907. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the BnF collections. Their reuse is governed by the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: -The non-commercial reuse of this content or in the context of an academic or scientific publication is free of charge, provided that the legislation in force is respected and in particular that the source of the content is mentioned as follows: "Source gallica.bnf.fr /Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF ". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates income: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the general code of public property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are -reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. Reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which the Bnk is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 7/ To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, contact utilisation. commercialeobnf.fl. O CI Cn m mi 167° 25 dulno s -D ARIS LIBRAIRIE LAROUSSE. Lix. 2 Le 25 2 Source gallica.bnt.fr / Blbllothèque natlonale de France E. : AT 67 7 7065 4 . 22 . °. 1- . ". .   ~ u JARDIN POTAGER 7 . *3 . ." - . 2 - 4 By L.-J. TRONCET Établissement d'un potager - Travaux préparatoires Travaux courants de jardinage - Culture naturelle et culture forcée des léqumes de France - 390 variétés - Soins particuliers Récolte et conservation - Porte-graines - Ennemis et maladies OUVRAGE ILLUSTRÉ DE IOO GRAVURES EN NOIR ET EN COULEURS PARIS 05 SUCCURSALE : Rue des Ecoles, 58 (Sorbonne) Z9Z0 80 m LIBRAIRIE LAROUSSE 17, rue Montparnasse, 17 Tous droits réservés - - 41 2 . . .   . each of our readers the means to set up a vegetable garden and successfully grow the main vegetables that grow in France. We believe we have done our utmost to achieve this goal. We have examined the writings of the most authoritative horticulturists, including Courtois-Gérard, Decaisne, Dybowski, Foussat, Gressent, Heuzé, Joigneaux, La Quintinie, Naudin, Noisette, Poiteau, Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie. We also called on the expertise of a highly competent specialist, Mr. D. Bois, assistant at the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle and secretary-editor of the Société Nationale d'Horticulture de France, whose work is justly esteemed. Mr. D. Bois graciously placed himself at our disposal and very kindly assisted us in our task; we cannot thank him enough for his invaluable collaboration! 1. Among Mr. D. Bois's recent works, we must mention the Dictionnaire d'horticulture, published by the Klincksieck bookshop, a work written by a group of the most authoritative authors, under Mr. Bois's direction; it gives precise details of everything to do with horticultural science, and scrupulously mentions the progress made to date. MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie have not only allowed us to take from their works any information we deemed useful; they have also authorized us to choose, from their magnificent collections of engravings, all the subjects, in black and in color, most suitable for illustrating our text, and, thanks to an agreement established between them and Librairie Larousse, we can offer our readers a luxuriously illustrated book, for an extremely modest price. All the figures that do not come from the collections of MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie are the work of MM. J. Druillet and A.-L. Clément, two of our most skilful illustrators. Last but not least, we have endeavored to write this volume in simple, clear language that anyone can understand on first reading, without having done any preparatory study. L.-J. TRONCET. CHAPTER ONE ESTABLISHING A VEGETABLE GARDEN When you want to set up a vegetable garden, choose a plot of land a short distance from your home, so that you can pick up vegetables for immediate consumption at any time. However, the land should not be so close that you have to worry about the odors given off by the manure from the beds. It is essential to have water available in the garden itself, as the cultivation of vegetable plants requires frequent watering: in mediocre soil, but well supplied with water, vegetables can always be grown, whereas in top-quality soil that cannot be watered, it is almost impossible to grow them. To allow rainwater to run off, it's a good idea for the soil in the vegetable garden to be slightly sloping; let's add that, as the soil is constantly being stirred up in one or other of its parts, and the vegetable beds don't always have the most pleasing appearance, it's not a bad idea to hide the view a little, which is done by means of the fences we'll talk about shortly. There are no hard and fast rules for determining the exposure of a vegetable garden; indeed, it's easy to see that its location must vary not only with the climatic conditions of the place where it's set up, but also with the plants grown there. In any case, we'd say that in the north and center of France, southern exposure is often the best; in a dry, hot climate, such as that of the Midi, for example, you should prefer exposure that gives plants the shade they need to prevent them from being scorched by too much hot sun. In some provinces, it is customary to place fruit trees next to vegetables. This method, excellent for southern regions, is far from advantageous for more northerly climates, where the trees in the vegetable garden prevent the crops placed at their foot from receiving direct sunlight. In this case, fruit trees should not be planted in the vegetable garden, unless they are espaliered! Fences. The most perfect fences are undoubtedly walls, which break the wind, allow espaliers to be formed and are an excellent means of protection. They are generally raised to a height of 2 meters, and are white in color, the color that best reflects the sun's heat. Their main drawback is the relatively high cost of their construction. They give shelter to numerous insects and pests, which are very difficult to avoid, and, 1. For espalier training, see Arboriculture pratique, by Troncet and Deliège (same bookshop). also, as they borrow nutrients from the soil, the latter yields little in the way of produce in their vicinity. What's more, they are often damaged by domestic animals during the first few years of their formation, and don't provide sufficient protection for the vegetable garden. Wooden fences and galvanized wire trellises are frequently used, although they offer little resistance to wind action; they can be supplemented with windbreaks, as some horticulturists do. These windbreaks, which are given a height of around 1.50 m, are generally made of rye straw. Windbreaks. Soil type. The most suitable soil for growing vegetables is one in which the various elements are mixed in the right proportions; it is then easy to work and is known as loose soil. Soil is of inferior quality when one of the elements is in excess; it is said to be strong if clay is in excess; it is said to be light if the limestone or silica element dominates. Clay soils are often very difficult to work, and almost always retain far too much moisture. However, they are preferable to siliceous soils, which are easier to plow but dry out relatively quickly. 1. The building blocks of soil are clay, silica and limestone. Humus or loam comes from the decomposition of plant and animal matter. However, both have their advantages: the former are suitable for growing large vegetables, such as cauliflower, artichoke and cardoon; calcareous or siliceous soils can be sown early, as they warm up in the first days of spring. In summer, heavy soils should be hoeed frequently, while light soils should be watered abundantly. If one of the elements is in too high a proportion, the soil must be amended by adding a certain quantity of the missing element: sand, for example, to clay soils, marl to siliceous soils, clay to calcareous soils. Soil conditioners made from organic matter are also frequently used; we'll come back to this subject in a later section on fertilizers. Preparatory work. When a new plot of land is to be cultivated, a number of important operations need to be carried out beforehand. Raking, the most difficult and costly of these operations, is designed to loosen the soil to a great depth. If necessary, dry grasses are pulled up and burned beforehand; their ashes spread over the soil will provide an excellent amendment. A trench 1.50 to 2 metres wide and 60 to 80 centimetres deep is dug with a pickaxe at one end of the plot, and the soil removed is carried to the opposite end of the garden. A second trench is then dug next to the first, and the earth used to fill this one, and so on, until the last trench is reached, which is filled with the earth removed from the first. During this work, the stones are set aside to be used to form the paths. After trenching, the clods are broken up and the top soil levelled. It goes without saying that when the subsoil is of poor composition, it should not be brought to the surface. When it is not deemed necessary to break up the soil, it should at least be turned over with a spade to a depth of 20 to 30 centimetres. Once the soil has been well loosened by ripping followed by ploughing, or by simple ploughing with a spade, it needs to be suitably distributed. As the garden almost always has a regular shape, this operation is relatively easy. It can be divided into two equal parts by a main path 1.50 to 2 meters wide, laid out in a straight line using a chalk line. In the same way, a driveway 60 centimetres to 1 metre wide, running all the way around the enclosure, can be set at a distance of around 2 mềtres from the fences, leaving strips of land on the edges, known as coastal strips. In northern regions, the coastal strips along the well-exposed walls should be wider, so that first-season vegetables can be grown there. The next step is to form the beds, which can be 1.50 to 2 meters wide. To do this, paths perpendicular to the main aisle are laid out at the required distance, always using a chalk line, and given a width of 30 to 40 centimetres. The paths are stone-covered and compacted, then covered with a 3 to 4 centimetre layer of sand. CHAPTER II FERTILIZERS Whatever the nature of the soil in which the vegetable garden is established, it is necessary to provide it with fertilizing materials, in other words, fertilizers, in order to obtain vigorous, high-quality vegetables. The fertilizers used are manure, mulch, potting soil and chemical fertilizers, which we will examine in turn. Manure. Manure is formed mainly from the excrement of domestic animals. The most suitable for vegetable cultivation is cow manure; but horse manure, half-consumed, is also an excellent fertilizer: it is used above all for the cultivation of early vegetables, as it releases a certain amount of heat during fermentation, which is put to good use. Sheep manure, hen manure, pigeon manure and guano are also very effective; city mud, sea plants such as kelp, bone meal, rapeseed cake and all organic residues can also be used to improve soil. Human manure itself gives very good results; unfortunately, it is not used as often as it could be, as some gardeners are averse to this fertilizer. Before use, it can be disinfected with powdered charcoal, sawdust, horse dung or iron sulfate at a rate of 2 kilograms per cubic meter. Cattle manure is generally applied to the soil in late autumn or early winter. Each year, around 300 kilograms of manure per acre are used for this operation. In bedded gardens, the manure from the beds, half used up, can be used as fertilizer for other parts of the garden. Human manure, if dried out, is called poudrette and mixed with the soil like animal manure; if not, it is called Flemish manure, and is spread by sprinkling after being left to ferment for some time; guano, poulinée and colombine are diluted in water and then spread in the same way; liquid manure, poured over flowerbeds, almost always produces good results. TERREAU. Mulch. Mulch is a layer of short, half-consumed manure spread on the surface of the soil, either to promote seed emergence, or to maintain a certain freshness in soils that require frequent watering. The mulch, which is given a thickness of 4 to 5 centimetres, is often formed with manure from the beds. It is applied only from the end of April onwards, on cultivated beds; placed earlier, it retains excess moisture in the soil, which could lead to frost. In autumn, when the mulch is buried by ploughing, it acts as a fertilizer. Potting soil. When manure has reached its final stage of decomposition, it is called compost. Manure heaps, left to their own devices, always reach this state, but the potting soil used in vegetable growing usually comes from old layers. Many growers, however, set aside a small area in the corner of the vegetable garden where vegetable peelings, old leaves, dried grasses and even rags are thrown, with the aim of converting them into potting soil. These are watered with household water, and when the whole is sufficiently decomposed, it can be used as a soil improver; its action is one of the best on crops; it makes compacted soils looser and lighter. It should be noted here that plants with mature seeds and those suffering from cryptogamic diseases should not be thrown onto the manure. The former would needlessly give birth to seedlings that would borrow their nourishment from the soil; the latter would alter the whole mass, which would quickly become a source of contamination. Plants in either of these conditions should therefore be burnt, and their ashes thrown onto the compost. Chemical fertilizers. If the nutrients removed by cultivation are not returned to the soil, it will soon become impoverished. To maintain its fertility, therefore, it is essential to supply sufficient fertilizers. Organic fertilizers can certainly contribute to a certain extent to making exhausted soils productive again, but as manure is often lacking, complementary fertilizers, i.e. mineral fertilizers also known as chemical fertilizers, are used to supplement the action of animal and vegetable fertilizers. The nutrients required by plants are of several kinds; there are four main ones: nitrogen, phosphoric acid, potash and lime; hence four types of mineral fertilizers: nitrogen fertilizers, phosphate fertilizers, potash fertilizers and lime fertilizers. The most commonly used nitrogen fertilizers are : Ammonium sulfate, which usually contains 19 to 20 percent nitrogen; it is usually extracted from sewage or water used to purify lighting gas; Sodium nitrate or azotate, containing 15 to 16 percent nitrogen, which is usually imported from Chile; Potassium nitrate or azotate, which is what we usually call saltpeter; it gives only 13% nitrogen, but contains potassium in the proportion of 44%, which also places it among the potassium fertilizers. The main phosphate fertilizers are : Lime phosphate, obtained from bones and mineral phosphates; the latter are almost always insoluble, and only become soluble when treated with sulfuric acid, when they are called superphosphates or acid lime phosphates. Bone powder, bones from which gelatin is obtained, and animal black used to refine sugar are also very active phosphate and nitrogen fertilizers. The most commonly used potassium fertilizers are : Potassium chloride and potassium sulfate, often mixed together and containing 25 to 50 percent potash; these are supplied in large quantities from Germany; Plant ash, long used, but containing fewer fertilizing principles; Residues from sugar manufacturing and beet distillation. The main calcareous fertilizers are: Lime, which should not be mixed with manure, as it releases the ammonia it contains; it is spread in small heaps, which are then covered with soil; marl, a mixture of carbonate of lime or chalk and clay, which is used like lime; finally, plaster or lime sulfate, which is widely used. The soil must contain the four nutrients in the right proportions: nitrogen, phosphoric acid, limestone and lime. To supply them to exhausted soils, we can use a mixture made up of 100 grams per square meter: soda nitrate 2 to 4 parts, lime superphosphate 3, potassium chloride 1, gypsum 4, iron sulfate 1 per 100 of the mixture. The following mixture, recommended by M. Grandeau, is used after being dissolved in water at a rate of 1 gram per liter: ammonia phosphate 30 grams, potassium nitrate 45, sodium nitrate 15, ammonia sulfate 10. CHEMICAL FERTILIZERS. CHAPTER III GARDENING INSTRUMENTS We shall not deal here with the many instruments that have been devised to facilitate horticultural work, most of which require a certain skill to be usefully employed, a skill that can only be acquired through practice. We will confine ourselves to examining in turn the various tools that are easy to handle and commonly used. Watering cans can be made of zinc, tin, yellow copper or red copper. Red copper watering cans are usually preferred, as they are the most durable. Watering cans have a capacity of around 10 liters, and are fitted with a movable spout pierced by a large number of small holes. The spade, whose shape and dimensions vary from region to region, is used for ploughing. It consists of a flat blade of hardened steel, fitted with a socket into which the handle is inserted. The pickaxe is used for ripping and deep ploughing, and is very useful for working hard or stony soils that cannot be cut with any other instrument. The hoe is used to stir up the soil and cut weeds. It consists of a broad blade with a socket into which the handle penetrates. The hoe, which can take several forms, is used like the hoe to slice weeds and stir the soil, to loosen the surface and allow air to penetrate; it has a sharp blade on one side and two long teeth on the other. The serfouette is a kind of small hoe, with a blade sharp on one side and a single tooth broadened towards the middle on the other; it is used for hoeing and for tracing the radii and boundaries of paths following the line indicated by the chalk line. GARDENING TOOLS. 17 Bèche Pioche L Houe Binette Serfouette fourche à dents platee fourche ordinaire Ratissoire Pelle 4 Brouette à coffre d LE POTAGER. Rake Watering can E B H Stretcher wheelbarrow 2 The flat-tined fork is used for ploughing, like the spade, but it is mainly used for more specific tasks, such as stirring up the soil at the foot of trees, which the spade cannot do without damaging the roots. There are two or three tines. The ordinary fork is made up of two or three large, slightly curved tines joined to a handle by a socket; it is used for loading manure, making layers, breaking up clods of earth, harrowing seedlings, and so on. The rake is used for dethatching, cleaning paths, smoothing the soil after ploughing and harrowing seedlings. The rake can be made of wood with iron tines, or entirely of iron. Rakes, used for weeding and raking alleys, come in two types: push rakes and pull rakes; the latter's socket is curved to allow the instrument to be pulled back while working. Shovels come in a variety of shapes and sizes; they can be made of wood or iron, and are used for loading and unloading earth, manure, etc. Wheelbarrows come in a variety of shapes. There are two types of wheelbarrow: trunk wheelbarrows with two sides to hold the load, and stretcher wheelbarrows with crossbars at the bottom. The former are used to transport soil and fertilizers; the latter can carry more cumbersome loads, such as straw, straw mats, watering cans filled with water, etc. The trowel essentially consists of a wide blade curved in the shape of a half-cylinder; it is used to pull young plants out of the ground for transplanting, without crushing the roots. The planter, frequently used for seedlings and transplants, is a simple spindle-shaped piece of wood 20 to 30 centimetres long. Its end can be lined with iron or copper. The chalk line is mainly used to mark out paths and alleys, and to draw the radii of seedlings. You can easily build your own by tying the ends of a forty-meter-long rope to two stakes. The frames, designed to encourage the growth of vegetables that would only come into the open later, are made up of GARDENING INSTRUMENTS. ~~ 3 m Frame M 664-4.7 imi Faceted bell String 2 Planter Doormat 18 Vegetable bell and Rack Planter 2 two main parts: the box and the panels. The trunk is a bottomless box that supports the glazed panels, so that they are slightly inclined. The most common model has three panels, a length of 4 meters, a width of 1.33 meters and a height of 33 centimeters at the back and 26 centimeters at the front. The panels are wooden or iron frames, 1.33 m wide by 1.36 m long, divided by the crosspieces to which the panes are attached. The mats, made of rye straw, are generally a little larger than the frames on which they are laid. Many growers build them themselves. Placed directly on the ground, they protect seeds and young plants from frost. Cloches are used for the same purpose as frames; a distinction is made between verrines or faceted cloches and cloches maraîchères, the most commonly used today. The former consist of a small iron frame with flat glass panes; they are much more expensive than the latter, and allow less heat and light to reach the plant. The most commonly used market gardening cloches are made of colorless glass and measure 40 centimeters in diameter; when they crack without becoming unusable, you can try repairing them with ceruse white. When you don't want to use them any more, place them one inside the other, interspersed with a bit of straw. The rack is formed by a slat with a certain number of notches; it serves to support the edge of the bell above the ground, so that air can penetrate to the plant. When the bell is to be raised on all sides, it is held in place by three racks. CURRENT WORK 21 When the gardener sows or plants vegetables at the usual times to cultivate them in the open air, without any care other than that which is normally essential for their growth, he is practicing natural cultivation; when he seeks to hasten their development by the use of layers, frames, cloches, etc., he is practicing early cultivation; when he seeks to hasten their development by the use of layers, frames, cloches, etc., he is practicing early cultivation, When, finally, vegetables are grown out of season, either on beds and under frames, or in a greenhouse, with the aid of artificial heat, the cultivation method used is called forced cultivation. In greenhouses, heat is generally produced by heating with hot water using the thermosiphon. Among the various gardening tasks, some are common to all three cultivation methods, such as sowing and transplanting; others, such as assembling layers, are specific to early cultivation and forced cultivation. We will look at these various operations in turn, starting with the most general. Ploughing. In vegetable cultivation, ploughing is mostly carried out with a spade; for it to be done properly, the instrument must penetrate to a depth of between 15 and 30 centimetres, and the soil removed must be turned over so that the deep layer is brought to the surface. Whenever we want to sow or transplant a plot of land, it must be ploughed; during this operation, we bury all weeds that cannot multiply by sprouting, but take care to remove those that could reproduce in this way. In late autumn and early winter, when ploughing is carried out to bury fertilizers, they must not be buried too deeply, as if the roots of the vegetables could not reach the fertilized area, the amendments would have no effect. Ploughing should be avoided after a frost, as the hardened soil could only be imperfectly divided; immediately after a heavy rain, the soggy earth, forming a compact mass, would only be worked with difficulty. Sowing. Sowing is the most common method of propagating vegetable plants. Sowing can take place as early as the end of February, if the winter is not too cold, but this is not a strict rule, as some vegetables, such as the early St Catherine's pea, can be sown at the beginning of winter. Sowing will alternate with harvesting, but rarely later than July for vegetables to be harvested the same year. When seeds that should be sown in spring take a long time to germinate, they can be planted as early as December of the previous year. If sown earlier, they will germinate before winter, and the first frosts will destroy the young plants. The smaller the seedlings, the less soil they should be covered with; in some cases, it's enough to sprinkle a little potting soil over the seedlings. If, for one reason or another, you want the seeds to emerge quickly, you can put them in a canvas bag and soak them in water for a while before sowing. Broadcast sowing. - Sowing can be done in a number of ways, the simplest of which is to take the seeds in your hand and throw them as evenly as possible over the chosen area. This is known as broadcast sowing. This operation is usually carried out in two stages, i.e. on two opposite edges of the sowing bed, so as to cover half of it each time: this avoids throwing the seeds into the paths. When you're sure of the quality of the seeds, sow them lightly to obtain plants that are as strong as possible. If, despite this, the emergence is too thick, you'll have to thin them out, i.e. pull out the weakest plants to allow the others to grow freely. We usually avoid sowing too thickly by mixing a little fine sand with the seed. After sowing, harrow with a rake or fork, then plow, i.e. tamp down the soil, either with a board or with the back of a shovel or rake. Water if necessary. Ray sowing. - Ray sowing consists in opening small furrows with a serfouette, following a line determined by a chalk line, into which the seeds are deposited, then covered by harrowing the seedbed; later hoeing will be easier. A modification of ray sowing, poguet sowing, is carried out by making small holes with a serfouette, into which the large seeds, such as bean seeds, are placed in numbers of two to five. Transplanting. Transplanting is an operation whose effect is to make plants produce abundant hairs, thus making them more robust and delaying their going to seed. It consists in changing the soil of vegetables when they have reached a certain size and could harm each other. To do this, you must not wait until they are too developed, as transplanting would then offer little chance of success. The soil in which the plants are to be transplanted must have been ploughed, mulched and watered if the weather is dry. Transplanting is done in lines, spaced according to the volume the vegetables can reach. Holes are made with the planter, into which the plant roots are placed, then filled in with soil. Each plant is then watered, compacting the soil around the roots. Transplanting can also be carried out in a small space, in pots, on a bed, etc., for plants whose vegetation is long-lasting and which need to be sheltered at the start of their growth. Weeding. Weeding is one of the most important operations in vegetable growing; its purpose is to prevent weeds from growing alongside vegetables, whose development they would otherwise hinder. Weeding consists of pulling out these weeds either by hand or with an implement, and should be repeated as often as necessary, especially when the plants are still young. In alleys and paths, weeding is done with a rake; in flowerbeds, it is mostly done by hand; but as it would be difficult if the soil were dry, it should preferably be done after rain or watering, so as not to raise the soil, which could disturb or expose the roots of the plants to be preserved. Hoeing. Like weeding, hoeing is an operation that should not be neglected; it is especially useful when the soil has been hardened by rain or watering. Depending on the situation, hoeing can be carried out with a hoe, a flail or even a hoe. It should not be too deep, for fear of damaging the plant roots, but deep enough to allow air to reach them. It also makes it easier for water to reach the deeper parts of the soil, so that evaporation is greatly reduced and the soil stays moist longer. Hoeing can take the place of weeding when care is taken to destroy all noxious plants at the same time; it must be repeated more often in compact soils than in light soils; it becomes less necessary when the soil is covered with mulch. Watering. It's a well-known fact that frequent watering is essential to ensure rapid, vigorous vegetable growth. In our gardens, watering is done with watering cans. Sometimes, to make the work easier, there are several reservoirs in the same vegetable garden; these reservoirs often consist of barrels sunk into the ground and connected by pipes; as they are also connected to a pump, they can all be filled at will. The gardener doesn't always have such a system at his disposal; sometimes he draws his water from a well or a stream; but as most of the time it's impossible to do otherwise, he uses whatever water is within his reach. We would point out, however, that rainwater is the best for watering, followed by running river water, spring water, well water, pump water and finally pond water. Before using well water, it's a good idea to leave it in the open air for a while, so that it can take on the temperature of the atmosphere and become sufficiently aerated. The time of day to water varies with the season. In summer, it's preferable to water in the evening, as the water evaporates less at night, so the vegetables are under its influence for longer; on the other hand, in autumn and spring, watering should take place in the morning, as if the water were poured on in the evening, its freshness could be harmful to the plants. When watering large vegetables, such as cabbages, we often remove the head of the watering can, allowing us to pour the necessary amount of water more quickly. Light watering without removing the head is known as "bassinage". Layering. Layers are piles of manure which, through fermentation, can release the heat necessary for early vegetable cultivation. Most often, layers are made from horse manure mixed with tree leaves, such as chestnut, beech or oak. For them to produce good results, they need to be at about the temperature at which vegetables grow best naturally. There are several types of layer, depending on their degree of heat and the shape they take. We'll look successively at floor layers and trench layers. Floor layers. - They are rectangular in shape, and their dimensions vary according to the number of frames or bells you wish to cover them with. However, their width is almost always between 1.33 and 1.70 meters. When new, unfermented manure is used to build them, the heat produced is considerable and the layers are said to be hot. When layers are built with a mixture of new manure and manure that has already fermented, or annealed manure, the heat developed is less and the layers are lukewarm; construction of the latter generally begins in November. Before building a layer, the location is first determined using four stakes around which a chalk line is stretched; the new manure is then mixed with the annealed manure, and the mixture is placed in the chosen spot using a fork, taking care to tamp it down as you go along, to maintain the same level throughout, and to raise the lateral edges of the layer vertically, which can vary in thickness from 40 to 65 centimetres. If the layers are intended to carry bells, they are filled with about 20 centimetres of potting soil, then carefully edged. If the manure is not sufficiently moist, it is watered to facilitate fermentation. At first, the temperature rises rapidly, reaching 65 degrees (the so-called "coup de feu"), but soon drops to around 25 to 30 degrees. Sowing generally begins at this point. Trench beds. - Trench beds are mainly used for growing melons; they differ from floor beds only in that they are raised on the bottom of a pit, so the height above ground is less. Trenches are generally 1 meter wide and 33 centimeters deep, with an average total layer thickness of 65 centimeters. Some of the annealed manure used comes from the old layers. Trench layers in which annealed manure is almost the only material used are known as deaf layers; the width of the pit is usually 55 to 60 centimeters, and the depth 25 to 30 centimeters. The upper part is filled with potting soil and covered with long manure. During the winter, it's necessary to protect the layers from the cold, and this is achieved with the help of "accots" and "réchauds". Accots are piles of old manure which surround the layers or frames; rechauds differ from accots in that only new manure is used in their composition; they are preferable to the former, as the heat they give off can prevent the layers from cooling down. CHAPTER V ASSOLEMENTS Once the crops to be grown in a vegetable garden have been chosen, and a suitable location assigned to each one, it seems at first sight as if this arrangement could be adhered to at all times; this would certainly be the simplest and most convenient way of doing things, were it not for the disadvantages that have long been recognized. This is because the plant borrows elements from the soil that are always the same, so that the soil ends up lacking the nutrients it requires; but it does contain others that are suitable for species which, thanks to their root systems, can draw their nourishment from different layers of the soil. This observation has led growers to alternate their various crops on the same site. This alternation is called crop rotation. Vegetables are not chosen at random. Experience has given us some general rules on this subject: the most exhausting crops are replaced by less exhausting ones; deep-rooted plants are replaced by shallow-rooted ones, etc. When several harvests or seasons are grown on the same planting bed in a single year, care is taken not to use the same crop for two consecutive seasons, so as to always have good-quality produce. It's easy to understand the advantages of a good crop rotation; like Mr. André Thouin, we can say that it's "the art of alternating crops on the same piece of land, to constantly produce the best products at the lowest possible cost". Choosing a crop rotation is quite a difficult task, as the grower must take into account not only the needs of the plants grown, but also the elements contained in the soil. It is therefore very difficult to give a system that is suitable for all cases; however, we will quote a model that we have borrowed from M. Courtois-Gérard. It shows the distribution of land for a 15-acre garden, and indicates the successive crops to be grown in each bed for the harvests of the same year. The horticulturist will make any modifications he deems necessary, and will ensure that a crop is brought back to the same bed only every five or six years. Square meters. 100 100 50 50 50 100 50 100 50 50 200 50 50 50 50 200 50 100 50 Artichokes, with a few feet of squash. Asparagus, with a row of beet between each asparagus bed. 1st season, early carrots; 2nd season, lettuces and romaine. Carrots and parsnips sown together. 1st season, beef cabbage with spinach; 2nd season, celery. Saint-Denis cabbage or quintal cabbage. 1st season, cauliflower; 2nd season, raiponce with spinach 1st season, broad beans; 2nd season, turnips. Strawberries. 1st season, bush beans; 2nd season, lamb's lettuce. String beans to be harvested dry for winter supply. 1st season, lettuces and romaine; 2nd season, cauliflower. 1st season, white onion; 2nd season, Meaux chicory. Red or yellow onion and leek sown together. 1st season, early potatoes; 2nd season, savoy cabbage. Potatoes for winter supply. 1st season, dwarf peas; 2nd season, kohlrabi or rutabagas. Dry peas for winter supply. Scorzonera or white salsify. 1500 square meters (15 ares). There is no room for parsley, chervil, sorrel, wild chicory, watercress or shallots, which are usually grown on the borders. The horticulturist will judge whether his garden is in the right conditions to produce them, and if necessary, he will substitute them for others less interesting to him. In any case, some vegetables will be sacrificed, as it is impossible to grow all species in a small vegetable garden. 31 SEEDS The vegetable varieties we grow have often been obtained by successive improvements of wild types. These improvements could only be fixed by selection, i.e. by always looking for subjects with the highest degree of the desired qualities for the production of seeds for future sowing, and by surrounding them with the most attentive care to prevent them from suffering the action of surrounding plants of lesser value. Improved plants all have a natural tendency to revert to the wild type from which they originate (the law of atavism); selection is therefore an absolute necessity to perpetuate breeds. Most of the time, gardeners cultivate varieties of the same species in beds far enough apart from each other; but this precaution is often insufficient, as insects can, in spite of this, fertilize one subject by means of pollen taken from another located at a certain distance from the first. The most effective method is to cover the seed-bearing vegetables with gauze when they flower, and uncover them once fertilization has taken place. It's preferable to collect the seeds you want to sow yourself, as this way you can be more sure of their quality. In the article devoted to each crop, we'll explain the special care to be taken with seed carriers. If, despite the precautions we have indicated, new varieties should appear, it will be up to the grower to judge whether or not they should be kept in the garden. Some seeds need to be sown fresh to produce good results, but almost all can retain their germination capacity for several years. In the table below, we give a few notes on the seeds of the main vegetables, taken from MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie's book on vegetable plants; the gardener will find this information useful. VEGETABLE GARDEN THE VEGETABLE GARDEN.  Artichoke... . . Asparagus. Basil (large). Basil (large). . Basil (small). Beet... ... . Cardoon... . . . . Carrot... . . . . Celery... ... ... . Chervil. Chervil, bulbous . Chicory. Chicory, wild. Cabbage. . . Kohlrabi... ... . Kohlrabi. Cauliflower. Cucumber. Cucumber. Pumpkin... ... . Butternut squash. Pumpkin. ... . Crambe....... Watercress. Watercress Spinach with prickly seed... ... . Round-seeded spinach... ... ... FloGrams 140 610 800 500 530 500 250 630 360 480 380 540 340 400 700 700 700 700 480 500 400 420 425 210 730 580 375 510 rence... ... ... 300 Beans... ... ... 620 to 750 In i gram 250 25 50 250 800 900 50 25 950 2500 450 450 600 700 320 300 9H 315 20 375 300 38 to 8 15 to 18 450 4000 90 110 200 In 100 grams 40 to 115 Years S0O0OS Ot 4 or 5 2 or 3 1 * and Ot OtO 2 or 3 1 5 S 269 ac Years 10 1 2 10 O 10 1 10 A cc O 10 POTAGE LITRE WEIGHT OF SEED NUMBER OF SEEDS GERMINATIVE LIFE Years Strawberry. ... ... Grams 600 Beans. 1625 to 850 Lettuce. . . . . . . Broad lentil . Common lamb's lettuce. Melons... ... . Black mustard. White mustard. Turnip. Onion. Parsnips. Parsnip. Parsley. Parsley . . . . . . Parsley ... ... . Dandelion... ... . Leek ... ... . Pear. . . . . . 430 790 280 360 600 750 670 500 650 200 120 500 450 270 550 250 Peas....... 700 to 800 Purslane... ... . Radish... ... ... ... Rapunzel... ... . Rhubarb ... ... . Salsify... . . . . Scolyma... ... . Scorsonera... . . Tetragon. ... . Thyme . . . . .. Tomato... ... . 610 700 800 80 to 120 230 125 260 225 680 300 In i gram 800 to 2500 In 100 grams 75 to 800 800 In 1 gram 14 1000 35 800 200 450 250 1000 220 350 350 150 1200 to 1500 400 60 In 10 grams 20 to 55 In 1 gram 2500 120 25000 50 100 200 90 10 to 12 6000 300 to 400 Years 0 * 5 CROE ertrO 019 Oo eR CR - A c D* LO CE CE CR O 10 1 co OE-10O Co WA-1 10 3 10 0-100-1-100000 LE POTAGER. 33 Average Extreme 6 CHAPTER VII POTTING CALENDAR Under this heading, we give a summary of the various activities that the gardener can undertake during each month of the year. These indications should not exempt the gardener from seeking more detailed information in the articles devoted to each crop; their sole purpose is to provide a reminder of the work to be carried out at particular times of the year. As they relate to the climate of Paris, the horticulturist will be able to modify them according to circumstances. January. The work carried out during this month is mainly related to forced cultivation. The horticulturist must set up new beds and care for those previously sown: he reshuffles the stoves and aerates the plants from time to time, transplanting those that are vigorous enough, and harvesting vegetables fit for consumption. He can also sow asparagus, carrots and other early vegetables; asparagus, early carrots, chervil, some varieties of chicory such as summer chicory, as well as some wild chicories for cutting, early cabbage and early savoy cabbage, early cauliflower, crambe, Alen cress, spinach, early broad beans, strawberries, the earliest varieties of beans, lettuce, cucumbers and melons. For the latter, we prefer the very early Cantaloup Prescott frame melon and the black Cantaloup des Carmes melon. Sow the earliest varieties of turnips, onions, leeks, peas, radishes and tomatoes, and plant potatoes. In the cellar, mushroom stacks can be larded. The only things that can be sown in the open ground are ordinary garlic, bulbous chervil, onions, parsnips, parsley, broad beans and early peas. For the latter two vegetables in particular, sowing must be done in good exposure. February. The general work carried out in February is a continuation of that done in January. The layers that have already produced are turned over and raised again, adding a certain quantity of new manure. Early crops are sown in the same way as in the previous month. Crops grown in the open are quite numerous. This is the time for planting asparagus claws, asparagus seedlings, early carrots, baby celery, wild chicory, cabbage, spring onions and chives, watercress and Alen cress, spinach, spring lettuces and romaine, leeks, early radishes and scorzonera; planting of shallot bulbs, crosne tubers and Jerusalem artichokes. March. From March onwards, bedding out gradually loses its importance, giving way to natural cultivation. Nevertheless, a number of vegetables can be sown under frame: artichokes, eggplants, cardoons, celery, chicories, cabbages and cauliflowers, squash, cucumbers, strawberries, beans, lettuces and romaine, melons, turnips, dandelions, leeks, potatoes, radishes, tetragonia and tomatoes. In the cellar, the mushroom stacks are larded. Towards the end of the month, you can uncover a number of vegetables, such as artichokes, which have been sheltered until now and will now be able to withstand the outside temperature. Almost all vegetables can already be sown or planted in the open ground. We'll mention just a few: ait, arroche, asparagus, carrots, chervil, chicory, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, kohlrabi, spring onions, chives, cress, crosne, shallots, spinach, broad beans, strawberries, yams, head and romaine lettuces, lentils, turnips, onions, sorrel, parsnips, parsley, dandelions, leeks, peas, potatoes, radishes, horseradish, salsify, scorzonera, tetragon and Jerusalem artichokes. April. In April, frosts are usually no longer to be feared, so plants grown on beds can be given frequent airing. Some eggplant, cardoon, chicory, cucumber, squash, bean, melon, pepper and tomato seedlings are still sown in frames and on beds. Plants vigorous enough to withstand this operation continue to be transplanted; cucumbers, squash and melons are pruned. Mushroom wheels can be larded in the cellar. Field work consists of thinning, hoeing, weeding and watering. Vegetables sown in the open ground are transplanted; artichoke eyelets, asparagus claws, crosne and potato tubers and tarragon are planted; a number of vegetables are sown: arugula, beet, carrots, celery, celeriac, chervil, chicory, cabbage, cauliflower, kohlrabi, turnip cabbage, chives, civets, watercress, spinach, broad beans, strawberries, beans with good exposure, yams, lettuces, lentils, white mustard, turnips, onions, sorrel, parsnips, parsley, dandelions, leeks, peas, potatoes, radishes, horseradish, rutabagas, salsify, scorzonera, tetragonia, thyme, tomatoes. Care must be taken to destroy all harmful insects. 37 In this month, beds are used only for planting potatoes, cucumbers, melons and chicory, the latter not needing to be sheltered by frames. The horticulturist is mainly occupied with outdoor work. He plants artichoke eyelets, tarragon stalks and potato tubers; He sows arroche, asparagus, beet, cardoons, celery, celeriac, chervil, summer chicory, escarole, large-root wild chicory, chicory for capuchin and witloof beards, improved chicory, cabbage, cauliflower, kohlrabi, kohlrabi, spring onions, cucumbers, watercress, spinach, strawberries, beans, head and romaine lettuces, lentils, melons, turnips, sorrel, parsley, dandelions, leeks, peas, purslane, spring, summer and winter radishes, salsify, scorzonera, tetragonia, thyme. Juim. In June, the only plants that occupy the beds are eggplants, melons, potatoes and mushrooms in the cellar. Watering, in particular, must be repeated often, as the heat quickly evaporates the water; the soil, hardened by successive waterings, must itself be hoeed from time to time. There are still a relatively large number of seedlings to be sown at this time of year; beets, cardoons, carrots, ribbed celery, chervil, summer chicory and escarole, various types of chicory with large roots, cabbages, cauliflowers, broccoli, kohlrabi, spring onions, cucumbers, squash, cress, spinach, strawberries, beans, head, romaine and leaf lettuces, lentils, lamb's lettuce, turnips, sorrel, parsley, dandelions, leeks, peas, purslane, radishes, radish, rutabaga, salsify, scorzonera, thyme. July. Vegetables require the same care in July as they did in June, but need even more watering, as the heat is generally stronger. Carrots, chervil, endive and wild chicory, cabbages to be harvested the following year, broccoli, kohlrabi, kohlrabi, spring onions, cucumbers, cress, spinach, strawberries, beans, lettuce, lamb's lettuce, turnips, onions, sorrel, parsley, dandelions, leeks, peas, purslane, summer and autumn radishes, radish, scorzonera and thyme. August. Growing operations in August are absolutely the same as in previous months, but if the temperature is lower than in July, watering will be less frequent. As always, mushroom wheels can be larded in the cellar. There are fewer open-ground seedlings; carrots, chervil, bulbous chervil, chicory, cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, spring onions, watercress, spinach and strawberries, winter and spring lettuces, lamb's lettuce, turnips, onions, sorrel, parsley, dandelions, leeks, periwinkle, purslane, winter radish, raiponium and scorzonera. 39 From September onwards, a smaller number of vegetables are sown in the open ground. Weeding, hoeing and watering are still the same general procedures for those still in vegetation. We are still sowing carrots, ordinary and bulbous chervil, chicory endives (which will be sheltered by frames when the cold comes), cabbages, cauliflowers, cress alénois, spinach, lamb's lettuce, turnips, early onions, sorrel, parsley, leeks, radishes; we are planting strawberry plants and trimming mushroom wheels. October. In October, a few more vegetables are sown in the ground. These include: ordinary chervil, bulbous chervil, cauliflower, watercress, spinach, strawberries, lettuce (which needs to be sheltered with a frame), sorrel, parsley, dwarf peas (which need to be protected from frost with chests) and radishes. Garlic and shallot bulbs are planted, mushroom wheels are trimmed, celery is mounded and cardoons are stuffed for blanching. November. In November, bedding becomes more necessary. Carrots, chervil, wild chicory, cauliflower, watercress, spinach, lettuce, peas and radishes are sown for forcing. In the open ground, plant garlic and shallot bulbs, common chervil, bulbous chervil, broad beans, lettuces and peas. For pea seedlings, Michaux peas are preferred. Mushroom grasses can be larded. Special care includes buttering artichokes, blanching celery and tying escarole and chicory. Celeriac and head cabbage are also trimmed; cardoons are stuffed and placed in the vegetable greenhouse if the weather is cold; cauliflower is placed in the greenhouse; asparagus is smoked; root vegetables that fear low temperatures are placed in the greenhouse. December. December is the most important month for forced cultivation: the gardener puts up layers for new seedlings, and from time to time aerates young plants in vegetation. Every evening, he covers his trays with straw mats, which he removes in the morning. The seedlings that can be sown on beds at this time, in addition to mushroom sowing, are carrots, chervil, wild chicory, cucumbers, broad beans, early beans, lettuces for cutting, melons, leeks, early dwarf peas and early radishes. You can also plant early Marjolin potatoes. Vegetables that are to overwinter in the garden must be covered with bedding; seedlings are entirely suspended. CHAPTER ONE THE POTATO The potato, regarded today as the best of our vegetables, is an annual plant with a herbaceous stem, whose underground parts are lined with swellings called tubers. We won't go into the history of the potato here; we know the difficulties it encountered when first introduced to France, and how Parmentier, by dint of perseverance, succeeded in making it accepted by his compatriots. The potato can grow in all types of soil, and almost always yields abundant harvests when the soil is thoroughly fertilized before planting. However, strong, damp soils are less suitable than light, chalky ones; in any case, the potato plays an important role in most vegetable gardens, due to its nutritional value and the variety of ways in which it can be used. Propagation. Potatoes can be propagated by sowing, but this is rarely done, unless new varieties are desired. The fruits containing the seed are small, unpalatable berries, generally smaller than a walnut. Reproduction is usually carried out with the help of the tubers themselves, which, when placed in the ground, soon produce stems whose first food is drawn from the material they contain. Once the potatoes have been dug up, it's a good idea to leave those intended for the propagation of the species in the ground for a while, before bringing them in. To do this, choose tubers with the most pronounced characteristics of the varieties you want to reproduce. When they have taken on a greenish hue, they are brought in and, some time before planting, placed on racks or, as some horticulturists recommend, in oyster baskets, so that they can begin to grow. For varieties that produce few sprouts, only one layer of potatoes should be placed on the tray or in each crate; for ordinary varieties, several layers should be stacked on top of each other. The tubers should also be exposed to air and light from time to time, simply by opening the windows when the outside temperature is not too cold. Thus prepared, potatoes can be harvested earlier than if they had been planted without any care. Natural cultivation. Soil intended for natural potato cultivation must be ploughed and smoked before planting, which usually takes place in April. Holes, 50 centimetres apart in either direction, are opened with a hoe, 10 to 15 centimetres deep. A tuber is placed at the bottom of each hole, then covered with soil. A few days after emergence, when the plants can be easily distinguished, the first hoeing is carried out, which has the advantage of removing weeds. When the stems are 20 centimetres high, they are ridged, i.e. the soil is lifted around each plant, either with a hand hoe, or with a ridging tool for large-scale cultivation. It is easy to see that varieties whose tubers are deep in the soil should not be ridged as hard as those whose tubers are a few centimetres above the surface, and that if the soil is clayey, ridging should be weaker than if it is siliceous or chalky. When planting takes place, as we said earlier, in the course of April, we can obtain, with the early varieties, a harvest of new potatoes at the beginning of July. Tubers that are to be consumed throughout the following year should not be pulled until the tops have dried out. This can be done with a hoe or a flat-tined fork. Leave the potatoes to dry out on the ground for a few days, then store them in a dry place. To prevent sprouting and preserve potatoes over winter, simply remove the eyes with a knife or small gouge, notching the tuber to a thickness of 2 to 3 millimetres. For large supplies, the procedure described by Mr. Schribaux can be used, which consists of immersing the tubers for ten to twelve hours in a solution of 1 hectoliter of water and 1 to 2 liters of commercial sulfuric acid, at 66 degrees Baumé. The solution is placed in a wooden container, and the tubers are washed thoroughly before treatment. This operation should be carried out in March or April, when the sprouts are visible. Forced cultivation. Forced cultivation of potatoes is carried out on beds covered with frames. The layers are generally 60 centimetres thick. They can be planted from the beginning of January, for harvesting in March. During the day, when the temperature eases and the sun falls on the frame, the plants can be uncovered; in the evening, don't forget to place mats over the panels. Gardeners who grow potatoes on trays generally use them for two successive seasons; the second, when the temperature is higher, naturally requires less care. For the night, it is sufficient to cover the young plants with straw mats and to support them above the layers with stakes, when bad weather sets in. Varieties. The varieties of potato known today are very numerous, so we'll limit ourselves to mentioning those generally considered to be the best or most productive. Round yellow potatoes. - Among the round yellow potatoes we'll mention the following: The Bonne Wilhelmine potato, widely grown as an early crop, as its tubers form quickly; The Chardon potato, which ripens in the first half of October; it is very productive, and, as its flesh is not of superior quality, it is often used for animal feed; it can nevertheless be eaten on the table at the end of winter; at this time it is better than immediately after harvesting; The Snowflake potato, one of the best American varieties, quite productive, which ripens around the middle of July; The Shaw potato, widely grown around Paris, whose flesh is mealy; it can be harvested in the first̀re fortnight of August; The Segonzac potato which, like the previous one, is often grown around Paris, and whose ripening takes place at the beginning of August. .P - Quarantaine de Noisy potato. E -. ---G- Potato Sausage. Pomme de terre Pousse debout. Marjolin potato. Magnum bonum potato. P'omme de terre rouge longue de Hollande. Vitelotte red potato. 45 Long yellow potatoes. - Long yellow potatoes include The Marjolin or Quarantaine potato, now widespread, which ripens in the first fortnight of July; this excellent variety is the most widely grown on beds; it is planted when sprouted; The Quarantaine de Noisy or late Marjolin potato, a superior variety now much sought after; It is very productive and ripens at the beginning of August; The Marjolin tetard potato, productive, early and of good quality; The Joseph Rigault potato, a semi-early variety, productive and of good quality; The Magnum bonum potato, semi-late, productive and of good quality: The Royale or early English potato, an excellent variety, as early as the early Marjolin. Round red potatoes. - Red round potatoes include: the floury red potato, one of the best varieties, with rough skin and white flesh; harvested in September; the very productive Strasbourg red round potato, with yellow flesh, generally ripening in the first half of September; the Zeeland potato, which is better at the end of winter than after harvest; ripens at the end of September. Long red potatoes. - Among the long red potatoes we'd like to mention: The red Kidney potato, with its floury flesh and smooth skin; it ripens in the first half of September; The Saucisse or Toute bonne potato, widely cultivated, which is harvested from September 15 to 30; it is one of the best-kept; its flesh is especially prized at the end of winter; The long red Dutch potato, whose only disadvantage is that it is not very productive; It ripens in the first fortnight of August; the Pousse debout potato, which is fairly productive and keeps well; it has gradually taken the place of the rouge longue de Hollande on the Paris market; the Vitelotte red potato, characterized by fairly deep cuts; it is a good variety, easy to keep; it can be harvested at the beginning of September. Purple potatoes. - Purple varieties are less numerous and less sought-after than yellow and red varieties. Here are a few examples: The round Violette potato, fairly productive, which can be harvested in the first half of September; The late Violette potato, grown especially in Brittany, which ripens in early September; it keeps well. Enemies. Like most vegetables, the potato is subject to attack by a number of insects, such as the white grub, the cricket and the moth; but it is also attacked by a disease that alters its tubers and makes them unfit for food. The disease is caused by a microscopic fungus called peronospora infestans. Peronospora attacks begin on the leaves, which turn yellow and become covered with brown spots. Gradually, the disease spreads from person to person, and usually reaches the tubers two or three days later. Some horticulturists have advised cutting off the leaves and stems as soon as the first symptoms of the disease appear: this over-aggressive procedure has the disadvantage of compromising the plant's vegetation later on. Others have claimed that the use of sulphur flower gives good results; we don't think this method is the most effective. In our opinion, the most effective treatment consists in immediately spraying affected stems and leaves with a liquid called Bordeaux mixture, composed of 88% water, 6% copper sulfate and 6% lime. In an experiment carried out in Joinville-le-Pont by Mr. Prillieux, Inspector General of Agriculture, not a single tuber was found to be affected on nine treated plants, while seventeen tubers were found to have been altered on six untreated plants, which had been set aside for comparison. PATATO, IGNAME, CROSNE, TOPINAMBOUR, OXALIS Potato. 49 Like the potato, the potato is a tuberous plant. It does well in the south of France, but requires more care in the Paris climate. In warmer countries, they often replace the potato, because, like the potato, they can be prepared in many different ways. Its floury flesh has a sweet flavor and a fragrance rather reminiscent of violets. In the south of France, potato cultivation requires little more care than that of the potato, and for the same surface area, it produces much greater yields. In spring, the tuber is planted in loose soil, which is soon covered by the creeping stems that develop on its surface. The main care consists of frequent watering via irrigation channels. In central and northern France, potatoes are grown in layers. In January, the best-preserved tubers are planted on a warm bed, covered with a frame and covered with mats for the night. When the shoots have developed, we detach them, keeping a fragment of the tuber with them, then plant them in small pots which we push into the bed and cover with a bell. At the beginning of March, they are transplanted onto a second layer of dry leaves covered with around 15 cm of potting soil; once this is done, the young shoots are sheltered by a frame. Around mid-April, the air is gradually allowed to penetrate under the panels, and later, when the outside temperature has become sufficiently warm, they are removed permanently. Sometimes, as they develop, the potatoes appear on the surface of the soil; in this case, they must be covered with soil. Harvesting takes place as late as possible, so that the vegetables have time to develop sufficiently; but as soon as the frost has reached the tops of the tubers, they must be uprooted, as the insufficiently protected tubers will themselves be attacked and rot quickly. When pulling potatoes, care must be taken, as those that are crumpled or injured will spoil immediately. When they have dried well on the ground, they are placed in layers in baskets, with a bed of tannin or heather that has been dried beforehand, and then placed in a place where the temperature does not fall below 8 to 10 degrees. There are many varieties of potato, the main ones being: the yam potato, with its grayish skin; the yellow potato, with its elongated, thin tuber, smooth skin and very fine flesh; the pink Malaga potato, also known as the red Algiers potato, one of the earliest; and the white potato, inferior to the above in every respect. M 41 t21 Malaga pink potato. Chinese yam. The yam is a tuber introduced to France in 1848 by M. de Montigny, consul in Chang-Haï. Much larger than the potato, yams can reach up to 1 meter in length; their taste is reminiscent of that of the potato, so most of the preparations suitable for potatoes can be applied to yams. Yam is a perennial plant that is sometimes left in the ground for two years before being harvested; it is easy to store; its annual stems are voluble, i.e. they can curl up like those of bindweed; they can be left to crawl on the ground; they then grow less, but make hoeing difficult. Yam can be propagated in a variety of ways: each of the little buds on the tuber can give rise to a plant; bulblets from the leaf axils can also be used for propagation. The best method is to plant unbroken tubers no more than 10 cm long in March. Stems are sometimes given long stakes around which they wrap as they grow, making routine gardening easier. When yams are propagated by bulbing, the first year's harvest is often minimal, but by the second year it has increased considerably. 40 8 Chinese yam. But the main obstacle to large-scale cultivation of Chinese yam is the difficulty of digging it up, which is generally done in November of the first year; it is often necessary to dig 80 centimetres or even 1 metre deep to obtain the tubers without damaging them; as a result, cultivation costs are very high. In the past, yams were grown as a forage crop to replace potatoes, given their much higher yield. However, the cost of harvesting them had to be borne in mind, and today yams are grown only as a vegetable, mainly as a curiosity. The genus Igname (Dioscorea) includes a considerable number of species and varieties that play a major role in the diets of populations in certain parts of the world. Crosne or Stachys affinis. The Japanese crosne is an excellent vegetable originating in China, which appeared in France in 1882, and whose cultivation is spreading more and more. It is now widely consumed in France, thanks to the perseverance and efforts of Messrs. Paillieux and Bois, who have done their utmost to propagate it in France. Crosne is easy to grow; it thrives in all types of soil. However, for easier harvesting, it's best not to grow it in compacted soil. In February, in holes 20 centimetres deep and 40 centimetres apart in both directions, crosnes are placed, usually three in each hole. Hoeing is done frequently, but rarely after the end of September, when tubers at shallow depths run a high risk of 1. This can be seen in the article devoted to this genus by Messrs Paillieux and Bois in their Potager d'un Curieux. Crosne du Japon. to be damaged. Each plant can be lightly butted when the last hoeing is done. Weeding should not take place before the beginning of December: it is often only at this time that the tubers are fully developed. As crosne does not fear frost, harvesting can be carried out at any time. To preserve crosne, it should not be left in the open air, where it will quickly wither; it should be placed in sand and kept in a cool, dry place. Crosne is a vegetable which, because of the care required to harvest it, is only suitable for small-scale cultivation; despite all the precautions taken to uproot it, a fairly large number of shoots generally appear around May, which, if left in place, would produce nothing. On the contrary, if you transplant them, you can obtain an abundant harvest. Crosne can be prepared in a variety of ways. In general, all the preparations suitable for potatoes can be applied to it; it is not peeled, but simply washed before cooking, which lasts twelve to fifteen minutes. Its pleasant flavor is reminiscent of potato, salsify and artichoke. Crosne is attacked by only one enemy: the white grub of the chafer. Jerusalem artichoke. The Jerusalem artichoke is a plant native to North America, with reddish-purple tubers about the size of potatoes. Mainly used as a fodder plant, Jerusalem artichokes are sometimes grown in the vegetable garden; their sweet taste is not unpleasant, but the quality of the flesh is inferior to that of most of our tuberous vegetables. Jerusalem artichokes require little labor to grow, and yield quite a lot. On the other hand, cattle can be fed on the aerial part of the plant; but it is necessary to wait 4 2 A 9 9 I EI Topinambour. before cutting the stems and leaves, until the tubers are sufficiently developed for them not to suffer. Some growers have claimed that it is more advantageous to leave Jerusalem artichokes to vegetate for two consecutive years than to harvest them in the first year. However, several experiments carried out by M. Joigneaux show that the harvest obtained in the first case is much lower than the product of two annual harvests. Jerusalem artichokes thrive in all soils, no matter how arid; when in the ground, they have little fear of frost; they are reproduced in spring by planting tubers; they are uprooted when the tops have died. The tuber is easy to preserve. Jerusalem artichokes can be reproduced by sowing, but the results obtained in this way are generally unsatisfactory. However, progress has been made in terms of flesh quality. The yellow tuber variety has a more delicate flavor than the ordinary variety, but is much less productive. Oxalis. Oxalis is a little-cultivated vegetable, as its yield is extremely low. Two main species of oxalis are grown: crenellated oxalis and Deppe's oxalis; the former is the more palatable and widespread variety, and is a tuber native to Peru with fairly deep notches; its shape is elongated and its volume slightly larger than that of a walnut. The crenellated oxalis, whose smooth skin can be red, yellow or white, reproduces by planting its tubers in May in holes spaced about Om, 80 apart in both directions; this spacing is necessary to allow the stems to develop freely. To stimulate tuber growth, they are often planted in March on warm beds, for transplanting in May in loose soil. As the stems develop, they should be covered with soil, although leaving around 20 cm of their terminal part in the open air, to encourage tuber formation on buried shoots. At this stage, crenellated oxalis has a pronounced acid taste. "In South America, say Oxalis crénelée. MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie, this acidity is eliminated by exposing tubers enclosed in woollen cloth bags to the sun. After a few days, they become floury and sweet; if this treatment is applied for several weeks, they dry out, wrinkle and take on a flavor somewhat analogous to that of dried figs". Red or yellow oxalis are the best for eating. The edible part of Deppe's oxalis, native to Brazil, is formed by the bulging roots, which are similar in shape to carrots. This species is generally propagated by bulblets or eyelets, which develop in the region of the root collar; they are planted in April in holes spaced about 35 centimetres apart in both directions; they are watered when dryness sets in. As mentioned above, the roots of Deppe's oxalis are inferior to the tubers of crenellated oxalis. The leaves of both plants can be used as a vegetable, and are eaten in the same way as sorrel. CHAPTER III RAVES AND TURNS, CHOUX-NAVETS AND RUTABAGAS CHOUX-RAVES, RADISHES, WILD RAIFORT Raves and turnips. In turnips and rabe, the food part is formed by the root, which is quite bulky and varies in shape from one variety to another. The color itself varies, with black, violet, orange, yellow and white varieties, as does the flavor, which is generally sweet. The words "rabe" and "turnip" are often used synonymously; however, the former has a slight difference from the latter: its root is more globular. Multiplication. - Turnips and rabe are generally propagated by sowing, which, depending on the earliness of the variety, takes place from the end of June to the beginning of September. Sowing can be done either broadcast or in rows; we recommend the latter, which makes gardening much easier. These seedlings are usually sown indoors. Cultivation. - When turnips and turnips are well advanced, you can light them so that the plants don't get in each other's way later on. On the other hand, the drier they are, the more frequent and abundant the watering should be. Some hoeing and weeding is also necessary. Turnips are uprooted when they have developed enough to be eaten; we rarely wait until they have reached their maximum volume, as they are tastier when they are young than when growth has stopped for good. If care is taken to sow several times, one or two weeks apart, turnips can be harvested for a good part of the year. Varieties. - Among the many varieties of turnips and rabe, we'd like to mention the following: Le navet long des Vertus, white in color, with sweet, tender flesh of good quality; it is widely grown around Paris; Le navet long des Vertus, Marteau race, the most renowned of turnips; its shape differs from that of the preceding one in that the end is rounded instead of conical; it's almost the only one used for forced cultivation; the Freneuse turnip, which adapts well to poor soils; its skin is grayish and its flesh white; the long Meaux turnip, whose elongated root is often deformed; It's also known as the "corne-de-bœuf" turnip; The yellow "boule d'or" turnip with a spherical root; this variety, with its yellow epidermis, is highly prized; The early flat white turnip, which is highly prized and in which the edible part is almost entirely out of the ground; The early flat red turnip, which differs from the previous one only in color; it is well suited to forced cultivation; The late Auvergne turnip, which is grown extensively in the Me Navet des Vertus, Marteau breed. Navet jaune boule d'or. FF Navet long de Meaux. central France, for animals, but can also be used as a vegetable. Seed carrier. - At harvest time, the horticulturist must choose plants with all the characteristics he wishes to obtain, in order to make them produce seed. These plants can be left in place, or planted in another location where they will occupy less surface area and remain Altise. until fruiting has taken place. The seeds harvested are very small and brown in color. The insect that causes most damage to turnip plantations is the flea beetle, also known as the ground flea. Flea beetles attack mainly young plants, sometimes forcing the gardener to repeat the sowing several times. We try to combat this insect by repeated drenching, and by adding tobacco juice to water. 58 Kohlrabi and rutabagas are similar to turnips in taste and root shape. The flesh of kohlrabi is white; that of rutabagas is yellow. Both vegetables thrive in cool, clay soils, but can be grown in any soil. White smooth turnip Rutabaga oval. Sensitive to hot weather, they are unaffected by cold, so are widely grown in northern France. They are generally sown in May and June, either broadcast or in rows, and later thinned so that the plants are about 40 cm apart. The only care required is some hoeing and, during drought, some watering. Vegetables are generally uprooted in late autumn and stored in a cellar over winter, after slicing off the leaves. Kohlrabi and rutabaga are often used for large-scale cultivation; in this case, the latter is generally preferred, because of the ease with which it can be uprooted; for vegetable cultivation, on the other hand, the former is more commonly used: white kohlrabi, white kohlrabi with red collar, smooth white kohlrabi with short leaf, rutabaga with green collar, rutabaga with purple or red collar, early flat yellow rutabaga, oval rutabaga. Seedlings are left in place or transplanted; in spring, they will produce flowers. To preserve free-run varieties, follow the instructions given in Part I: keep different varieties apart, and even cover plants with fine gauze at the time of fertilization. Kohlrabi. Although we place kohlrabi alongside the root vegetables, it is not the root that is the food part of this white kohlrabi. vegetable, but a very pronounced bulge in the stem, globular in shape and situated entirely above the ground. This part bears leaves; its flavor is similar to that of kohlrabi. Kohlrabi can be sown from March to June. Once they have developed and gained some strength, they can be transplanted, leaving a gap of about 40 cm between them. Water abundantly throughout the summer. Three or four months after sowing, we pull them out, because, like turnips, kohlrabi can be eaten before they have reached full development. The main kohlrabi varieties are: White kohlrabi, violet kohlrabi, early Vienna white kohlrabi, early Vienna violet kohlrabi. Kohlrabi seedlings are cared for in the same way as turnip cabbage and rutabaga. S /- Round pink radish. Summer yellow radish. Radishes. 4 Pink half-long radish. White round summer radish. Large round winter black radish. Winter long black radish. Radishes are one of the vegetables that require the least care to prepare, so consumption is considerable. They are propagated by sowing, at different times of the year, depending on whether you are growing all-month radishes, summer radishes, autumn radishes or winter radishes. All-month radishes. - All-month radishes can be sown from the beginning of January on a bed, and from March to November in the open ground; their growth is very rapid: they require barely a month of vegetation to be fit for consumption; as their cultivation requires only a small plot, they can be broadcast among the other vegetables. If you force them under a frame, don't forget to give them air from time to time. Radishes need to be thinned out after sowing, then weeded and watered frequently throughout the summer. Radish varieties for all months include: round pink radish, half-long pink radish, half-long pink radish with white tip, half-long scarlet radish, half-long scarlet radish with white tip, half-long white radish, long pink or salmon radish, long pink radish, Vienna radish. Summer and autumn radishes. - Summer and autumn radishes also include larger varieties that grow more slowly and require stronger soil than ordinary varieties; they are best sown once in the vegetable garden, in rays about 15 cm apart, in May or June, sown very lightly. In calcareous, siliceous soil, water often. Don't wait until the roots are fully developed before pulling them out; they are almost always eaten when they are about halfway through their growth; later they will be less tender and of much poorer quality. We'd like to mention a few varieties of summer and autumn radishes: the round Dlanc summer radish, the giant white Stuttgard radish, the yellow or red summer radish, the round gray summer radish, the round black summer radish, the half-long white Strasbourg radish. Winter radish. - Winter radishes, also known as horseradish, are even slower-growing than their predecessors; most are very large, reaching the size of an ordinary turnip. They require fairly substantial soil; they can be sown in rows 25 to 30 centimetres apart, from May to August; weeded and hoeed from time to time; watered abundantly during the summer and harvested after three months. Winter radishes buried in sand keep well in a cool place; other varieties should be eaten immediately. We recommend the following winter radishes: Large round black winter radish, large purple winter radish, long black winter radish, large white Augsburg radish, white Russian radish, gray winter Laon radish, pink winter Chinese radish. Young radishes are often attacked by flea beetles; we have already indicated the remedies generally used. Horseradish. Wild horseradish, also known as cran de Bretagne, cranson rustique or capucin mustard, grows on the coast, particularly in Brittany. It is a perennial plant with a strong, pungent flavor, similar to that of mustard. It can be propagated by sowing seeds in spring, but is more often reproduced by planting root fragments in autumn. These fragments emit adventitious roots that grow vertically and deeply into the soil; they are placed permanently using a planter. The only care required in growing this vegetable is hoeing and weeding. Harvesting takes place after three years of cultivation. Placed in a cellar and buried in sand, horseradish keeps very well. After grating the skin, it is used as a condiment. Horseradish. BETTERAVE, CARROT, PANAIS, CÉLERI-RAVE CERFEUIL BULBEUX, PERSIL A GROSSE RACINE Beetroot. 65 Beetroot can be grown as a vegetable, sugar or fodder crop. We will deal here only with the cultivation of beet, a vegetable used mainly in salads as a dressing. Beet requires deeply tilled, well-smoked soil, rich especially in potassium fertilizers. It is harvested in April or May, either broadcast or in rays 35 to 40 centimetres apart. Thinning takes place once the plants have emerged; later, weeding and hoeing are carried out; harvesting generally takes place in July or August. Roots you want to keep Beetroot from Castelnaudine. Beet from Castelnaudary. are placed in a cellar, where they are buried in sand; those destined to provide seed are removed from the cellar and placed in the ground again in the spring of the following year; their seed ripens in September. The main varieties of beet are: POTAGER. Red beet, Castelnaudary red beet, dwarf red beet, long red beet, long yellow beet, Castelnaudary yellow beet. Carrot. Like beet, carrot requires soil that has been deeply disturbed by ploughing and that has received a certain amount of fertilizer during the year preceding its cultivation. It thrives best in light soils, and does admirably in cool, siliceous soils. It can be grown in the ground or in beds. Natural cultivation. - Carrots are generally sown in a bed facing south or east. Very early varieties can be sown in September; carrots covered with mats when it freezes can be harvested in May. Sowing can be done either broadcast or in rows; after September, others can be done in February, March, April, May or June, depending on the variety. After emergence, carrots are thinned out; during the growing season, they are hoeed, weeded and watered. In winter, carrots can be stored in straw or fine sand, after removing the leaves. Forced cultivation. - When growing on a bed, a bed producing a temperature of around 15 degrees is generally put up at the beginning of December, and loaded with a 20-centimeter-thick bed of terra-cotta. Once the desired temperature has been reached, the seed is sown; in January, unconsumed manure is added to the stoves, to raise the heat of the layer a little.

When the weather is dry, the plants can be lightly soaked in water. With this cultivation method, carrots fit for consumption can be harvested as early as April. Varieties. - The most popular carrot varieties are : Red carrots: Altringham long red, Vilmorin long red, pointed half-long red, obtuse half-long red, Nantaise half-long red, early short red, very short red with frame. Yellow carrots include: jaune lonque, jaune courte. Finally, let's mention a variety that is actually more curious than useful: the violet carrot. Seed carriers - Carrots from which seed is to be obtained are selected at harvest time from among the best varieties, and then placed in gauges. This is usually done by transporting the plants to a trench dug with a northern exposure, and covering them with thick litter. In spring, they are replanted in rows, 50 cm apart in both directions. The seeds are ready for harvesting in August. Don't forget to cover each plant with gauze at the time of fertilization, if the different varieties are not far enough apart. Pests. - Carrots are prone to attack by a variety of insects; the most feared for young plants is the spider mite 4 1 E mm Altringham long red carrot. Red semi-long pointed carrot. Red half-long Nantaise carrot. Long yellow carrot. red, which ravages plants as soon as they emerge. This insect is combated by frequent drenching. Parsnip. The shape of the parsnip is quite similar to that of the carrot; it is white and is mainly used to give broth a pleasant flavor. However, it is also used for animal feed and, in some regions, for human consumption. As parsnip cultivation is absolutely identical to that of the carrot, we won't go back over the various operations involved. Parsnips are not very sensitive to frost, so they can be dug up very late in the season; in some areas, they are even left in the ground throughout the winter; the plants are removed from the ground when they are to be used immediately. Seedlings should be left in the ground during the coldest weather; they will continue to grow the following spring. The main varieties of parsnip are Round hatif parsnip. Long parsnip, improved Brest parsnip, long Guernsey parsnip, early round parsnip. Celeriac. Celeriac is a vegetable whose root has been mo25 dified by cultivation. It thrives in loose, fresh, fertilizer-rich soil, and can be propagated by sowing, either in the ground or on a bed. Sowing in the open ground takes place towards the end of March; when the plant is sufficiently developed, it is pricked out, then planted out in May. By October, the root is generally large enough to be delivered for consumption. For bedding plants, sowing usually takes place in February. In addition to transplanting and planting, celeriac requires abundant watering. To encourage growth, we usually cut off the side roots and lightly butter the plant. The main varieties of celeriac are : Ordinary celeriac, smooth Paris celeriac, Erfurt celeriac, small-leaf apple celeriac. Bulbous chervil. Introduced to France in 1826, bulbous or tuberous chervil is now quite sought-after. Its root, which is only small, is roughly carrot-shaped, gray in color, with white flesh and a flavor reminiscent of chestnuts. It is eaten like potatoes. Bulbous chervil can grow in any soil. It is usually sown as a broadcast crop in autumn, with very little covering; most of the time, it's enough to lead the seed. As the seed is not expected to emerge until spring of the following year, it is important not to let weeds encroach on the planting bed. Water frequently as the plant grows. By stratifying the seeds, i.e. depositing them in small containers in which a layer of seed alternates with a layer of sand, and watering the preparation, it is possible to sow only in the spring of the year of harvest. When the stem and leaves have dried out, bulbous chervil can be harvested, but it's a good idea to wait a while before eating it, as its taste is then more delicate; bulbous chervil is also easy to store. TI Parsley with a large root, highly renowned in various countries, is less appreciated in France. The root, which is the part used here, is roughly shaped like a long carrot; its color is that of parsnips, i.e. grayish white. Its cultivation is no different from that of parsnips. Big-rooted parsley is sown in spring, in well-tilled soil; as it is very hardy, it can remain in the ground through the winter; however, it is sometimes put in gauges to be replanted as spring approaches. The root is pleasantly flavored, somewhat reminiscent of celery root; it can be used in the same preparations, but can also be eaten after cooking in ash, or sliced and mixed into salads. The leaves, similar to those of common parsley, can be used for the same purposes, but it is preferable to leave them on the plant if the roots are to develop fully. However delicate the flavor of large-rooted parsley may be, we all agree that it has one rather serious drawback: the food part is too small to pay for the work it requires; however, in home gardens, where it is not the object of speculation, this drawback loses its importance. There are two main varieties of parsley with a large root: the tardice variety, more elongated, and the hâtive variety, swollen near the neck. CHAPTER V SALSIFIS, SCORSONERE, RAIPONCE, SCOLYME Salsify. Salsify is a vegetable with an elongated root up to 20 cm long; the skin is yellowish; the flesh is white; it has a slightly pungent flavor without being acidic. Salsify can be grown in well-tilled soil, as its taproot digs fairly deeply into the soil. It can be propagated by sowing, in spring, in rows about 25 centimeters apart. After emergence, the plants are thinned out so that they are 10 to 15 centimetres apart. Weed and water when necessary; in October, white salsify can be uprooted and removed from the ground as needed, often harvesting well into winter. Subjects intended to serve as seedbeds should be moved to a different location in the spring; several experiments have shown that the best-rooted seeds come from subjects that have flowered in the second year, in a different location from where they spent their first year of vegetation. 73 The importance of growing white salsify has diminished considerably since the introduction of scorzonera into most vegetable gardens. The latter has all the qualities of the former, to which it adds greater hardiness. In fact, scorzonera can grow at more northerly latitudes than white salsify. The taste and shape of scorsonera are absolutely the same as those of salsify; it differs, however, in the leaves, which are larger, and the root epidermis, which is black instead of white. Cultivation is absolutely the same, but scorsonera doesn't necessarily have to be pulled out of the ground in winter; later, during the second year, the vegetable, while developing, remains tender and therefore fit for consumption; it can even be eaten after fertilization and seed production, without losing any of its flavor. 3 Rapunzel. Rapunzel. The raiponce, now little cultivated, is reminiscent of the long turnip in the shape and color of its root; it hardly exceeds 12 to 15 centimeters in length; its flesh is firm and sweet to the taste. It is usually eaten raw, mixed with lamb's lettuce. Riponce is sown in June, either broadcast or in rays 15 to 20 centimeters apart; a little sand is mixed in with the seed to make sowing more uniform. Prefer soil that has not been smoked too recently. After sowing, press the soil down and lightly baste to avoid carrying away the extremely small seed. After emergence, thin out; harvesting can begin in October or November; during winter, uproot as needed. Scolyma. Scolyma, like raiponce, is little cultivated in vegetable gardens; its root can be used like that of salsify and scorsonera. In the southern provinces of France, it grows spontaneously in uncultivated land, where it is often simply harvested. In northern France, on the other hand, it is widely cultivated, as it requires no care. Scolymes can be broadcast or sown in rows in March or April. To prevent food plants from flowering, the stems are pinched off as they develop. Harvesting begins in October. Before delivering them for consumption, the scolyme roots are split lengthwise to remove the fibrous middle part. If the whole root is tender, as can be seen by detaching a small section at the lower end, it can be kept to produce seed. In this way, it may be possible to obtain bark beetles whose entire root is edible. ONION, PEAR, GARLIC, SQUASH, CIBBAGE Onion. 75 Onion, one of the most widely used of our vegetables, is a plant grown for its bulb. It thrives best in substantial soil that has been carefully fertilized during the year preceding its cultivation. ) N ATIF DE PARIS Although it is biennial, it is generally left to develop for only one year. Cultivation. - The most common method of reproduction is sowing; however, some varieties produce bulblets which are also used to propagate the species. Sowing takes place in March, in well-tilled soil; it is broadcast, then lightly harrowed with a rake; it is then planted and, if necessary, watered a little. Some time after germination, the plants are thinned out; later, cultivation is limited to a few waterings, if drought makes them necessary, and to a few hoeings, which are carried out from time to time, when the usefulness is recognized. Another cultivation method is used in regions with mild winters: sowing from August to October, for planting in late autumn or early winter; this produces large varieties that are harvested in May. A third process, recommended by Messrs Lebrun and Nouvellon, involves replanting small onions, slightly larger than hazelnuts, which have been sown very tightly in March or April of the previous year. These onions develop in a short space of time and produce very fine products in the second year. Varieties. - There are many varieties of onion; the most commonly grown are : The early white Paris onion, of medium size, which keeps well; the large white onion, fairly voluminous, but late, of mild flavor, which keeps rather poorly; the Danvers onion, reddish yellow, early, which is not sown in autumn; the straw-yellow Vertus onion, early and easy to keep; the Cambrai or Mulhouse onion, reddish yellow, early, which keeps well; The yellow sulfur onion from Spain, a little late, but of good quality and easy to keep; The pale red onion from Niort, early, highly prized, easy to keep; The black red onion from Brunswick, purplish red in color, very easy to keep; The round, very large Madeira onion, prized for its flavor, very difficult to keep: The flat Madeira onion, very voluminous, which differs from the previous one only in shape; Sulfur yellow Spanish onion. Round Madeira onion. OGNONS. Mulhouse onion ( ) Niort pale red onion. Flat Madeira onion. 7 Piriform onion, late, easy to preserve; Egyptian onion or Rocambole, red, reproduced by bulblets, which replace the fruit; Potato onion or potato onion, propagated by cloves; generally planted in February; mounded to encourage the development of individuals growing in groups around the cloves planted. The method for preserving onions is simple: just bind them together in bundles using the stems, which are then turned on themselves to bind them together and hang them in a dry place. Seed holders. - Onions destined to supply the seed are replanted in February or March at a distance of 35 to 40 centimetres from each other; the stems are cut after fruiting; they are tied together and hung in a dry place where ripening is completed. Enemies. - The main enemy of the onion is the small white worm, which penetrates the bulb and stops its growth; there is no preservative against this insect, whose attacks have so far been impossible to avoid. Onions are also subject to a disease called rot, which affects young plants in particular. There is no known cure. Leeks. Like many of our vegetables, the leek is a biennial plant, which is cultivated as if it had only been growing for one year. The part used in cooking is the part that is sunk into the ground; it is white in color, contrasting with the green of the leaves. Cultivation. - Leeks thrive best in cool, damp soil, smoked with consumed manure. It is propagated from seed, which is usually broadcast at the end of February or beginning of March; after the seeds have developed, they are thinned out; in May, they are usually transplanted with a planter, deep enough to increase the length of the useful part, leaving a distance of about 25 cm between the plants in both directions, then watered abundantly. The main care required during cultivation is hoeing, weeding and watering. You can start harvesting in August, but if you take care to sow on a bed in February, you can obtain leeks as early as June. The bed used for this cultivation should be about 40 centimetres thick and produce a heat of 15 degrees. Transplanting takes place on 4 June. Poireau monstrueux de Carentan. seedlings are sown in the ground at the end of February; the work is then the same as for cultivation in the ground. Varieties. - The main leek varieties are : Le poireau long, which fears little cold and has a relatively long blanched part; it is often lightly ridged to increase its length; Le poireau gros court, which is early and not very frost-resistant; Le poireau jaune du Poitou, which is early and develops rapidly; Le poireau très gros de Rouen, which is short but quite voluminous, hardy and of good quality; and finally Le poireau monstrueux de Carentan, a highly recommended variety. Seed carriers. - The leeks that are to provide the seed are sown in July and transplanted in September. In winter, they are protected from frost by bedding; by the following September, the seeds are generally ripe. The stems are then detached, tied together and hung in a dry place. The enemies of leeks are the same as those mentioned above for onions. Garlic. Garlic is used extensively in the southern provinces of France, as a seasoning in food preparation. Its strong flavor has made it sought-after since ancient times, and it is widely cultivated. Garlic can grow in all types of soil, but produces its best results in light, substantial soils. It is reproduced by its cloves, which are planted at different times depending on the climate. In the south of France, this is the garlic moth (very enlarged and natural size). In central and northern France, it is more usual to plant the cloves in the early spring. When the stem is sufficiently developed, it can be twisted on itself and held in this position by tying. This facilitates bulb growth. Garlic planted in February or March is harvested in August. Garlic varieties include ordinary garlic, early pink garlic, Rocambole or Spanish garlic, and Oriental garlic. Garlic is sometimes attacked by larvae of the garlic moth, also known as the leek moth; like onions, it is prone to rot. Shallot. Shallots, like garlic, multiply by their cloves; they thrive best in light soil that has been thoroughly fertilized the previous year. If this has not been done, it is preferable to give this vegetable well-consumed manure rather than fresh manure. The cloves are planted in February or March, about 10 cm apart and shallowly; they are hoeed and weeded from time to time during the summer. Harvest around July. The most widely grown varieties of shallot are: Noisy shallot, Jersey shallot, earlier than the above. The insects we mentioned when talking about onions, leeks and garlic sometimes attack shallots, which, like these vegetables, are prone to rot. THE POTAGER. Chives. Although the chive is considered a herbaceous vegetable rather than a root vegetable, we place it alongside the onion, garlic and shallot, with which it has many similarities. Chives usually multiply by means of their seeds, which they produce in fairly large quantities. It is sown indoors and broadcast in February-March and even April and May. For most of the summer, the leaves are harvested and used as seasoning; the only cultivation care required is hoeing and watering. At the beginning of December, the remaining vines can be gauged for use during the winter. The main varieties of spring onion are : Common chives and early white chives. As the chive is a perennial plant, the plants destined to produce seeds can produce them for several consecutive years. Chives or civets, which have the same uses as chives, are propagated with the help of their cloves, which are planted in February or March. As a perennial, it can be preserved over winter by cutting the stems at ground level and covering them with a light layer of compost. It is often grown as a border plant. Ciboule. A Ciboulette. As it is a perennial vegetable, it can be planted in the vegetable garden in such a way as to provide for a family's needs for several years. The only soils where asparagus will not grow well are impermeable ones. The edible part of the asparagus plant is formed by the shoots that emerge each year from the underground part or claw. These shoots, as we know, have a delicate flavor that makes them much appreciated. Natural cultivation. When you want to establish an asparagus plant in your garden, you can either buy seedlings and transplant them, or sow them from seed in March-April, either broadcast or in rays, in soil that has been smoked and ploughed in autumn; then cover with a light layer of potting soil, and lightly baste. Once the seedling has developed, thin it out so that the remaining plants are 7 to 8 centimetres apart. Water occasionally and hoe lightly, taking care not to injure the young plants. The following spring, the plants are planted out, as far as possible in one of the healthiest parts of the garden. Planting can be done in a single row, but most of the time it's done in beds. Whichever way you do it, the growing process is pretty much the same. In February or March, the soil is prepared, having already been fertilized and ploughed in autumn. Pits are dug about 50 centimetres wide, 70 centimetres apart and 15 centimetres deep, into which fertilizer is placed; the location of the claws is then determined, at a distance of 40 to 45 centimetres, so that small mounds of potting soil about 5 centimetres high can be raised, on which a seedling is placed; a layer of potting soil or even compost is then thrown on top; the soil is then brought back to its original level by covering with some of the soil removed. The remainder will be used later for ridging the plants; in the meantime, it is left on the paths. At the end of autumn or the beginning of winter, the stems are cut back to 10 or 20 centimetres from the ground: the remaining part indicates the place of each plant. After hoeing, or rather shallow digging, each plant is given a light layer of natural manure mixed with chemical fertilizers, which is mixed with the soil in spring. The same care continues into the following year. In autumn, dead stems are cut off and, if desired, the location of the claws is marked with a small stick stuck in the ground. Fertilizers are always applied in the same way. In the third year, asparagus can be harvested for consumption, but it is preferable to wait four years before harvesting. In the third year, asparagus is ridged, bringing back the soil that had been left when the plants were planted. Ridging is usually done in April. The mounds of earth formed are 25 to 30 centimetres high. When harvesting asparagus, some horticulturists advise not to cut them under the soil, as is too often done: they believe that the best method would be to spread the soil around the spear and break it by hand, then replace the soil that has been removed. Harvesting begins when the first asparagus shoots are a few centimetres above the surface of the soil, generally in April, and is completed in the first fortnight of June. In subsequent years, cultivation is carried out in exactly the same way; however, after the sixth year, asparagus is usually only fertilized every two years, although annual fertilization is preferable. An asparagus plantation thus established can produce for more than ten years. Although the above-mentioned method is still the most widely used for growing asparagus, there is another method that also gives excellent results. In Argenteuil, the center of asparagus production, different methods are used. Most gardeners there agree that the vegetable should be buried shallowly in the soil, to benefit from the influence of the air, and their various cultivation operations are geared to the application of this principle. They also claim that, with the ordinary method, the fertilizers supplied are placed at too great a distance from the plant's roots, and they try to obviate this inconvenience. Here's how they do it: at the time of planting, the claws are placed only about 15 centimetres below ground level. Every year, at the start of winter, they dig up the soil around each plant to check the condition of the roots and place the fertilizer needed for vegetation. This method seems to us to have a few advantages, but both methods can produce some very fine products. Forced cultivation. Forced cultivation of asparagus is so common today that we can't resist saying a few words about it. M. Courtois-Gérard, in his Manuel pratique de culture maraîchère, discusses the subject at some length. We will outline the procedures he recommends. The first method consists in forcing the plant on the spot where the asparagus is to be grown; the second, in planting the plant in layers once it has reached a certain stage of development. The former produces white asparagus, the latter green. When forcing white asparagus, we plant as we have indicated for ordinary cultivation, and only start forcing in the first fortnight of November of the third year of planting. To do this, the trunks are placed in position, then a layer of potting soil is spread on the boards; the paths are then dug to a depth of around 50 centimetres; the soil removed and placed on the boards will raise them by around 30 centimetres, and by this means, you will obtain shoots of greater length than by the ordinary methods. In the paths, stoves of unconsumed manure are set up and raised to the height of the frame panels. Mulch is spread over the boards, and removed as the asparagus emerges from the soil. The panels are then lowered, kept closed at all times, and covered with mulch every evening. Every fortnight or so, the stoves, which have lost their heat, are replenished; a certain quantity of old manure is removed and replaced by fresh manure. The temperature under the frames should, as far as possible, be no lower than 15 degrees and no higher than 25. Twenty or twenty-five days after placing the boxes, we start harvesting the asparagus, which can be picked every two or three days. Green asparagus is foraged in layers 60 to 80 centimetres high, at a temperature of 20 to 25 degrees Celsius. To form these layers, we use a mixture of consumed manure, fresh horse manure and cow manure; we spread a light layer of potting soil on the surface, then place the boxes. A few days later, they are lightly covered with potting soil, and stoves are set up, to be changed every time the temperature drops. The frames are covered every evening with straw mats, and when the asparagus begin to show, the panels are lifted from time to time to allow the air to penetrate. Fifteen days later, the asparagus is ready to pick. Harvesting can be carried out over a period of about three months. Once the claws have stopped producing, they must be pulled out, as they can no longer be used. Varieties. There are quite a few varieties of asparagus, but we'll just mention a few that are of some importance in vegetable growing: Green asparagus, whose tips quickly take on a rather pronounced green hue; it's worth pointing out here that it's not this variety alone that produces the vegetables we sell under this name; all asparagus can become green by the cultivation process we indicated earlier; Violet asparagus from Holland, which is very commonly grown; White asparagus from Germany, which is often confused with Dutch asparagus, but which is a little earlier than the latter; Early Argenteuil asparagus, which has a pointed tip and relatively large shoots; Late Argenteuil asparagus, which is more productive for longer than the previous variety. Seedstocks. The choice of rootstocks has a major influence on the quality of the produce harvested, so great care must be taken in selecting them. The general rule is to keep isolated, during flowering and fertilization, those plants which have been designated in advance to be used for the propagation of the species. All too often, gardeners neglect these precautions, and hybridization, which is the consequence of this lack of care, leads to the degeneration of the best varieties. In addition, the grower must not harvest from the claws intended for propagation, as it is necessary to preserve their full strength so that their seeds produce vigorous, good-quality products. By following these instructions, you will not only be able to keep good varieties healthy, but also improve them from time to time. Sowing. In addition to white grubs and cricket beetles, which cause considerable damage to the claws, asparagus is attacked by the asparagus beetle and the twelve-spotted beetle, which infest the stems and branches of the plant. To destroy them, the stems are shaken over a container of soap water; the larvae detached from the plant fall into 2 A Asparagus beetle Larva of the asparagus beetle. Twelve-spotted beetle. These insects are shown enlarged on the first line and in natural size on the second. the vase. Another method of getting rid of the beetle is to place wood ashes at the foot of each plant; by shaking the stalks as described above, the larvae fall to the ground, where they are burned by the ashes. Asparagus plantations are sometimes ravaged by a disease that rages especially when the soil where the asparagus plantation is located is too damp: we're talking about rust, caused by a microscopic fungus that develops on the stalks. CHAPTER II Cabbages Cabbages are one of the most useful vegetables in our diet. We will look successively at ordinary or cultivated cabbage, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower and broccoli. We won't go back over kohlrabi or turnip cabbage, which were discussed in the second part of this volume. Cultivated cabbage. Cabbage is considered to be native to Europe; it grows spontaneously near the sea; it is perennial, but is almost always cultivated in our gardens as an annual or biennial vegetable. Cultivation. - The cultivation of cabbage varies according to whether we have spring, summer, autumn or winter varieties; all, however, do well in well loosened soils, rather moist than dry, and fertilized with consumed manure. Cabbages are propagated by sowing, usually by broadcasting, lightly harrowing the soil and covering it with a light layer of compost, then watering with an apple. Spring varieties are sown in late August or early September, in the open ground; summer varieties are sown in January or February; autumn and winter varieties are sown in April, May or even early June, in the open ground. When the plants have reached a certain stage of development, for example, when they have two or three leaves, they are transplanted. Transplanting is carried out in rows about 10 centimetres apart; the distance to be left between two plants on the same line is also 10 centimetres. Transplanting is carried out using a planter. If there are any plants lacking the terminal bud, these must be carefully removed, as they will not grow after transplanting. Transplanting, essential for spring varieties, is not compulsory for U DE MILAN ORDINAI summer cabbages. It is never used for autumn and winter cabbages. Planting, like transplanting, is done with a planter, in rays spaced at around 30 centimetres apart, a distance that can vary according to the volume of the varieties being grown. After planting, the cabbages receive abundant watering, which can be done at the spout to save time. Spring varieties can be planted in November; summer, autumn and winter varieties a month or a month and a half after sowing. During the cultivation period, the cabbages are hoeed and watered from time to time. Spring cabbages can be buttered three or four months after planting, for harvesting in March or April. Summer cabbages are delivered for consumption throughout this season; autumn cabbages are harvested throughout the fall, and winter cabbages generally at the end of November. The most common method of storing cabbages over winter is to turn them upside down after harvesting, i.e. place the head on the ground, with the roots in the air. They can also be placed in a gauge in this position, and covered with about 15 cm of soil. Varieties. - As we said earlier, there are spring, summer, autumn and winter varieties. Some of these are smooth-leafed: these are mainly smooth-leafed cabbages; others are curly-leafed: these are mainly savoy cabbages. The best spring cabbage varieties are: small Yorh cabbage, large York cabbage, small Coeur-de-bœuf cabbage, medium Coeur-de-bœuf cabbage, large Coeur-de-bœuf cabbage, Joanet or Nantais cabbage, early Milan Ulm cabbage, early Milan Saint-Jean cabbage. Among the varieties that can be grown in summer are: Ulm early savoy cabbage, St. John early savoy cabbage, Vertus large savoy cabbage, Étampes early savoy cabbage and red cabbage. The most esteemed varieties of autumn cabbage are : Bonneuil or Saint-Denis cabbage, Schweinfurt cabbage, Winnigstadt pointed cabbage and Pomeranian conical cabbage. Among the most recommendable varieties of winter cabbage are: ordinary Savoy cabbage, Norwegian Savoy cabbage, Vaugirard green cabbage, which keeps well, Quintal cabbage or large German cabbage, and blond cabbage with a large rib or Meaux cabbage. Seed carriers. - Cabbages from which we want to obtain seeds have had their heads removed like the others, but we use Joanet cabbage or Nantais cabbage. CHOUX. Medium beef cabbage. Chou de Milan gros des Vertus. 1 3 CaChou de Bonneuil ou de Saint-Denis. Quintal cabbage. 93 is used to store cabbages in gauges over the winter; during the frost period, they are carefully sheltered. Some very hardy varieties, however, have little fear of the cold; they are left in place during the off-season. In spring, cabbageworm caterpillars. Cabbageworm caterpillar. Harvest moth caterpillar. Cabbage maggot. Cabbage worm. Harvest noctuid moth. The various varieties are kept as far apart from each other as possible, to avoid hybridization. It's a good idea to cover each plant with gauze, as this not only ensures seed production by flowers from the same individual, but also protects the seeds from birds, which often feed on them. You can hasten the fertilization of some late-flowering varieties by cutting off the ends of the stems as they begin to produce flowers. Spring cabbages are naturally left to set seed. Enemies. - Cabbage is attacked by many insects. Foremost among these is the flea beetle, which wreaks havoc on young plants. Several types of caterpillar are also to be feared. These include the cabbage whitefly, the harvest moth and the cabbage moth, which can be destroyed by adding water to tobacco juice. Aphids are destroyed in the same way. Cabbage is also subject to a disease known as cabbage hernia, caused by a microscopic fungus that spreads on the roots, which soon develop numerous blisters. Affected plants should be burned. Brussels sprouts. Brussels sprouts are very similar to savoy cabbage. It differs in that its stem is higher and its top does not have the same layout. The edible part consists of small apples, about the size of walnuts, attached along the entire length of the stem. Brussels sprouts are propagated by sowing, preferably in cool, substantial soil, from March to June, so that they can be harvested throughout the winter. When the plants have reached a certain level of development, they are transplanted. To do this, they are placed in rows 40 to 50 centimetres apart, depending on whether you are transplanting ordinary or dwarf Brussels sprouts; the distance of 40 to 50 centimetres is maintained between two plants in the same row. Cultivation care is no different from that for cultivated cabbage. The first Brussels sprouts can be picked in October. There are several varieties of Brussels sprouts: ordinary Brussels sprouts or large Brussels sprouts, which are the most commonly grown and produce the most highly-prized products; semi-dwarf Brussels sprouts; dwarf Brussels sprouts, which are less tall than the preceding varieties, but have larger sprouts that can be harvested earlier. We won't add anything to what we've said about the rootstocks of cultivated cabbages; the same care should be applied to Brussels sprouts. Cauliflower. In cauliflower, it is no longer the leaves that are sought after for consumption, but the hypertrophied flowering shoots that are eaten, providing a healthy, nutritious food. Cultivation. - Cauliflower can be grown in several ways, depending on when it is sown. It can be sown in late summer or early autumn, or in late autumn or spring. In the first case, seed is sown around the beginning of September on a bed that has been given a certain amount of potting soil, or even on a dull layer. In October, the seedling is transplanted and sheltered by a frame; then, in the following January, it is transplanted onto a warm layer covered with frames, on which straw mats are placed to protect the seedlings overnight. Water when necessary and lift the panels when the outside temperature is not too severe. At the end of April, you can start harvesting cauliflowers. Consumption can continue well into May. When sowing is carried out in late autumn or early winter, it is done on a warm bed; transplanting is also done on a bed where the young cabbages are carefully sheltered by frames. When spring comes, they are uncovered more frequently and, in the first days of April, they are placed in the open ground where they conti5 Lenormand short-stalked cauliflower. Sicilian black cauliflower. vegetation. The most advanced can be harvested at the beginning of July. When seedlings are finally sown in May or June, they are always grown in the open ground. Transplanting is not practiced, and the plants are planted permanently in July. Care should be taken to water abundantly during hot spells, as drought can be very damaging to young plants: they are often placed in a shady spot where they have nothing to fear from the scorching sun. To preserve cauliflowers, we hang them upside down, after removing the leaves. When you want to use them, leave them to soak in water for a while before serving, so that they regain their volume, which is usually considerably reduced by evaporation. THE POTAGER. (Cenges -* Varieties. - The most esteemed cauliflower varieties are: Tender Paris or Petit Salomon cauliflower, whose head forms fairly quickly, but which is difficult to preserve: Semi-hard cauliflower or gros Salomon, early, with a dense head that is easy to store; Hard Paris cauliflower, less early than the preceding varieties. Lenormand short-stalked cauliflower, now widely cultivated thanks to its hardiness and the various qualities it combines; Holland hard cauliflower, fairly large, late and easily adapted to strong soil; English hard cauliflower, hardy and late; it is one of the most popular varieties to sow in April or May; Sicilian black cauliflower, with a violet-colored head; it is an early variety, with large, tightly packed seeds. - Cauliflower rootstocks are sown at the end of September and protected under a frame over winter. They are usually transplanted in March, and the most beautiful individuals are chosen to produce seeds. They need to be watered abundantly while they are growing, and the stems and branches pinched off to increase seed production, which usually ripens in September or October. Enemies. - In addition to the enemies we've mentioned for cultivated cabbage, cauliflower can also suffer from a disease that sometimes affects seed-bearing plants. We're talking about powdery mildew, caused by a small fungus whose effects have so far been unstoppable. Broccoli. Broccoli may be considered a type of cauliflower, but in reality it differs very little from cauliflower. Growing broccoli is very easy, as it is fairly cold-resistant; it is a good idea, however, to shelter it during the winter with a layer of litter a few centimetres thick. Broccoli can be sown from March to May; the earliest varieties are sown first. Transplanting takes place in the nursery when the plant has developed sufficiently, and permanent planting takes place four to five weeks later, in rays spaced 60 to 70 centimetres apart in both directions. Cultivation is absolutely the same as for cauliflower, and if care is taken to sow the plants successively, they can be harvested in autumn, throughout the winter and at the beginning of spring. The main broccoli varieties are: early white broccoli and Mammoth broccoli. White broccoli Mammoth. ba CHAPTER III CRAMBUS, PEAR, CARDON, RHUBARBUS, FENNEL Crambé. Crambé or sea cabbage is an excellent vegetable whose young leaves, blanched, are used for consumption. It is very easy to grow, yet not very common. Crambé thrives in light soil, previously smoked with consumed manure; it is perennial; a plantation can produce for ten consecutive years. Crambe is propagated in two ways: by sowing and by root cuttings. Sowing can be done in situ, but it is preferable to prick out the seedlings; we therefore recommend sowing in a well-soiled bed, where vegetation will begin. Sow the seeds in rays about 30 centimetres apart, then cover with a few centimetres of potting soil. After thinning, plants on the same line should be 15 centimetres apart. Later, water and hoe as required. Planting takes place in February or March, in troughs spaced 60 to 70 centimetres apart in one direction, and 50 to 60 in the other. Every year, dead leaves are removed in autumn, and mulch is applied to the plantation after hoeing. The leaves can be harvested as early as the second year, but to avoid weakening the plants prematurely, it's a good idea to wait three years before releasing them for consumption. To whiten the leaves, a ridging is usually done at the end of January. In order to harvest gradually and over a longer period, a certain number of plants are ridged first; the others are only ridged a fortnight later. Here's how it's done: the plants are surrounded by a small mound of potting soil about 15 cm high, on top of which a layer of manure or dry leaves is laid. When you see the leaves emerging from the soil, cut them off near the collar, leaving the eyes around it. This section will trigger the development of a number of buds, of which only four or five will remain. When a first crop has been harvested, a second one is dug up to obtain a second crop, after which the soil used for this dug-up is poured into the soil. There's a second method for blanching leaves: cover each plant with an opaque vase or cloche. When the leaves have reached 15 cm in length, they are cut off as before. To propagate crambe by cuttings, dig up old plants in March and divide their roots into 10-centimeter-long fragments. If the roots are about 1 centimetre in diameter, the fragments can be placed directly in the ground, where they produce buds, of which only the three most vigorous are kept. If the roots are not large enough to produce cuttings that can be planted immediately, the pieces are planted in Crambé rays, 20 centimetres apart in both directions, and not planted permanently until the following year. Root cuttings are widely used for propagation, often producing excellent harvests. In England, where crambe is much more widespread than in France, this vegetable is the object of forced cultivation. The plants to be forced are watered in autumn and planted on beds; the plantations are covered with frames on which straw mats are laid to intercept the light. Crambé is subject to flea beetle attack. Pear. Pear is very similar to beet, but whereas in beetroot it is mainly the root that is developed through cultivation, in pear it is only the leaves that are developed. Depending on the harvesting season, seedlings can be sown from March to June. Some growers even sow at the end of July to harvest the following spring. Seedlings are sown either in the field or in nurseries, in rays spaced 40 centimetres apart. During the growing season, pear need only be hoeed and watered. When sown in July, the plants are ridged over winter and sheltered with bedding. Harvesting is carried out by removing the leaves to be used immediately; to have some in the winter, pears are protected by frames placed on the boards, and surrounded by a stove. Whenever the weather permits, air is allowed to penetrate the panels. Two main varieties of pear are grown: the common pear or blond pear, which lends itself to the same uses as spinach and can produce about a month and a half after sowing; and the chard pear, whose stalk, commonly known as the tail of the leaf, is very well developed; chard pears are sown mainly in June, and harvested at the end of April. Plants intended to produce seed are wintered under glass; the seed usually ripens the following September. Cardom. Cardoons are botanically similar to artichokes. The edible part is the leaf stalk, which has been developed by cultivation. Cardoon can grow in any soil and almost always gives satisfactory results. It is propagated by sowing, either on a bed in April, or in the open ground in May, in the position it will occupy throughout its growth. Sowing is done in bunches, 1 m apart in both directions. Two or three seeds are placed in each hole, with a little potting soil thrown in at the bottom. After emergence, the most vigorous of the plants sown in the same hole is selected, and the others are removed. During the summer, weed and water abundantly. In September, the plant is blanched. This is done by wrapping the entire plant in straw, then tying it up, leaving only the upper tips of the leaves sticking out. Cardoon is left in this state for around three weeks, after which it must be used immediately, otherwise it will rot. To extend the consumption period, cardoons are gradually stuffed. As cardoons are very sensitive to frost, some time before winter we pull up all the plants and put them in a sheltered place, such as a vegetable greenhouse, where they will naturally turn white; we take care to remove any leaves that start to rot. Cardoon varieties are few and far between. The most widely grown are: Toure cardoon, which is generally very popular; inerme full cardoon, which has no prickles; Spanish cardoon, which is widely grown in the south of France; Puvis cardoon or artichoke-leaf cardoon. The seed heads are covered during the cold season, and are uncovered as spring approaches. In September, the cardoons are ready to set seed, which they do for several consecutive years. Young cardoon plants are subject to attack by grubs and crickets. 5 Cardon de Tours. Rhubarb. Rhubarb has been cultivated in Europe for no more than two centuries. As with cardoon, it is the leaf stalk that is edible. In England, rhubarb is much more widely cultivated than in France. Rhubarb thrives in sandy soil. It is propagated by sowing, but also, and above all, by planting fragments. Sowing should be done as soon as the seeds have reached maturity. When dividing plants, this should be done in spring. Each part to be planted should bear a bud. Permanent planting is generally carried out in spring, in soil that has been fertilized with manure. Plants are planted 70 centimetres apart in one direction and 1 metre apart in the other. Harvesting does not begin until spring of the following year. To do this, take care to detach the leaves by pulling them, not by slicing them with a knife, as is too often done. A rhubarb plant can produce for eight years, but it must not be allowed to 4 American Wavy Rhubarb. flower, so the stems are cut off as soon as they appear, to preserve the plant's vigor. The best rhubarb varieties are : Victoria rhubarb, Michell's royal Albert rhubarb, Nepaul rhubarb, Monarque rhubarb and finally American wavy rhubarb. The flower stalks of plants destined to produce seed are kept; seed usually ripens in April. Florence fennel. Florence fennel is an annual vegetable that can reach 60 to 70 centimeters. The most sought-after part is the base of the stalks, which swell to form a sort of whitish apple above the collar of the plant. Florence fennel is sown in April, in rays about 45 centimetres apart. After emergence, the plant is thinned out and care is limited to weeding and frequent watering. When the plant has reached a height of 25 centimetres, it is mounded so that the swelling formed is half covered with soil. Harvesting can begin ten or fifteen days after ridging. Fennel is eaten after cooking; its flavor is reminiscent of celery, with a sweetness that celery lacks. This very delicate vegetable is rarely grown in France. It is most widely grown in Italy. Florence fennel. ARTICHUT 107 The artichoke is one of the most widely cultivated perennials, both by market gardeners and hobbyists. It is found throughout France. However, as not all varieties would thrive equally well everywhere, each region cultivates the breeds best suited to its soil. Reproduction methods. Artichokes prefer substantial, moist soils that are compact rather than light. It can be propagated either by sowing or by the eyelets it produces in abundance. The second propagation method is preferable to the first, as it reproduces more faithfully the varieties grown. Sowing is done in flower pots filled with soil and placed in a warm layer. In February, plant four or five seeds in each pot; after emergence, keep only the two most vigorous plants in each pot, and plant them in clumps in May, in rays about 80 cm apart in both directions. You can also sow in the open ground in May. In this case, sowing is done in bunches: four or five seeds are placed in each hole and, as before, only two plants per bunch are kept, to be planted permanently when they have developed sufficiently. The eyelet propagation method is the most widely used. Each plant produces a certain number of eyelets, which must be removed if it is not to be exhausted. Only two are left, to ensure the following year's harvest. Separation of the eyelets, or œilletonnage, takes place in April. First, the plant is dethatched, exposing the part where the eyelets are attached to the main plant. Using the tip of a knife, the eyelets are detached, but care is taken to remove with them a small piece of the root of the old plant, without injuring it too much. Once this has been done, the soil is brought back around the plant. Before planting, the eyelets are pruned with a serpette, i.e. the leaves are shortened with this instrument, so that the remaining part is about 20 centimetres long, then planted in rays, about 80 centimetres apart in both directions. Planting is done using the planter in holes 8 to 10 centimetres deep. Lightly press the soil around each plant, then water with a spout. Cultivation. After planting, hoe and water frequently. Many plants will produce artichokes the same year they are planted. Once harvested, cut the stems that have produced at ground level, then shorten the leaves. At the start of winter, we spade the soil between the plants, which we then butter to protect them from frost. In northern regions, where these precautions would be insufficient, we'll shelter the plants with litter. In winter, when temperatures are mild enough, the mound can be uncovered to allow air to circulate around the plant. The following spring, cut down the mounds, plough and smoke the soil, then proceed again with eyeletting, as it's a good idea each year to replace some of the plants with young ones. The same plant should not be kept for more than four years. If you only want to harvest in spring, plant the carnations in July. Some growers force artichokes into trays, placing them in November on a bed surrounded by a stove. The frames are covered with straw mats at night. During the day, the panels are lifted whenever the temperature permits. Varieties. There are many varieties of artichoke. Here are some of the most recommended. Artichoke gros vert de Laon. Artichoke violet hátif. The large green Laon artichoke is the most widely grown artichoke on the Paris market. It multiplies well by sowing; the receptacle is very large and fleshy. The artichaut vert de Provence, or artichaut pointu précoce d'Alger, is less voluminous than the artichaut de Laon. The head is generally eaten raw, with pepper. The artichaut camus de Bretagne is an early variety. It is grown mainly in western France. The scales are green in the middle, with brownish edges. The purple artichoke is grown mainly in the south of France. It is an early variety, with a relatively small head. It is eaten fried or peppered. Gray artichokes are often found near Narbonne, from where they are shipped in large quantities to Paris during the winter. Enemies. Artichokes are often ravaged by the field moth, a quadruped that damages many vegetables. Among the 2* - -3 Mulot. . - a. 2 insects, the white grub and cricket are the most damaging. To keep them at bay, simply grow lettuces between the artichoke rows. As for aphids, which often get into the heads, we have to leave them there, as tobacco juice with water added to get rid of them would give the artichoke an unpleasant taste. SPINACH, TETRAGON, ARROCH, CUCUMBER Spinach. 111 Spinach can be propagated by sowing, starting in March. By staggering sowings from two weeks to two weeks, this vegetable can be harvested for a long time, and can be sown as late as the end of August. Spinach should be permanently sown in rows 25 to 30 centimetres apart. During vegetation, water frequently and abundantly. Spinach sets seed very quickly, but fruiting is slower if sown late in the year. It is harvested about six weeks after sowing, by cutting off the most advanced leaves with the fingernail, which are eaten in the same way as sorrel. The best spinach varieties are : Ordinary spinach, which is closest to the wild type, with prickly seeds; English spinach, also with prickly seeds; Dutch spinach, with round, seedless seeds; Viroflay monster spinach, with very broad leaves; sorrel-leaf spinach; lettuce-leaf spinach, and finally slow-rising spinach. The plants you want to sow should be sown in September. By the following July, fruiting is complete and the seed can be harvested. As male and female flowers are borne on different plants, care should be taken to leave a few plants with male organs next to the female plants. Noctuid moths and cutworms are two dangerous enemies, sometimes destroying a large part of a spinach plantation. Two diseases are to be feared: jaundice, due to excessive heat, which can be fought by abundant watering, and damping-off or rot, due to soil humidity. Tetragonia. Originally from New Zealand, tetragonia is very similar to spinach; it is used in summer for the same Q purposes, and has the advantage of being less sensitive to heat and of not going to seed as quickly; it is still called summer spinach. Tetragonia can grow in arid areas, where growing spinach would be more difficult. It can be propagated by sowing, either on a bed in February or March, with seeds that have been left to soak in water for some time, and then transplanted in rays spaced about 60 cm apart, or immediately in the field in May. Growing tetragonia requires almost no care. Most of the time, the plant is left to reproduce on its own by its seeds, which fall to the ground in autumn and sprout in spring; it is then transplanted when the plants have acquired sufficient vigor. "Tetragonia. Little cultivated in northern France, tetragonia is more widespread in the southern provinces, as this plant requires little water to produce excellent products. It has a pleasant flavor. Arroche. Arroche has long since taken its place in vegetable gardens. It is an annual plant similar to spinach. It is generally sown in rows and rows in March. Like tetragonia, it produces in summer and has little fear of heat. After emergence, it is thinned out and watered from time to time. Arrowroot bears fruit very quickly, so to prolong consumption, sow several times, a few days apart, from March to September. Garden orache is an excellent vegetable that deserves to be more widely grown. The most widely grown varieties today are: Blonde arroche, dark red arroche and green arroche. These three varieties differ mainly in leaf color. Arrowroot is generally mixed with sorrel, softening its acidic flavor. It can also be mixed with spinach, or even eaten on its own. To harvest the seeds of this plant, cut the stems in September before they are fully ripe, then leave them to mature in a dry place. Sorrel. Arroené blonde. Sorrel can be propagated by sowing or by dividing clumps. Sow in rays, from March to July. Spread a light layer of compost over the seed, then water with an apple. POTTING. The young plants are later thinned out, and two or two and a half months after sowing, harvesting can begin, by hand-pulling the most advanced leaves. The second harvest takes place at the end of October, when the soil is lightly hoeed and mulched. Growing sorrel requires frequent watering. When propagating by dividing clumps, this operation is carried out at the beginning of April. This method is particularly useful when you want to create a border of mainly male-flowered sorrel. In this case, as fertilization does not occur, the plants retain their vigor and produce beautiful products. The same plant may produce leaves for three or four consecutive years. When some plants are completely exhausted, they can be replaced by others, by separating the clumps or sowing them anew. Sorrel can also be force-fed. To do this, plant in November on a warm layer with a few centimetres of potting soil. Air is supplied as often as possible. At night, we cover the panels with straw mats. The main varieties of sorrel are: Belleville sorrel, which is widespread around Paris; virgin sorrel, which goes to seed quickly; round sorrel, which is very acidic; and spinach or patience sorrel, which is very productive and not acidic. Seedlings are sown in July; the following year, at the same time, seed can be harvested. Sorrel sometimes suffers from attack by various kinds of caterpillars. To get rid of them, add tobacco juice to four times its volume of water, or soap water. Belleville sorrel. LETTUCE, CHICORICE, CELERY Lettuce. 115 Lettuce is one of the most highly esteemed lettuces. Two main species are grown: head lettuce and romaine lettuce or chicon, both of which contain a considerable number of varieties. These varieties are classified according to when they are eaten. We'll look successively at winter, spring and summer lettuces, followed by a fourth group of lettuces for cutting, which can be grown at any time of year. Winter lettuces. - Winter lettuces are sown during the second half of August and the first half of September. At the end of October, they are planted in a well-exposed bed sheltered from the wind by a wall. During cold spells, the plants are covered with bedding and allowed to breathe as often as is safe for the vegetation. These varieties generally have little fear of snow, so they can be left in place without risk of loss. Their growth, halted for some time by the bad season, resumes with renewed vigor as soon as the cold has ceased. Towards the end of April, the first plants can be harvested. Harvesting can continue for five or six weeks. Among the winter lettuces, we'd like to mention: Passion lettuce, very hardy, but only used for winter sowing, as it sets seed quickly during the summer; Morin lettuce, not very bulky, but quite hardy and highly esteemed; Brown winter lettuce, very hardy, but which has the disadvantage of setting seed quickly; Red winter lettuce, an early and very productive variety. Among the winter romaine varieties, we'd like to mention those whose cultivation is identical to that of head lettuces: Green winter romaine, hardy and very productive; romaines that rarely head on their own are usually tied, to allow the inner leaves to turn white; this precaution is unnecessary for this variety; Royal green romaine, quite similar to the previous one, but wider and less dark green; Red winter romaine, hardy and productive, slow to bolt and head naturally. Spring lettuces. - Spring lettuces are grown differently from summer lettuces. In March, they are sown in warm soil or in well-exposed potting soil. Transplanting takes place in April, and harvesting begins in early June. Spring lettuces are also used for forced cultivation. In this case, they are sown in October on a bed and grow entirely under a frame. We recommend crepe and gotte lettuces for forced cultivation. The most popular spring lettuces are : Early, black-seeded crepe lettuce, ideally suited to under-frame cultivation; also known as little black lettuce; White-seeded gotte lettuce or gau lettuce, very productive and hardy; as it takes up little space, it can be planted with narrower spacing than the other varieties; Slow-rising gotte lettuce, early and productive, with a tight head and excellent quality; Red-edged lettuce, slow-growing but most productive. The most widely grown spring romaines are : Market-garden green romaine, highly esteemed and fast-growing; LETTUCE. e Crepe lettuce. Red winter romaine. Moraine lettuce. O ca-é o Palatine lettuce. - S.a. Romaine blonde maraichère. 117 Romaine blonde maraîchère, which is sometimes subjected to forced cultivation; it is very bulky, but a little less early than the preceding variety. Summer lettuces. - Summer lettuces are easy to grow. They can be sown in nurseries from March to July. When the plants can withstand transplanting, they are pricked out and later set out. During the development of summer lettuces, water frequently and abundantly. To reduce water evaporation, cover the soil with mulch. Among the varieties of summer head lettuce, we'd like to mention: Blonde summer lettuce, widely grown, small but productive; it's fairly early; Blonde Versailles lettuce, larger than the previous one, of roughly equal quality; Large lazy blond lettuce, highly developed and very productive, which succeeds almost everywhere; its very tender head is of excellent quality; Palatine lettuce, productive and requiring little care; its cultivation is very advantageous; Blonde Batavia lettuce, whose head is relatively large. The most popular summer romaines are : White-seeded Romaine Alphange, which is very bulky, but has difficulty forming its head; Black-seeded Romaine Alphange, which, like the previous variety, needs to be tied in order to peel; White-seeded English Brown Romaine, whose outer leaves have a bronze tint; It is very hardy; English brown romaine with black seed, which differs from the previous variety only in the color of its seed; variegated romaine with white seed, whose leaves have red spots; the head is difficult to form, so it must be carefully tied. Cutting lettuces. - Cutting lettuces are picked young, before the heads have fully formed. They are grown in all seasons, from March to November, often among other vegetables. Special breeds are not used for this type of cultivation, but early varieties such as gotte and crepe lettuces. The lettuces to be sown are chosen from among those with the most beautiful heads. They can be left in place or transplanted. Once the stems have developed, they are held in place with a stake. During fertilization, follow the general rules we have outlined (page 31). Stems are cut before full maturity, usually at the beginning of August, and when dry, beaten to remove the seeds. Lettuces are susceptible to snails and slugs, which the grower must destroy whenever they are encountered. Many aphids are also very dangerous. Repeated watering helps to destroy them. To get rid of them, syringe with tobacco juice and four times its volume of water, or with water in which black soap has been dissolved. Powdery mildew, caused by a microscopic stinging fungus, is also a formidable enemy of lettuces; we have not yet found a way to prevent it. Chicory. There are several species of chicory in cultivation. We will look successively at endive chicory, which includes curly endive and escarole chicory, then wild chicory, which produces nasturtium, large-root or coffee chicory, F'itloof chicory and slicing chicory. Chicory endive. - Chicory is fairly easy to grow. The plant grows quickly, so you can grow it several seasons in the same year. Chicory is propagated by broadcasting seedlings in the ground, from April to September. Later, in September and October, chicory is sown under a bell, then on a bed. When the young plants have acquired sufficient strength, they are transplanted in rays 30 to 35 centimetres apart, and watered frequently during their growth. By the end of July, April sowings can produce vegetables fit for consumption. To make chicories more tender and delicate, they are blanched when they are almost fully grown. To do this, the leaves are lifted and tied together with a straw or wicker twine. After this operation, watering is carried out at the neck, so as not to allow water to enter the leaves, where it could cause rotting. Salads can be used a fortnight or three weeks after blanching. In some provinces in the south of France, chicory is blanched by covering it with soil, a process we do not recommend. When blanching during cold weather, chicory should be covered with straw mats, transported to the vegetable greenhouse and planted in damp sand. When sowing under a bell, transplanting is also done under a bell, but permanent planting takes place under a frame. During forcing, the panels are lifted as often as possible without S Fine summer chicory. Meaux curly chicory. Scarole en cornet. 2 2 Scarole blonde compromise the operation. Chicory sown in September or October finishes growing in January or February. When growing under a frame and on a bed, the temperature of the bed should be around 25 degrees. The layer is about 50 centimetres thick and covered with 15 centimetres of potting soil. Once the seedling has been sown, it is simply plumbed in without covering it with soil. The developed plant is transplanted onto a layer of lesser heat. Harvesting can begin in late April. Towards the end of March, the plants that are still growing are transplanted into the open ground, still sheltered by cloches or frames. Later on, all shelter is removed. To preserve chicory plants that have developed before winter, they can be uprooted in November, leaving the soil adhering to their roots. Placed upside down in the vegetable greenhouse, they will blanch naturally. If you only have a small number, you can shelter them in frames on the ground, or cover them with straw mats. The best varieties of chicory are curly endive: Fine summer chicory, also known as Italian chicory, which is suitable for both outdoor and forced cultivation; it is very widespread: Meaux curly endive, which is very hardy and makes an excellent autumn salad; Picpus curly endive, which is mainly used for outdoor cultivation; it is hardy and its leaves are very tender; Rouen curly endive or corne-de-cerf chicory, which is also very hardy and admirably suited to outdoor cultivation; Mousse chicory, very productive in a small volume; often grown under cloche; Ruffec curly chicory, which is bushy, very hardy and highly recommended for outdoor cultivation; ever-white chicory with very pale green foliage; also known as golden curly chicory. Among escarole chicories, we'd like to mention: Round escarole, which, like other types of escarole, is grown mainly for autumn consumption; it is usually sown in June; Pale-green, blond escarole, which is highly prized; Horn-shaped escarole, whose leaves are actually horn-shaped. Wild chicory. - As we have said, wild chicory has given rise to chicory beard, coffee chicory, Witloof chicory and chopped chicory. The usual way to grow wild chicory is to sow it in spring, very thickly, indoors and in rows, in deeply loosened soil that has been smoked for some time. After development, the most advanced leaves are cut off with a knife. The same plants can produce several harvests in the same year. New seedlings are sown every year. Magdeburg chicory. Nasturtium beard. When you want to grow Magdeburg chicory, you use wild chicory seedlings that have been sown in the open ground in June. These plants are dug up as winter approaches; their leaves are sliced off to within 1 cm of the collar, then the roots are bundled. Forcing is carried out in a dark place, such as a cellar. A layer of horse manure about 35 centimetres thick is laid down, and when the temperature has dropped to 20 degrees, the bunches are placed side by side, upright and about a third deep in the layer. On average, we baste twice a day, and when the leaves have reached a sufficient length, we cut them for consumption. Many growers use the simpler method of placing bunches of chicory on a layer of damp sand, which is admittedly slower-growing, but produces a product of just as good quality. In the case of large-root chicory or coffee chicory, it's the Witloof. root that's most often used. By dividing the root into small pieces, which are then roasted, a product is obtained which, when mixed with coffee, gives it a pleasant flavor. Two main varieties of wild chicory are grown: the highly productive Brunswich chicory and the Magdeburg chicory. Big-root chicory varieties are also used to produce cappuccino beard. One of these, Brussels endive, which is actually a sub-variety of Magdeburg endive, is grown to produce a salad called Witloof. Witloof is obtained by forcing this variety, whose leaves take the shape of an apple which, blanched, makes an excellent food. Brussels sprout chicory is sown in the open ground in June, in rays about 30 cm apart. After emergence, the plants are thinned out to 15 cm apart on the same line. As the plant develops, water abundantly and hoe when necessary. At the end of autumn, all the plants are uprooted; only those with a diameter of at least 3 centimetres are used, with the leaves removed a few centimetres from the collar. The roots themselves are dressed, i.e. the rootlets are detached and the tip of the pivot cut off, so that the remaining part is about 25 centimetres long. Once this has been done, we dig a pit about 35 centimetres deep and 70 to 80 centimetres wide, at the bottom of which we plant the roots vertically, pushing them in 8 or 10 centimetres and leaving an interval of 4 to 5 centimetres between them. The trench is then filled with potting soil, and covered with a thick layer of litter or about 40 centimetres of unconsumed manure. This last method generally produces excellent-quality white shoots within a month, which are harvested by digging up to the crown and slicing off the base of the head. Cutting chicory is by no means the least esteemed of all lettuces. It is sown in spring in rays 25 centimetres apart. It is thinned out, weeded, hoeed and watered from time to time during vegetation. During the winter, we remove the dead leaves, then cover each bed with a layer of potting soil, so as to hide the leaves completely. Twenty or twenty-five days after this operation, harvesting can begin. The most popular varieties of chicory for cutting are : Improved wild chicory, derived from the wild type that grows spontaneously in France; its leaves are curled into a cone shape; variegated improved wild chicory, a variety similar to the previous one, but whose leaves are spotted brown; curly improved wild chicory, whose leaves are finely cut and slightly blistered; of all the wild varieties, it is the one that most closely resembles endive chicory. Improved wild chicory. Chicory seeds are obtained by beating the flower stalks, which have been cut a little before maturity. Harvest cutworms sometimes devastate plantations. Look for it and destroy it. Celery. The stalks of celery leaves, and sometimes the leaves themselves, provide a highly appreciated seasoning and salad. Hollow celery. We won't go into the celeriac we dealt with earlier. We will only describe the cultivation of the varieties whose ribs are used. Celery requires fresh, substantial soil. It is propagated by sowing from February to June, first on bedding to transplant on bedding and plant in the ground, then from April directly in the ground, but never in situ. Permanent planting is done in rays 25 cm apart in both directions. To facilitate growth, weed and water frequently. Before delivering them for consumption, we usually blanch the petioles, which is done by mounding. First, all the leaves are tied with a twine of straw, then the soil is brought up around each plant, once to a third of its height; after eight days, the mound is raised to two-thirds of its height, and finally, eight days later, the operation is completed, leaving only the tips of the largest leaves to emerge. Among the varieties of celery we'd like to mention: Golden-white celery, an excellent breed with well-developed ribs; Turkish celery, which is less and less cultivated, despite its quality; Short white celery, less vigorous than the preceding varieties; its leaves are numerous; it can be buttered without binding; Violet de Tours celery, whose ribs have a purplish tint; it is very hardy and highly esteemed; Small celery or hollow celery, this last name comes from the fact that its ribs are hollow; its leaves are also used. The seedbeds, removed in November, are planted in rootballs 55 to 60 centimetres apart. They are firmly planted and covered with a thick layer of litter, so that they can survive the winter without fear of the cold. The seeds can be harvested at the beginning of September of the following year. CHAPTER VII DANDELION, MACHE, POURPIER, CRESSON Dandelion. Dandelion grows spontaneously in almost all of France, and is rarely cultivated in the kitchen garden; we are often content to pick it in the meadows, where it is sometimes found in large quantities. The dandelion is a perennial plant that does not suffer from extreme heat or low temperatures. It reproduces by seed, which can be sown from late February to mid-June. However, it's best not to sow seeds until June, as the plants will not flower the same year. Sowing can be done either in the nursery or in the field. In the former case, seed is broadcast on well-tilled soil, then covered with a light layer of compost. When the plants are sufficiently vigorous, they are planted in rows 10 cm apart in both directions. Picked in meadows, dandelion leaves make an excellent salad, but to eat them with their full flavor, 68 they need to be blanched; in gardens, this is done by covering each plant with soil in November; deprived of light, the leaves quickly lose their green color. Two varieties of dandelion are usually grown: the full-hearted dandelion and the moss-enhanced dandelion. The latter is the more popular. The few plants set aside to bear seeds are not blanched; at the end of May of the second year, the seed can be harvested. Lamb's lettuce. Lamb's lettuce grows naturally throughout France and much of Europe. It is an annual vegetable, highly prized as a salad. Lamb's lettuce is reproduced by sowing in August, very lightly and broadcast, in soil that has been well loosened by ploughing. After sowing, the soil is harrowed with a fork, then a small layer of compost is spread over the surface. Water from time to time during the germination period. During its growth, lamb's lettuce requires frequent weeding. Sown in August, it is generally ready for consumption in October. If you want to ensure winter production, you can sow it in September, but in this case, during the cold season, it's best to keep it in the garden. Round-leaf lamb's lettuce. the plants must be sheltered by a heavy bedding. The same applies to spring lamb's lettuce, sown in October. It is not essential for lamb's lettuce to be grown in land specially set aside for it. It can be sown very lightly among other vegetables such as cauliflower and chicory, which it will not harm in any way. Several varieties of lamb's lettuce are grown, including round-leaf lamb's lettuce and Étampes green lamb's lettuce. A third variety, mâche régence, is more voluminous, but also later-ripening than the previous ones. It is grown in the same way, but is sown lighter and preferably in October. A few plants from the autumn sowing are left to carry the seed. It flowers in May, and can be harvested in June. Purslane. Purslane is a relatively uncultivated plant, used only as a garnish for salads. All varieties of purslane are edible, but only one is grown in the vegetable garden: golden purslane, whose leaves and shoots are eaten when still young. When you want to plant purslane in a corner of the garden, sow the seed in well loosened soil. A rake is then used to harrow the soil, followed by a very light layer of compost. Sowing can take place from the beginning of May to the end of July. If sowing is carried out during a drought, it is necessary to water from time to time, firstly to help the seed germinate, and later to encourage the plant's growth. These waterings will help to make the vegetables tender and tasty. When you take the precaution of sowing very lightly, the leaves develop more than when you sow them thickly and, what's more, you have the advantage of being able to harvest them twice. Once you've established a few vines of purslane in a bed, you don't need to resow every year. The plant multiplies on its own, and some growers claim that it is more vigorous under these conditions than when you have taken the trouble to sow it. Cress. Two main species of cress are grown today, differing greatly in cultivation and botanical characteristics: Alenois cress and watercress. Alenois cress. - The Alenois cress is an annual; it reproduces by sowing in the open ground and in rays, at the end of April or beginning of May. The seed is then covered with a thin layer of compost. Harvest when the leaves have reached a length of 8 to 10 centimetres. The same plants can be harvested twice in succession. When sowing is staggered from fortnight to fortnight, the harvest lasts for several months. Today, three main varieties of watercress are grown: common watercress, curly watercress and broad-leaf watercress. After the second harvest of leaves, watercress quickly produces seeds: leave it in place if you want to obtain some. Watercress. - Watercress, the most esteemed of cresses, is a perennial aquatic plant. It grows wild in all parts of France. It can be found on the banks of flowing waters, the presence of a watercourse being an essential condition for its growth. Watercress is a perennial vegetable that can be used either as a garnish for meat or as a salad. A very healthy and refreshing food, it is now widely cultivated, but it is a specialty and not within the reach of all growers. To establish a watercress bed, you need a site where you can bring in water at will, and from which it can drain without impediment. When these conditions are met, a pit is dug to the length of the available space, with a width varying between 1 and 2 meters. It should be 35 centimetres deep, and the bottom of the trench should slope in the direction of the water current. The bottom of the trench should be ploughed, then fertilized with consumed manure; once this has been done, water should be left for one or two days before planting. Watercress is propagated in August using cuttings, or rather rooted seedlings, which are placed in damp soil after letting the water run off completely. At the bottom of the pit, holes 8 to 10 centimetres apart are planted in either direction. Three or four cuttings are placed in each hole, taking care not to bury them too deeply. To facilitate recovery, use a windbreak to shade the cress bed. After a few days, you can start to slowly circulate the water, keeping it at a height of 3 or 4 centimetres in the pit; the speed is increased a few days later, until the cress is entirely under water. Harvest as the cress develops, but make sure that aquatic plants do not interfere with its growth. To prevent watercress from freezing in winter, the water that submerges it must run off fairly quickly. It's a good idea not to pick cress when it's cold. Cress can also be propagated from seed; we won't go into detail on this method of propagation, which is rarely used today. When cress production weakens, a new planting should be made, which can be done in the same pit, taking care to renew the fertilizers. CHAPTER VIII PARSLEY, PERFEUIL, PERCE-PIERRE, MOUTARDE, BASILIC THYME, ESTRAGON Parsley. Parsley can be propagated by sowing in the garden from March to the end of August. Parsley is often sown in borders, as the quantity required to feed a family is not very large. However, gardeners sometimes grow it in beds, in which case they sow it in rays 25 cm apart. Emergence takes place after a month or so; the plants are thinned out, then weeded and watered as they grow. Three months after sowing, you can start picking the most advanced leaves. Parsley fears low temperatures, so if you want to have some during the bad season, take care to shelter the plants under a frame or transplant them to a bed. In this way, production will continue throughout the winter. Some growers are content to shelter the plants with bedding and straw mats, but this is often ineffective. Several varieties of parsley are grown: Common parsley, large Naples parsley, curly parsley, very curly dwarf parsley and fern-leaf parsley. Seedlings are sown in June. They are left in place over winter, sheltered by frames or other means of protection. Seeds mature in September of the second year. Chervil. Chervil thrives best in shady areas, but can be grown in all soils and climates. It can be sown from early March to late October, either broadcast or in rows 25 cm apart. To have chervil throughout the year, sowing is staggered from fortnight to fortnight, as chervil rises very quickly in summer. Curly chervil seedlings. Chervil in flower. in spring or summer usually produce a single harvest, but those sown in autumn can produce for longer. Among the best varieties of chervil are: common chervil, the most widespread and one of the most highly esteemed; curly chervil, which grows earlier than the previous variety and has all its qualities; its leaves are thin and slightly blistered; musky chervil, a large perennial plant very different from the previous varieties, with a fragrance reminiscent of aniseed. The seed of this variety needs to be sown as soon as it ripens, as it retains its germinative properties poorly; if sown in autumn, the seed sprouts in spring; if sown in spring, the seed does not develop until the following year. Chervil and curly chervil seedlings are usually selected from autumn sowings. Their leaves are not harvested, so that they retain all their vigor. Seeds mature around June. Perce-pierre. Stonewort is a plant that grows spontaneously on our coasts. In the kitchen garden, it is sown in September; it can also be sown in March, but it has been found that autumn sowing gives better results. Sowing takes place in light, substantial soil, with good exposure wherever possible, and with seed that has just reached maturity. Over winter, the seedlings are covered with litter. Stonewort leaves are used as a condiment after being preserved in vinegar. 3 Stonewort Mustard. Mustard is rarely grown in the kitchen garden, as it is mainly cultivated in large quantities; it is a very hardy plant that requires little care. There are two main species: white mustard and black mustard. White mustard is used when very young, generally after eight days' cultivation; its leaves are eaten as a salad, especially in England, where it is mixed with lettuce and watercress. The seed is also used in the preparation of the condiment known as mustard, but it is mainly the seeds of black mustard that are used for this purpose. In the garden, black mustard is sown in rows. It requires almost no care. Basil. Mustard. Basil is a highly regarded condiment today, although it is still relatively little cultivated. It is propagated by sowing in the months of March and April. Transplanting takes place when the plants have grown several leaves; it can be done on a bed or even in a nursery. Plants are planted out in the open ground around the middle of May. Care should be taken to water abundantly during the summer. Two main species of basil are grown: large basil and small basil. Both have the same aniseed flavour and can be used in the same way; but, while the stem of the former can reach up to 40 centimetres, that of the latter rarely exceeds 20 centimetres, which means it can be grown in pots. Basil. Thyme. Common thyme is best grown as a border plant. Placed in a good spot, it thrives in all types of soil. It can be propagated in a variety of ways, either by cuttings, by dividing clumps, or by sowing; in most cases, it is reproduced in the latter way, which is preferable in every respect. Sowing takes place in April, usually directly in the ground. If you prefer to grow it in a nursery, you can plant it in June or July. All you need to do is grow a few vines of

thyme, renewed every three or four years. Thyni. Tarragon. As tarragon does not produce seeds, it must be propagated by dividing clumps or taking cuttings, which are planted from mid-July to the end of August. The work involved in growing this plant is insignificant. At the start of winter, cut off the stems and cover with a little soil or litter. In the Paris area, however, some market gardeners grow tarragon under frames to keep it in season. In gardens, tarragon is grown naturally. Tarragon is used as a condiment in salads, and above all to flavor vinegar. Yo Tarragon. R CHAPTER I Squash, cucumbers Squash. Squash is one of the most widely used vegetables in our diet. Although there are countless varieties, they can all be grown in much the same way. In squash, as in the plants we're going to look at, the edible part is provided by the fruit. Cultivation. - Squashes are propagated by sowing, which can hardly be done in the open ground before May. To facilitate growth, they are sown in deep holes 50 centimetres long and of variable width, filled with manure and covered with 20 centimetres of compost. Two or three seeds are placed in each hole. Sowing, which is done in the open ground when natural cultivation is applied, can be done on a bed if you want to hasten the ripening of the fruit. In this case, the seedlings are transplanted to the bed, buried up to the cotyledons and then planted in the open ground. Alternatively, seedlings can be sown in pots filled with potting soil, which are then pushed into the bed up to the rim. Leave them there until the plants have gained sufficient strength, and the outside temperature has become mild enough to allow safe transplanting. After transplanting, the young plants are sheltered from the hot sun for the first few days. When growing varieties with non-running stems, transplanting can be carried out in furrows 1.50 m apart. Once the main stem has grown a few leaves, it is useful to prune it above the second leaf to facilitate the development of two second-order branches which, once they have grown, are themselves pruned above the sixth leaf. In this way, the stems won't use the nutrients to develop, which must be used by the fruit. It's on the third-order branches that the flowers are formed, followed by the gourds. If you want to obtain very large fruits, it's a good idea to keep only two or three per plant. After fertilization, select the best-knotted ones, then prune the branch to which they are attached above the second leaf beyond the fruit. Stems can also be "marcotted", i.e. the parts with knots are placed in the ground, so that they emit adventitious roots. In this way, the squash will benefit from the surplus food provided by the new roots. If watered in times of drought, all these methods combined will produce fruit of considerable volume and excellent flesh. Varieties. - M. Charles Naudin was the first to establish a classification system that reduced to a few main types the infinite number of squash varieties which, until then, had been grouped together and considered as originating from several distinct species. Mr. Naudin has shown the links that exist between apparently very dissimilar varieties, and today his simple classification is universally adopted. We therefore report, with Mr. Charles Naudin, on the various Potiron rouge vif d'Étampes. aros E Courge cou tors du Canada. Giraumon. Boulogne grey pumpkin. 141 U S Marrow squash. Touraine pumpkin. three types of varieties: pumpkin, butternut squash, pumpkin. The best pumpkin breeds include The large yellow pumpkin, a creeping-stemmed variety that can grow to a considerable size; its rind is light yellow-orange; its ribs are not very pronounced; its yellowish flesh is thick but fine; its flavor is sweet; the large yellow pumpkin is easy to store; The large white pumpkin; its size sometimes reaches that of the preceding one; its rind is creamy white; its cooking qualities are the same as those of the large yellow pumpkin; The bright red pumpkin from Étampes; its cultivation is spreading more and more around Paris; its rind is a dark orange-yellow; its ribs are more pronounced than those of the preceding varieties; The large green pumpkin or gray pumpkin, very large and very hardy; The green pumpkin from Spain, a fairly esteemed breed, of medium size; It's easy to store; Boulogne grey pumpkin, fairly large and fast-growing; when ripe, the rind is very finely embroidered; it's easy to store; Brown pumpkin, also known as maroon squash, a vigorous, small, highly esteemed variety; the rind is bright red and has no ribs; Ohio pumpkin or squash, ovoid in shape; its rind is pinkish; Its flesh is highly prized; Valparaiso pumpkin, whose shape is reminiscent of the previous variety; its rind is grayish; its flesh is highly prized; unfortunately, this breed is not easy to preserve; Giraumon, still known as Turkish cap and turban, which has produced many sub-varieties; the fruit is small, its flesh pleasant to the taste. Among the butternut or melons squashes, we'd like to mention: The full Naples squash, swollen at both ends; the seeds are found in the swelling opposite the stalk; this variety can reach and even exceed a meter in length; it is easy to preserve; it is grown especially around Paris, where it is very delicate; The Canada squash, early and easy to preserve; as it takes up relatively little space, it can be grown in small gardens; The melon-shaped squash, a runny variety, slow to produce; it is fairly highly esteemed; The olive squash, a new breed that is not yet widespread, but of very good quality and preserves very well. Pumpkins include The marrow squash, which the English call vegetable marrow; it is eaten when the fruit is about half grown; later the flesh is dry and of inferior quality; The white non-runner squash, which is also eaten before full maturity; it is elongated and has five clearly defined ribs on its surface; The Italian squash or coucourzelle, which is delivered for consumption before ripening has taken place; The Brazilian sugar squash, very runny, fairly early, productive and easy to preserve; The Patagonian squash, with a very dark green rind; its main merit lies in its hardiness; The Touraine pumpkin, which grows almost without any cultivation care; although it can be used for human consumption, it is mainly used for animal feed; The Patisson, or Bonnet d'électeur, very characteristic by its shape; it is easy to preserve. The larger varieties are mainly grown by market gardeners, who always find an outlet in the big cities. In home gardens, the smaller varieties are usually grown, as the larger fruits cannot be eaten all at once, and spoil when opened. In fact, it's easy to obtain medium-sized fruit from large breeds: just keep four or five per plant instead of just one. The seed for squash seedlings should only be taken from fruits that show all the characteristics you want to obtain. Cucumbers. Cultivation. - In our climate, cucumbers can be grown in the ground. This is the simplest and most widespread method. They are propagated by sowing seeds, which is done in May, directly in situ, in rows and generally in a single row. Leave a distance of 1.35 m between two plants, then mulch. Water frequently to facilitate growth. When the main stem has given birth to five or six leaves, it is pruned above the second; later, the two lateral branches undergo the same treatment above the fifth or sixth; when the first fruits are set, the branches bearing those you wish to keep are cut to two leaves above them. This operation, which is carried out when the fruit has reached half its size, continues as the cucumbers are produced. In this way, a dozen cucumbers per plant can be preserved. If gherkin cucumbers are grown, the plants are left to produce as much as they can, and the fruit is picked young, when it has reached 6 to 10 centimetres in length. Other varieties are harvested in August or September, from plants sown in May. CONCOMBRE RNICHON VERT PETIT DE PANS When you want to use forced cultivation, sow on a warm bed and under a frame from the beginning of February; when the plants have grown a few leaves, transplant them to a second bed. After two or three weeks, the plants are planted out by removing the rootballs and planting them again on a bed. Four plants are placed under the same frame, mulched and watered to help them take root. As they develop, the stems are pruned as described above. Thereafter, the only cultivation care consists of providing air whenever possible, and watering from time to time. By the end of April, most of the fruit has ripened and can be harvested. THE POTAGER. 10 Varieties. - Among cucumber varieties, the most highly regarded are the Russian Embroidered Cucumber: The Russian cucumber, widely used for forced cultivation; it is small, but very early; it does not need pruning; The very large Bonneuil white cucumber, whose ovoid fruit is quite large; it is widely grown around Paris; The large, elongated, fairly early yellow cucumber; The long green English cucumber, a breed of good quality, widespread in England; it has produced a number of sub-varieties; The gherkin cucumber, very productive, and which, preserved in vinegar, makes a highly appreciated condiment. To obtain the cucumber seed, the fruit from which it is to be extracted is left to rot on the stem, then opened and the seed removed, washed and dried. Cucumbers are often affected by aphids, which are removed by adding water and tobacco juice. Another insect, the grey cucumber beetle, often causes serious damage. We have not yet managed to stop its ravages. MELON 147 The melon is a vegetable that needs warm, fertile soil to thrive, which is why, in most of France, it is grown on a bed. We will, however, say a few words about natural cultivation, which, although rarely practiced, is of some interest in the southern provinces. Natural cultivation. In natural cultivation, the seeds are sown on the bed in April, but in May, they are placed in holes that have been filled with 25 to 30 centimeters of manure, over which a layer of compost has been spread. Transplants are planted in rows at varying distances from each other, depending on the varieties grown; the plants transplanted in this way have previously been pruned above the second leaf. To facilitate recovery, they are sheltered by cloches for the first few days, then, when they continue to grow and the temperature is high enough for them to be safe, the cloches are removed for good. As vegetation continues, two branches develop, which are pruned above the sixth leaf. When a fruit begins to form, the branch bearing it is cut off above the second leaf, located beyond the point of attachment. Some growers prune differently, while others don't prune at all. In any case, the system we have adopted has many supporters, and the results are almost always satisfactory. It should be noted, however, that pruning is not indispensable in natural cultivation. An important question for the gardener is to know when melons need to be picked in order to get their full flavour and aroma. There are several signs that a melon has reached maturity. Most commonly, small cracks appear around the stem; the stalk seems to want to detach itself entirely; the fragrance of the fruit becomes more penetrating; the color of the rind is lighter; the part next to the eye is softer. When the melon has reached this stage of development, it can be picked by slicing the stalk 8 or 10 centimetres from the point of attachment. It can then be taken to the fruit orchard, where it will remain for a few days to complete ripening before being eaten. Although many varieties show their ripeness through all these characteristics, it should not be forgotten that some show it through only one or other of these signs. In fact, a single sign may suffice to guide the horticulturist. Forced cultivation. In forced cultivation, melon seeds are sown from mid-January on a bed with a temperature of around 25 degrees. A furrow is opened on the surface, into which the seed is placed, then covered with a little potting soil. Once this is done, the frames are put in place, surrounded by a stove. At night, they are covered with straw mats. Once the plants have broken through the surface of the soil, they can be given some air. Once the plants have grown a terminal bud, they are ready for transplanting. Transplanting can be done on the same layer, if it has retained sufficient heat. The best way is to plant out in pots, which are pushed right up to the edge of the bed, so that when the bed's temperature drops, the plants can be transported on a 2 Melon Cantaloup Prescott fond blant de Paris. Melon de Honfleur. Melon Cantaloup noir des Carmes. Melon Cantaloup Prescott hâtif à chässis. Melon maraîcher rond de Paris. 149 seconds without any break in vegetation. To encourage the plants to put out more roots, we bury them up to the cotyledons; they are then lightly bashed. To facilitate recovery, the frames are covered with straw mats for two or three days; air is then allowed to penetrate from time to time, but only when the temperature is above zero. Fifteen or twenty days before transplanting, we proceed with planting. Planting is usually done on a trench bed. Two plants are planted in the same frame. These plants should be pruned as described above. The cultivation method we have just described applies to early varieties, which we want to produce in May or June, and which are therefore sown in January or February. Those sown at the beginning of April are much less demanding. Sowing is done as before, on a bed and under frames or cloches. Sow on a second layer, 60 to 65 centimetres apart; plant in a single row and place the bells, which are lifted with racks whenever you feel they are useful; remove them completely when they are no longer needed. Varieties. We classify melons into two categories, which include almost all our cultivated varieties: Cantaloupes and brodés melons. Cantaloupe varieties include The Cantaloup d'Alger melon, highly esteemed both for its hardiness and the sweetness of its flesh; The Cantaloup noir des Carmes melon, with a very dark green rind; the bright red flesh is of the highest quality; The Cantaloup Prescott fond blanc de Paris melon, with deeply marked ribs; The Cantaloup Prescott silver-white melon, widely grown around Paris; The Cantaloup Prescott petit hâtif à châssis, one of our best melons, admirably suited to forced cultivation; The Cantaloup sucrin green-fleshed melon, with the most delicate flavor. Among the embroidered melons, we should mention: The pineapple melon, small in volume but very productive; its sweet flesh has a pleasant aroma; The maraicher melon, spherical in shape; the rind is almost entirely covered with fine intertwined lines that make up the embroidery; The Honfleur melon, very voluminous; it is hardy and of good quality; it is one of the most frequently used for outdoor cultivation; The red-fleshed Cavaillon melon, generally highly appreciated; The sucrin de Tours melon; the rind is covered with coarse embroidery; the flesh is of good quality; The green row melon, an excellent variety that is generally grown by guiding the stems on a trellis; it is not very large, but its flesh has a very spicy flavor. -=- O 4 4 En 9 O Melon seeds should be selected from varieties that best combine the desired qualities. Hybridization between different breeds should always be avoided. Enemies. Melons can be attacked by many kinds of insects. In addition to grubs and crickets, the gray moth, which we have already mentioned, is all the more formidable in that there is no way to combat it. Aphids are much less dangerous, as their ravages can always be stopped. A disease that sometimes occurs in melons is canker, which attacks the branches. To stop its effects, the affected parts are removed with a sharp instrument. Jaundice, which manifests itself in the yellowish hue of leaves and stems, is caused by a general weakness of the plant.  GE RN Green climbing melon. TOMATO, AUBERGINE, PIMENT Tomato. 153 As tomatoes are native to South America, they require a great deal of heat to produce abundantly. In the southern provinces of France, it is always grown in the open ground, but in the climate of Paris, the plants are always raised on a warm bed. Cultivation. - Tomatoes are usually sown towards the end of March; transplanting is done three or four weeks after sowing; a month later, the plants are pruned 50 to 60 centimetres apart. When the plants have reached a certain height, it's a good idea to give them a stake or even fix them to a trellis; this procedure has the advantage of preventing the fruit from coming into direct contact with the soil, which could lead to rotting. It's even better to grow them close to a wall, which will shelter and reflect the sun's heat. To fully expose the fruit to the sun, thin out the leaves when they are half their size. Water frequently and abundantly. To regulate production, we usually prune the branches. The main stem is cut above the fourth branch. Each of these secondary branches is allowed to produce four bunches of flowers. You can prune in different ways; any system that fulfils your purpose should naturally be considered good. Tomatoes sown at the end of March can produce in August, but forced cultivation will produce fruit much earlier. For this reason, sowing can start in September, although in most cases not until January. Transplanting and planting are done on a bed sheltered by a stove, and always under a frame. Only two branches are left on the forced plants, which are attached to a wire held in place by small stakes. When a sufficient number of flowers have been produced, the stems are cut to stop their growth. If sown at the beginning of January, the crop can be harvested in May. If sown in September, harvesting is accelerated by several months. Varieties. - The best tomato varieties are: The large red tomato, quite productive, which is grown on E 7 V all over the Midi region, as it is a little late; The early large red tomato, widely grown in central and northern France; The early dwarf red tomato, a good small variety, very suitable for under-frame cultivation; The smooth large red tomato, remarkable for its volume; the latter has no ribs. Tomato seeds should be taken from fully ripe fruit, crushed and removed. They are then carefully washed and left to dry. Tomatoes, like potatoes, are attacked by peronospora infestans, which can be treated with Bordeaux mixture. 2 2~~ 5- Early dwarf red tomato. 155 Cultivation. - In our climate, eggplant is almost always sown in the soil. They are generally sown at the beginning of March; three or four weeks later, the plants are ready for transplanting; they are placed in pots filled with potting soil, which is then pressed into the bed. Transplanting takes place in the open ground; the young plants are removed from their rootballs and planted in rays 45 to 50 centimetres apart, as far as possible in a well-exposed bed. During growth, water frequently and take care not to let any weeds grow. Harvesting can begin in early September. Varieties. - Among the best varieties of eggplant, we would like to mention the following: The long purple eggplant, which is eaten when it has not yet finished growing; it is grown mainly in the south of France; The early long purple eggplant, perfectly suited to the Paris climate, and considered a sub-variety of the previous one; The round purple eggplant, quite late and widespread mainly in our southern provinces; its fruits, very large, are shaped like a ball; Long purple eggplant. The very early dwarf violet eggplant, small in size but relatively very productive; The very early Barbentane eggplant, a new variety, long, violet in color, very early. For future sowings, choose the seeds of the most beautiful fruits. Like tomato seeds, they should be washed and left to dry. Chillies. As chili cultivation is identical in every respect to that of eggplant, we will limit ourselves to indicating the best varieties of this fruit. Long yellow chillies. These are: The long red pepper, the long yellow pepper, the Chile pepper, the cherry pepper, the tomato pepper, the monstrous pepper, the sweet pepper or large square pepper. The pungent, hot flavor of chili peppers makes them sought-after by only a small number of enthusiasts, which is why they are not widely cultivated. However, some of the larger varieties lack the pungent taste characteristic of chillies in general, and are often used in the same way as eggplants. BEANS, PEAS, BEANS, LENTILLES Beans. 157 Beans are one of the most important food crops. The seeds are used in shelling and parchment varieties. In mange-tout varieties, the whole fruit is used for consumption. Cultivation. - When cultivating beans in the open ground, it is important to keep the soil substantial and light, ivory butter beans. Giant white bean. Val d'Isère bean. Haricot zébré. Émile bean. moderately humid, with good exposure. Sow when frosts are no longer a threat, generally in May for the Paris climate. Sowing is often done in rows 40 to 45 centimeters apart and 5 centimeters deep. Holes are made 15 to 20 centimetres apart on the same line: a bean is placed in each hole, then the furrows are closed and lightly basked if necessary. If sowing in clumps, place four or five seeds per hole. Once the plants have grown a few leaves, hoe them, then weed and water. Some horticulturists hoe the young plants, which seems to have a positive effect on vegetation. Several seedlings are usually sown over the course of a year, enabling harvesting as late as October. When growing snap beans, which require less time to develop, they can be sown later than other beans. String beans, on the other hand, should be sown at the beginning of the season. When the stems of pole beans have reached a height of 30 to 35 centimetres, they need to be rowed, i.e. provided with stakes or rods to support their growth. These can be rods or even simple reeds. Dwarf beans have the advantage over pole beans of being self-supporting throughout their development. When the pods of snap beans have reached a sufficient size, they should be picked as soon as possible, because if you waited until they had developed further, they would be less tender and the threads in their pods would be detrimental to their quality. Beans that are to be eaten fresh are picked a little before full maturity. In this case, they can be harvested every two or three days. As beans are very sensitive to frost, late sowings must be sheltered from the cold. Although dry beans can be eaten constantly, it has been found useful to force-feed this vegetable. Seedlings are sown around mid-January, on a warm bed. They are sheltered by frames which are lifted whenever possible during development, and any leaves in poor condition are removed from the plants. It goes without saying that only dwarf varieties are used for forced cultivation, as the others cannot restrict their development to occupy only the space reserved under a frame. The dwarf Dutch bean is usually preferred, and four rays 15 cm apart are planted under the same box. Water from time to time during growth, and place mats over the panels at night. In April, fresh beans can be picked. If several successive sowings have been carried out, they can be harvested until the products of natural cultivation replace those of forced cultivation. Varieties. - We group bean varieties into pole beans and bush beans. In these two categories, we'll talk successively about shelling beans and beans without parchment. The best varieties of string beans for shelling are : The Soissons bean, which is best eaten dry; it is widely grown around Paris; The Liancourt bean, hardy and productive; it is a much-appreciated variety; The rice bean, whose very small bean is of good quality; The sabre bean, a little late, but very productive; its stalk can reach 3 meters in height, and its very large pod contains a top-quality white bean. WHITE LAGEOLE BEANS The most recommended breeds of row beans without parchment are: The Prédome bean, one of our best beans, both green and fully mature; The Princesse bean, hardy, fairly early and relatively productive; The intestine bean, a productive and highly esteemed breed; The Alger or butter bean, black-grained, very productive and much appreciated as an all-rounder; The ivory butter bean, mainly grown as an edible bean, but whose beans are nevertheless very good; The giant white bean, vigorous and productive; its seed is white, while its pod is green; The Val d'Isère bean, late but productive, with a black bean; The zebra bean, generally quite esteemed. Dwarf shelled beans include The early dwarf Dutch bean, usually grown on a bed; The white Hageolet bean, one of the most esteemed of our dwarf varieties; The very early Étampes flageolet bean, an early breed of equal quality to the previous one, over which it has the advantage of precocity; The waffle-leaf flageolet bean, grown mainly under frames; The haricot noir de Belgique, an early bean, which is forced to be eaten green; The haricot de Bagnolet, which is also eaten green; The haricot Saint-Esprit or à la religieuse; the bean has a spot whose shape is reminiscent of a bird; generally, we like to think of it as a dove. Among the dwarf beans without parchment: the Canadian yellow bean, one of the most recommended; the Chinese yellow bean, now widespread in France; the dwarf black Alger bean, early and productive; the Emile bean, very early and very delicate as an all-rounder; it is well suited to forced cultivation. Peas. Cultivation. - Pea cultivation is one of the simplest. To be successful, it must be grown in loose soil with plenty of water. Green pea. Pois sabre. Clamart pea. Ram's-horn pea. Green dwarf pea. However, peas can be grown successfully in almost any soil. Peas are sown in rays, at times that vary with the climate. 11 with the climate, from late November in the Midi, to February in the North; they continue throughout the spring. We often sow in clumps, spacing the rows more or less according to the size of the varieties we're growing. When the larger varieties have reached 30 or 40 centimetres, it is necessary, as with beans, to support them with oars that are always slightly inclined towards the middle of the bed; the ends of the stems can also be cut off above the third and fourth flowers. In this way, you can speed up production and dispense with the need for oars. When the pods are ready to be picked, cut off the stalk with the fingernail; pulling them off could injure the feet. Like beans, peas have been subjected to forced cultivation, for which we prefer to use the very early dwarf pea with a frame. In this case, it is not essential to use layers. You can also sow in a sheltered, well-exposed bed, protecting the plants with frames. Sowing then takes place in November. At the time of frost, it is sufficient to surround the boxes with a brace. When using varieties other than the very early chassis dwarf pea, it is necessary to lay the stems on the ground when they have reached a height of around twenty centimetres, so that they can continue their development unhindered. November sowings produce in April. Varieties - Like beans, peas are classified into pole and bush peas. Each of these groups includes hulling and non-hulling varieties. Among the string peas for shelling, we'll mention : Prince Albert pea, an early and very popular variety, sometimes used for forced cultivation; Dutch Michaux pea, generally 1 meter high, hardy and productive; Ordinary Michaux pea, also known as St. Catherine pea, sown mainly in November, hardy and fairly productive: The round-grained William pea, whose pods are slightly curved; it is early and productive; The Auvergne pea; its pods are curved; it is a highly appreciated vegetable that requires little care; The sabre pea, less cultivated than most of the preceding ones, but nevertheless a good variety; The Clamart pea, late, but nevertheless highly esteemed; The Knight pea, with wrinkled grain, which is cultivated especially for late summer. The best breeds of peas without parchment are : Corne-debélier pea, which is hardy and productive; POIS PRINCE ALBERT Butter pea, which is less widespread than the previous one. The most recommended varieties of dwarf shelled peas are : The very early chassis dwarf pea, remarkable for its earliness and small size; The Dutch dwarf pea or ordinary dwarf pea, one of the best dwarf varieties; The very dwarf Brittany pea, widespread especially in England; The large green dwarf pea, its round seeds are quite developed; The American marvel pea, with wrinkled seeds, whose cultivation has made notable progress in recent times. Among the dwarf peas without parchment, we'd like to mention the very dwarf early frame pea, which adapts very well to forced cultivation. It is also frequently used in early field seedlings. N Pea flea beetle (very large) Pea flea beetle larva (very large) Peas are vulnerable to damage caused by an insect known as the pea flea beetle. Its larvae enter the pods as the seeds are forming. To distinguish, after harvesting, the seeds where this insect has lodged itself, it's best to put all the seeds in the same container.) All you have to do is put them all in water: those that are attacked stay on the surface. Peas are also subject to two diseases caused by parasitic fungi: powdery mildew and rust. Broad beans. Cultivation. - Although broad beans are much less important than beans and peas from a nutritional point of view, they are nevertheless widely cultivated. They are propagated from seedlings planted in early March, preferably in abundantly smoky soil, in rays spaced 35 to 40 centimeters apart. When the plants have reached a height of about fifteen centimetres, they are lightly hoeed, and at flowering time, the end of the stem is cut off to speed up fruit development. Hoeing is repeated from time to time; in most cases, watering is not even necessary. When grown under a frame, seed is sown from January onwards and, after a month, transplanted to a well-exposed bed in the open ground. Beans can also be grown in winter, by sowing in late autumn and protecting the plants with frames or straw mats supported by sticks, but this method is rarely used except in the south of France, where winters are not very harsh. Varieties. - The most widely grown varieties of broad bean are: Fève de marais, widespread around Paris; Fève de Windsor, later than the previous one, but more productive; fr Fève Julienne. Fève de Séville, an early variety whose pods are generally longer than those of the other varieties; Fève d'A quadulce, an early variety whose pods can reach up to 35 centimeters in length; Fève Julienne, an early variety that is highly regarded despite the smallness of its seeds; Fève naine hâtive à châssis, which, because of its small size, is well suited to forced cultivation; cultivated in the open ground, it also produces very fine products; Fève naine verte de Beck, even lower than the previous variety, but just as early. Beans are affected by the bruchid we mentioned earlier, and sometimes by an aphid that lives on the ends of the stems. Pinching, which is mainly used to make the fruit swell, also has the advantage of stopping the ravages of this aphid. Lentils. Like broad beans, lentils are generally sown in the field 3 Me M. Me Lentille. and in racks in the first days of March. No cultivation care is required until harvest, which takes place a little before full maturity, usually in August. The main lentil varieties are: The large blond lentil, the green Puy lentil and the lentillon. The lentil pod is small, containing no more than two or three round, flattened, disc-shaped seeds. Although strawberries are not usually considered a vegetable, it is customary to place them alongside vegetables. Cultivation. Strawberries can be grown successfully in all types of soil, provided they are given the necessary amount of moisture. If you don't want to water it as frequently, it's best to place it in naturally cool soil. Strawberry cultivation differs according to whether it involves four-season or large-fruited varieties. Four-season strawberry plants multiply by sowing rather than by the nets, runners or stolons they emit naturally. Sowing is done in the first days of May, by broadcasting, in soil prepared by ploughing; the seed is then covered with 5 to 6 millimeters of compost. After sowing, water lightly with an apple. Watering should be repeated once or twice a day, especially during the germination period. A month or a month and a half after sowing, the plants are generally sufficiently developed to undergo the transplanting operation. Transplanting involves placing two plants in the same hole, about 12 centimetres apart in either direction. Transplanting almost always takes place at the end of September, in Fraise belle de Meaux. Strawberry Jueunda. Strawberry Victoria. O 3 Fraise docteur Morère. E 22Fraise docteur Nicaise. 2 Strawberry Marguerite Lebreton. Fraise vicomtesse Héricart de Thury. 1 Fraise Capron framboisée. 169 lines spaced 30 centimetres apart in both directions. The following year, you can start picking fruit. Every year in spring, the strawberry plants are hoeed and weeds pulled out. The soil should be covered with a mulch of manure that has been almost completely used up, a precaution designed firstly to maintain a constant level of humidity, and secondly to prevent the fruit from touching the ground directly. As the runners are not used, care must be taken to remove them as and when they are produced. Strawberry plantings are renewed every three or four years. When large-fruited strawberry varieties are grown, the seed is no longer used to propagate the species, so it is preferable to use runners, which reproduce the distinctive characteristics of the varieties more faithfully. This is a sort of spontaneous layering. In the first days of August, we try to obtain sufficiently rooted nets, which we transplant into the nursery as described above. Towards the end of September, the young plants are removed from their rootballs and transplanted at varying distances according to their development. In the course of the following year, a first harvest can be made. Care during vegetation is absolutely the same as for all-season strawberries. Strawberry plants are frequently forced into cultivation, and in this case all-season strawberry plants, like large-fruited strawberry plants, are propagated by their nets. In July, plants from runners are put to rest in the same way as above, by placing two plants in the same hole. Water and hoe frequently until the end of the year. When the frosts start to make themselves felt, we place the frames above the plants; at the end of January, we surround the whole with stoves made of unconsumed horse manure. When the temperature of the stoves begins to drop, we replace some of it with new manure. At night, the frames are sheltered by straw mats. During the day, air is provided as often as possible. In this way, harvesting can begin in April. Varieties. Among the four-season strawberries, we can mention the following: The improved Janus strawberry, conical in shape and very dark red in color; The Gaillon strawberry, a variety with the particularity of not emitting runners; The beautiful Meaux strawberry, one of the most renowned; slightly flattened at the tip and bright red in color. Among the larger varieties, we'd like to mention The strawberry Ananas, yellowish in color, with a delicate flavor; The strawberry Docteur Morère, very large, fragrant and with a very pleasant taste; The strawberry Docteur Hogg, a vigorous and highly sought-after variety; The strawberry Docteur Nicaise, moderately vigorous, large and of first-rate quality; The strawberry Jucunda, a hardy, productive and vigorous breed; The strawberry May queen, early, but relatively undeveloped; The Victoria strawberry, rounded, attractive and full-flavored; The Marguerite Lebreton strawberry, early, productive and ideally suited to under-frame cultivation; The Vicomtesse Héricart de Thury strawberry, widely grown both under-frame and in the open air; The Wonderful strawberry, a productive variety of excellent quality; And let's not forget the Capron raspberry, much sought-after for its pleasant fragrance. Strawberries are sometimes attacked by white grubs and aphids. II. - MUSHROOMS The only mushroom commonly grown today is the champignon or agaric mushroom; it is also one of the most commonly sold mushrooms at Paris markets. The edible part consists of the stem and cap, which are not, as is commonly believed, the whole mushroom, but only the reproductive organs. On the underside of the cap are the blades or leaves that carry the spores. These spores can be likened to seeds, since they play the main role in plant propagation, and we know from the recent work of M. Costantin that, like seeds, these spores reproduce plants with their own specific characteristics, so that improved varieties can be obtained through selection. As we can see, the reproductive organs are the most obvious; as for the vegetative organs, they are essentially made up of whitish threads that intertwine to form what is commonly known as mushroom spawn, the white produced by the development of a spore. A remarkable feature of this spawn is that, placed in a dry place where it cannot normally develop, it nevertheless retains its vegetative properties for several years, and can continue to grow at the earliest opportunity, when provided with the necessary moisture. Mushroom spawn is usually preserved in the medium in which it was formed, or rather in which its formation was encouraged, i.e. in horse manure. In this state, it can be found on the market, making it easy for anyone to obtain. The fungus grows naturally in damp places, such as meadows and fields. It is also found on layers of horse manure, where it sometimes grows spontaneously. It is best cultivated in places of constant temperature, deprived of light, such as cellars and abandoned quarries. The mushroom is grown on a layer of horse manure. As far as possible, we use manure from the stables of working horses, whose bedding is not often renewed. Under these conditions, the manure obtained is well soaked with urine and contains more fertilizing principles. Before using it to build the layers, the manure is piled up in sufficient quantity, at least 1 cubic meter, so that it begins to decompose. A month after this operation, the manure is used to build a bed, a layer about 65 cm high, whose length and width vary with the quantity of manure used. Straw that is too long should be removed by shaking with a fork, and after each bed has been formed, it should be compacted and watered. Eight or ten days later, the bed will be rebuilt; the manure that was in the middle will be placed on the surface, and as before, it will be compacted and watered. Leave to ferment for a week, then demolish and rebuild in the same way. After five or six days, the manure is ready to be used to form the millstones. The millstones are given a width of 60 centimetres at the base and the same height of 60 centimetres. The millstones are erected in a hump-back shape, so that the width at the top is only 10 centimeters. Care is taken to ensure that no excessively long strands of straw enter into their composition; the manure from which they are made must be well packed. Fermentation continues in the millstones; when the temperature has dropped to around 25 degrees, larding can begin. Larding consists of introducing fragments of spawn into the millstones, about 20 centimeters apart and 10 centimeters deep. Eight or ten days after larding, small whitish filaments appear on the surface of the millstones, indicating that the spawn has set. If, on the other hand, the whitening has not developed, you should repeat the larding process as described above. Once the white has set, the wheels are gopted, i.e. covered with a 1-centimeter layer of light, sifted earth containing saltpetre debris. One month after goptage, the filaments have spread to all parts of the millstones; light watering with apples is carried out from time to time to prevent the millstones from drying out completely. The cavities left empty by the mushrooms are filled with the soil used for goptering. When mushrooms are grown in the open air, it is essential to cover each wheel with a layer of long litter after spawning. This will protect the mushrooms from rain and wind. In addition to Agaricus champêtre, there are a large number of edible mushrooms that grow spontaneously in woods and meadows, but it is often very difficult to distinguish between poisonous and edible species, and many cases of poisoning have been caused by mushrooms thought to be harmless. Various means are given for recognizing species, but unfortunately they are not infallible. PIM. Accot, 27. Adventives (Roots). 140. Agaric champêtre. 171. Garlic, 80. Alleys. 11. Flea beetle. 58, 63, 95, 102. Amender, 10. August (Work of). 38. Appendix. 167. Red spider. 68. Arroche. 113. Watering. 25. Open watering. 26. Watering can. 16. Artichoke. 107. Asparagus. 83. Crop rotation, 28. Aubergine. 155. April work. 36. Powdery mildew. 98, 119, 164. Bordeaux mixture. 48. Boursette, 129. Windbreak. 9. Stretcher wheelbarrow. 18. Wheelbarrow with trunk. 18. Pea beetle, 164, 165. Bulbils, 51. Buttage, 42. Buttoir. 43. Capuchin beard, 123. Basil. 137. Bassinage. 26. Spade. 16. Beet, 65. Hoeing. 24. Hoe, 16. Mushroom white, 172. Cloves. 80. Vegetable-growing calendar. 34. Cardoon. 103. Carrot, 66, Celery, 126. Celeriac, 69, Chervil. 135. Chervil, bulbous. 70. Tuberous chervil. 70. Cultivated mushroom. 171 Chassis. 18. Coffee chicory. 124. Cutting chicory. 125. Chicory endive. 120. Wild chicory. 123. Sprouting cabbage. 95. Broccoli. 98. Cultivated cabbage. 90. Brussels sprouts. 95. Cauliflower. 96. Cabbage. 90. Turnips and swedes. 59. Kohlrabi. 60. Chives, 82. Chives, 82. Pumpkin. 142. Civet. 82. Cloche à facettes, 20. Cloche maraîchère, 20. Clôtures. 8. Chest, 20. Spiral. 119. Columbine. 12, 13. Cucumbers, 144. String. 18. Gherkin. 145, 146. Coasts, 11. Hot diapers. 26. Floor layers. 26. Trench layers. 27. Layers (assembly of layers), 26. Deaf layers. 27. Warm layers. 26. Sliders. 167. Coup de feu. 27. Butternut squash. 142. Squash. 139. Moth. 47, 88, 104, 110, 152. Crambé, 100. Cran de Bretagne. 64. Cranson rustic. 64. Crémaillère, 20. Cressonnière. 132. Cressons. 131. Twelve-spotted beetle. 88, 89. Asparagus beetle. 88, 89. Crosne, 52. germinative faculty. 31. Florence fennel, 105. Broad beans, 164. February (Work of). 35. Nets. 167. Cast iron. 112. Forte (Earth). 9. Flat-tine fork. 18. Ordinary fork. 18. Strawberry plant, 167. Manure, 12. annealed manure, 26. planter. 18. Doucette. 129. E December (Works of). 40. Roughening. 10. Watering water. 25. Shallot. 81. Thinning. 23. Fertilizer. 12. Chemical fertilizer. 14. Flemish fertilizer. 13. Spinach. 111. Tarragon. 138. Establishment of a vegetable garden, 7. Exhibition. 8. Sludge. 12. Germinative (Faculty). 31. Goptage. 173. Seeds. 31. Asparagus claw. 83. Grey. 146, 152 Guano. 12, 13 H Cabbage hernia, 95. Hoe. 16. Chinese yam, 50 Gardening implements. 16. January. 34. Gauge, 67. Jaundice, 112, 152. July (Works of). 38. June (Works of). 37. L Labour. 10, 21. Lettuce, 115. Lettuce for cutting. 119. Larding. 173. Light soil. 9. Fruit vegetables. 139. Herbaceous vegetables. 83. Root vegetables, 41. Lentils. 166. Slugs. 119. Lamb's lettuce. 129. May (Works of). 37. March (Works of). 35. Melon. 147. Furniture (Floor). 9. Mushroom wheel. 173. LE POTAGER. Miller, 119. Mustard. 136. Mulot, 110. 177 Nature of soil. 9. Turnips, 56. Harvest moth. 95, 112, 125. Cabbage maggot. 95. November (Works of). 39. October (Works of). 39. Eyeletting. 108. Eyelets. 107. Onion. 75. Sorrel. 113. Oxalis. 54. Paillassons. 20. Paillis, 13. Panais, 68. Panels (Frames). 20. Potato. 49. Shovels. 18. Perce-pierre. 136. Peronospora infestans. 47, 154. Parsley. 134. Parsley with large root. 71. Small white worm. 78. Cabbage worm. 95. Chili pepper. 156. Pickaxe. 16. Dandelion. 128. Planchée, 172. Plantoir, 18. Plates-bandes. 11. Plomber. 23. 12 Leek, 78. Poirée, 102. Pea. 161. Potato, 41. Seed carrier, 31. Pumpkin, 142. Poudrette. 13. Poulina, 12, 13. Purslane. 130. Rot. 78, 81, 112. Aphids. 110, 119, 165, 171. R Radish. 61. Horseradish, 64. Rapunzel. 73. Rake, 18. Push rake. 18. Pulling rake. 18. Raves and turnips. 56. Stove. 27. Repiquage, 23. Rhubarb. 104. Romaine. 115. Rust. 89, 164. Rutabagas. 59. S Seasons. 28. Salsify. 72. Weeding. 24. Scarole. 120. Scolyma. 74. Scorsonera. 73. Selection, 31. 22. Broadcast sowing, 22. Sowing in bunches. 23. Ray sowing. 23. September. 39. Serfouette. 16. Loose soil. 9. Spores. 171. Stachys affinis, 52. Stolons. 167. Stratify. 70. Garlic moth. 80. Potting soil. 13. Strong earth. 9. Light earth. 9. Tetragon. 112. Thermosiphon. 21. Thyme. 138. Tomato. 153. Jerusalem artichoke, 53. Works in progress. 21. Preparatory work. 10. Turion, 83. Kelp. 12. White worm. 47, 53, 88, 104, 110, 152, 171. White worm. 78. Cutworm. 112, 125. Verrine, 20. Witloof. 124.- W Mes PREFACE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... PART ONE. - VEGETABLE GROWING. CHAPTER ONE. Pages. Establishment of a vegetable garden. Exposure . . . . . . . . Fencing ... ... ... ... . Nature of soil ... ... ... . 3 o 0 Preparatory work... 10 CHAPTER II. Fertilizers ... . . . . . . 12 Manure . . . . . . . 12 Mulch... ... ... ... . Potting soil . . . . . . . . . 13 13 Chemical fertilizers..... 14 CHAPTER III. Gardening tools. 16 CHAPTER IV. Routine work . 21 Ploughing ... ... ... ... . 21 Sowing ... ... ... ... . 22 Transplanting.... ..... 23 Weeding. . . . . . . .. 24 6 Watering ... ... ... . 25 Layering... . 26 CHAPTER V Crop rotation ... ... . 28 CHAPTER VI. Seeds.... . .. . . 31 CHAPTER VII. Vegetable-growing calendar ... ... ... ... ... . 34 January . . . 34 February.... . . . . . . . 35 March . . . . . . . . .. 35 April ... ... ... ... . 36 May ... ... ... ... . June ... ... ... ... ... . 3° 37 July... ... ... ... . 38 August... ... ... ... ... . 38 September . . . . . .. 39 October . . . . . . . 39 November . . . . . . . 39 Hoeing . . . . . . . . . 24 December 1 ... ... ... . 40 PART TWO. - ROOT VEGETABLES. CHAPTER ONE. The potato. . . . 41 Multiplication . . . . . . 41 Natural cultivation . 42 Forced cultivation . . . .. 43 Varieties . . . . . . .. 44 Enemies ... ... ... . 47 CHAPTER II. Pages. Potato, Yam, Crosne, Topinambour, Oxalis... . . Potato... ... ... ... . Chinese yam... ... . Crosne or Stachys affinis . Topinambour... ... ... . 49 49 50 52 53 Oxalis... . . . . . . . . 54 CHAPTER III. Turnips, Kohlrabi and Rutabagas, Kohlrabi, Radishes, Wild Horseradish.... . . . . ... 56 Turnips and turnips....... 56 Turnips and rutabagas, 59 Kohlrabi ... ... ... ... 60 Radishes ... ... ... ... . 61 Horseradish... ... ... ... . 64 CHAPTER IV. Beet, Carrot, Parsnip, Celeriac, Chervil bulbous, Parsley with grosseracin. 65 Pages. Beetroot ... ... ... ... . 65 Carrot. . . . . . . . . . . . 66 Parsnip.... . . . .. 68 Celeriac ... ... ... ... . Bulbous chervil ... ... . 69 70 Parsley, large-rooted. ... . 71 CHAPTER V. Salsify, Scorsonera, Rapunzel, Scolyma... .... . 72 Salsify ... ... ... ... . 72 Scorsonera... . . . .. 73 Rapunzel... . . .. 73 Scolyma... . . . . . . . 74 CHAPTER VI. Onion, Leek, Garlic, Shallot, Chives... ... . 75 Onion... ... ... ... ... ... 75 Leek . .. . . . .. 78 Garlic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 Shallot..... . . . . 81 Shallot... . .. .... 82 PART THREE. - HERBACEOUS VEGETABLES. CHAPTER ONE. Asparagus. . . ... 83 Natural cultivation...... 83 Forced cultivation... ... ... 86 Varieties ... ... ... ... . Seed carriers... . . . 87 88 Enemies...... . . . . 88 CHAPTER II. Cabbages... ... ... ... . 90 Cultivated cabbage ... ... . 90 Brussels sprouts.... 95 Cauliflower ... ... ... . 96 Broccoli. 98 CHAPTER III. Crambe, Poirée, Cardoon, Rhubarb, Fennel... . .. 100 Crambé... ... ... ... 100 Poirée ... ... ... ... . 102 Cardoon... ... ... ... ... 103 Rhubarb... .. . . .. 104 Florence fennel. ... . 105 CHAPTER IV. Artichoke... ... ... ... . 107 Breeding methods . 107 Cultivation ... ... ... ... . 108 Varieties . 109 Enemies.......... 110 Spinach, Tetragon, Arroche, Sorrel. . . . . 111 Spinach. ..... . 111 Tetragon. . ... 112 Arroche. . . . . . . . . . . 113 Sorrel. ... ... ... ... . 113 CHAPTER VI. Lettuces, Chicory, Celery . 115 Lettuces.......... 115 Chicory.... . 120 CHAPTER VII. Dandelion, Lamb's lettuce, Purslane, Cress... ... ... .. 128 184 Pages. Dandelion ... ... ... ... . Lamb's lettuce . . . . . . . . . . 128 129 Purslane.... . . . . .. 130 Cress . . . . . . . . . . 131 CHAPTER VIII. Parsley, Chervil, Perce-pierre, Mustard, Basil, Thyme, Tarragon. ... ... ... ... 134 Parsley. . . . . 134 Chervil ... ... ... ... ... . 135 Perce-pierre... ... ... . 136 Mustard... ... ... ... . 136 Basilie..... .... .. 137 Thyme....... . .. 138 Estragon. . . . . . . . . . 138 TABLE OF CONTENTS. PART FOUR. - FRUIT VEGETABLES. CHAPTER ONE. Squash, Cucumbers..... 139 Squash...... . . . 139 Cucumbers...... . 144 CHAPTER II. Melon ... ... ... ... . 147 Natural cultivation ... ... . 147 Forced cultivation... ... ... . 148 Varieties . . . . 150 Enemies....... 152 CHAPTER III. Tomato, Aubergine, Pimento. 153 Tomato... . . . . . .. 153 Aubergine... . . . . . . . . 155 CHAPTER IV. Beans, Peas, Fềves, Lentils. ... ... ... ... ... 157 Beans.... . . . .. 157 Peas ... ... ... ... ... . 161 Beans ... ... ... ... ... . 164 Lentils . . . . . . . . . 166 APPENDIX. I. Strawberries... . . . . . . . . 167 Cultivation . . . . . . . . . . 167 Varieties ... ... ... ... . 170 Peppers ... ... ... ... . 156 II. Mushroom . . . . . . 171 2 (S. Paris.- ImP, Larouisee, 1, rue Montparre "- LIBRAIRIE LAROUSSE, RUE MONTPARNASSE, 17, PARIS MONN - A BIBLIOTHEQUE RURALE ARBORICULTURE PRATIQUE Trigemme pruning. The two lower buds become stings and the upper one a shoot. By L.-J. TRONCET and E. DELIÈGE Reproduction. - Shapes. - Pruning. - Care and maintenance. - Fruit picking and preservation. - Trellises. - Pear trees. - Apple tree. - Quince. - Peach tree. - Apricot. - Almond tree. - Plum. - Cherry tree. - Fig tree. - Orange tree. - Olive. - Chestnut. - Walnut. - Raspberry. - Gooseberry. - Hazelnut. - Néflier. Illustrated with 190 engravings, paperback, 2 francs. APICULTURE MODERNÉ By A.-L. CLÉMENT The role of bees. - Mobilism. - The hive, frames and apiary. - Different types of hives. - Apiary management. - Bee diseases and enemies. - Use of honey and wax. This work won a silver medal, grand module, from the Société centrale d'apiculture and a silver medal, ire classe, from the Société d'acclimatation. Illustrated volume with 115 figures, paperback, 1 fr. 25. Bee collecting pollen in a poppy seedbed Bee carrying pollen balls. - - - - - --- Free shipping on receipt of money order. LIBRAIRIE LAROUSSE, RUE MONTPARNASSE, 17, PARIS. BIBLIOTHEQUE RURALE VITICULTURE MODERNE By G. DE DUBOR The vine; species and varieties. - Establishing a vineyard. - Vine propagation. - Vineyard maintenance. - Growing vines in greenhouses. - Vine accidents and diseases. - Wine-making. One volume illustrated with 100 engravings, paperback, 2 francs. 8 4 2° Ramcau on which the annular incision was made. AGRICULTURAL ACCOUNTING AND A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO SAVINGS By HENRI BARILLOT Agricultural accounting and administration. - Cost prices. - Accounting (author's method). - Study of securities. - Cash stock market transactions. - An annuitant's guide. - The enemies of savings. One paperback volume, 2 francs. Subscription by the Ministry of Agriculture. LES ENGRAIS AU VILLAGE By HENRI FAYET Fertilizing value of fertilizers. - Their purchase, transport and use. - Agricultural unions, their purpose and operation. One paperback volume, 2 francs. Subscription by the Ministry of Agriculture. In press: LE JARDIN D'AGRÉMENT V Yi Free shipping on receipt of money order. VILMORIN-ANDRIEUX ET Cie, 4, QUAI DE LA MÉGISSERIE, PARIS. OMMES DE TERRE ET TOPINAMBOURS DE SEMENC Hybrid Petunia. Same company name since 1781 - de Semences Grands PFIX et Trois GRAINES POTAGERES et de FLEURS BLANC DE CHAMPIGNON et notice de culture -moc9- TrOIS Médoilles dOpOGNONS A FLEURS DE TOUTES GRAINES TExposiéion Graines Fourragères, Industrielles et Forestières - - CULTURES SÉLECTIONNÉES ANI (Universelle Paris 1880 - 9- 2 CEREALS, GRAMINÉES Illustrated catalogs free on request. 100 [O Cultivated mushrooms. ARTICHOKE, ASPARAGUS, STRAWBERRY AND CHRYSANTHEMUM PLANTS? "annn 5 - 2t44