Even slightly mediocre soil should always be preferred, but it should be deep and therefore easily amenable to gardening improvements, rather than soil 
that is better on the surface, but shallow. If you have a choice between several sloping plots, take the one facing east or south, even if it's inferior 
in quality to the one facing north or west; first make sure you'll be able to get water by digging wells of ordinary depth. If the soil is calcareous, it 
will yield in the wild: several species of Speedwell, Gallium, Sainfoin, Barberry, Viorne, Clematis, Pulsatilla Anemone; - if it is clayey, it will yield: 
Rush, Argentine, Coltsfoot, Saponaria; - if it is siliceous: Arearia, Viper's Bugloss, Spergula, etc. Strong or clayey earth is always soft to the touch; 
fired, it produces a tight, consistent brick. Iron oxide gives the soil a yellow-red color; if there are too many metal oxides, vegetation will be thin. 
Taste indicates the presence of salt. If the soil contains a lot of sulfur, it will release its vapors when burned on a red iron. Fire can also be used to 
determine the quantity of decomposing plant or animal substances contained in the earth, which essentially constitute its richness. Does a lump of this 
soil, when subjected to red heat, give off a gravelly smell as it burns? You can conclude from this that it contained a lot of animal matter. Fertilizers 
are divided into plant fertilizers and animal fertilizers. To make the former, fresh plants of all kinds must be collected and buried before the open air 
has robbed them of their natural moisture. Of all the fertilizers based on animal substances, the strongest and most energetic is animal black, which is 
wrongly thought to be good only for large-scale cultivation; use it with care in cold, clayey soils, and it will give great vigor to crucifers and root 
vegetables without imparting a bad taste. Stable manure can replace all other manures; it is very good for building layers; it will ferment more or less 
depending on whether you keep it wet or dry. Less esteemed than the previous one, as it is less active, stable manure is suitable for gypsum, sandy and 
calcareous soils, which are too light and very easy to heat up. Sheepfold manure mixed with stable manure is very hot. Pigeon droppings, pig manure and 
liquid fertilizers should also be used, although the latter should only be used to hasten the decomposition of plant debris because of their stench. The 
best potting soil is obtained by fermenting horned beast excrement under the soil for a whole year; it will be black, even in all its parts, soft to the 
touch and odorless. Common loam is the product of the complete decomposition of manure. There is also simple vegetable loam, usually made from the leaves 
used to build the layers. Compost is the mixture of various soils and fertilizers in proportions most suited to the cultivation of a given species of 
plant. For example, orange-tree soil is free-range soil with the addition of a quarter or a third of leaf compost and fatty manure or good heather soil. 
Dummy heather soil is made up of a mixture of half silica sand and vegetable loam, or three parts black loam from decomposed gorse and one part pure sand. 
Manure water, or bouillon, is obtained as follows. In a pit a few meters wide, Om.80 to one meter deep, walled in at the sides and perforated at the 
bottom, pour rainwater through a bung onto a compact mass of cow and horse manure from the stable; after a fortnight, drain off the liquid part. This 
broth restores vigor and beauty to ailing plants, and greenness to orange trees; use sparingly. Mineral substances that do not nourish plants, but modify 
the soil to advantage, are called soil improvers: sand, lime, marl, plaster, added earth; add ashes and soot. For gardening, marl should be mixed with 
equal parts of good soil; it's a good idea to spread a little every four years in the vegetable garden, if the soil is not too chalky or too light. In the 
coldest soil, no more than 25 to 30 liters of lime per acre should be used for initial liming, and as a maintenance dose, no more than 12 to 15 liters for 
the same surface area. Market gardeners replant chicory in the same beds where they sow their spring onions during the months of June and July; and as the 
chicory is removed six weeks after being planted, it does almost no harm to the spring onions, and they thus make a double harvest in the same land; those 
for whom the land is precious can practice the same thing. Cultivation of this plant is quite straightforward, and any kind of soil is suitable, provided 
it is well prepared: If the soil is hard, cover the bed with an inch of potting soil, wet it if necessary and weed it. There is no need to take any other 
precaution, as it sometimes wilts or is eaten by worms. Replanted spring onions are the best for seed, because they have more body, and their heads are 
larger and better nourished; consequently, you need to keep a bed of them in place, which you let grow in spring; when the stem is fully formed, it is 
supported either with running laths, or with stilts to which several nipples are tied together, and in the absence of laths and stilts, they are tied with 
the month of August when the seed begins to uncover and emerge from its lodge, We leave it to dry in the sun for a few days on a sheet, then rub it with 
our hands, winnow it and lock it up, but it's better to leave it in its stuffing until it's needed, as it keeps better there and lasts four years, whereas 
winnowed it's only good for two years; It differs from onions only in size, which is slightly smaller. Once the seed has been harvested, if you don't need 
the space, cut off the stalk and all the foliage at ground level. The plant sprouts new shoots and produces seed again the following year, sometimes even 
three years later; that's what I've found. The S. Jacques has an advantage over the common one, in that the worm does not get into it, and that one foot 
is as effective in food as twice the size of the other; it is also not subject to winterkill, whatever the severity of the weather; I'm referring to the 
foot of the plant, as its leaves dry up and disappear in August, and it's only in the following spring that it comes back to life; then you can see it 
grow at a glance, forming extraordinarily large tufts that supply abundantly, and which are later to go to seed than the other species: It is not 
cultivated differently from the first, except that there is only one season to sow it, which is spring. The apricot tree, too well known to be described 
here, offers a fairly large number of varieties. We shall mention the best and most widespread. 1. ABRICOTIX, or Early Apricot. In espaliers, it ripens at 
the end of June, and in July if grown in the open air. Small, rounded, yellow or reddish on the sunny side. Its flesh is musky and of rather mediocre 
quality, tending towards yellowish. Its kernel is bitter. This variety reproduces very well from stones, so it doesn't need to be grafted, and in this 
case the tree lasts a very long time. As its greatest merit lies in its earliness, it is customary to raise it in espaliers with warm exposure. 2. WHITE 
ABRICOT. It ripens a little later than the previous variety, i.e. at the beginning of July; it is about the same size, with whiter skin and flesh; the 
latter has a slight peach flavor, which makes it a little more pleasant. Its kernel is bitter. It does well in the open air, but prefers a warm espalier 
position. 3. ARRicor ANGOUMOIS. Ripens around July 15. It is smaller and usually more elongated than the previous variety. Its color is amber-yellow, more 
or less reddish and speckled with brown, depending on whether it has been more or less exposed to the sun during its development. The flesh is yellow to 
reddish, very aromatic, melting and pleasant, but a little acidic. Its kernel is very good and often double. 4. ABRiCOr COMMUR. Ripens at the same time as 
the previous variety. It is fairly large, reddish-yellow in color, and may be scabby on the light side, or even cracked if the year has been rainy. Its 
flesh is melting and quite good when grown in the open air, but becomes mushy if ripening is too advanced. Amaude amere. A vigorously vegetating tree, but 
rapidly thinning out. It is never espaliered, and as it reproduces identically from stones, it is often not grafted; in this case, it is much less robust, 
which is common in apricot trees. 5. HOLLAND ABRICOT, or filbert almond. Ripens at the end of July. Its fruit is small, reddish, yellowish, with a 
reddish-brown spot on the light side; its flesh is juicy, vinous, melting, quite pleasant, and its sweet almond has the taste of filbert, from which comes 
one of the names it bears in the trade. It does better in espaliers than in the open air. 6. ABRICOT DE PROVENCE. Ripens at the end of July. It is small, 
slightly compressed on the sides, yellowish, reddish on the light side; its flesh is juicy, quite full-bodied, but still a little dry in certain warm 
years, sweet, vinous. The stone is rough and the tart sweet. 7. ABRICOT DE PORTUGAL, or male apricot. Ripens around August 15. The flesh is yellow, 
melting, fragrant, with a very pleasant flavor. The tree is delicate and, in our climate, requires a warm espalier. 8. ABRICOT ALBERGE. Ripens around 
August 15. Its flesh is firm, fragrant, good and excellent for jam. Sweet almond. The tree grows quite tall, is very vigorous, and bears a large quantity 
of fruit, which sometimes degenerates. It reproduces its variety identically by sowing. There are three sub-varieties: Abricot de Montgamet, ripening a 
little later, larger, less round, with more melting flesh and the same perfume. Sweet almond. Abricot de Tours, ripening at the same time, larger, more 
fragrant, better quality. Amande douce. Apricot aveline, differing only slightly from Montgamet, from which it has the same quality. Sweet almond. 9. 
ABRICOT PÊCHE, or Nancy apricot. Ripens around August 15th; very large, compressed, more or less brownish-reddish-yellow, especially in high winds, and 
often becomes scabby on the light side if the season is rainy. The flesh is reddish, very melting, with a distinctive and very pleasant fragrance. A 
distinctive feature of this fruit is the hole in the stone through which a pin can easily be inserted. The tree is of average vigor, and its foliage is 
usually wilted. It has given rise to a large number of sub-varieties, because it always reproduces more or less well by sowing. 10. ABRICOT ROTAL. Ripens 
around mid-August. Slightly smaller than the previous variety, more rounded, yellowish, lightly colored, with melted, yellow, fragrant flesh, better than 
that of the peach apricot. The tree is very vigorous; it is remarkable for the size of its leaves and the length of their petiole. 11. AbRicor MUSCn. 
ripens at the end of July. It is almost round, with very thin, yellow skin, revealing the stone through the flesh, which is very delicate, fragrant and 
excellent. This variety requires a very warm espalier. 12. ApRIcor caos MUSCH. It ripens at the end of July. Its flesh, which does not adhere to the 
stone, is melting and fragrant; its kernel is sweet; the tree is more vigorous than the previous one. 13. ABRICOT NOIR Ou DU rAPX. (Prunus dasicarpa, by 
Willdenow.) Round, small, dark wine-red; flesh red and clinging to the pit; bland, very poor quality, except in extremely hot years. I have seen other new 
varieties obtained by Mr. Noiseite, such as the Apricot Vinux, the Apricot de Paris, etc., etc., but they are not as widespread as they should be. 
PRIMEUR. Apricot trees are only very rarely forced to grow in Paris, either because their fruit is not valued as highly here as it is in the north, since 
we have an abundance of them in season; or because we suspect difficulties in this operation which do not exist; or, finally, because this carelessness 
too often results in France in an uncertain sale which sometimes cannot compensate for the cost of cultivation. The apricot tree, so well naturalized in 
France, has not yet become so in northern Europe above the fiftieth degree of latitude, and particularly in Russia. It's no more than sixty years since 
the apricots eaten in St. Petersburg were brought there from Paris, and although care was taken to pack them a little before they were ripe and with 
meticulous care, it's easy to judge their condition after such a long journey. tried growing apricots in greenhouses. He succeeded perfectly, made his 
fortune, and only then stopped making a secret of his process. Until then, he convinced those who came to buy them from him at an exorbitant price that he 
was bringing them from Paris. Since then, Russia has harvested enough of these fruits to satisfy the consumption of wealthy people. When it comes to 
forcing an apricot tree, the variety is not indifferent; those that lend themselves most easily to this kind of cultivation are: the apricotin, the petit 
musch, the common apricot and its varieties named blanc-groszeespèce, commun hatif and blanc de Provence; the angoumois hatif, and some sub-varieties of 
the apricot-pêche. Nevertheless, the others could succeed in certain climates, given proper care.
