Souiree dal Eblothèque pat lonale de francs S°122 xise GUIDE PRATIOUE PII 8 . P. A. -. -. m--- A Gr--s-... JARDINIER FRANCAIS (L TRAITÉ COMPLET D'HORTICULTURE ..----- ☙ -- -- 3 gontonant. 1° TOUS LES DÉTAILS RELATIES AU JARDIN POTAGER, AU VERGER, A LA PÉPIVIÈRE, A LA GREFTE ET A LA TAILLE DES ARRRES FRUITILHS. CTE... 3° TUUS LES DÉTAILS RELATIPS AU PARTERRE, AU JARDIN POTAGER; A LA CULTURE DES ARBRES, ARRUSTES ET FLEURS D'ORXEMENT, RAXGÉS PAI ORDRE ALPHABÉTIQUE; 3° UN VOCARLLAIRE DES TERMES DE JARDINAGE, DES NOTIONS DE BOTANIOUL, ETC., ETC.. FAR. PH. DESMOULINS Vice-president of the Sociétès d'agriculture et d'horlicnhuge du cantou de l'Iste. Member of the Académie nationale, Sociaés centrales d'horticulture de France, de Pontoise, de l'iste-Adam. Prix d'honneur, médaille d'or, diplôme d'honnetr aux Expositions 1869-18:0 - 1873-1875, Médailles d'or et d'argent aux Espositions de Versailles, Saint-Germin en Laye. Pontoise, Curbeil, Sceaux, Étampes, Iste-A dam, Montmerency. - -. .. - TROISIÈME ÉDITION Revue, corrigée et augmentée PARIS LAPLACE, SANCHEZ ET Cle ÉDITEURS RUE SÉGUIER, 3 1881 -- - *3 GUIDE PRATIQUE DU JARDINIER FRANÇAIS 225 f ... - - " 2327-81. - CORBEIL, TVP. ET STÉR. CRÉTÉ. GUIDE PRATIOUE DU JARDINIER FRANCAIS OU TRAITÉ COMPLET D'HORTICULTURE contenant 1° TEUS LES DÉTAILS RELATIFS AU JARDIN POTAGER, AU VERGER, A LA PÉPINIÈRE, A LA GREFFE ET A LA TAILLE DES ARBRES FRUITIERS, ETC.; THE MAIN CEREAL, FORAGE, ECONOMIC AND MEDICINAL PLANTS; AZX PLANT DISEASES, HARMFUL INSECTS; 9° ALL DETAILS RELATING TO THE PARFERRE, THE VEGETABLE GARDEN; THE CULTIVATION OF ORNAMENTAL TREES, SHRUBS AND FLOWERS, ARRANGED IN === ALPHABETICAL ORDER; 3R A VOCABULARY OF GARDENING TERMS, BOTANICAL NOTIONS, ETC., ETC. BY H. DESMOULINS Vice-president of the Societés d'agriculture et d'horticulture du canton de l'Isle, Membre de l'Académie nationale, des Socie Tepifales d'horticulture de France, de Pontoise, de l'isle-Adam. Prix d'hanneur, ancdaille d'or, diplòme d'honneur aux Exposilions 1869-18 0 - 1873-1875 Medailles d'or et d'argent aux Expositions de Versailles, - Saint-Germaïn en Laye, Pontoise, Corbeil, Sceaux, Étampes, Isle-Adam, Montmerency. ... - TROISIÈME ÉDITION Revue, corrigée et augmentée PARIS LAPLACE, SANCHEZ ET Cie, ÉDITEURS RUE (CEGUIER, 3 Gathering together in one inexpensive, portable volume, neither too long nor too short, of easy reading for people who do not know even the first elements of horticulture; indicating the discoveries of our predecessors, simplifying them, making them intelligible to all, such is the twofold aim we set ourselves in publishing this Practical Guide to the French Gardener. The work is divided into two parts, each of which can be consulted separately. The first part deals with soil selection, fertilizers, plant propagation, plant diseases, insect pests, the cultivation of perennial vegetables, root vegetables, edible bulb vegetables, etc., etc., etc.; in short, everything that the market gardener and nursery gardener needs to know, and we have never demanded so much of them as we do today. For the sake of completeness, we've included a few more chapters on medicinal plants, economic plants and field plants, a subject rarely covered even in the largest and most expensive gardening treatises. The second part is devoted to flowers, ornamental trees and shrubs, greenhouses, landscape gardens and so on. The second part is devoted to ornamental trees and shrubs, greenhouses, landscape gardens, etc. It contains succinct descriptions and detailed cultivation procedures for around a thousand species of ornamental plants in the open ground, etc., etc.; very simple, very abbreviated notions of botany, which are nonetheless sufficient to explain the terms most commonly used in this science, which is graceful in itself, but so complicated and off-putting when bristling with barbaric or pedantic expressions. Drawing largely on the studies and discoveries of our predecessors, and, if we may say so, on the personal results of long experience, we have endeavored to make this second part the vade mecum, the indispensable guide for the French gardener. Numerous life-size figures are interspersed throughout the text. Tables by subject and alphabetical order help the reader to find the object of his research with as much certainty as promptitude; the man of the field as well as the city dweller, the novice gardener boy, the young child, will use this book without any difficulty, so simple is it in its general plan, clear in each of its chapters and paragraphs; we wanted to put it within everyone's reach, to make it, in a word, truly popular. May we succeed in inspiring others with our long-standing, but still passionate, love of beautiful and rare flowers, and our taste for the less noble, but more useful and positive products of the vegetable garden and orchard! FRENCH GARDENER PART ONE VEGETABLE GARDENER'S CALENDAR (1) January. - This month is devoted to clearing the ground, already begun in November and December; opening the pits, where Asparagus will be planted in March and April; transporting manure and fertilizers. If the weather is mild, you can remove the litter that covers Celery, Artichokes, etc.; sow small quantities of Marsh Beans and early Peas on sheltered, south-facing soil; towards the end of the month, sow Onions in light soil, but protect them from frost with litter. Renew the manures in your beds every two weeks, where you have already sown Cucumbers in December; renew the beds for Radishes, Raves and Salads; sow Gotte, Crêpe and other spring lettuces(1) See in the second part: Flower gardener's calendar, and the note at the bottom of the first page of this calendar. Romaine, Cresson alénois, Chicorée d'été; small white Radish from Holland, early purple and red ones, Carrots, Celery, Cauliflower; Melons, Cucumbers in small pots, from which you will remove the plant a fortnight later, to put it on a new bed. Sow tightly on a warm bed: Early beans, peas, broad beans; take from the ground and replant tightly, on a bed with panels: Tarragon, Sorrel, Parsley; sow York cabbage; continue to bed mushrooms in warm, barely lit greenhouses. Clean Cardoon, Celery, Cauliflower, Chicory, Carrots, Turnips and other roots still in greenhouses. Plant all tree species, except conifers, in dry soils, but postpone this operation until March or April, if your soils are cold and damp. If it doesn't freeze, start pruning the less vigorous apple and pear trees; prepare your stiles, trellis slats, etc.; prepare the branches and twigs for cuttings, which you will keep half-buried, by the large end, in fresh sand or light soil, sheltered from heavy frosts and the heat of the sun, until April, when they will be planted. You'll look after your pineapple greenhouse as you did the previous month, and if you have room for potted strawberries, they'll bear fruit from February onwards. The vegetable greenhouse offers: Cardoons, Cauliflower, Celery, Capuchin Beard, Curly Chicory, Carrots, Turnips, Beetroot, Potatoes, etc. Open ground provides : Leeks, Chives, Savoy cabbage, Brussels sprouts, Head cabbage, etc., Salsify, Scorzonera, Lamb's lettuce, Rapunzel, Parsley, etc. Layers yield : Cutting lettuce, Watercress, Tarragon, Parsley, Radish, Purslane, etc.; some small Asparagus. February. - Plough actively when the weather permits; sow in the first fortnight: Marsh beans, Early peas, Onions; in the second fortnight, on coasts: Carrots, Leeks, Spinach, Chervil, Sorrel, Parsnips, Burnet, Garlic, Shallots, etc., etc., etc. Reheat your layers; make new ones on which to transplant : Melons, Cucumbers, Lettuce, Romaine, Early cauliflower, Dwarf peas, Broad beans, Aubergines. Continue pruning apple, pear and grapevine trees; stock up on branches suitable for grafting; sow apple and pear seedlings, chestnut and horse chestnut seeds, etc. Clean your greenhouses and give them air whenever the weather permits. Vegetable greenhouses and open ground provide the same things as in January; Strawberries of the four seasons, forced under frames, give more abundant fruit. March. - Complete your ploughing; bury manure and fertilizer; sow Lettuce, Peas, Broad Beans and the other seeds indicated in the previous month; in addition: Bonne-Dame; plant Asparagus in strong, cold soil; sow in place or in nurseries. Bulbs and roots collected the previous year and which will bear seeds should be planted by hand: Beets, Turnips, Carrots, Onions, etc. Seedlings and plantings should be covered with a light mulch or a small layer of potting soil to protect them from sunburn and frost. On beds and in trays, plant the following plants: melons and cucumbers, fine Italian chicory, lettuces, cauliflowers, eggplants; sow lettuces and supplies, turnips, beans; plant asparagus stalks. Prune your espaliered fruit trees, except those with a lot of vigor and Peach trees; immediately tie up the branches; plow the base of the trees and spread a thick mulch. Sow pear and apple seedlings and tree and shrub seeds in the ground or in a terrine; you can also lay or butter Cognassier mothers and cuttings prepared in the previous month. Cuttings under cloches; tree stakes. The vegetable greenhouse now yields little more than: Beets, Carrots, Turnips, Potatoes; the open ground provides a little more abundantly: Wild Chicory, Chard, Chervil, Parsley, Sorrel, Spinach; the beds offer: Asparagus, Raves, Radishes, Cauliflower, Lettuce, etc. April. - As we no longer have to fear heavy frosts, sow abundantly in soft, light soil: Early turnips, Savoy and Brussels sprouts, Cardoon, Celery, Summer chicory, Beetroot, Cucumbers, Gherkins, etc. Ordinary layers are used only for Aubergines, Tomatoes, Melons and Cucumbers; muted layers for late-season Potatoes, Peppers and Melons. Nevertheless, for fear of the cold, water only in the morning and during the day. Prune vigorous fruit trees reserved until then, and Peach trees; remove useless buds. In the event of frost, cover espaliers exposed to direct sunlight with canvas or straw mats. Weed; destroy any caterpillar nests that may have escaped winter weeding. All grafting had to be done when the buds of the trees were elongating; some plants are cut under a bell and grafted on approach or otherwise. Boldly renew the air in your greenhouses, most of which can do without fire; take out the least delicate plants. Open ground and beds yield the same products as in the previous month, but in greater abundance: white onions, crambe, broccoli, asparagus, etc. May. - Redouble your efforts. In the first fortnight, plant large quantities of beans that you want to harvest dry, and sow from fortnight to fortnight those that will be eaten green; sow in the same way, but a little at a time: Broad Beans, Peas, Lettuce, Romaine, Chervil, Spinach, etc.; continue sowing from fortnight to fortnight.Continue sowing beets, carrots, cardoons, gherkins; large-ribbed cabbages, Brussels sprouts, turnips, early turnips, broccoli; put in bed-raised cardoons and celery, cabbages, gherkins, cucumbers, tomatoes, eggplants, etc. Mushroom stacks outdoors. Keep an eye on the branches of your fruit trees; immediately cut back fruit-bearing branches of Peach trees that have remained sterile onto replacement branches, to fortify the latter; destroy worms, bud cutters, etc. Stakes, ties; first hoeing. There is now an abundance of Asparagus, Broad Beans, Raves, Radishes, Celery for cutting, Chard, Pear, York Cabbage, etc., etc.; Artichokes, Strawberries, etc. The first flute and escutcheon grafts with growing eyes are made. June. - Same work as in May; make sure the garden is always stocked with in-season vegetables, and don't forget those that will produce later; sow for autumn: Cauliflower, Swede and Turnip cabbage, Carrots, Turnips, Broccoli, Celery, Scarole, Clamart peas, Beans, Black radish, etc. Weeding, hoeing, pinching and removing unnecessary buds. Grafting is carried out on all kinds of fruit trees. Great abundance of almost all the vegetables mentioned in the previous two months, plus: white celery, beef cabbage, white cabbage, tomatoes, etc.; strawberry, raspberry, some cherry and currant bushes; Myrobolan plum, petit muscatel and Amiré-Joannet pears. Frequent watering. July. - Continue with seedlings and plantings that will produce fruit in less than four months, such as: Beans to eat green, Peas and Broad beans, Black radishes, Autumn cauliflowers, Broccoli, Turnips, Salads, etc.; Chives for winter. Scarole and Chicory are blanched; Celery is milled every two weeks; onions intended for preservation have their stalks twisted; Garlic and Shallots are plucked as soon as the tops are dry. Trim; pinch; uncover fruit over-shadowed by leaves; disbud to form cattails; rake. Graft into buds with growing or dormant eyes. Destroy snails and earwigs. Abundance of all kinds of vegetables; Tetragonia replaces Spinach; there are already early potatoes. - Strawberries, melons, figs, apricots, blackcurrants, redcurrants, gooseberries; raspberries, cherries, guignes; early peaches; Tours plums, early Monsieur, early Royale, etc.; pears: Madeleine, Épargne, Muscat Robert, early Rousselet; apples: Calville. Frequent watering. August. - Harvest seeds for sowing; continue planting everything that will be eaten in the current year, or will overwinter, to give its produce the following year; sow Beans to eat green; Scarole, Chicory, Curly Lamb's lettuce, Tetragona, Spinach, Salsify, Scorsonera, Raves, Radishes, Turnips, Carrots, York cabbage, Beefheart cabbage. Cabbage, etc. New Strawberry plants need to be planted, and borders of Sorrel, Hyssop, Tarragon, Lavender, etc. need to be replanted. A little manure or guano put at the foot of the cauliflowers, which have already been stubbed out, activates their vegetation. Cut off the onion tops and trim the artichoke stems that no longer produce. Mushrooms in the open air. In August, grafting is carried out on well-arched wood. Fruit trees need to be trellised, ripe fruit carefully uncovered, disbudded and staked. Artichokes planted in spring are in full report. We have : Four-season strawberries, cherries, sour cherries, apricots, peaches, almonds, figs, green walnuts, Reine-Claude; Astracan apples, Passe-Pomme apples, summer Rambour apples; melons, etc., etc... Frequent watering. September. - Sow and plant everything that will be consumed before the frosts: Raves, Radishes, Salads; sow: 1° for autumn and winter: Chervil, Spinach, Turnips, Lamb's lettuce; 2° for the following year: Passion lettuce, York sprouts, cabbage, etc., which you'll take care to transplant on the coast or in a nursery and on the first layers of December. Stuff the Cardes-Poirées, to blanch them, and hoe the Celery. There is little to do in the orchard; nevertheless, the most vigorous branches of the Peach trees need to be pinched and trellised, fruits too well hidden by leaves need to be uncovered, the nursery needs a final weeding, subjects whose sap was too strong in the previous month need to be grafted, and the most beautiful bunches of Chasselas need to be protected with horsehair or paper bags against birds, flies and early frosts. We have lots of vegetables, lots of fruit: Strawberries of the four seasons, Northern cherries, Autumn figs; excellent Peaches: Madeleine de Courson, Bourdine, Brugnon, Admirable, Royale, Grosse violette; Grapes: Chasselas, Muscat; Plums: Reine-Claude violette, Prune de Jérusalem, Damas de septembre, Surpasse-Monsieur, Sainte-Catherine, Dame Aubert, Couetsche; Pears: Bon-Chrétien d'été, Bergamote d'été, Gros Rousselet, Doyenné, Beurré gris, Beurré d'Angleterre; Apples: Belle d'août, Reinette jaune hâtive. Watering should be moderate. October. - In the first fortnight, you will renew the Artichoke plant, which has already given you two harvests; you will sow Pancake Lettuce and Romaine, which will have to be replanted on beds in November and December; on the spot you should only sow, and only if the weather is favorable, Spinach, Chervil and Lamb's lettuce, the produce of which you will have in March. Transplant white onions, York cabbage and other cabbages sown in August; Passion lettuce. At the end of the month, cut the Asparagus stalks, smoke and plough around these plants; ridge them a little later and give them a cover against frosts; cut the late Artichoke uprights, and do a little ploughing around the stalks to wait for the November ridging; harvest potatoes, leaving their roots to dry out in the sun around mid-day; then put them in a healthy place, away from cold and damp; pull potatoes when their leaves wilt; tend and cover beans, and butter the last celery plants. Don't forget, either, to prepare your manure supplies; destroy the old beds, whose unconsumed manure will provide mulch or be buried as fertilizer; sow the lettuces you intend to use for your February-March coasts on 1. old beds or under cloches. Pick winter fruit on a dry day. Keep the greenhouse temperature at a suitable level. November. - In this month and the next two, transplant York sprouts, Beef hearts, Brussels sprouts and Cauliflowers (frame or straw mats for the latter). If frost threatens, pull up carrots, turnips, beet, black radish, chicory, scarole, cardoon, celery, etc., and bring them into your vegetable greenhouse; cover artichokes and other vegetables left in place with leaves or litter. Sow on the old beds, under cloches or frames: Lettuce, Romaine, Early Radishes, Cauliflowers, Cucumbers, etc., etc.; Four Seasons Strawberries will continue to bear fruit if you protect them with frames. You can already prune weak or old seed trees, and remove dead trees. Fig trees and other trees and shrubs that are too sensitive to the cold of our northern climate should be wrapped in straw. Vegetables from the previous month are still plentiful, as are fruits such as Strawberries of the Four Seasons, Chasselas, Crassane Pears, Martin-Sec, Duchesse d'Angoulême, Chaumontel, Sylvange, Beurré d'Aremberg, etc.; Reinette apples from Canada, etc. Watch greenhouse temperature. December. - This month, the gardener is mainly occupied with breaking up the soil, ploughing with a spade, and transporting manure. He should not forget to repair his tools, buy boxes and frames, clean the seeds, etc., etc. He will still be sowing Michaux Peas in the open ground; in the greenhouse, he will be transplanting: Lettuces gotte, Romaines; he will sow : Cucumbers, Melons; he will plant Asparagus on beds every fortnight. If the frosts are not too severe, the gardener will prune the less vigorous apple and pear trees. The pineapple greenhouse and the warm greenhouse should be kept at -10 and 20 degrees Celsius, with fresh air and careful watering. For the temperate greenhouse and orangery, it's enough if the thermometer doesn't fall below zero, and if the sun wants to produce - 5 to 10, it's welcome. Cover greenhouses at night. WEATHER PRONOSTICS Old proverbs, the fruit of experience, should not be disdained. When swallows frequently skim the surface of land and water, when crows caw from tree tops, when lamp oil fizzles and the wick foams, it's often a sign of rain. If the stars shine brightly in the depths of a clear sky, if the fog falls and promptly settles to the ground, the weather is likely to be fine. If the sun sets behind a fiery cloud, it means wind for the night; if it hides in a blue or red mass, fear rain or wind; if it rises or sets radiant and cloudless, rejoice: it's almost certain that you'll have fine days. Yellowish-white clouds bring hail with them. Meteorology (the part of general physics dealing with atmospheric phenomena, their causes and effects) is more precise than popular tradition; it tells us, for the climate of Paris, that: 1° Rain and fine weather follow each other at short, frequent intervals in spring; in summer, the atmosphere is less changeable; showers are very common in autumn, but long-lasting rain is less frequent than in spring. 2° The wind that prevails in the first month of each equinox generally prevails for six months of the year; this is why, in some countries, it is said that, if it rains on Palm Sunday, . = 2 "1" 2 -4. . - E. 7- WEATHER PREDICTIONS. it will rain at harvest time. In Paris, if the wind begins to blow from the south, it will generally turn in the same direction around the compass rose, i.e. it will blow west, then north, then east, then back south and so on. Southwest winds are generally warm, rainy and humid; northwest winds are generally cold, bringing clouds but rarely rain. The wet autumn and temperate winter herald a cold, dry spring. If summer is rainy, winter will be harsh. If the barometer falls, you can expect rain; if it rises slowly and steadily, it generally indicates fine weather; if the mercury falls very quickly, it heralds a violent wind and squalls whose end you will learn from the rain; hence the saying: "Little rain brings big wind". Amendments. - Irrigation. Even slightly mediocre soil should always be preferred, but it should be deep and therefore easily amenable to gardening improvements, rather than soil that is better on the surface, but shallow. If you have a choice between several sloping plots, take the one facing east or south, even if it's inferior in quality to the one facing north or west; first make sure you'll be able to get water by digging wells of ordinary depth. If the soil is calcareous, it will yield in the wild: several species of Speedwell, Gallium, Sainfoin, Barberry, Viorne, Clematis, Pulsatilla Anemone; - if it is clayey, it will yield: Rush, Argentine, Coltsfoot, Saponaria; - if it is siliceous: Arearia, Viper's Bugloss, Spergula, etc. Strong or clayey earth is always soft to the touch; fired, it produces a tight, consistent brick. Iron oxide gives the soil a yellow-red color; if there are too many metal oxides, vegetation will be thin. Taste indicates the presence of salt. If the soil contains a lot of sulfur, it will release its vapors when burned on a red iron. Fire can also be used to determine the quantity of decomposing plant or animal substances contained in the earth, which essentially constitute its richness. Does a lump of this soil, when subjected to red heat, give off a gravelly smell as it burns? You can conclude from this that it contained a lot of animal matter. Fertilizers are divided into plant fertilizers and animal fertilizers. To make the former, fresh plants of all kinds must be collected and buried before the open air has robbed them of their natural moisture. Of all the fertilizers based on animal substances, the strongest and most energetic is animal black, which is wrongly thought to be good only for large-scale cultivation; use it with care in cold, clayey soils, and it will give great vigor to crucifers and root vegetables without imparting a bad taste. Stable manure can replace all other manures; it is very good for building layers; it will ferment more or less depending on whether you keep it wet or dry. Less esteemed than the previous one, as it is less active, stable manure is suitable for gypsum, sandy and calcareous soils, which are too light and very easy to heat up. Sheepfold manure mixed with stable manure is very hot. Pigeon droppings, pig manure and liquid fertilizers should also be used, although the latter should only be used to hasten the decomposition of plant debris because of their stench. The best potting soil is obtained by fermenting horned beast excrement under the soil for a whole year; it will be black, even in all its parts, soft to the touch and odorless. Common loam is the product of the complete decomposition of manure. There is also simple vegetable loam, usually made from the leaves used to build the layers. Compost is the mixture of various soils and fertilizers in proportions most suited to the cultivation of a given species of plant. For example, orange-tree soil is free-range soil with the addition of a quarter or a third of leaf compost and fatty manure or good heather soil. Dummy heather soil is made up of a mixture of half silica sand and vegetable loam, or three parts black loam from decomposed gorse and one part pure sand. Manure water, or bouillon, is obtained as follows. In a pit a few meters wide, Om.80 to one meter deep, walled in at the sides and perforated at the bottom, pour rainwater through a bung onto a compact mass of cow and horse manure from the stable; after a fortnight, drain off the liquid part. This broth restores vigor and beauty to ailing plants, and greenness to orange trees; use sparingly. Mineral substances that do not nourish plants, but modify the soil to advantage, are called soil improvers: sand, lime, marl, plaster, added earth; add ashes and soot. For gardening, marl should be mixed with equal parts of good soil; it's a good idea to spread a little every four years in the vegetable garden, if the soil is not too chalky or too light. In the coldest soil, no more than 25 to 30 liters of lime per acre should be used for initial liming, and as a maintenance dose, no more than 12 to 15 liters for the same surface area. Soot destroys insects; it should be diluted in water and sprinkled with great care. Ashes and charrée (ashes that have already been used to pour lye) are suitable for plants that don't like greasy manures; deposit ashes in small quantities at the same time as the grains. Trrigation. - Rainwater, especially when it has been laden with a greater or lesser quantity of organic matter as it flows over the soil, is rightly considered the best water for irrigation. Natural irrigation consists in dividing the vegetable garden into narrow planks, with the soil raised on both edges and a little dug in the middle, forming a gutter to receive the water. Hand-watering tools include: ordinary watering cans, the flat-sided watering can, the English watering can; continuous-spray syringes and the ordinary hand pump, the Dietz pump, and so on. Plants with soft or hairy leaves, strawberries, lettuces, melons, etc., like to be watered in the rain; in general, plants need more water in the first period of their vegetation than when the seeds and fruit begin to form; you should water more frequently plants grown for their stems and leaves (vegetables, forage), than those grown for their flowers or fruit. In summer, water your plants in the morning and evening; in spring and autumn, in the morning only; if you water in full sun, make sure your water temperature is as high as that of the plants. Well water, which is generally very bad for watering, loses some of its crudeness if it is agitated a lot and for a long time in the air before use. Spring water is often too cold and needs to be exposed to the air before use; stagnant water too often breeds moss and turns lawns yellow. The best running waters are river waters. Gardening tools and utensils. - Shelters for conserving plants: Frames, Layers, Greenhouses, Orangeries, Planters, Apartment greenhouses, etc. The spade is the gardener's main, indispensable tool. Its weight and handle length must be appropriate for the person using it. It must also be proportionate to the thickness of the plant layer. For good ordinary soil, neither too strong nor too light, we recommend the common flat-iron spade, slightly narrower at the bottom edge than at the top. For hard, stony subsoil, we recommend the curved-edge spade; instead of a straight edge, the cutting edge describes a curve with two points at the ends. The Flemish spade, slightly curved towards the middle of its length, holds back light soil that would otherwise fall back crumbled and badly turned. The pickaxe is used to make holes, to uproot trees, and to break up compacted soil that is difficult to break up with the spade. If this is not enough, a pick is used, which differs from the pickaxe in the strength and length of its thick, narrow blade, and in its very penetrating point. The hoe works more superficially, but also more quickly than the spade; it is used for ploughing at the foot of trees or in nurseries, for mounding potatoes, etc. The ordinary hoe has a carved blade. The ordinary hoe has a square blade, slightly curved on the inside, with a short handle, which forces the worker to work bent over, moving straight ahead; when working with a spade, he walks backwards. To break up hard, dry soil, we use a hoe with a 41 Fig. 1 - Hoe. triangular blade. Potatoes and other root vegetables are dug up using a hoe with two flat teeth of varying length. After the spade, the hoe is the most widely used gardening tool. Its blade, much lighter and narrower than that of the hoe, is used to make holes for sowing beans, buttering certain plants, planting potatoes and so on. The second method is called hoeing. The serfouette differs from the hoe in that it has a narrower blade; the forked serfouette has two tines forming a fork on the opposite side to the blade; it is used to bury soil around small flowerbeds, to pull up bindweed, quackgrass roots, etc., etc., etc. The disbudder, either hand-held or attached to a stick of varying length, is used to cut buds and twigs from tree trunks; the Fig. 2. - Disbudders. three forms indicated above are the most advantageous. The weeder, whose use is indicated by its very name, is used to break the hardened crusts that form around plants during drought, and to remove weeds. The blunter is a kind of scraper used to clear the trunks and branches of fruit trees of parasitic plants such as mosses and lichens. The rake is also used to clear paths of weeds, by cutting the roots below the collar. The tracing tool is a wooden instrument used to mark out radii on the ground for planting and sowing. Imagine a kind of compass with a stationary branch in the middle, and two outer branches that can be moved on hinges, but whose spacing can be controlled at will by means of pegs and corresponding holes drilled in a curved piece of wood. Forks and rakes are well known to everyone; suffice it to say, with regard to the latter, that they must be of different sizes, with C A 2 Fig. 3. - Planters. tines more or less spaced, well forged and pointed, so as to adapt to all the ways in which the garden is laid out, and to the spacing of the plants. The planter is made from a piece of hard wood with one end rounded and slightly pointed; the other end, curved and forming a more or less obtuse angle, provides a convenient grip for the hand. The simplest is a small, trowel-shaped spade, which is used to gently remove the plant, which is then placed in the hole prepared for it; other transplanters have blades bent into half and three-quarter circles, and others form a complete cylinder. Wooden shovels must have a strip of sheet metal lining the bottom of the flat part; iron shovels with curved, slightly concave blades are also used. Scissors of different sizes should be made of good steel, with a stag-horn handle that retains its roughness and is blackened, and with a wide, protruding edge, so that the instrument remains firm in the hand; Rouen scissors have a well-deserved reputation. Among the main grafting tools we'll mention the ordinary grafting tool, whose handle is fitted at its base with a spatula-shaped piece of ivory used to lift the bark; the blade folds back like that of a knife. The grafting tool has a retracting blade or a sliding blade with a spatula; the metro-grafting tool uses a pressure screw to measure the depth of the graft; the grafting tool is used for slit grafting, the hazelnut grafting tool is used for Pontoise grafting; the grafting tool-shears is used for ring grafting. Pruning shears are available in a range of sizes; when using this instrument, care must be taken to turn the sharp blade away from, and not towards, the branch to be cut; the pruning shear is preferred for large branches. The sickle should have a sharp cutting edge and a very thick back. Saws should always be able to work between the branches of bushy trees; the rough work done by the saw is completed with the pruning shears. Crescents, loppers and pruners are used for pruning and trimming large trees; they must be attached Fig. 4. - Loppers. firmly to their handles, which are several meters long. The pruning shear is a scissor-shaped instrument fitted at the end of a long handle to reach the highest branches easily; it is set in motion by pulling one of the blades with a string; a sort of net, attached below, catches the cut part. Towards the end of winter, before the eggs have hatched, the weeding must be done. Shears are large, strong scissors, armed with two sturdy handles, used for pruning young shrubs, palisades of greenery, hedges and so on. The cast-iron, wooden or stone roller consists of a hollow or solid cylinder, fitted with a handle, which the gardener pushes in front of him; the hollow cylinder is made more or less heavy by loading its inner part to a greater or lesser extent. The claie is used to sift the soil, compost and compost needed for cultivation; clâies with iron rods are more ~ ~ ~ Fig. 5. - Echenilloir. solid and provide better service than clâies with wooden rods. The trowel, fairly well defined by its name, is used to place the soil in the pots, and to open the holes where the pots will be placed. The cueille-fruit or cueilloir, carried on a long handle, is used to pick, without damaging them, fruit placed beyond the reach of the arm. Shelters are used to protect plants from the cold, strong winds and excessive sunlight. Let's list the main types of shelter. An ados is an elevation of earth in the shape of the back of a hut, wider at the bottom than at the top, generally leaning against a wall at the top, facing south, with a slope of Om, 32 or so; ados provides early crops, and makes them grow faster than on horizontal ground: lettuces, Raves, four-season French peas, etc. Stone walls are the best of all shelters for fruit trees; white walls reflect the sun's heat, black walls absorb it; on the south side, they hasten the ripening of fruit and vegetables and protect frigid trees from the cold; on the north side, they defend plants in cold countries from too much sun. In the absence of stones, plank walls of roughly the same height (2.50 m) are built and, to make them durable, coated with tar. Two rows of Jerusalem artichokes, with their rapid growth and abundant foliage, make excellent windbreaks for cold and temperate greenhouse plants that spend the summer outdoors; for seedlings that fear drought, and so on. Movable canopies, made of planks or straw, placed over espaliers, protect them from late spring frosts; for the same purpose, mulch or canvas is spread in front of flowering trees; greenhouses and frames are covered with it to break the sun's rays in summer and to cushion the impact of hailstones. Mulch is a layer of short litter or half-consumed manure, used from March onwards to retain water from rainfall and watering; to smother the seeds of certain weeds; to prevent the soil from cracking, drying out and hardening; and to protect delicate plants from spring frosts. Glass cloches are laid flat on the ground when the plants they are designed to shelter can do without air. If the heat is too great, or if the nights are cold, these cloches are covered with a bit of long straw or heavy canvas; if the temperature is mild, the cloches can be raised a little on the south side. Verrines are glass compartments joined together by lead strips; they have one or two small windows on their facets, which can be opened at will to give air to the plants thus enclosed; verrines are very useful, but expensive. Cages are closed or open cylinders made of wicker, with pointed feet that are sunk into the ground. This type of shelter provides certain plants with the amount of light they can withstand during their early development, and protects them from animals. Counter-sunshades (against the sun) are halves of flower pots, cut lengthwise, which are placed in front of a young plant to shelter it from heat and wind; they are mainly used for cucumbers, gherkins, pumpkins and other cucurbits. The box is usually made of wood and varies in length from 1.30 to 4 meters, with a width of only one meter when it is to contain a warm layer; you can make it 1.30 meters wide for warm or dull layers. The back of the box is always higher than the front, to give the panel a greater or lesser slope. Air is supplied from behind or in front by lifting the panels with a rack, sliding them gently backwards, forwards or sideways. Overlapping panes of glass must be both very transparent and fairly thick. The box rests on the ground, and even sinks a few centimetres into it, when the artificial heat is produced by fermenting manure; if a thermosiphon is used, the box rests on a 2 wooden floor, under which the pipes of the appliance pass; an outer covering of hot manure hastens or forces the plants contained in the box; a simple bedding of dry leaves protects them from the cold. Each mobile frame is fitted with two iron handles. The fixed frame, 2.10 to 2.80 m high at the back and Om.70 at the front, is a kind of small greenhouse, in which we place, planted in pots, full-ground shrubs, simply to preserve them from the cold, or to force them: in the first case, an outer cover of dry leaves or slats is sufficient; in the second, a manure stove renewed every 15 or 20 days is needed; a deaf layer is established inside, where the pipes of a thermosiphon are laid under the boards supporting the soil. For the construction of mobile or fixed frames, oak wood is rightly preferred, tarred on the inside and oil-painted on the outside. On economical white wooden frames, the glass panes are replaced by linseed oil-coated canvas or paper. The layers are made of manure, either on its own or mixed with dead leaves, moss, etc., which can heat up and carry the heat it gives off for varying lengths of time. The layers do not feed the plants directly, but must be covered with a more or less thick bed of potting soil or garden soil, combined in various proportions. They need to be protected by natural or artificial shelter from northerly winds, and placed on dry rather than damp soil. For warm layers, we use horse manure in all its fermentation stage, fresh from the stable, well mixed and well watered. This manure has the advantage over all others of interrupting fermentation when dry, and resuming it as soon as it is watered. Recent manure stoves or belts maintain or restore heat to these layers, whose length is indeterminate, whose width varies from Om, 80 to 1m, 30, and whose height from Om, 80 to one meter. The same dimensions, or more or less, are observed for warm layers built with a mixture of horse manure, cow manure and leaves; for deaf layers built, if you like, with the same materials as the previous ones, and having the distinctive character of being established in trenches of Om, 30, and of being domed on top. You will notice, moreover, that the muted layers retain their heat for a long time, but cannot be renewed with the help of stoves; it is nevertheless a good idea to line the paths separating these layers with a thick layer of dry, hot manure. As a general rule, to build up a layer properly, you need to mix the manures well, spread them out in equal bunches, tamp them down, strike the entire surface with the back of the fork, and clearly determine the vertical edges. Some gardeners build up their layers in large manure beds superimposed lengthwise and widthwise; others prefer, with good reason, to build up one end of the layer immediately to the desired height, and continue in this way to the other end, working backwards. It's better to wet manure before placement than afterwards. In tarpaulins and hot greenhouses, layers are made with tannin. Mushroom beds, finished in the shape of a roof, are made in dark, draught-free cellars or storerooms, with donkey, horse or mule dung well soaked in the urine of these animals; these beds produce on their own; otherwise, they must be lined with fragments of mushroom spawn arranged in a chessboard at Om, 16 from each other and flush with the surface, or with very small pieces of young fresh mushrooms picked and laid in fresh water. They are usually built of masonry, with the floor lower by Om, 50 to Om,60 than the outside floor; they are high enough inside for a man of average height to be able to stand on them everywhere; they are heated by means of furnaces, the openings of which are arranged in such a way that the smoke cannot harm the pineapples, Cape bulbous plants, vines, heathers, etc., which they usually contain. The glazing, hinged to the back wall, lifts from the front throughout the summer, night and day, except in rainy weather; tarpaulins and mats are used to protect against excessive heat and frost; a thick layer of river sand or even clinker protects the bottom from insects. The orangery differs from the greenhouse proper in that it has no glazed roof, is built entirely of masonry, and has large windows on the south side; the plants receive light from one side only, so this type of building should not be too deep; the temperature in the orangery must never fall below zero in winter, and to obtain this result, a permanent heating appliance is not necessary, so a stove is all that's needed. The cold greenhouse, with one or two slopes and a flat or domed surface, is used to house plants that naturally suspend their growth in winter without losing their leaves, or that continue to live as they would in their native country where winter is unknown: Camellias, Pelargoniums, Calceolaria, Indian Azaleas, Magnolias, etc. As in the orangery, it's enough that it doesn't freeze in the cold greenhouse; the Dutch greenhouse and the Flemish greenhouse differ little from the ordinary cold greenhouse: covers and straw mats protect against frost and the excessive action of the sun's rays. The winter garden, which has become very fashionable in recent years, is a two-sided greenhouse with walkways and a pond. The temperate greenhouse is the most useful of all greenhouses; if it weren't so expensive to build, it would have long since replaced all the orangeries built at such great expense over the last two centuries. It is made with one or two sides, and is preferably heated by a thermosiphon. This device consists of a hermetically sealed boiler under which fire is lit at will; cast-iron or copper pipes start from the boiler and, after describing more or less long convolutions in the greenhouse, return to the boiler at a point on its lateral surface lower than their point of departure; in this way, ascending currents of hot water and descending currents of cold water are established until the temperature of the entire contents of the boiler is perfectly balanced. The boiler and furnace are usually placed outside the greenhouse in an insulated compartment, such as a cellar. Large, temperate, double-sided greenhouses are topped by a gallery designed to facilitate the maneuvering of canvas and mats. Hinged windows that can be opened and closed at will allow hot air to escape from inside, but cold air from outside is introduced with extreme care, through pipes that are pressed against the thermosiphon pipes and receive some of its heat. The water used to water plants grown in temperate greenhouses must be maintained at the greenhouse temperature of -6 to 20. At night, the temperature should not exceed -6 to 10 degrees, to allow the vegetation to cool down a little. The construction, heating and ventilation of the hot greenhouse are the same as for the temperate greenhouse; the heat is brought up to - 30 and 40 degrees centigrade; the atmosphere should be as dry as possible and maintained at - 15 during the resting period; humidity is needed during the vegetation period, with frequent watering of the soil and foliage. Leorchids and aroids require a lot of humidity. In order 2. to provide each series of plants with the right temperature, the hot greenhouse is often divided by glass partitions, and the inside temperature of each compartment is varied as desired. The forcing greenhouse, designed to hasten the ripening of grapes, peaches and the flowering of ornamental plants, etc., is a temperate or hot greenhouse, more or less narrow and more or less long. The propagation greenhouse is a cold greenhouse, usually facing north or sunset, to protect greenhouse plants propagated by grafting or cuttings from the direct action of the sun's rays. We call mobile greenhouses long panels of glazed frames, leaning against an espalier wall, more or less inclined, heated by a stove with large pipes, or by a thermosiphon, finally well caulked. These types of greenhouse can be used to force Fig, Peach and other espaliered fruit trees to grow. The apartment greenhouse is a miniature greenhouse with a water tank underneath, heated by a spirit-of-wine or ordinary oil lamp. The aquarium is a kind of greenhouse, generally vaulted, and almost entirely occupied by a basin full of water maintained at the temperature required by beautiful tropical plants, such as Victoria regia, Nelumbo, etc., etc.; a flowerbed is laid out around it for foreign ornamental plants, eager for an atmosphere that is both warm and humid. The apartment aquarium is a device supported by copper columns, through one of which passes a lead pipe designed to carry the water, while another of these columns allows the overflow from the basin to escape through a small hole, creating a continuous flow of liquid. This kind of aquarium is a little expensive; here are two others, much simpler and moreover very sufficient for raising the plants in our streams and ponds -- Figs. 6 and 7. - Apartment aquariums. If the aquarium is supplied with fresh water, you can grow sticklebacks, very interesting fish to study, and pond shells, etc., in the midst of many aquatic plants; if it is supplied with seawater, with a bottom lined with pebbles, flat stones, rockeries, etc., you can have, in addition to the algae, a wide variety of other plants, such as the mollusks, the mosses and the mosses, In addition to seaweed, zostera, kelp, etc., you can also have seahorses (horsehead fish) and other small fish with curious habits, shellfish, etc.; we recommend placing these kinds of aquariums near well-lit windows. Floral hanging baskets, a kind of lamp-post suspended from the ceiling, are used to grow a number of hardy orchids in peat soil mixed with a little heather and covered with a bed of damp moss: Burlingtonia candida, with translucent white flowers and a yellow band; Zigopetalum, with green flowers marbled with brown; Stanthopea, with tiger flowers; Oncidum butterfly, so named because its shape is reminiscent of this insect; OErides; and still other plants: Achimenes, with long blue flowers and a white center; Flagelliform Cactus, with numerous superb red flowers; Serpentine Cactus, with pinkish-blue flowers and cylindrical stems reminiscent of a snake's coils; the hybrid Petunia with violet flowers; the Saxifrage sarmenteuse with pink flowers mixed with white and yellow; the Torénie asiatique and the Torénie magnifique; Capillaries, Sedums, Pelargonium with ivy leaves and pink flowers, white or scarlet Crassules, etc..., etc. In window boxes well filled with light but substantial soil, with a bed of fine pebbles, on a zinc base, you can easily grow the little daisy, the cute Saxifrage; even more often, you can place ready-made plants, bought in pots, such as; Camellias, Crocus, Bulbocode, Perce-Neige, Jacinthe, Hellébore (Christmas Rose), Helléborine, Violette: JANUARYFEBRUARY. - Dielytra remarquable, Adonide, Saxifrage de Sibérie, Hôteia du Japon, Tritélée uniflore, Ficoïde tricolore, Narcisse de Constantinople, Fritillaire méléagre: MARCH. - Auriculas, Scillas, Muscaris odorants; varieties of Narcissus; Silenus, Epimedium, Double daisies in APRIL. - Anemone varieties, Eucharidium, Gilia, Giroselle de Virginie, Oxalides, Némophiles, Adonide d'été, Lychnides, Œillet mignardise, Œillet d'Espagne, Saxifrage ombreuse, Renoncule des fleuristes, Glaïeuls hâtifs, etc., in MAY. - Cupidone bleue, Ephémère de Virginie, Amaranthe, numerous Pelargoniums, Érine des Alpes, Bermudienne, Calandrine, Chrysanthème caréné, Cinéraire maritime, Amaryllis, Lis, Campanulas, Lobélies, Œnothères, etc., etc., in JuiN. - Madagascar periwinkle, some small Phlox, Achimenes, Lupins, Crassule, Myrthe, Heather, Lantanas, dwarf orange trees, etc., etc., etc. But if you want your plants to remain vigorous, you need to expose them to as much light as possible, give them air, even in winter, as soon as the atmosphere outside is warm enough; remove dust from their leaves using a feather duster, a wet cloth or a watering can with very fine holes; for this watering, which should be done in the evening rather than the morning, you should use rainwater or river water in preference to any other water, and after cooling it down a little. Plants that are fat or have tough, glossy leaves can go a long time without water; plants with tender foliage suffer and die quickly from drought: 1° place them so that the base of the bulb rests on the rim of the decanter, and so that the tray and the roots emerging from it are completely immersed in the water; 2° give them air and light, without exposing them to too much heat; 3° change all or part of the water from time to time, but keep the decanter quite full; you can throw in a few grains of cooking salt to prevent the liquid from corrupting. When the roots are well developed and the buds are showing, the need for bright light diminishes and the onions can be placed back on the mantelpiece or on the furniture inside the apartment. This is how we care for Ornithogales, Amaryllis, Crocus, Hyacinths, Narcissus, Italian and Siberian Scillas, etc., etc., etc. Plants that require moderate heat and fear frost can be raised on double-framed windows; window greenhouses can be heated by hot-water basins with pipes, small thermosiphons, etc., etc. In good exposure, in the open air, often on balconies: Sweet peas, Nasturtiums, Ivy, Reseda, etc., etc. (1). (1) Flowers should never be kept in the bedroom at night. Means of plant propagation. - Sowing - Budding and Marcottage. - Cutting. - Grafting. - Crossbreeding. - Hybridization. The main aim of all horticulture is the multipli. cation of plants. Plants multiply by seed in their primitive, natural state; but we need to resort to artificial means in our cultivation. At the same time as sowing is the surest way of obtaining robust, fast-growing individuals, it also produces very curious varieties; roots, stems and branches perpetuate plants without alteration. Take well-ripened seeds, which you can tell by weight, color and inspection of the internal organs, which must be complete; not too old, with no wrinkles or alterations. The best way to preserve seeds is to enclose them in canvas bags of varying thickness, once they have been cleaned of all moisture. Large seeds with hard bark can be sown deeply; a thin layer of soil or pulverized compost is enough to cover the other fine seeds; the smallest seeds will even germinate without being buried; seeds with bumps, membranes or hairs should be rubbed between the hands for a few moments and mixed with ash or dust, to prevent them from attaching to each other. We hasten the germination of stone seeds (cherry, plum) and seeds with very hard skins by stratification, i.e. we hold these seeds for varying lengths of time in pots filled with soil or sand moist enough to ferment due to the action of the soil's heat, into which we push them at Om, 30 or Om, 40, at midday exposure, after which, the germ having developed, we sow in rows or broadcast. Seeds produce more hairs in soft, light soil than in heavy soil. Broadcast sowing. - This involves spreading the seeds as evenly as possible by throwing them with the hand from a distance. - Sowing in packets or pots. Holes are made at a greater or lesser distance depending on the species of plant, which is first surrounded with some of the soil removed, and then lightly tilled. - Sowing in terrines and pots. If the plants are very water-loving, there's no need to pierce the pots, which should be immersed up to a quarter of their height in the liquid, which gradually seeps through the walls, moistening the young roots sufficiently. Pierced pots or terrines should be lined with coarse sand to facilitate water drainage. - Ray sowing. Draw the rays with a chalk line, give them a depth of about Om, 03 to Om, 06; sow and cover the seed with the soil first raised. - Sowing in nurseries. Pips and seeds are broadcast and should be buried Om, 03 deep; pits are placed one by one, at a suitable distance, in Om, 06 holes. Mulch or leaves permanently against frost until spring. - Sowing on a bed. All seeds too delicate to be planted in the ground are planted in a bed or bell. Transplanting is any transplanting that is not permanent. Tubers are roots, underground stems or branches of underground stems of various shapes; separated and placed in the ground, they form new plants: Dahlia, Cyclamen, Potato, Jerusalem artichoke, etc. Each tuber eye produces true roots, stems, complete individuals in a word. If you cut large tubers into as many parts as there are eyes, each of these parts will produce a new plant. The stalks and bulblets should not be detached until they are ripe, which you can see by the complete desiccation of the leaves in whose axils these little bodies are born. Carnations are the rooted shoots that appear at the collar or on the roots of certain plants. Plants with perennial roots produce tufts of varying thickness, with seeds, buds or turions, which are broken off in autumn and towards the end of winter to produce new individuals. Strawberries and other plants have runners or stolons, which are spindly stems with buds at their joints; these buds, separated and placed in the ground, become new plants. Layering consists in burying a portion of a plant, one end of which protrudes outwards, while the other adheres to the mother plant, which is responsible for nourishing the cutting until it takes root and lives on of its own accord. A simple cutting is said to exist when a branch firmly fixed in this position by wooden hooks and covered with soil is placed in the ground at a depth of about Om, 08, 0, m10; marcotte 3 is said to be a serpentine marcotte when the top of the branch, instead of remaining freely erect out of the ground, is bent back in order to force it to give other marcottes; in marcotte by strangulation, the bark of the buried branch is tightened by means of an iron or linen wire, near and below an eye; in marcotte by circumcision, a circular strip of bark is removed below an eye, so as to maintain the descending sap at the base of the upper lip, and create a bead from which the roots grow; in marcotte by twisting, a branch with thin, fibrous bark is twisted at the point where it is to produce roots; in the simple incision method, the branch is split down the middle, and the separated parts are kept apart by placing a stone or other hard body between them; in the heel incision method, the branch is first split horizontally down the middle, then vertically upwards; in the complicated incision method, two perpendicular cuts are made on the horizontal slit made as above, and kept apart by placing small stones between them; in the amputation method, the cut piece is completely removed, as in the heel incision; finally, in the cepée method, after cutting a tree or shrub flush with the ground, the stumps are covered with soil; in this state, the stumps produce several shoots, which are removed once they have taken root. Annual shoots are often too high to be laid down or brought to ground level, or the wood is too brittle to lend itself to bending. In this case, after staking the branch, it is placed in a basket or pot with a deep indentation, in funnel-shaped glass vases, or in lead or zinc cups lined with soil; the soil is watered; the cutting is separated when it has taken root. Cuttings are young, fresh shoots that are placed in the ground at the cut end to take root. This operation is based on the inherent property of adventitious buds and all latent plant germs to convert into branches or roots, depending on the diversity of the environment in which they are found. In many cases, cuttings are an advantageous substitute for propagation by seed. Few plants are unwilling to undergo this operation. For cuttings to be successful, there must be an abundance of cellular tissue to prompt root development at the buried end of the shoot, and the soil must be as moist and warm as possible; it is important to prevent transpiration of the shoots and evaporation of moisture from the soil. Moist moss and heather soil encourage root development. Simple cuttings. - For very easy-to-grow trees: plane trees, poplars, willows and especially waterside plants, in December or March, cut off young branches two to six years old, prune them, leaving some of their shoots, and push them into deep holes, three to five decimeters square, filled with light soil and pressed in all directions. These branches will cover with leaves in the same season. For amenity trees that are difficult to regrow, in March, cut young shoots from the previous year below a node, divide them into sections of five or six buds, and bind them for a month up to a quarter of their length in fresh sand, sheltered from wind and frost; at the beginning of April, cut each section with a planting knife, in well-ploughed ground, facing north or east, leaving two or three eyes above the ground; water with gentle rain; mulch and keep cool at all times. Species which do not lend themselves to the two above-mentioned procedures can be cut with a bead or heel. As early as June of MULTIPLICATION OF PLANTS. the previous year, a circular ring is made on the young cutting, or a strong ligature is made with wire, so as to create a bead of abundant cellular tissue on this point; or, finally, a branch is broken off from the trunk, pulling up and down so as to remove with it the impasto naturally formed at its junction, and is planted. This procedure is detrimental to mother plants, and should only be used with caution. For Vines, Currants, many Roses, etc., cuttings are made from two-year-old wood or crossette: a fairly long piece of a two- or three-year-old branch is removed with the cutting; the old branch is pruned and placed in heather soil, to a depth of about Om, 12; finally, it is watered and covered with mulch. Orangery and greenhouse plants; herbaceous plants, Dahlias, etc. are generally cut under a bell. Here's how it's done: In terrines or deep pots of Om, 1 or Om, 2 lined with heather soil and potting compost, with a bed of sand, you will prick with an unsharp planter, the cuttings leafy in May and June, leaving them only the top and two leaves, after having well packed the soil, you will water; you will let it dry out in the shade; you will put the whole on a covered bed or in a warm place, in the shade. The air must be renewed with care and precaution; you must be sparing with watering, removing the vapors that settle on the inside walls of the bell and the moulds that often form around the young plants. We have always found the months of May and June to be particularly favorable for bell cuttings. Orange trees can even be propagated by taking cuttings from their leaves, while lilies, etc., can be propagated by taking cuttings from their scales. The aim of grafting is to make the branch or bud of one plant grow on another. For the operation to succeed, two main conditions must be met: 1° coincidence in the development of the branch removed, called the graft, and in the development of the plant on which it is placed, called the subject; 2° identity, if not of species and genus, at least of family and certain relationships between individuals. Let's take a look at the most frequently used grafts. Grafting by approach consists in strongly binding together two branches of neighbouring trees, after having first cut them to a quarter of their thickness. The wounds are protected from light, air and water, using Saint Fiacre's ointment or grafting wax. Most of the twigs above and below the graft are removed; little by little, the stem is incised, waiting to be cut until the welding is complete, which takes place in the course of the year. This grafting process gives new vigor to old espalier trees. To this end, two wildings of the same species are planted next to the exhausted tree; they are bent crosswise, or more or less, on the trunk of the first, a little above the other; suitable notches are made to graft them by approach; the following year, once the weld has been made, the two wildings are decapitated, their sole task being to provide the old tree with fresh, strong sap, to make it fertile, as in the days of its youth. Approach grafting can be used to form espaliers, hedges and fences. It is especially useful for delicate plants, at a time when the sap is moving. Herbaceous grafting is a type of approach grafting, with the difference that instead of operating on woody branches at least one year old, it is performed on herbaceous or barely woody plants, mainly on the terminal shoot of coniferous Fig. 9. Slot grafting. trees during the height of their vegetation. After cutting away the terminal shoot with a triangular section, the bevelled scion is placed in its place. Ligation must be done with care and skill; the lack of consistency of this type of graft makes it much more likely than the previous one to be strangled if it is too tight. Slot grafting, the most commonly used method for fruit trees, consists in cutting the tree or branches to be grafted horizontally at the base; on the flat part thus cut, or tray, a slot is made in the middle from Om, 03 to Om, 04 with a serpette and a hammer; the graft or scion (a well-aruged branch from the previous year) is taken. Fitted with 2, 3 or 4 eyes, this graft is beveled from the large end on both sides, and inserted into the slot so that the bark is at the same level and perfectly aligned. Two, three or four scions can be inserted if the tray is wide enough; then, without shaking the scions, the small wooden wedges holding the slits open are removed, tightened with woolen thread, and the wounds healed with grafting wax. For this operation to be successful, it is important that the subject is in good health, and that the scions have not yet grown. They can be cut in advance and kept fresh by burying them in the north; they can be grafted in the first spring, or in September (sleeping-eye grafting). In the latter case, the graft and subject will begin their winter sleep at the same time, and will be revived together in the spring. This does not destroy the general rule for scion grafting, which is as follows: the subject must be in sap and the graft must be about to enter it. Crown grafting is performed on subjects too large to be split. After horizontal amputation, a wedge of very hard wood is used to insert the scions, beveled on one side to a length of Om.04 to Om.05, between the sapwood and the bark, with the bark separated from the sapwood. A tie is placed around the scion, and grafting wax is applied. In this way, there are no cracks on the surface of the cut, which remains perfectly intact; such is the character of crown grafting. In this way, a large-diameter branch can receive ten or more scions. Flute or whistle grafting consists in amputating a branch at an eye, at a very smooth point, splitting the bark without damaging the wood, into two or three strips of Om, 06 in length; a ring of bark with its buds is removed from the graft, which should be as large as possible; it is threaded onto the sapwood of the subject, and the strips are raised without covering the eyes. If the subject's diameter is greater than that of the flute, the ring is trimmed to fit the designated place, and covered with one of the loose, falling strips; if the diameter is smaller, a strip is removed with a whistle, and the edges joined; grafting wax over the slits. This type of grafting is used mainly for walnut and chestnut trees. Grafting with a growing eye is done in May-June; grafting with a dormant eye is done in April and September; their distinctive feature is that they do not introduce any part of the grafted wood onto the subject. Here's how it's done: 1° After detaching a well-formed bud from the branch you wish to graft, you remove the leaf, but keep the part of the petiole adhering to the eye, which you remove with its bark, squarely above, pointed below, in the shape of an escutcheon, hence the name of this type of graft; 2° At the point reserved for the escutcheon, make an incision in the shape of a straight T or an upside-down ], penetrating all the way into the wood; using the spatula of your grafting tool, pull the two lips of the bark apart upwards; 3° Slide Fig. 10 - Escutcheon. Fig. 11. - Grafting the escutcheon. between the bark and the wood in the incision you've made on the subject, determining the most exact coincidence. Then bind the lips of the bark together to secure the bud, but without covering it. Don't cut the stem or branches just as you're grafting; you'll create an untimely shoot that's exposed to a lot of bad luck; so wait a few days, until it's perfectly fused; then pinch the end of your scions; cut halfway through; then retrench. If you have grafted with a dormant eye in autumn, postpone this part of the operation until the following spring. Loosen ligatures if they cause constrictions, and carefully remove any eyes that develop at the same time as the bud. English-style grafting or grafting by copulation can only be applied to subjects of exactly the same diameter as the scions; the top of the former and the bottom of the latter are cut at an angle so that all their parts overlap and the edges of the two barks coincide at all points. Ligature; grafting wax. Pontoise grafting, particularly used for ornamental trees and shrubs that retain their leaves in winter, is performed as follows: when the winter sleep is over and the sap begins to run again, you cut a triangular slit in the side of the subject, into which you insert the bottom of your wedge-cut graft, then bind it; but you must keep the shrubs thus grafted under a frame for two weeks or so; otherwise, the scion used, being loaded with leaves and often even flowers or flower buds, will perish through evaporation. As faun grafting is only a minor variety of flute grafting, we won't go into it here. Remember that, for all grafts, you need to choose a mild, rather humid than dry temperature; take trees rich in sap; don't let the sap abandon the grafts and, to this end, remove all the buds underneath them; loosen, a fortnight after the operation, the ligatures which often create harmful swellings; have sharp, clean, simple instruments that have been adopted 3. by experienced people: a clamp, a screwdriver, a scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors, a pair of scissors. by experienced people: ordinary serpette, serp, hand saw, slotted grafting tool; ties made of wicker, woollen thread, lime bark, iron, etc.; liquid grafting putty, Saint Fiacre's ointment; grafting wax to be used at a degree of heat such that it can be handled without burning. This phenomenon is often observed in plants that have been cultivated for a long time; these varieties sometimes remain so similar to themselves, through a long succession of generations, that one would almost believe oneself entitled to declare them true species: Onions, cabbages, melons and many vegetable plants; roses, carnations, daisy queens, azaleas, pelargoniums, dablias, etc. If you want to fix these new characters as much as you can, you will breed away from all other individuals of the same species, those in which these manifestations have occurred: this is what selection is all about. If you protect your chosen subjects from crossing with typical plants for a very long time, they will provide you with new types. Perennial varieties can be preserved by grafting, cuttings and layering. When a species has naturally produced a few clear-cut varieties, you can increase the number by artificial crossing or métissage, which is performed as follows: after allowing the races or varieties you wish to obtain mixed-breed forms to flower simultaneously, you place the pollen of one on the stigma of another. The operation is therefore quite simple; only it requires certain precautions to succeed, of which we'll say a few words. As soon as the foreign pollen has been deposited on the stigma, protect the flower from all contact with pollen from the plant itself or from other varieties. To this end, cut off all the other flowers, cover the artificially fertilized flower with a piece of canvas until the ovary swells; the smallest insects could bring it this pollen, the action of which would render all your care null and void. For hybridization, you will operate in the same way as for cross-breeding, with this crucial difference: the cross-breeding no longer takes place between races or varieties of the same species, but between different species, resulting in much greater uncertainty. There is a chance of success if the two species not only belong to the same natural family, but are also of the same genus, without differing too much from each other. Half-breeds and hybrids often take after both the father and the mother; half-breeds themselves are almost always as fertile as the typical species; hybrid flowers are affected by total sterility in the case of simultaneous abortion of their pollen, which has thus become unsuitable for fertilization, and poor conformation of the outer parts of the ovary or ovules; hybrid flowers are affected by partial sterility if the pollen alone is lacking, the ovary and ovules remaining in normal conditions. Some hybrid Petunias are very fertile; they fertilize themselves or cross between themselves, giving rise to many hybrid varieties. More or less fertile hybrids do not form a species; from their second generation, there is a tendency to revert to specific forms; then complete or incomplete return to these forms. In general, cross-breeding between races of the same species, or between different species, gives plants the ability to vary. Hybridization should never be practised for vegetable plants, to which it could only be harmful; we hardly know the results it would have on fruit trees - it is best to refrain from any imprudent attempt here. - ==="" ~πu======" =-==mo==-- -r==e=-==----=n =-"Sru FIRST SECTION. - PLANT DISEASES. There are diseases which, like plethora in men and animals, arise from an overabundance of life in plants. For example, certain branches, called gourmands for this reason, appropriate almost all the juices and leave the other parts of the plant without vigor; cut out the gourmands, reduce the manure; replace soil that is too fat, too substantial, with leaner, lighter soil. Trees that produce leaves instead of fruit are known as phyllomanes, or portfolios. Carpomante is the opposite of phyllomania: the tree has far too many fruits, but they are small, of poor quality and difficult to ripen; the problem is remedied by pruning and disbudding. Fasciation, so common in Compositae and Roses, consists in the accidental flattening of stems in branches that are naturally cylindrical; moreover, fasciation does not rob plants of their vigor and, because of this very monstrosity, makes them sought-after as ornaments. We can remedy the loss of vigor and languor of plants in poor soil or exposure, by moving them to another location and giving them manure, light, air and warmth. The ordinary causes of sterility are: cold, which freezes the fruiting bodies; heat, which dries out the stigma and makes it unsuitable for retaining pollen; and rain, which removes it from the stamens before it has fertilized the pistil. Hyacinth and gladiolus onions, etc., are subject to white glanders, caused by very bitter cold. Without destroying the outer forms of the tubers, white glanders changes them into a white, slimy, odorless, slightly acid and semi-liquid pulp. The progress of this serious disease is sometimes halted by removing the infected tunics and placing the onions in pots lined with sandy soil, in a warm location, but out of the direct action of the sun's rays. The garden potato species Marjolaine, Chaville, Schaw and Sept-Semaines are subject to a disease that manifests itself as frisole, or a peculiar folding of the leaves over themselves, changing from green to dark brown, and the appearance of brown spots on the surface of the stems; if you divide the tuber, you'll see that it has taken on a yellowish tint, then brown, spread irregularly in length and width. Immediately cut off all the outer parts of the plant at ground level; when you pull them out, you'll have small but mostly good potatoes. Just leave them exposed to the sun in the open air, then bring them in when the weather dries out. Don't be afraid to eat slightly damaged potatoes, as long as the damaged parts have been removed beforehand; starch factories will even buy the worst ones. 51 Dry sulfuring of vines is best carried out in full sunlight, from 10 a.m. to noon: once, when the vines begin to vegetate; again, when they flower; and again, when the bunches are in verjuice. Grapevine disease consists of the rapid multiplication of a microscopic fungus, Oidium Tuckeri, on leaves, shoots, bunches and grapes, which then appear to be covered with a whitish dust or powdery down. Examined under the microscope, this fuzz is made up of fine, ragged, compartmentalized filaments and oval or elliptical spores, joined end to end like grains in a necklace. Leaves twitch, fruits crack and dry out. The only remedy is sulphur flower, spread with a Gontier bellows on the diseased individual, which has been well bathed beforehand. The value of the crop saved in this way, in whole or in part, compensates for the pain and cost of the medication. Blanc de meunter is another disease similarly due to the development of a microscopic fungus, erysiphe, which attacks fruit trees in particular: Plum, Apple, etc.; ornamental shrubs: Rose, etc.; and some annual plants: Pansy, etc. We prevent erysiphe by keeping vegetation vigorous and energetic; curative means have yet to be discovered. Ulcers, from which gum or other juices from decomposed sap flow, gradually eat away at the heart of the wood and kill it, unless the damaged part is promptly and deeply cut away, taking care to line the scar with Saint-Fiacre ointment or grafting wax; later, the bark advances on both sides and covers the wound. The same precautions are taken against root ulcers. The rounded, more or less voluminous growths that appear on elm and other trees are called burls; if they are not so numerous as to interfere with the plant's growth, they are allowed to remain. Chlorosis or variegation alters the green color of leaves, making them mottled or variegated: Aucuba, Phalaris rubane, etc.; this morbid state is often seen, in reality, as an improvement, an amenity of the individual; variegation sometimes disappears when plants are given more substantial soil. Lightning shatters tree trunks and branches, stripping bark and wood, dividing the latter into longitudinal fibers: cleavage. The cold causes the champelure of the vine or death of young shoots and even branches, which are cut and disarticulated at the nodes, sometimes to such an extent that there is no wood left for pruning. Cracks in tree trunks are called frostbite, sometimes in the bark alone (simple frostbite), sometimes in the wood itself (interwoven frostbite). There is no remedy for champelure and gelivure; they can be prevented by sheltering trees with hedges and windbreaks; by shodding their feet with sand or dry earth; by rolling a rope of dry straw around their trunks, etc. Mercury, arsenic and baryte sprays, soda prussiates, copper acetate, quinine sulfate; soluble oxides of tin and copper; quicklime; sulfuric, prussic and muriatic acids; alcohols, ethers and extracts of hemlock, jimsonweed and black henbane poison plants. We therefore need to keep a close eye on the waste from soda factories and other chemical products that may be found in the vicinity of gardens. External causes, such as high winds, often lead to the decortication, tearing or fracture of certain parts of the tree; grafting wax should be used in preference to St. Fiacre's ointment to hasten the healing of these wounds; trees are often preserved by tying up branches that are too heavy, too laden with twigs or fruit. If the tear does not extend too deeply, we apply pieces of wood hollowed out like gutters to the two points opposite the split, and tighten them with hemp or iron ties, which should not be removed until five or six years later, when the wound has healed perfectly. Grafting wax, ointment of Saint Fiacre. If the broken part cannot be reattached, saw it low enough below the fracture to remove all traces of splitting or tearing on the amputated surface, then pare with grafting wax. Not only does hail cause purely mechanical damage to the parts of plants it hits, but the nitrous acid it suspends disorganizes them, as you will easily notice on the leaves and stems of melons, where hailstones leave spots that grow, turn from yellow to brown and kill the part hit. No remedy, but preservatives: glass frames and mats. Nails, bullets thrown by firearms, stones, animal horns, often remain in the wounds they have made; you will leave them there, unless you can extract them without enlarging the wound too much. Healing takes place very well on its own, and the bodies gradually buried in the wood do not interfere with the circulation of the sap. Necrosis or death of the wood is caused by bruising, burns, poor pruning, cold, etc., and can be seen in a portion of the wound. It is indicated by a dry, dead portion of wood, almost always longer than it is wide, enclosed in healthy tissue. Sometimes you leave necrosis to nature, sometimes you attack it with a gouge. You won't give rise to necrosis if, when pruning and trimming a tree, you cut obliquely from top to bottom, to make it easier for rain to run off, and if you cover the bare surface with tar or pitch. Entophytic helminths, small, thin, elongated, almost transparent worms, sometimes fill the pericarp of wheat (haggard or stunted wheat) and destroy it; humidity is favorable to their development and life; no means of destroying them is known. Entophytic fungi attack all parts of plants. Ergot is a disease of grass seeds, which elongate, become purplish-black, and emerge from between the bales in the form of small black horns or ergots. All these ravages, comparable to those of gangrene on living creatures, are probably due to the presence of a poisonous fungus. No cure. Oecidial fungi attack Compositae, Leguminosae and Umbelliferae; rœstélies fungi grow mainly on Pear trees; peridermium can be seen on Pine leaves; phragmidium on Roses, Raspberries, Strawberries, etc.; red rust destroys the leaves of Grasses; smut is found on Wheat, Oats, Barley, Millet, Corn, etc.; liming is often successful against smut. Fumaginia and honeydew, vegetal-animal products, cover the stomata on the upper surface of leaves, causing them to perish. Orange, lemon, myrtle, rockrose, maple and olive trees are particularly prone to the latter two diseases. The disease attaches itself preferentially to apple trees, willows, poplars, lime trees, etc.; more rarely to oak trees. Cuseute takes Serpolet, Flax and Vine as its victims; orobanche lives at the expense of Leguminosae, Serpolet, Mugwort, Hemp and Broad Bean. Melampyrus, rhinanthus and euphrasia feed on the juices of many plant species, exhausting them. These dangerous parasites must be destroyed by careful weeding. Byssus or root white develops on the roots and rootlets of Roses, Apples, Peaches, etc.; it looks like plaster. This fungus is very hardy; it often only shows its presence after killing the individual on which it has attached itself. Some plants affected by this kind of secret leprosy can be saved by uprooting them, cutting off the roots that are too diseased, washing all the roots that are still healthy or nearly so with plenty of water, even brushing them, and then replanting them in loose soil, away from the heat of the sun. SECTION TWO. - ANIMAL PESTS. Among the mammalian animals that are harmful to plants are the rat, the mole, the dormouse and the ferret. Rats like to take up residence in old, degraded walls, where they multiply and emerge, especially at night, to gather fruit from espaliers. The best trap for them is the "four de chiffre", so called because of the particular arrangement of the small sticks that hold a plank loaded with a heavy body in balance; it is primed with pieces of roasted bacon. The mole provides a real service by destroying insect larvae and certain bad plant onions, but on the other hand, it disturbs garden soil to such an extent that it has to be chased away. They are most active between ten and midday, when they are caught and killed with a spade. They live on fruit, and are caught in wicker cage traps, primed by a ripe fruit, but different from those available on the espalier tree; young dormice and ferrets can be tamed like squirrels. Among molluscs, slugs, especially in autumn and spring, cause great damage in gardens, multiplying rapidly and becoming a real nuisance; have the duck, which is very fond of them, chase them away; or throw cabbage or romaine leaves flat on the ground; The slugs will feed greedily on them, even sheltering in them at night so as to be ready for the next day's feast sooner; in the morning, before sunrise, remove them; instead of crushing them, feed them to your farmyard animals. Snails or escar gots are easy to catch after heavy showers in the summer, when they spread out everywhere in search of suitable and varied food: vegetables, ornamental plants, fruit, flower buds, etc. Destroy them mercilessly.You can protect your fruit trees and dahlias by defending the base of these plants with a circular pile of crushed oyster shells, whose sharp blades will be enough to keep your enemies at bay. Snails are widely traded in Burgundy and elsewhere. Insects. - The most harmful insect in our climate is the cockchafer. It usually appears in France in the second half of April as a larva, feeding on plant roots for three or four years; as a perfect insect, it devours the green parts; shake or warp the trees in the morning, and the beetles fall off; crush them and feed them mixed with other foodstuffs, to pigs, hens, etc., which are very fond of them. Female cockchafer beetles lay their eggs in the ground, in holes from Om, 08 to Om, 10 deep; the larvae that emerge from these eggs are called mans, worms or tures; moles destroy them, but by themselves upsetting the ground in such a way that the remedy is almost as damaging as the disease. Cantharids are more formidable as perfect insects than as larvae in May or June; in a single day, they destroy all the foliage of the Ash, Oak and Privet trees they attack: Cantharides fall numb on cloths previously laid on the ground; immediate immersion in vinegar kills them; well dried, enclosed in glazed pots inside, they can be kept for thirty or forty years; pharmacists buy them at a fairly high price. Fig. 12 - Lucane or Kite, Fig. 13 - Hind or Kite (female). The kite larva (lucania) lives in the woody tissues of old oak and fruit trees; it can sometimes be partially destroyed by emptying the galleries it digs and injecting them with a burning liquid. The larva of the grain weevil appears in early spring and multiplies until autumn; we recommend covering piles of wheat devastated by this enemy with leaves of Walnut, Elder, Hemlock and Tansy; we doubt the effectiveness of this remedy; the best preservatives are silos, jars and dry, well-stoppered barrels. The green satin weevil pricks the leaves, making cones in which to deposit its eggs, from which white, hairless larvae emerge, already very voracious in this state. The following year, they're just as dangerous, in their perfect insect state; remove leaves, eggs and larvae and burn them. Destructive and type-setting bark beetles attack elms and pines; remove the rough outer bark from trees where they settle. 8 Fig. 14 - Prionc. - Hero beetles, parasites of old Oaks, and saperids, parasites of Wheat and Poplars, should be removed along with the parts of the plant they have eaten away. The prione, so called from a Greek word meaning saw, in allusion to the shape of its mandibles, is a nocturnal insect that is highly destructive to oak trees. The flea beetle, a beautiful metallic blue color, can be found on young cruciferous plants such as cabbage, rapeseed and turnip. As soon as they germinate, they gnaw their cotyledons and riddle their seminal leaves with an infinite number of tiny holes. Carefully weed and gently shake the affected plants, moving wide boards coated with glue or tar in their vicinity; the flea beetles jump on these boards and get caught. The grapevine eumolpe, gribouri, bud cutter or writer, owes this last name to the marks it leaves on the gnawed leaves, which represent the letters A, I, L quite well,

V; before sunrise, remove and shake the vines invaded by these insects, which fall into a basket placed under the branches beforehand; then destroy them. The beetle and eucampe attack all kinds of trees; their larvae are very voracious. Fig. 15 - Beetle. A Sulfur fumigations can destroy the black-bellied beetle, a parasite of grapevines, and the gall beetle, an enemy of elms. Grasshoppers and crickets must be hunted down and their corpses fed to poultry, or used as fertilizer. The courtillière or mole-cricket devours many larA 1 1 . Fig. 16 - Eucampe. ves, insects and worms, but to find them, it breaks and tears up all the roots it encounters in its path; as its damage is more harmful than its services are useful, it must be destroyed by pouring water and oil or horse urine heated to -40°, into its nest, a sort of small globe of well kneaded earth with an opening directed towards the surface of the soil at Om, O1 or Om, 02 depth. Fig. 17 - Earwigs. Earwigs or forficulas are nocturnal marauders, harmful to carnations, etc., fruit and vegetables; place pigs' dewclaws in the places they frequent, where the forficulas will gather as day approaches; you'll catch them there and then throw them into the fire. Luciferous termites, all the more formidable for being invisible during the day, attack almond, plum, peach and other trees with gummy juices, withering leaves and drying fruit, When you find them, send chlorine or hydrogen sulfide through glass tubes into the depths of these insects' shelters, where they will die of asphyxiation. They seek out shade: let the sun shine on the plants, which is a simple and effective way of preserving them. The common bee feeds mainly on the ripest and tastiest fruits; flood its nest or beehive, a kind of large ball about Om, 30 to Om, 33 in diameter, hidden in the ground, with boiling water; or asphyxiate the whole cursed colony by introducing a sulphurous, flaming wick into its home. If the nest escapes your search, attach to the branches of fruit trees : 1° flasks full of honey water, where the wasps will soon drown; 2° superimposed boards, coated with honey, set in motion by a string; they will come to be crushed in this primitive but safe trap. Bees do no harm to flowers; on the contrary, they facilitate fertilization by transporting pollen from one to another. It is therefore as odious as it is absurd to destroy these useful insects. Grasshoppers. - Frémobia limbata, Bradyporus dasypus. Grasshoppers can be recognized by their hind legs, which are much longer than their front ones, enabling them to make great leaps: hence their name. The male makes a kind of song by rubbing his thighs against his elytra; the female deposits her eggs in the ground, enclosed in a thin membrane. Its larvae differ from the perfect insect only in the absence of wings and elytra. It is mainly the locust or grasshopper -4 Fig. 18. - Grasshopper. that causes damage in fields; against the grasshopper and against Eremobia limbata and Bradyporus ti Fig. 19. - Eremobia limbata. Fig. 20. - Bradyporus Dasypus. and pigs. Lizards and frogs wage a fierce war on grasshoppers, destroying considerable quantities in a single day. Cochineal. - It would be unfair to say nothing but bad things about this insect, several species of which - cactus mealybug, Polish mealybug, etc. - are prized for their beautiful red color, Several species, such as the cactus mealybug, the Polish mealybug, etc., are prized for the beautiful red color they provide, but the following must be destroyed without mercy: the mealybug of the fiquier, the mealybug of orange trees, the mealybug of greenhouses, the mealybug of the peach tree, so harmful to the leaves and fruit of trees; mealybugs accumulate in patches at the insertion of large branches, The female, thus fixed on the tree, secretes a cottony material with which she wraps herself and in which she then deposits her eggs; in dying she bequeaths to her Fig. 21. cochineal. offspring its dried-out skin as an impenetrable shelter from rain and cold. Cockroach. - This insect is only seen at night, and attacks not only leaves and fruit, but also bread, Fig. 27. cockroach. flour, fish, etc.; it is frightened by light, and is easy to catch. Crickets are blamed for similar damage. Fig. 23 - Cricket. The black ant harms plants by its subterranean work and feeds on ripe fruit, peaches, apricots, etc. So lure it into the shade. Lure them into vials full of sweet, honeyed water; spread a mixture of crushed ripe fruit and white arsenic or sublimate corFig. 24. - Winged ant. Fig. 25. - Ant. rosif which will poison it: destroy it en masse in its dwelling by sprinkling boiling water with a few spoonfuls of oil in the evening. Cynips, diploptera and cecidomia create excrescences on the various parts of Oak, Pine, Willow, Elm, Maple, Rose, Ivy, etc., called galls if they are closed on all sides; false galls if they retain some communication with the outside. Vegetable garden pentatomas cause damage to flowers and vegetables; shake the plants affected by them over a wide-mouthed, well-glazed vase; the insects will fall in and you'll burn them. You'll easily recognize aphids by the two horns or nipples usually pointing upwards and attached to the tip of the abdomen; from these nipples emerge a sweet liquid which ants are very fond of sucking; hence the name "ant cows" given to aphids; these improvised mothers and their infants live together in harmony, frequenting each other day and night. Aphids sting and suck leaves, distorting them and soaking them in a viscous, highly-nuisible substance. The green aphid is a particular enemy of roses, destroying young shoots and buds; cabbages, cauliflowers, turnips and radishes. To get rid of them, smoke tobacco under a bell in the morning or evening, when the weather is calm. Remove the bell as soon as the aphids are asphyxiated, so that the smoke dissipates without harming the vegetation. The black aphid, which is rightly considered to be the same as the black aphid, and which undoubtedly owes its black color to the bean's juice, of which it is very avid, always attacks this plant from the top leaves; remove these leaves and burn them. The woolly aphid, quite different from the green and black aphids, has only one thing in common with them: its frighteningly rapid spread. It lives at the expense of the apple trees in our orchards, and of the ornamental apple tree with semi-double flowers, on whose bark it causes cankers of a bad nature, very often fatal. This consists in walking, in winter, Fig. 26. A large aphid. on trees infected by this insect, the moderate flame of a torch 4. made of twisted, resinous straw; this grills the hairs of the Fig. 27. - Southern tenthrush (female). woolly aphid, which soon perishes; the action of this fire is too short-lived to attack the bark of the plant. The sawfly is so called because it is armed with a kind of saw with which it cuts into the bark of the plant to which it entrusts its egg. This egg grows and lives at the expense of the plant, and changes into a false caterpillar, then into the perfect insect whose figure we give here. Dragonfly or damselfly. - It is wrong to wage war on the dragonfly, so aptly named by Linnaeus as the sparrowhawk of insects, as it destroys hundreds of them in a single Fig. 28 - Depressed dragonfly (female). day, without harming any plant. Nightingales and warblers destroy caterpillars by the thousands; so attract these insectivorous birds by placing troughs full of water and boxwood cribs lined with mealworms at their disposal in the quietest part of your vegetable garden, in the shade of the cribs; You'll be amply rewarded for these inexpensive acts of kindness, but don't let this stop you from destroying all caterpillar nests at winter pruning, and looking for the eggs where the branches meet, in the cracks in the bark. If, in spite of your diligent care, the caterpillars multiply, catch them in the evening, just as they are about to go to sleep in bundles on the branches, and kill them by spraying them with soap water; then wash the area flooded with this corrosive liquid with fresh water. Cabbage worms pierce through the leaves of this plant, often leaving only the ribs and veins; hunt them at night, by candlelight, or in the morning, before sunrise; they hide in the ground to protect themselves from the heat of the day. Pigs' droppings, used to fertilize hops, sometimes protect them from their dangerous enemy: the hop hepiracle. The tent caterpillar, the most common of the caterpillars, owes its name to the longitudinal lines of various colors on its back; it is destroyed in spring in its easy-to-find nest. Spare the larvae of the sycophantine beetle, and even encourage their development: these larvae devour hundreds of processionary caterpillars in their nests. The golden-tailed caterpillar is very common, very fertile, hairy, brown and has sixteen legs. It lives on all kinds of trees, sticking large white silky bundles to their branches. The willow caterpillar chops small fragments of wood and, mixing them with silk, forms a very hard, very solid shell that must be destroyed. Let's just give the figures of a few other che eE MI Fig. 29. - Willow caterpillar. very invisible caterpillars; to describe them would be to exceed the limits of this work. Fig. 20 - Poplar caterpillar. Fig. 31 - Fir caterpillar. Fig. 32 - Ilicifolia caterpillar. The nest of the oak caterpillar is difficult to find. Equal strips, four or five times as long as they are wide, overlap each other and are joined together in certain places by a real, finely-made seam; the whole thing forms a kind of hood; the oak caterpillar has a very keen sense of smell, and can smell its enemy from afar. Fig. 33 - Oak caterpillar. Fig. 34 - Another oak caterpillar. Fig. 35. - Oak butterfly (male). m It's in spring that the thousands of eggs laid by butterflies hatch and give birth to thousands of caterpillars; if you've neglected to destroy the eggs, destroy the caterpillars; regardless of the marvellous beauty of their wings, destroy most of the day and night Fig. 36. - Half peacock butterfly (male). lons. The peacock and half-night peacock are very common in gardens around Paris; they have thick, broad, gray wings, with brownish patches and zigzagging reddish lines; a wide, brown eye, edged with black, black in the center, occupies the middle of each wing. The moth is about Om, 020 long, with a brown head and first segment, green or yellowish in the other parts; it rolls the leaves where it shelters during the day, taking advantage of the night to commit its frightening ravages on the stems, flowers and bunches of the vine. Eggs are found covered in a greenish mucilage on the leaf surface. Warm up the vines, put the stakes on the fire; give chase to the perfect insect, the moth that comes dazedly to burn itself at the small fires lit at night, from distance to distance. There is no known preservative against the olive leaf beetle, which is so harmful to wheat, rye and barley. It is useful to wash the bark of fruit trees over winter with a strong milk of lime, to destroy, at least in part, the larvae of apple and pear moths, which are responsible for wormy fruit. The olive tree's enemy is the chiron or Dacus oleœ larva. Carefully defend your greenhouses and frames against armadillos (woodlice), and especially against the common sowbugs so numerous in cellars and damp places; they cut seedlings and eat them to the core. Use the same method as described above for earwigs. Perennial vegetables and vegetables proper: 1° Artichokes, Asparagus; - 2° Peas, Beans, Lentils. FIRST SECTION. - ARTICHOKES, ASPARAGUS. ARTICHAUT is a plant with long, strong roots, native to Barbary and southern Europe (Compositae). Its most remarkable varieties are: L'ARTICHAUT DE PROVENCE, or artichoke without hay, with an elongated head; it is less fleshy but earlier than those we will discuss below; it fears frost and can only be grown successfully in our southern departments. - The A, gros camus de Bretagne, with its broad, flattened, slightly dark-green head, is fairly early, but not very fleshy; it thrives particularly in Touraine and most of the departments of central France. - A. gros vert de Laon, with pointed, divergent scales, is the best, most esteemed and most widely grown artichoke in the climate of Paris and the surrounding area. - The early purple A is small, but very delicate, and is best eaten raw, with peppers, rather than cooked. Artichokes are propagated by separating the offshoots or eyelets, usually in mid-April, from the old stumps; each plant can produce 6 to 12 offshoots; the two or three most beautiful are kept on the stump, and the others are broken off as close as possible to the root, so that they can be removed with their heel; shorten the leaves to the length of Om, 16, and plant in a chessboard of Om, 80 at a distance of 1 meter, in previously well loosened and smoked soil; if possible, manure should be spread throughout the artichoke patch. The soil should be well moistened and watered every two days until vegetation is vigorous; the first harvest will take place in autumn. Artichokes fear the rigors of winter. As frosts approach, cut the stems close to the roots, and deadhead each plant in dry weather, so that the soil does not retain moisture that could lead to rot. In addition, cover each clump with leaves or litter, which are easy to lift when the air is warm, and easy to pull down when the cold returns. Towards the end of March, litter and leaves should be removed, and the mounds on each plant destroyed; the levelled soil should be ploughed well, and only two or three of the strongest eyelets should remain on each clump. It's always a good idea, as a precaution, to uproot a few plants before the frosts, which, if planted in a healthy cellar or storeroom, will escape the ravages of the bad season and form a valuable reserve. However, if winter has destroyed all the plants, there's still sowing. This can be done in February or March, on a warm bed and under a frame, in pots or in potting soil. Sowing can also be done at the end of April, or at the beginning of May, in beds, separating two or three seeds by each earthen dimple. An Artichoke plant will only give a good yield for four years, so renew it in the third year. At the end of summer, you can stuff and blanch your old shoots like cardoons. Artichoke seed retains its germinative properties for five or six years; it 3 curdles milk without imparting a bad taste to the cheese. ASPERAGE (Liliaceae) is a perennial root vegetable native to many parts of France, especially the Var region, with a claw-like perennial root that produces new stems every year, which die off at the end of summer. There are two main varieties: A, green or common; grosse-violette or A, from Holland. Asparagus seed is usually sown in nurseries in October, or from mid-February to the end of March, either broadcast or, better still, in rays. Choose light but fertile soil, strong but well-amended with plenty of ash or silica sand; cover the seed with Om, 02 to Om, 03 of soil and compost; water, weed and hoe gently, lest you remove, along with the weeds, the nascent asparagus, at first as small as threads and barely visible. This plant can be used from the first year, although it is customary to leave it to grow for two years; if this practice is followed, the care given in the first year will be continued in the second. The important and difficult thing is to establish the plant permanently. Some gardeners dig pits about 1 metre deep, from which they remove all the soil and replace it with more fertile soil spread on a bed of plaster, coarse sand, broom and heather detritus, etc., with fertilizer: peat, muds and ditch and pond curings, etc. Other gardeners content themselves with planting the plant in a pit of their own. Other gardeners simply make well-sealed trenches Om, 30 to Om, 40 deep; others simply plough and smoke the bottom, then plant and sow flat. They also vary the layout and spacing of the plants; sometimes they combine up to three or four rows of Asparagus in a pit or bed Om, 90 to Om, 60 wide with ados; sometimes they plant in isolated rows equally spaced Om, 50 to 1m,60 apart, using these large intervals for other crops. Without in any way wishing to criticize these methods, which have good results (despite the teens declared here to be harmful by experience), we recommend proceeding in this way; after smoking your soil, draw your lines with a chalk line in the beds running from east to west, mark the width of each bed with a small mound of earth, then on this very bed, and without delay, establish your claw, which fears the dryness of prolonged exposure to the air and wants its hair to be spared with the greatest care; top-dress each bed; water, hoe and weed. Towards the end of October or in November, cut off the dry stems. For subsequent cultivation, take the soil you need for your annual autumn replenishments from the gaps that are becoming increasingly gullied as the soil rises around the asparagus; in spring, do a light ploughing or forking; every two or three years, fertilize with short manure at the beginning or end of winter. If the subsoil is ungrateful and always damp, it's best to plant flat, maintaining intervals of Om, 60 between beds. If, instead of planting claws, you sow on the spot, here's what you need to do: With your soil well prepared, well smoked, as we said above, your lines drawn with a chalk line, and your distances fixed, dig a ditch, where in the first case you would have raised a mound, and sow at Om, 03 one from the other 3 or 4 seeds that you will cover with compost. When the plant has sprouted, pull out the weakest plants and keep only the most vigorous; all the rest of the seedling cultivation is similar to the claw cultivation, but you won't get the products of your seedling until a year later. In Paris and the surrounding area, asparagus is harvested as soon as it emerges from the ground as a slightly green and purple shoot, about a decimeter long. Use a short knife to avoid damaging the central plateau of the claws. Never try to grow Asparagus after Asparagus itself; it would tire the soil too much; it can only grow in the same place after an interval of at least ten years. The best Asparagus to force are those that have been planted for at least five or six years. When you want to heat them, dig up and remove the soil from the paths separating the beds, replacing it with warm, trodden manure; refill the beds with the soil from the paths mixed with fresh manure, and cover them with the glass frames. This operation is carried out in December or March. From time to time, we remove the manure from inside the frames and cut off the shoots, known as white asparagus, because they have little color. New manure replaces exhausted manure; at night, straw mats or bedding protect the asparagus from cold and damp, and are removed during the day if it doesn't freeze. The plant is left to rest for a year, then heated the following year. A similar process is used to produce forced green asparagus. SECOND SECTION. - PEAS, BEANS, LENTILLES, Peas (Papilionaceae) are native to southern Europe. It requires light, healthy soil, and should not be grown for several years in a row if it is to be rich and beautiful. It can be sown in clumps or rays, in warm locations. Make rays about Om 20 apart, and in each hole, dug Om 35 apart, plant 5 or 6 peas. Until harvest, hoe, weed and rake large species, and pinch out early species at 3rd or 4th flower. Peas from warm climates can only be grown in the open air when the frost has stopped; however, St Catherine's Peas can be grown along walls exposed to midday sun, even when the cold is still to be feared. For early plants, build layers covered with Om, 25 to Om 30 of soil; sow in November, December, January; tarpaulins, layers or frames. Pinch off 3 or 4 flowers; replant the nursery plant when it has reached Om, 08 or Om, 10. As soon as your Peas have reached Om, 22 to Om 25, before flowering, lay them down at the bottom of the frame, gently placing laths on their stems to keep them flat for three or four days; once the laths have been removed, the heads straighten up and continue to grow, with only their lower part remaining flattened; this artificial curvature greatly enhances the fruiting of this vegetable. Here are some of the most important pea varieties. Dwarf shelled peas. The early dwarf is usually sown before winter, at the foot of south-facing walls; its distinctive feature is that it flowers from the 2nd or 3rd node. - P. nain de Hollande, smaller than the preceding variety and of average season, has small pods and grains, and can be planted in borders in ordinary soils; it can also be raised under chassis. P. très-nain à châssis barely reaches Om, 16 in height, it is very early; its pod contains five seeds. - P. gros nain tardif produces large, good-quality seeds; strong and stocky, it requires more space than the preceding varieties. - P. dain vert petit and P. dain vert de Prusse are two productive species. - P. Michaux de Hollande is sown at the end of February or the beginning of March; pinched, it does not need oars; it has difficulty with winter and does not grow in damp soils. - P. Michaux or Petit Pois de Paris, as early as it is good, is sown before winter at the foot of south-facing walls; pinched at 3 or 4 flowers, it is rowed in good soils; its sub-variety, P. de Ruelle, requires the same care. - P. de Clamart or carré fin gives a tight, sweet grain; it is sown in open fields without oars, for the late season; in gardens it must be rowed. - P. gros vert normand à grandes rames is a late bloomer, but produces excellent quality dry grain. - P. géant is extraordinarily large, but soft and not very tasty. - P. carré blanc is good and sweet, but too often loses its stalks and leaves. - P. fève, a large, late variety, has large, tender berries that are not very sweet. - P. vert de Noyon is content with very ordinary soil; it is semi-hardy and productive. - P. wrinkled, originally from England, is unrivalled for its large, wrinkled, sweet kernels, enclosed in a long, large, full pod. - The dwarf P. wrinkled white heath combines the precocity of P. Michaux with the qualities of P. wrinkled. P. turc has two varieties, one with a red flower, the other with a white flower; it is very heavy and yields a grain that is not highly esteemed. - P. with a volette pod produces a grayish, very large, floury, slightly hard grain, enclosed in a purple-purple pod. When cooked, it takes on the hue of roasted coffee; it tastes like a small marsh bean. Peas without parchment or mange-tout. P, the dwarf, early parchmentless pea from Holland, does very well in the open ground; it is also grown under frames. The white P, without parchment, with large pods or ram's horn, is late and produces a lot in good soils. - P. sans parchemin with half-stems, less late than the previous variety, has a less wide, but fuller pod. - The ordinary dwarf P. sans parchemin has small pods, but very numerous and very tender. - The giant P. sans parchemin, grown mainly around Paris, outshines all other species in terms of the width and size of its pods. "11 The P. sans parchemin with yellow pods is grown like the ordinary P. sans parchemin, whose qualities it shares and which supplied it. - P. sans parchemin with white pods, so called because of the whitish color of its pods, is of fairly good quality; it wants to be rowed. Peas, especially the earliest ones, are enemies of the bruchid beetle, whose female lays eggs in each barely-formed seed, so that its larvae can find abundant food there from birth. The ravages of this insect could perhaps be avoided, at least in part, by sowing at the beginning of May or in April; besides, peas pierced by the bruchid beetle are still good for sowing when the germ remains intact, which often happens. Ripe Peas, kept as seed grains, should not be shelled until they are ready to be planted; they retain their germinative properties for several years. CHICKEN PEAS. - A close relative of the pea, but of a different genus, this plant is sown in spring and harvested in autumn in the Paris climate, where it does not ripen completely. Its naturally slightly tough grain, which is difficult to digest, is used to make crouton purées. In warmer climates, it is sown in autumn and harvested in summer. The low, stocky chickpea doesn't need oars. For northern Europe, we rightly prefer the brown-grained red chickpea, which is earlier than the common chickpea. HARICOT (Papilionaceae) is native to India; it does not require as much care as Pea. It needs a soft, light, slightly fresh, well-smoked soil with a well-consumed fertilizer; sow the early species in clumps around April 20: five or six seeds per hole; hoe twice, re-sowing lightly in the second. For the other species, wait until the first half of May; June and July for the Swiss species and, in particular, for the early Dutch dwarf and flageolet, preferred by market gardeners around Paris. If your soil is clayey and compact, increase the quantity of fertilizer, delay sowing, and cover the seed very little. In strong soils, rather than sowing in clumps, sow in rows, grain by grain at about Om, 08 apart, with row spacing of Om, 30 to Om, 40. Mix a small quantity of wood, peat or coal ash with the soil. Green bean sowing continues through July and even into mid-August; if you sow them in well-sheltered beds when the year is not too dry, these late products will not ripen before the frosts arrive, but as green beans or as fresh shelled beans, they will amply compensate you for your trouble. With the help of frames, manure and stoves, you can have new green beans for most of the winter and throughout the spring, by sowing on a warm bed; you transplant the very young plant onto less warm beds, in clumps of three or four plants, at intervals of Om, 30; you need to aerate from time to time and especially at flowering time; wipe off the steam that attaches itself to the glass; finally, water abundantly. The preferred variety in this case is the Dutch dwarf bean, which yields after two and a half to three months of cultivation; it should be neither bedded nor topped. New varieties include : Bicolore d'Italie without parchment. - The early yellow H. of six weeks, the early dwarf H. Valentin. dwarf early without parchment. The runner bean is an ornamental plant known for its beautiful bunches of scarlet-red flowers; its turnip-sized root is pulled out and stored in fresh sand in the cellar for replanting in March; it flowers and produces seeds indefinitely. 4- Fava (Papilionaceae). - Beans are happy in any soil, but prefer cool, well-smoked soil, not exposed to full sun. It is sown in February, March and April, in rows or clumps, with 3 or 4 seeds in each hole, spaced about Om, 30-35 apart; at the second hoeing, they are resown to strengthen them; as soon as the flower has passed, the ends of the stems and branches must be pinched to hasten the formation of the lower pods. If the bean is removed to a quarter or half of its normal volume, the stems are cut to ground level, defended against drought and, in this way, a second harvest is obtained in autumn. Among the main varieties are: the Fêve des marais, native to Persia; the grosse F, ordinary; the F. the red dwarf, the earliest and most dwarf of all; the late green F., a very productive breed, originally from China; the F. à lonque cosse, early and well-filled. Beans kept in their pods retain their germinative powers for more than five years. Lentil (Papilionaceae). - Lentils are sown in March and April, preferably in dry, sandy soils, in rows or clumps. A variety known as Lentille à la Reine, L. rouge, has a small, reddish, rounded seed; it has a finer taste than the common L.. Some people, in keeping with ancient practices, sprout Lentils before cooking them, to increase their sweetness; Lentils should not be threshed until they are ready to be sown or eaten, in which case they keep well for two years. GESSE is sown like Peas and eaten mashed. 5. Raves, Raiforts, Salsify, Scorzonera, Beetroot, Potatoes, Jerusalem artichokes (1). CARROTS. - The carrot is a biennial, indigenous plant (Umbelliferae). It has a large number of varieties; we will mention only the main ones. Among the reds, the most esteemed are: the short red of Holland, the English red of Altringham; the common red lonque; the red demi-lonque or Meaux carrot. - Red carrots are generally tastier than yellow and white ones. The short red Dutch carrot is early and of good quality, preferable for autumn and early spring sowing. Gardeners near Paris have obtained a highly sought-after sub-variety for stews; Altringham red and Meaux red have a beautiful color and a very pleasant flavor. R. lonque commune and R. pâle (1) These last two plants are wrongly classified as root vegetables, since the edible parts of the Potato and Topinambur are tubers and not true roots. de Flandre keep better from one year to the next than all the other carrots. Among the yellows, only the short yellow and the lonque from Achicourt, near Arras, are grown in gardens, and both are of excellent quality. Among the white varieties, the most esteemed for their sweetness and ability to keep for a long time are: common white, Breteuil white, transparent white, green-collared white; violet, yellow inside and very sweet, but prone to bolting if sown early, and very difficult to keep in winter. - The Spanish violet carrot, almost black in color, or the Indian black carrot, is more an object of curiosity than a real vegetable. Carrots need deep, rich soil or open, soft soil, smoked in the year or, at the latest, in the autumn before sowing. Sowing begins in February, when there is no need to worry about spiders or snails; sowing in March, April, May and June is more exposed to the attacks of these two dreaded enemies. The early Carrot is sown in September, and spends the winter in place, producing new roots in spring and early summer. Sow by broadcasting, or in rows spaced 15-20 cm apart, about 40 to 50 grams of seeds per acre; cover with a rake; sometimes add a little potting soil; if the soil is light and sandy, pack it down with a roller. Carrot seeds take a long time to germinate and require diligent care. Weed them and thin them out to leave at least an Om.15 space between each plant. When a plant is missing, transplant it, paying particular attention to the root tips. The seed used should be two years old, well scrubbed and free of hairs. Short carrots can be harvested early; long carrots can withstand frosts if protected by a layer of sawdust or litter; it is always wise not to wait for the harsh winter to bring them in and select the seed-bearing roots. For forced cultivation, we prefer to sow the Bell Carrot under a frame and on a bed filled with 20 to 25 cent. of potting soil; we thin out the plant if it is too tight, and give it air when the sun spreads a little heat. For spider mites (Theridium), water with a quantity of soot; or with an infusion of corporal tobacco: 60 grams in 12 liters of boiling water, which must be allowed to cool completely before use. NAVET. - Turnip is biennial and indigenous (Cruciferae). It requires light, slightly moist soil; drought makes it hard, stringy and pungent; it is broadcast from late June to October; spring sowing is sometimes dared with two- or three-year-old seed. The quantity of seed varies with the season, averaging 15 to 20 grams per acre. We cover with a rake; we thin and weed; we wage war on flea beetles. In fact, the surest way to protect turnips from this enemy is to choose ploughed, well-smoked soil for sowing, so that the vegetation is quickly strong enough to resist this insect, which attacks budding leaves in particular. Among dry turnips, let's mention: N. Freneuse, the most esteemed for stews, is russet, small and half-long; N. Petit Berlin, the smallest of all; N. jaune long, which does well only in sandy, soft soil; N. de Meaux, blond, shaped like a tapering carrot: Among the tender turnips, we grow the following in particular: N. blanc-plat hâtif, rouge-plat hâtif, précoce; N. des Sablons, white, half-round, very flavorful; N. des Vertus, N. de Claire fontaine, gros long d'Alsace, rave du Limousin, N. rose du Palatinat, etc. Among the semi-tenders, N. Boule-d'Or, N. jaune de Hollande, N. jaune d'Ecosse, N. gris de Morigny, N. jaune de Finlande, are very good and strong enough to withstand the first frosts. Turnips should be harvested before the first frosts, which, without destroying them, alter their tissues, give them a bad taste and even make them indigestible. They can be stored in a cellar or in a healthy yard, covered with fresh sand. Turnip seeds retain their germinative properties for three or four years. PANAIS. - Parsnip is a native, biennial plant (Umbelliferae). Sow outdoors, preferably in February or March. It is grown in the same way as carrots. The plant should be thinned out when the young individuals are the size of your little finger. The seed retains its germinative properties for only one year. There is a variety of parsnip known as the round or Metz parsnip, shaped like a top; it is preferable for soils with little depth, where the common species would be difficult to grow. RADISH (Cruciferae). - Annual plant from China. The main varieties are: early white radish, ordinary white radish, half-long radish, half-pink radish, summer gray radish, ordinary pink radish, early pink radish, summer yellow radish, early yellow radish, large winter purple radish, Chinese winter pink radish, etc. New: White Russian radish; Large winter radish, to be sown in June; keeps very well all winter. Most radishes, especially small round radishes, can be sown all year round. In spring, Radish seed is sown alone or mixed with lettuce and onion seed for transplanting; in other seasons, full soil is sufficient, at noon in winter, with a little shade in summer. The BLACK RADISH is sown in spring and harvested in autumn; well grown, well watered, in light, cool soil, it becomes very large, but remains tough. RAVE commune and its varieties, R. violette hâtive, R. rose, R. tortillée du Mans, R. rouge lonque, have the same cultivation and uses as Radishes; soft soil. Wild RAIFORT, with its pungent flavor, multiplies from seeds sown in summer in cool, shady soil, or from root sections planted in spring. Its grated root is eaten as German mustard or capuchin mustard. Winter Radish can be grown in a frame, with the same care as for early plants: warming, hoeing, weeding, etc. SALSIFIS. SCORSONERA. SPANISH BARK BEETLE. - These plants belong to the Compositae family and are all obtained by the same method of cultivation. They are sown broadcast, or even in rays, in March, April or July and August; they require substantial, well-disturbed soil, ploughed thoroughly, smoked from the previous year, and frequent watering in dry spells; they are thinned out, hoeed and weeded. The roots are harvested in autumn and into spring; summer seedlings only produce edible roots the following year. Salsify and Scorzonera seeds retain their germinative properties for two years; they never fully germinate. Scolyme d'Espagne should be sown in rows spaced about Om, 45 apart; plants should be placed at a distance of Om, 25 from each other; like Salsify and Scorsonera, Scolyme d'Espagne tolerates frost fairly well; however, if winter is too severe, Salsify should be covered with dry litter. BETTERAVE (Chenopodea). - Biennial plant native to southern Europe; its vegetable varieties include: ordinary red beet, the most widely cultivated of all and the least difficult to grow in the right soil; bark beetroot with chagrined bark; round red beetroot, a little rough, the most difficult to grow in the right soil. red, round, a little rough, very dark red; petite rouge de Castelnaudary with spindle-shaped root, rightly praised for its fine, delicate flesh; B. de Bassano, with delicate white flesh, much sought-after for the table; jaune ordinaire, very sweet; jaune globe, almost spherical with white, tight, sweet flesh, with orange stripes. Beet seed is broadcast in spring, in soil well loosened by one or two deep, smoky ploughings from the previous year; if sown in a nursery, the plant is transplanted when finger-sized; water often, until well established; weed and hoe. Plants should be about Om, 40 or Om, 50 apart. The roots are pulled out around Saint Martin's Day (first half of November). Once the leaves have been cut off, the beets are placed in a healthy cellar; the seed carriers are placed in gauges and covered with litter. These seeds retain their germinative properties for 4 or 5 years. POTATOES (Solanaceae). - Native to America. Gardeners cultivate only the earliest species. They should be planted in March, with good exposure, in sandy, light, unsmoked soil, simply covering each hole with a handful of litter to prevent frost. The tubers are planted either whole, or cut into pieces, each of which should have one or two good eyes. If planted in winter, the holes should be made deeper, leaving 50-60 cm between plants. Weed or ridge. For forced cultivation, tubers are taken from the germinator (1), where they have been placed since the end of November; (1) The germinator is a glazed frame with a box which is placed on a warm bed, under a frame, straw mats and bedding at night, but light is allowed to penetrate throughout the day; without this precaution, shrivelling is to be feared; a mild, uniform temperature is sufficient. The layout for each frame is 4 rows and 6 plants per row; at the start of vegetation, the spaces between rows will be advantageously occupied by Radish, Sorrel, Small Lettuce and Tomato seeds; but as soon as the Potato stems have gained strength, they need all the land; moderate watering at first, then more abundant: air as soon as the season allows. We only force the Marjolin variety. Potato seedlings are not to be scorned. These include: Pomme de terre de Jeaucé, half-ta rdive, round, yellow-fleshed, very good; P. comice d'Amiens, early, round, yellow; P. Shaw, yellow, round; P. Segonzae, early P. Kidney or Marjolin, elongated, yellow, very hátive; P. Châtaigne Sainville, one of the best; P. Truffe d'août, red and round; rouge lonque de Hollande, jaune lonque de Hollande, Descroizille, half-long, very delicate; Vitelotte, red, long, preferred for stews; Caillou blanc; Flocon de neige, Princesse, Quaran taine volette; marjolaine Tétard, pomme de terre ruban rouge, Belle de Browenell, a beautiful variety with an elongated, purplish-red tuber. TOPINAMBOUR or POIRE DE TERRE (Composites). - Native to Brazil. It is 2 to 2 m high, 60 cm with flowers resembling small suns, and tastes like an artichoke. It thrives without fertilizer in the poorest soils, where it can be planted in the first spring in medium-sized whole tubers, to be harvested in autumn. It thrives and perpetuates itself, so to speak, indefinitely at the foot of a warm wall; the potatoes placed close together are removed as soon as they have sprouted shoots and roots. With Topinambours planted very close together, you can form good hedges that will protect delicate cold or temperate greenhouse plants planted in the open during the summer from gales. Two varieties of Topinambours are grown in the same months as Potatoes: one purplish-red, the other white or yellowish; they are harvested only as and when needed for consumption. 4 Vegetables with edible bulbs: Onions (species and varieties), Leeks (species and varieties), Garlic, Chives, Shallots. ONION (Liliaceae). - This perennial plant, but treated as a biennial in cultivation, offers many varieties that are easily modified by the influence of soil and climate: the large white onion and the early white onion, both good and sweet; the bulbous onion with rocambole or Egyptian onion, whose stem bears bulbs joined at the head, or rocamboles, hence its name; the white onion from Nocera, eaten candied in vinegar as an hors-d'oeuvre with gherkins; the sulfur-colored Spanish onion. d'Espagne, sulfur-colored, with tender, pleasant flesh; O. cornede-bœuf with bulbs Om, 30 long; O. globe, beautiful, but rather difficult to preserve in its spherical form; O. potato, giving neither seeds nor rocamboles and multiplying by cloves; the O, pear, flesh a little coarse and of a very strong taste; the O. jaune ou blond des Vertus and the O. de Cambrat, both large, very good and long-lasting; the O. de Madère, pale red, very large and of a sweet flavor; etc.., etc. The white onions are delivered for consumption in summer; the others, which keep better, are eaten in autumn and winter. In the North, onion seedlings are left in place; in the South, they are sown in nurseries before winter and planted in squares in spring. Both methods have undeniable advantages; we prefer the first, but will briefly explain both. Sowing in place. - Choose substantial, light, smoky soil from the previous year; roll to pack well; broadcast at a rate of 100 to 120 grams per are, in February or March; lightly bury with the rake, put in a little potting soil and pack again with the roller; very moderate watering at first; weeding and thinning. In August and September, lay down the tops to slow down the drying process and speed up ripening. Leave the crop to dry for a few days on bare soil, then bring it in during dry weather. Transplanting. - You should sow very thickly in August or September, and transplant before winter for white onions; for other species, postpone transplanting until spring. Once you've made your rays with a hoe, place your onions about 10 cm apart, covering only the roots, but keeping your bedding ready to protect them from the cold; water and weed as described above for seedlings. Harvest in August and September. Many gardeners rightly praise and practice the Nouvellon method. Here's how it works. You sow very thickly in a nursery, in August, watering only as much as is necessary for the seed to rise; you then leave the plant to form and dry on the ground; each seed thus produces an Onion from the size of a pea to that of a hazelnut. These are reserves to be transplanted in rows in spring. Watering, weeding, etc. All onions have a tendency to bolt in winter, and to exhaust themselves through premature sprouting. So keep them in a place where it doesn't freeze, but where it's cold rather than hot. As soon as they have elongated, seed-bearing onions should be given sturdy supports to protect them from gales. Ripe seeds retain their germinative properties for more than two years; leave them in the head capsules, bundle them and hang them in a dry place until you're ready to use them. POIREAU OR PORREAU (Liliaceae). - Native to Switzerland. Biennial. Leeks come in several varieties, the main ones being: the ordinary long leek, very good for sowing in the open ground; the large short leek, suitable only for spring sowing or for layering in the Paris climate; the large short leek from Rouen, which in Normandy sometimes reaches arm's length; the yellow leek from Poitou; the monstrous leek from Carentan, very large and very rustic. Leeks are sown thickly in February, March and July, in substantial soil, preferably amended the previous autumn with horse or sheep manure, grape marc or charrée, and not with the fresh manure of horned animals; replant, as soon as the individual has reached the size of a feather pipe, in rays about Om, 12 deep and Om, 15 to Om, 16 apart, after cutting off the tips of the leaves and roots; frequent watering during droughts; weeding. Some gardeners cut the leaves of Leeks up to 5 or 6 times in summer, to give them strength. To strengthen Leeks, they are sown on beds and under frames in mid-December, with stoves and blankets; they are replanted in February and delivered for consumption in July. Any plants that grow too quickly in spring should be pulled out and replanted in deep trenches. The seed comes from new plantings, also made in March, and retains its germinative properties for two years running. Well-formed leeks do not freeze, but even mild cold destroys the young plant. GARLIC (Liliaceae). - Native to Sicily. Garlic, cultivated mainly in southern France, comes in four main varieties: common garlic, Spanish garlic, early pink garlic and Oriental garlic. This plant needs dry rather than damp soil, amended with horse manure for a year or two, and warm exposure. Garlic is propagated by planting cloves Om, 15 or Om, 20 apart, in beds or, better still, in borders; plant in February or March to harvest in spring; also plant in spring to harvest in August and September. As soon as the leaves and flower stalks appear, twist and tie them together to stop the sap flowing to the garlic bulbs or pods; don't pull up the plants until the tops are completely dry; leave them to dry out in the sun, tie in bundles, and hang in a dry place. If you let a few plants grow, you'll be able to produce seeds, albeit with difficulty in the Paris climate; but in the first year, they'll only produce bulblets for planting, and the harvest will be a year late. Propagation by separating the cloves is therefore quite rightly the only method used. CIBOULE (Liliaceae). - The Ciboule is grown as a biennial or as a perennial; its seed is sown in spring like that of the Leek. Transplant when very young, keeping a distance of Om, 16 between clumps; harvest throughout the summer; sow towards the end of July for autumn. It needs light, substantial soil. Some gardeners prefer to plant perennial Ciboule in borders like Garlic, letting it form large clumps that they split twice a year. In addition to Ciboule commune and C. vivace, we'd like to mention: Civette-Saint-Jacques and its varieties, propagated by cloves in spring or autumn, in borders. Ciboulette or Cirette indigène et vivace, smaller than Ciboule, propagated by separate cloves in March, planted in beds or more usually in borders; good soil, warm exposure, watered in summer. Keep Ciboule and Ciboulette seeds enclosed in their capsules; they are good for 2 or 3 years. ECHALOTE (Liliaceae). - Native to Palestine. Cultivated like garlic, at the same time, in soft, healthy soil, smoked the previous year. The bulbs are planted in rays 0b.15 apart, up to the surface of the earth, in February-March, for harvesting in July and August; or in October-November, for harvesting in June of the following year; the leaves are pulled off when dry; the Shallots are left to dry out in the sun for a few days; then they are stored in an attic, dry and protected from the cold. The two main varieties of shallot are Jersey shallot and Alençon shallot, which are larger than the common species, but less delicate and less easy to preserve. Edible leafy and flowering vegetables: Cabbage (its varieties), Kohlrabi, Turnip cabbage (varieties), Spinach, Tetragon, Sorrel, Celery, Celeriac, Cardoons, Watercress, Alen cress, Rhubarb, Parsley, Chervil, Tarragon, Purslane, Fennel, Nasturtium, Borage. Cabbage (Cruciferous). - Indigenous. Biennial, triennial and almost perennial (in some varieties). This vegetable requires a great deal of care, but it suffices to summarize here the general principles of its cultivation, which is simple and easy. First and foremost, it needs fresh, loose, slightly strong soil, with plenty of smoke and a little shade. Carefully weed your young plant, thin it out if it's too tight, and protect it from ticks, slugs and worms (see Insect pests). Place them permanently, in staggered rows, at distances of Om 50 for small species, and Om 70-80 for larger ones. If you're transplanting in dry weather, water gently. Seedlings are planted in the spring; their enemies are aphids, just as shaped cabbages have caterpillars. Cabbages, in general, resist cold well, and you will often be content to pull them up and leave them on the ground, root up; they would perish if rain and snow melted between their leaves and turned them into icicles; you can also, after removing their largest leaves, store them in a cellar; they are measured at the foot of a wall, at a good exposure, with litter and straw mats. To make the best use of time and land, some gardeners counter-plant, i.e. place cabbage plants between rows of potatoes or other early plants; once these have been removed, a square of cabbage is planted. Let's look at some of the main species or varieties, and the special care they require. First, let's establish five main series: cabbages, Milanese cabbages, green or headless cabbages, rooted or fleshy-stemmed cabbages, cauliflowers and broccoli. The main sub-varieties of cabbage are: C. d'York, with its small, elongated head, highly prized and very early. - C. cœur-de-bœuf, very good. - Large white cabus with the following varieties: C. de Saint-Denis or C. blanc de Bonneuil with large head; C. cabus d'Alsace, very quick to form head; C. conique de Poméranie with regularly conical head; large C. d'Allemagne which gives a huge head in good soil; C. de Hollande, medium size, fairly early; C. Joannet and C. Joannet tardïf; C. de Vaugirard or pommé d'hiver, which ripens at the end of winter; vert glacé, which withstands cold well, etc. - C. hâtif or pain-de-sucre with elongated apples, tender and sought-after. - Red cabbage, highly prized and highly prized in the north, where it is even eaten in salads. All large cabbages are used to make sauerkraut. York sprouts are sown in August-September for planting in October-November; sometimes they are transplanted in nurseries and only replanted in February-March. C. cabus are generally sown: 1° in February in beds, if antomne plants are to be replaced; 2° at the beginning of March, in beds; 3° during the same month, until April, in potting soil; 4° especially at the end of July and during August, until September 8th. August seedlings are replanted in nurseries from October to November, and planted out in November-December in dry soil, or in February-March in cold soil. Savoy or curly cabbage. Varieties include: Very early Savoy cabbage from Ulm, not very large, but very tasty and quick to pick. Pancalier from Touraine. - Joulin, gros Milan, etc. - C. de Milan des Vertus, remarkable for its size and beauty; it grows like cabbages, and goes well with them, especially in well-smoked soil. - Norwegian Savoy is winter-hardy. - Brussels sprouts produce small, tender, delicate apples in the leaf axils, which are picked as they grow. They can withstand severe frosts, and are enjoyed from autumn through to the end of winter by successive sowing. Savoy cabbages are generally sown in August-September, at a distance varying from Om, 50 to 1 meter, depending on the size of the variety. Kale is more of a fodder plant than a vegetable in the strict sense of the term; however, the vegetable garden admits the dwarf kale and its two sub-varieties, the variegated kale, and the prolific kale, whose curious foliage on the veins of their leaves even earns them a place among ornamental plants. Kale is generally sown from March to May and July to August, from Om,80 to 1 meter for the larger species; to Om 60 for the smaller ones. ~--En- Kohlrabi. - Although the leaves of this plant are not eaten, we thought it appropriate to group it with the other cabbages, since it is a true cabbage with a stem that swells above the ground and forms a sort of ball at the top; the leaves are planted on the sides of this ball. Kohlrabi tastes like cabbage and turnip, and can withstand fairly hard frosts. It and its varieties are sown in nurseries from the end of March to the end of May; the plant is placed in cool, well-smoked soil; it must be watered abundantly, otherwise the ball develops poorly and remains stringy. The root is kept in crates or gauges, like turnips, unless you prefer to leave it on the spot, since in the Paris climate, this cabbage winters very well outdoors. Other varieties include: C. rave with dissected leaves; its elegant leaves are reminiscent of those of the Artichoke; small but delicate apples. - C. navet or C. turneps, with its varieties (C. navet ordinaire, C. navet blane and C. navet blane à collet rouge), capable of withstanding the coldest weather; they are sown lightly, from late May to late June, without the trouble of transplanting. - C. rutabaga or C. navet jaune, with rounded, yellowish roots, can be sown in the field from late May to mid-July. Seedbeds should be sheltered with bedding and straw mats; the seed keeps for 5 to 6 years. Cauliflower. - Cauliflower needs soft, well-smoked soil, plenty of watering, and a temperature that's more humid than dry or too hot; that's why it does better in spring and autumn than in summer. Sow in September in potting soil, at midday; prick out in a nursery and protect from frost; plant out in March at a distance of about Om.60; it produces in June and July. Hard and semi-hard cauliflower are rightly preferred for sowing. You can also sow, but very lightly, on a warm bed, under a bell or in a frame, in February, for transplanting in March and at the beginning of April, with straw mats, and plant in the open ground at the end of April; you'll have produce in June-July. Choose hard or soft varieties for sowing. During the second half of June, sow the demidur in an earthen bed, in the shade and without transplanting; set out in July; water abundantly in the evening and morning; produce in October-November. Cauliflowers can be stored in a dry place, on shelves or hung in a cellar or a healthy cellar, throughout the winter. When transplanting cauliflowers, space them at intervals of about Om, 50 to Om, 60 in all directions. As soon as the heads start to form, cover them with a few pieces of their fresh leaves laid flat to protect them from direct contact with air and light. There are three main breeds of cauliflower: the tender or salomon, with a leaf that is plainer, straighter and less wide than that of the others, and a head that is quick to form, but not very compact; the durum, with its thick, short stem and tight, heavy, compact head, which often doesn't form at all; and the demi-dur, which is a combination of the salomon and durum varieties, and outperforms them all. The following are also grown as sub-varieties of the above: Lenormand cauliflower with very large apples, Roscoff (Brittany) cauliflower, Malta cauliflower, Cyprus cauliflower, Dutch cauliflower, etc. As seedbeds, we reserve cauliflower plants sown in autumn, wintered under a frame, with strong stems and firm, tight, clean, white apples. Broccoli. - This is a species of cauliflower with wavy leaves and larger dimensions; it is grown like cauliflower, but is more sensitive to the rigors of winter. Its main varieties are white, purple and early dwarf purple or Sicilian black cauliflower. Broccoli is sown in May-June: when cold weather arrives, the stalk is covered with bedding and harvested in early spring. England has supplied us with the B. mammouth, a late breed, but whose head is equal in volume to that of the largest cauliflowers. Broccoli can only be grown successfully in the South, from the Loire onwards. We'll just say a few words about: 1° Chinese cabbage or Pe-Tsaï, an intermediate between cabbage and turnip; it grows quickly and can be sown most of the year, but is more successful in summer and autumn than in spring; 2° Marinated cabbage, whose perennial root produces stems and shoots every year; it needs healthy, deep soil and, preferably, saline fertilizers. Multiplication by seed and cuttings. SPINACH (Chenopodea). - From northern Asia, annual. Spinach can be sown very lightly every month, from March to the end of October, in well-smoked, slightly cool soil; water quite frequently; summer seedlings should be sown in semi-shade, as heat causes this plant to bolt very quickly; round-seeded varieties are preferable for this purpose. Sometimes, in winter, spinach leaves appear frozen; soak them in cold water, then let them dry out in the air, on very dry boards. The rays should be spaced Om, 16 apart. The beaten seed, as soon as it matures, can be kept for several years; we use the two-year seed for spring and autumn sowings. Male plants should be removed as soon as they have finished flowering. The main varieties are: thorny-seeded E., common E., English E., Dutch E., Flanders E., Esquermes E., the last three with smooth seeds. E. monstrueux de Viroflay, highly recommendable. TETRAGON, from New Zealand, quite common now in our gardens, replaces, at least during the Summer, Spinach, of which it has the color and taste. Sow it in beds or in holes filled with potting soil and spaced om, 50 apart; a single plant can cover an area of one square meter, watering frequently during the summer. Tetragonia's branch tips and leaves are eaten. CLOVER (Polygonaceae). - Perennial, common in meadows. Sorrel can be propagated by sowing in rows, in spring and autumn, in any soil and at any exposure; frosts slow its growth, but without destroying it or even attacking its leaves; however, it is wise to cover it with straw or dry litter. Sorrel can also be propagated by dividing clumps in spring and autumn, although sowing is still necessary from time to time to maintain the properties of each species. - Varieties: - Belleville sorrel, less acidic than common sorrel, with broader leaves, widely cultivated in the Paris area; - Virgin sorrel, very delicate, with blonder leaves, broader than those of common sorrel; it can be prevented from seeding, its male and female flowers are on separate stems; it is propagated by shattering; - Slap-leaved sorrel, still not very widespread; - Snow sorrel grows even under the snow. Sorrel seeds retain their germinative properties for 3 years. CELERY (Umbelliferae). - Native, biennial. Requires naturally cool soil, or frequent watering. It is sown from January to April, on a bed or under a cloche and under a frame; in the open ground, from April onwards in a sheltered position, in rows separated by sufficient intervals to allow the soil necessary for buttages to be taken up. This operation is carried out three or four times before heavy frosts; as the plants lengthen, they are tied up; the soil is first covered up to the first tie, then eight days later up to the second, and eight days later up to the third; only the tips of the leaves remain uncovered. In gique and northern France, gardeners transplant Celery stalks to the bottom of a ditch, bring 6. the soil up on either side and mound. With plenty of potting soil and a good bedding, some Celery can be left in the vegetable garden; the rest is brought into the vegetable greenhouse, mounded with sand or light earth, and blanched according to consumption needs; some is kept in reserve in gauges; the cold is fatal to Celery. In our northern departments, we are obliged to overwinter seedlings under frames, whereas in the south of France, we simply transplant them to a warm location with a cover. The seed retains its germinative properties for two or three years; the newest are the best. Main varieties: Céleri court hâtif, C. plein blanc, C. nain frisé, C. violet de Tours, C. creux, C. à couper, the last two are non-stopping. CELERI-RAVE (1), still little known and not widely grown, has an aromatic taste, which is not to everyone's taste; it is nevertheless an excellent vegetable; it needs deep, naturally cool or almost continuously watered soil. Seedlings are treated in the same way as other species. Plant at a distance of Om, 50; surround the beds, if possible, with gutters that retain water and thus provide Celery with the perpetual moisture it craves. This is the German method. Look for fibrous roots and cheyelu. Celery root plants are tucked in and surrounded in winter by sand or light earth; a few plants left outside in healthy soil brave the cold without the help of mats or bedding. CARDON (Compositae). - Barbary, Biennial. The various varieties of Cardoon are sown in May, in the very place where they are to grow to their full potential, as they do not tolerate transplanting. (1) The root is the only part of the celeriac plant that is eaten; nevertheless, we have not thought it necessary to separate this plant from the others listed in this chapter under the heading of edible-leaf plants. You'll make holes spaced Om, 80 to 1 meter apart in all directions, well-soiled and in each of which you'll place two or three seeds, reserving yourself to leave only the most beautiful plant afterwards; you'll treat these plants like those of Artichokes, but you'll need to water them more often when the leaves have reached 1m,50 to 2 meters; around mid-June, gather them together with wicker or straw ties, cover them with a straw shirt, and protect the base from the wind by a small ridge Om 06 high, to prevent them from shrivelling; don't forget that the ribs must be eaten as soon as they are white, otherwise they will rot. So, at the end of autumn, lift your cardoons intended for winter canning, plant them in fresh sand in a dry, frost-free place, and only stuff them as and when they are needed for consumption. Don't bind your seedbeds, simply stub them out like those for Artichokes; they'll flower the following summer and give you seed that keeps for five or six years. Varieties : C. de Tours, with full, thick ribs, wrongly preferred to the following; - C. inerme, almost as full as the C. de Tours; - C. d'Espagne, with hollow or half-hollow ribs; - C. à côtes rouges, very wide and very full; - C. Puvis, remarkable for its volume. Puvis, remarkable for its volume, wide and half-full ribs; many gardeners rightly proclaim it the best of the Cardons; it is certainly worth the Tours variety, with its dangerous spines; it has few prickles, sometimes none at all. CRESSON de fontaine (Crucifers). - Perennial, native. Watercress requires a trickle of running water or tubs half-filled with soil, and almost continuously covered with a sheet of water. Multiply with seeds or roots. Large artificial watercress beds can also be created when the soil lends itself to this type of cultivation. Varieties: C. des prés is sown in spring in moist soil; same properties, same care as for Cresson de fontaine. C. de terre is sown in damp, light soil, in spring, in rows; it also replaces Cresson de fontaine. CESSON ALÉNOIS Ou PASSERAGE CULTIVÉ (Crucifers). - Annual, from Persia. This plant owes its name to the pungent, acrid flavor of its leaves, which is quite similar to that of watercress. Passerage is short-lived and quick to bolt; it needs warm, dry soil with southern exposure; in summer, seedlings are renewed every two weeks. Three varieties: C. alénois frisé, C. à larges feuilles and C. doré. An excellent addition to early spring salads, which are always a little bland; very healthy. Cresson alénois is worthless once grown. - Water frequently in summer. RHUBARBE (Polygonaceae). - From Asia. Rhubarb can be propagated from seed, sown as soon as it matures in March, in a bed of light soil, to be planted after the first year in deep, healthy soil, with a distance of about 1.30 m between plants. They can also be propagated by separating clumps; water frequently. The best species are: Rhubarb ondulée, Rhubarb australe or Népaul, Rhubarb groseille, preferable to the two previous ones. We know that the English eat a lot of Rhubarb for their pies. Tartreum is just one variety of wavy Rhubarb. PARSLEY (Umbelliferae). - Parsley is one of the most widely used seasonings. The seeds of common parsley take a long time to germinate; they should be sown early in the spring, or, in large quantities, as early as February, in well loosened soil; the gutters should be Om, 35 apart, so that the soil can be easily hoeed in these intervals and weeded. In winter, Parsley is sold by weight and at a high price, so Paris market gardeners transplant a certain quantity of Parsley to the foot of a wall, to the south, with glass frames, as a guarantee against frost. Parsley does not flower or set seed until the third year, but then it dies. Some people, afraid of confusing it with hemlock, prefer to grow parsley with crisp leaves. Cultivated parsley varieties are: P. commun, P. frisé, P. nain très-frisé; S E ~ S O 7 M 8 Fig. 57. - Parsley. The last two are not constant and often revert to common parsley; the only truly distinct species is parsley with a large fleshy root, much sought-after in Belgium and Holland as a seasoning for fish; we use it little in France. CERFEUIL (Umbelliferae). - Native and annual. Chervil is sown in March, at the foot of a wall, in a warm spot; in June, in the north and in the shade, and in any spot between the end of March and September. The seed ripens within the year and keeps for three years. Varieties: C. frisé, C. musqué or d'Espagne, aniseed-flavored. Multiply by sowing in spring and separating plants. - Tuberous or bulbous C., sow from September to December, in soft, carefully weeded soil. - M M 2 7a E 4 2 E les~ Fig. 38 - Chervil. Q 2 AM E - C. de Prescott (from Russia), with edible root, widely used for stuffing turkeys, geese, etc., sown at the end of April; harvested at the end of August; stored in a dry place until March. Chervil should always be carefully peeled to avoid leaving behind the small hemlock (Ethusa cinapium), which you can recognize by the darker green and sharper divisions of its leaves. Large Hemlock is easy to recognize by its stems dotted with livid spots reminiscent of snake skin, its repulsive odor, its very bitter taste and the pungency of all its parts; Its leaves resemble those of Wild Chervil; they are twice and thrice winged, large and a little soft; the leaflets are pinnatifid, acute and blackish-green; the flowers are white, arranged in very open umbels, with 3 9 4° 4 2l 2 Fig. 29 - Small hemlock. several leaflets. The calyx is entire; the petioles are unequal and heart-shaped; the seeds are oval and globose, with tubular ribs. Hemlock is found in wastelands, rubble, hedgerows, etc. (1). ESTRAGON (Compositae). - From Siberia, perennial. Multiply in April by the bursting of feet, placed at Om, 30 from each other; in the climate of Paris, it easily braves the rigors of winter; north of the Seine valley, one folds back . E E Fig. 40. - Great hemlock. stems in November-December; mound and top with dry litter. POURPIER (Portulaceae). - Native to southern France, (1) Hemlock poisoning is treated with plant acids, vinegar, lemon juice, and promptly administered purgatives. annual. Once eaten as a salad, this plant is now eaten stewed. It is sweet and refreshing. It is sown in the open ground from May throughout the summer. In both cases, it's important to remember that the plant spreads quickly over the whole ground, so you need to be careful with the seed. Frequent potting. Varieties: P. doré, P. doré à très-larges feuilles. In order to prolong the production of the leaves, the edible part of this vegetable, the tops are removed as soon as they are ready to flower. The seed retains its germinative properties for five or six years. FENNEL (Umbelliferae). - Native to the southern regions of Europe, and much sought-after by the Italians, who consume huge quantities, it is not widely grown around Paris. It is sown from February-March in light, sandy, well-amended soil; broadcast or in nurseries; in the latter case, replanted: keeping a distance of about Om, 20 between each plant. Hoeing, weeding and watering. Fennel is very hot, so don't eat too much of it. It can be used to garnish stews, macaroni, etc., etc. CAPUCIN (Tropéolées). - Native to South America. We will only discuss the edible varieties here. The large one and its brown-flowered variety, the small one whose barely-formed flowers and still-green seeds are candied and used in place of capers; the fresh flowers are used to season salads. Sown in March along trellises and arbors, Nasturtiums bloom all summer long. BOURRACHE (Borraginae). - Native, annual. Sow in the open, in spring and autumn; its pretty blue flowers adorn salads like Nasturtium flowers; its leaves are a good sudorific. No cultivation care is required, just prevent Borage from invading the garden with its seeds. Salads: Spring, summer and winter lettuces, Roman lettuces, Chicory, Scarole, Wild chicory, Chicory with Nasturtium beard, Lamb's lettuce, Rapunzel LAITUES (Composites). - From Asia. All the many varieties of lettuce produced by cultivation can be grouped into two general divisions: 1° Head lettuces; 2° Roman lettuces or chicory. Among the lettuces in the first division, the earliest of all are called spring lettuces; the most voluminous and least prone to bolting are called summer lettuces; and those treated as biennials from autumn onwards, to be eaten in the spring of the following year, are called winter lettuces. This division also includes non-heading lettuces for cutting. In general, lettuces grow quickly and set with difficulty in soil that is too light, too hot and too dry; they grow extremely slowly in strong, cold soil. The main spring lettuces are: L. crêpe and L. gottes or gau, which are of little value, hold poorly, i.e. are far too quick to bolt before they have formed their heads or almost immediately afterwards, but are very early; this is their only merit. One variety, the -~~~] 7es 1* gotte à cordon rouge (red-stringed), can be grown on a coucne or in the open on a hillside, in the south, from the first days of spring. The dauphine variety, highly esteemed in England, is the best of the spring lettuces. The main summer lettuces are: L. blonde de Versailles, which is very delicate; L. blonde laesseuse, L. chou or L. de Batavia, L. de Gênes, L. rousse de Hollande, etc. L. chou is a very good apple, with a high yield. In many countries, this plant is grown only for pigs, which are very fond of it. In mediocre soils, you can plant the blonde pa vesseuse and the rousse de Hollande, which are very hardy and succeed on their own when left to their natural vegetation. The following are grown as winter lettuces: Passion lettuce, morine, petite crêpe and black lettuce, all of which are not very delicate in taste, but are very hardy and can overwinter in the garden if planted in a good spot. They are especially suited to the forced cultivation we'll be talking about later. Market gardeners call lettuces "cuttings", not particular species, but plants of Pancake or Gotti lettuces, sown very thickly: they cut them off at the root collar as soon as the fourth leaf appears and deliver them for consumption; Chicory and Spinach lettuces have this particular destination. Among the true novelties, we admit only the large white winter lettuce, which is easy to grow. Romaine lettuces include even more varieties and sub-varieties than round lettuces. We'll just mention the main ones: the early spring and summer green, the summer market garden green, the market garden grey, the largest known; the winter red, fairly insensitive to cold; the thick-leaf alphange, the blonde marai chère, the blonde de Brunoy, very large and quite similar to the alphange, needing, like it, to be tied. All are good and advantageous, but you'll rightly prefer the green summer romaine and the grey summer and late-season romaine, to which you can even add the tender, delicate, very large artichoke-leaf romaine, capable of withstanding the first white frosts. All Romaines are easily capped, i.e. they have a tendency to fold the tops of their leaves over each other; you can encourage this natural tendency by tying the leaves together at mid-height with a wet straw tie. Lettuce seed (whatever the species) should be sown in light rather than heavy soil, broadcast, very light, barely covering each other. Round-headed lettuces do not require transplanting, as they pump very well in place. Plant in staggered rows at distances varying from Om.40 to Om.20 between each plant, depending on the size of the individual plants; don't pack the soil too tightly so that the roots of your Lettuces sink easily into the soil, and mulch the beds so that the water from your watering doesn't make the soil too compact. Sow spring lettuces in March for transplanting in April, and summer lettuces from April 15 to the end of July, so that they follow one another uninterruptedly throughout the summer and provide you with good plants for transplanting; Winter lettuces in three or four different sowings, from August 15 to September 15, so that you can transplant them before All Saints' Day and leave them in place over winter with mulch and litter; lettuces for cutting, which cannot be transplanted, can be sown on a bed and under a frame in January; on a dull bed in the economic tarpaulin from mid-December, when winter is not harsh. When spring comes, you'll be able to start sowing outdoors again on a terra-cotta bed, and continue fortnight after fortnight throughout the summer. Watering and weeding. Lettuce's enemies are grubs. Romaine lettuces are grown in much the same way as round lettuces; the Romaine maraîchère plant is raised under a bell or under a frame, for forcing or transplanting in the open air, so that it can be delivered for consumption as early as the first spring. The plant is transplanted in rows, in a checkerboard pattern about Om, 04 apart; it can be partially planted in the open air from February to April, and sometimes as early as the end of December. Beware of frost and sunburn. For the forced cultivation practiced on such a large scale around Paris, you sow the seed of early lettuces under cloches, on an earthen bed, at noon, giving your plant as little air as possible (étouffée cultivation); you transplant under other cloches (at a rate of five individuals per cloche), then on beds, leaving only the necessary space between the surface of your bed and the glass, as your lettuces must not become large; You'll need to maintain a moderate but constant heat by using manure stoves, or even better, thermosiphon heaters. Be sure to wipe the steam condensed on the inside walls of your frames; the mist that falls on the leaves when they're cold causes stains. Set aside the best Lettuces of each variety for seedbeds, without tying them up; keep birds out in general, and goldfinches in particular, by means of small mirrors attached by strings to slightly inclined sticks, or by other scarecrows made of rags, etc. Lettuce seed retains its reproductive properties for three or four years; for your seedlings, you should preferably take the two- or three-year-old seed; the plant it provides grows more slowly than that which would come from the previous year's seed. CHICORÉE (Composites). - Indigenous and perennial. Chicory's bitterness must be forgiven, in view of the other qualities of this salad, the healthiest of all. It is very sensitive to cold, and can only be grown outdoors from April onwards. Bury little, if any, of the seed, which you should sow on a well-soiled bed. When planting, keep a distance of about Om 30-32 between each plant in all directions; give Chicory the same care as Lettuce until its leaves, spread out in a circle, meet on top of each other; bind them to blanch them. From April onwards, seedlings are renewed month by month and planted until September; if autumn is fine, you'll have easy-to-keep reserves in the cellar for winter supplies. Beware of the slightest frost. Gardeners who use forced cultivation sow curly chicory seed on a warm bed, under a frame, in February-March, and even sometimes in January, for the primeur, on a very warm bed; they always transplant on a very warm bed, leaving intervals of Om 20 in all directions. The main varieties of chicory are: Chicorée d'été or Chicorée d'Italie, highly sought-after for the early seasons, and even for autumn, as it fills up quickly and well; C. de Meaux, which is prone to bolting if sown before June and fills out slowly; Rouennaise or corne-de-cerf, with a full, yellow, tender heart; toujours blanche, a semi-full-grown variety especially suited to the Midi climate; Scarole or Escarole, or Endive, which is grown like ordinary curly chicory, but without forcing it; At the end of autumn, it is blanched on the spot by laying the leaves down at their ends and holding them in this position with a weight of soil proportionate to their strength; it is harvested as soon as the weather softens. Wild Chicory or Coffee Chicory grows in uncultivated areas, along roadsides; you can sow the seeds very abundantly, and pick the smallest leaves as soon as they appear, to eat in salads, alone or mixed with Lamb's lettuce or Lettuce. Market gardeners use wild chicory to make the salad known in Paris as Barbe-de-capucin. In spring, they sow the Scarole seed, tightly packed in poor sandy soils; in November, they uproot the plant, and after removing all the leaves except the emerging central leaf, they entrust it, in bunches about Om, 20 in diameter, to layers of hot manure prepared in advance in cellars, in vast abandoned quarries where neither outside air nor light reaches. New: Wild Chicory with a large root, very happily cultivated in the Brussels area; it makes a good Capuchin Beard. Chicory seed retains its germinative properties for five or six years; the old variety is preferred, as it produces plants that are less prone to climbing. MACHE, BOURSETTE, DOUCETTE, etc. (Valerianaceae). - Annual, native. Three varieties are available: Mâche commune, M. ronde, M. d'Italie or M. régence. Lamb's lettuce is sown from August to the end of October, broadcast, in loose soil, smoked from the previous year; for example, on beds that are still available after having produced several vegetable garden products; it is lightly covered and watered in dry weather; the most advanced Lamb's lettuce plants are picked as and when needed for consumption. Since the seed falls out of its own accord as soon as it is ripe, the seedstocks should be removed before they are fully ripe, and hung up in a healthy but not too dry place. The seed retains its germinative properties for at least five or six years. Lamb's lettuce is considered best when it has withstood frost once or twice. Lamb's lettuce that grows wild on its own in the harvest is called wheat or hare's ear lamb's lettuce. New: lettuce-leafed M., a beautiful white-green; a recommendable and easy-to-cultivate plant. RAIPONCE (Campanulaceae). - Campanula raiponce grows naturally in woods, along hedges; its leaves and roots are edible. Sow in midsummer, in light, well-soiled soil, barely covering it with the tines of a rake; if you forget to water, the root becomes so hard that it ceases to be edible. Wild Rapunzel has a finer, more delicate taste than cultivated Rapunzel. ε παιι πωσ Edible fruit plants: Strawberry (species and varieties), remontant strawberry plants, non-remontant strawberry plants, biferous highbush strawberry; Pineapples; Melons, Cantaloupes, Embroidered melons, Smooth-skinned melons, Watermelons, Cucumbers, Gherkins, Squash; Tomatoes, Aubergines, Peppers. STRAWBERRY (Rosaceae). - Perennial. The Strawberry, which is not very fussy about the choice of soil, is the first in our climate to give us its delicious fruit, and it gives us this fruit for longer than any other plant. It braves the most rigorous cold, even those of Siberia and Greenland, which last nine or ten months; nevertheless, it prefers substantial, slightly cool soil. All strawberry plants, except F. buisson and F. Gaillon, send around them, in all directions, nets or runners furnished with knots from distance to distance; these knots take root in their turn and give other nets; let them take free flight in August-September, if you want the plant by this means; otherwise cut them off or rather prevent them from developing, as they weaken the mother plants. F. buisson and F. Gaillon can be propagated by dividing clumps in spring and autumn, taking care that each clump retains a few roots. 7. Strawberry seeds should only be sown when the aim is to regenerate or maintain good species unaltered, or to create new varieties; this is how we have obtained all these large-fruited strawberry varieties of American origin. To sow, take the best ripe strawberries, crush them in water to separate the seeds, then place them in light, soft, well-divided, terra-cotta soil. Cover with Om, 001 sifted potting soil or heather; Warm exposure, but sheltered from the sun and strong winds, by means of straw mats; frequent watering; the seedling takes about fifteen days to emerge; at two months, it can be transplanted in situ or in a nursery. If you don't want to sow until the following spring, leave the seed to dry out and store it in a dry place. Strawberry plants are planted in borders or beds, with a distance of Om, 30 to Om, 40 between each plant, in soil that is neither clayey nor too compact, well tilled, well smoked and free of bindweed roots and other perennials; weeding, hoeing and watering are carried out; a thick mulch will protect the fruit from contact with bare soil, on which it would become dirty, and will prevent many weeds from reappearing. Renew the plant every two or three years if you want to keep your harvests good and plentiful. In the first half of September, we pull up wild strawberry plants in the woods. Strawberries are usually planted around mid-September. Strawberry plants with very large fruit require a spacing of Om, 35 to Om, 40 in all directions; small and medium-sized varieties are happy with spacing of Om, 25 to Om, 30. Watering should be frequent during the hot season; you should stop when the first white frosts are approaching. Strawberry plants have an enemy in white grubs, which you can prevent if, before planting, you line the bottom of the soil with a thick, well-trampled bed of carpenter's shavings or chestnut leaves; then, with the soil back in place, proceed as usual. Warm cattle urine, spread over the strawberry field, kills the cricket mole, one of the strawberry's most formidable enemies. For forced cultivation, use the nets produced in July by the young Strawberry plants of the Four Seasons, the Princess Royal and the Count of Paris, planted in March of the same year, and raise them in a nursery in part-shade until the beginning of September; Then you plant three plants in each of the pots prepared in advance, with good, light, substantial soil. You then arrange these pots (about forty) in a frame that's not too deep, so that your Strawberry plants are at most a few centimetres from the glass. In December, you will successively force your pots by transporting them either to the pineapple greenhouse, or under a frame, in tannin or warm bedding manure, always as close as possible to the glass, as they need light. Strawberry plants left in the open ground, in a suitable position, can also be harvested much more quickly if they are sheltered (straw mats, frames). Strawberries that produce several harvests in the same year are known as remontant strawberries. The two main varieties are The F. des Alpes, or four-season or all-month variety, is the best of the remontant strawberry plants, indeed of all the strawberry plants; its fruit is almost as delicate as that of the F. des bois, and can be harvested from April until the frosts, in the open ground, and during the winter in frames and hot greenhouses. It is sometimes necessary to renew it by sowing, as it degenerates quite easily; it offers the following sub-varieties: F. with white fruits, Gilbert's black with strongly colored fruits, les quatre saisons meudonnaises. F. buisson de Gaillon produces fruit similar to that of F. des quatre saisons and requires the same care in cultivation. It flowers a little later in the spring. It is usually used to garnish flowerbeds along driveways; in fact, as it has no netting, it is very suitable for this purpose. It needs to be renewed often, however, as overcrowded clumps choke, wither away in the middle and stop producing. A light mulch or moss protects F. Gaillon from sunburn and direct contact of the fruit with the ground. Distance between plants, Om, 30. White-fruited sub-variety, very good, like Gaillon proper, it produces more in the second season and autumn than in spring. Non-remontant F. are those that provide only one crop each year; all attempts to make large-fruited Strawberries remontant have failed. F. des boïs: round or elongated fruit, small but excellent. - F. de Montreuil, the largest and most productive of the F. des bois varieties, requires a dry, sandy site for planting, and fresh, rich soil for permanent transplanting. - Caprons, with their lightly-colored, slightly musky fruit, have their male and female flowers on separate plants: the male plants, which are naturally sterile, therefore occupy a precious place in the vegetable garden, but to no avail. - Pineapple F. have a bland, musky flavor that is not to many people's taste; their stalks swell and thicken as the fruit grows. - American F. have provided, and continue to provide, many varieties through hybrid crosses and seedlings; their rounded fruits are sweet rather than acidic, while their conical fruits are acidic rather than sweet. Among the American species most worthy of a place in the vegetable garden, we'd like to mention: Virginte scarlet, with high, bluish-green foliage, small, round fruit, pierced with deep cavities, very early; it bears from the end of May to the end of June. American scarlet, very productive; oblong, dark-red fruit, pink flesh. F. du Chili, very large fruit; requires substantial soil and southern exposure. - F. svperbe de Wilmot, very beautiful fruit, up to Om, 22 in circumference. Goliath, fruit almost as large as Wilmot. The F. queen Victoria, very beautiful, large fruit, dark red, glossy, with a fine, fragrant taste. British queen, very productive, the best of the American varieties, with rounded fruit. F. haut-bois is the name given to a strawberry plant remarkable for the height and elegance of its flowering stems, and for its fruit, which has a vinous flavor. It is biferous, meaning that, without being very remontant, it flowers again in autumn and gives a second harvest almost as abundant as the first. As large strawberries only produce once a year, the deyra gardener must grow several varieties, ripening at successive times over a two-month period, in the following order: First fortnight. Princesse Royale, Black Prince de Cuthill, Keen's seedling. Second fortnight. Comte de Paris, Caroline, Pineapple. Third fortnight. F. Elton, Duchesse de Treviso, Superb Wilmot, Queen Victoria. Fourth fortnight. British queen, Barne's large White, F. du Chili. ANANAS (Bromeliads). - From South America. Pineapples are grown exclusively in France, etc., under forced cultivation. It is propagated by the eyelets that are born at the

The first two methods are almost always used; the third is used to obtain new varieties. Carnations and crowns are treated in the same way as cuttings from succulents; you don't plant them at the very moment you detach them, but let them dry out in the air, leaving the heel cut. Complete cultivation takes eighteen months to two years. You can start at any time. If you have planted your carnations at the beginning of November, in pots filled with heather soil and immersed in a layer that is always kept very warm, 20° centigrade at night and 25° centigrade during the day, you will wait until spring to put up a new, very warm layer, where the pineapples will quickly develop their roots; Ten or twelve hours later, they should be cut into pots larger than the first, filled with a mixture of equal parts of potting soil, heather soil and good garden soil. These pots should be placed in the tannage of a greenhouse, as close as possible to the glass. Watering and sprinkling from time to time; cleaning foliage with a damp cloth or sponge; high heat up to 35 and 40 degrees; strong fumigation with tobacco against parasitic insects, lice, cochineal insects and so on. Towards the end of summer, the plants are made or reeds; many gardeners, as soon as the flowering is over and the fruit has formed, subject the pineapple roots to an amputation almost as severe as that mentioned above. Replace each individual plant in a pot about Om.20 wide, immersed in new tannin, and make do with a temperature of -30°-32°. Distance between each plant, 0m,60. In recent years, many people have adopted the English method, which has always worked for us and which we believe is at least as good as the previous one. It consists in planting rooted Pineapples, after their first winter, in a tarpaulin soil Om, 60-80 deep, well heated by thermosiphon pipes; they are not transplanted or amputated later, distance between each foot, Om, 60. Frequent watering. Pineapple seeds, sown in spring in heather soil, sprout fairly quickly, but the plant only bears fruit after five years. Main varieties: A, providence and Enville, very early; Cayenne and its varieties: - A. Otaïti and A. de la Jamaique, very late; A. Comte de Paris, easy to grow; A. de la Martinique; A. Charlotte Rothschild; Princesse de Russie; Enville Pellevilain; Enville Mme Gonthier, etc. MELON (Cucurbitaceae). - Native to Asia. The first sowings are done in January, in pots of Om, 11 diameter outside, which you will bury in layers covered with frame and straw mats; at the rate of one seed for each pot; you can also sow in full compost, in small gullies of Om, 04 deep, leaving between each seed a dista nce of Om 08; or, finally, in terrines which you will entrust similarly to a warm layer. You'll need to provide air at the most favorable times of the day; you'll need to clear the glass of the fog that hangs on the inside walls. One month later, you'll set out, still on a bed, at a rate of two or three plants per panel, taking care to press each plant down to the cotyledons. When the plant has four leaves, you top it to encourage the growth of buds in the leaf axils; you prune the branches at the sixth or seventh leaf, and when there is a fruit, you pinch an eye above it. Bell Melons are sown in March-April, on a bed, under a frame, and are transplanted in clods and rows, at an average distance of Om, 80 to Om, 85, with a shaded bell, for a few days, on each plant until it has recovered well. Give air and light from time to time. Prune as above. In the South of France, sow four or five seeds in piles of manure, covered with soil. Choose the most beautiful plants as soon as they have emerged, and sacrifice all the others; the fruit obtained in this way is not very tasty. Don't grow Melons, Cucumbers, Potzrons, etc. too close together. The fertilizing dust, spreading in all directions, profoundly alters the species, giving you pumpkin melons with an unpleasant taste. Melon is sown in the open air, from May 10 to 20, on a bed of half-decomposed manure, inclined to the south, with potting soil mixed with good ordinary soil; there's no need to transplant; from time to time, spread a few handfuls of pigeon-hole around the melon plants, and water. The seed should only be harvested from fully ripened fruit, dried thoroughly and kept away from humidity; prefer old seeds to young ones. The best of all melons are Cantaloupes, and the best of all Cantaloupes are: the orange Cantaloupe, small, round, ribbed, with slightly firm red flesh; the earliest of all melons; consequently the most widely used early. Noir des Carmes, with round, green-black fruit, with ribs that are not very pronounced, but without scabs; red, vinous, very good flesh; very early under glass. - Prescott, the most esteemed in Paris; with more or less scabby ribs; shades varying from green to silver; small Prescott, with black or brown background, crown with protruding point in the center of the crown; - C. d'Alger, with red flesh; - C. de Hollande, etc. - M. maraîcher brodé. New: cantaloup d'Epinal; comes in at around 2 kilograms; fine, flavorful, beautifully colored flesh. For seedlings in the field, use preferably this last melon, the M. de Honfleur, the M. sucrin de Tours, the M. sucré vert d'Angers. In the south of France, we mainly grow: Melon de Malte, with white, melting, sweet flesh; early; medium size. - M. de Cavaillon or M. d'hiver, greenish-white flesh, juicy and fine. - M. d'Odessa, green with yellow stripes; melting green flesh; like the two preceding varieties. PASTEQUE or WATER MELON (Cucurbitaceae). - With red or white flesh, rather bland, can only be grown in France, in the departments of the Midi, where the orange tree lives; it comes in open fields, in holes previously filled with substantial earth and manure; we leave it to itself. Watering in the event of severe drought. CUCUMBER (Cucurbitaceae). - Native to India. Grows like melons, either on beds or in the open air. Sow in the first fortnight of May, keeping a distance of about 1.50 m between each plant from the center of the holes, each of which is about Om.50 in diameter and has been previously filled with fresh manure and good loam mixed with substantial earth. Mulch; water frequently. Concentrate all the sap on the fruit, by pruning and pinching. For early cucumbers, blane hâtif and hâtif de Hollande, remember what we said above about early melons. Bonneuil cucumbers are grown in the open air and turn into cucumber pomade. CORNICHONS (Cucurbitaceae). - These are cucumbers picked during the first period of fruit formation. The following are grown as Gherkins: 1° the small green Cucumber; in the open air, without pruning; frequent arr osage; 2° the C. serpent, so named because of the elongated, flexuous shape of its fruit; a less productive species than the previous one because it branches much less. Same care in cultivation. CUCUMBER (Cucurbitaceae). - They are sown in April-May, on piles of manure covered with potting soil, in damp, warm soil; holes are made similar to those for cucumber seeds, but larger, deeper and more widely spaced, depending on the size of the variety; when the seeds have sprouted, the best plants are selected, leaving one in each hole; They are usually left to develop naturally, with the exception of the Pumpkin, whose first stem is cut off above the second or third eye, and when the fruit is set, the branch bearing it is stopped two or three eyes above. Among the cultivated species and varieties, let's mention the main ones. The Pumpkin proper, often with huge, very heavy fruit, with the following varieties: P. d'Espagne, better than the previous one; P. de Chypre, with greenish flesh, not very thick; Giraumon-Turban, with yellow and greenish fruit, quite sweet. - The most esteemed varieties of squash are: Melonée or Muscade de Marseille, which ripens with difficulty around Paris, but does well in the south of France; - C. de Messine, with almost no inner cavity; C. de l'Ohio (America), with fruit weighing up to 3 or 4 kilograms; soft, sweet flesh; C. à la moelle or vegetal pith, with long fruit from Om, 14 to Om, 22; pale yellow; soft, melting flesh; highly prized by the English; the non-running Artichoke de Jérusalem; with fine, delicate flesh. - The Gourde de Pèlerin, the Courge Massue, etc., are not edible. Squash seeds retain their germinative properties for six to eight years. These plants are also propagated by cuttings and herbaceous grafting. New: Flat striped squash; waffle squash with spherical fruit weighing 6 to 7 kilograms; sweet, fine, golden-red flesh. TOMATO OR POMME D'AMOUR (Solanaceae). - From Mexico, annual. Like melons and squash, tomatoes fear the cold, and can only be sown in the open air from mid-May: the cold of autumn destroys many of these plants if they have not ripened by this time. It is therefore more prudent to sow in February and March, in the empty parts of melon plants; transplant to bed; then plant out as soon as the atmosphere is sufficiently warm. A little water and manure are all it needs to grow almost anywhere, with a good exposure to the south; pinch it to stop its wild shoots; press it to support its soft stems. Tomatoes are strengthened by sowing on a warm layer from the first days of January, then transplanting to another warm layer and planting out on a third warm layer; pruning is severe, leaving few fruits; harvesting takes place in June. For field tomatoes, if the autumn cold stops them ripening, simply place them in a warm greenhouse on shelves, or even on the kitchen mantelpiece, to turn red. New: Early dwarf red tomato; very productive variety; fine, tasty flesh. Seeds retain their germinative properties for three years. EDIBLE FRUIT PLANTS. AUBERGINE OU MÉLONGÈNE, Merangene (Solanées). - This plant, so widespread and easy to grow in the south of France, only produces good fruit in the Paris climate when it is forced, as the tomato is, with the difference that, to increase the volume of the eggplant, it is transplanted up to three times, eight or ten days apart each time, on very warm beds; it is planted in May and harvested in July. Sow on a bed in March, transplant on a bed in April, then plant in the open air, at the foot of a wall, in a warm spot. The following varieties can be distinguished: violette lonque, the most widely cultivated; V. ronde and panachée from Guadeloupe, with white, purple fruit; in the Midi, even the rather unhealthy fruit of A, poule-pondeuse or Plante-aux-Œufs is eaten. PIMENT (Solanaceae). - This plant is grown like eggplant. Sow on a bed in February-March or on compost in April; replant at the end of April or first fortnight of May, in a bed facing south, or in pots buried in a bed. Fruits are harvested within the year. Varieties: Long Pepper, Sweet Spanish Grey, Violet, Pepper-Tomato, with yellow, rounded, fairly sweet fruit, but which ripens with difficulty. - P. enragé des Antilles is a greenhouse shrub. Several chili peppers are grown as ornamental plants in the northern provinces of New France; Piment rouge d'Espagne, a very pretty breed of chili pepper with fruit 15 to 16 centimeters long, more or less cylindrical in its entire length. Fruit is a beautiful coral red, very fleshy and extremely sweet. Mushrooms. - Medicinal plants. - Economic plants We mentioned above (1) how to prepare manure for mushrooms; now let's talk about cultivating these cryptogams. When the spawn has penetrated all the way to the top of the millstone and has firmly attached itself, it is necessary to gopter, i.e. cover the entire surface with about Om, Ol of very finely sifted, slightly salty earth, which is applied with the back of the shovel; After harvesting, a little soil is added to the empty places left by the removed mushrooms; in this way, products can be obtained for another four or five months. In the English method, two or three wheelbarrow-loads of dung are taken from animals fed mainly on dry fodder, oats, field beans, etc.; it is crumbled as finely as possible; layers of Om, 20-25 thick are formed, which, by settling, are reduced, after a few days, to Om, 12-15; towards their center carefully chosen spawn is sown and, during (1) See the chapter on Fertilizers.  " -". - "*2 Pr "1-- 4. CHAPTER XI about two months, we have a harvest abundant enough for a family. Gardeners on the other side of the Channel don't lay these kinds of beds on the ground, but on shelves with ledges, in a warm yet dark shed leaning against the wall of a single-sided greenhouse; we have seen, in some Scottish homes, beds of Mushrooms in wide, deep drawers under large kitchen tables. Mushrooms, even the best and best-known ones, those that are grown in layers, become dangerous when they have aged, and should be eaten as soon as they hatch; if the edges have unfolded and the blades under the cap have turned from purplish pink to brown or black, throw them away; at the very least, they could give you terrible indigestion. Medicinal plants (1) with emollient properties are: GUIMAUVE, flowers, leaves and roots. Multiply by clumps or seeds, in spring, in any shallow soil. The roots, stripped of their bark, are hung in a well-ventilated room, where they dry out and keep for a long time. - ROUND LEAF MALL, same cultivation as Marshmallows. Leaves and flowers are used. - LINSEED, seeds for herbal teas, etc., flour for poultices. - CONSOUD. Dry or green root. Emollient pectoral plants: VIOLET, flowers and leaves. - WHITE WHEAT, flowers and leaves. Multiply by seed in light soil with warm exposure. Diuretic emollient plants are: CHIENDER: CHIENDENT, roots. Multiply by trace in any soil(1) For details of some of these plants, see their names in Cultivation of Ornamental Plants (Part 2); also see Vegetables. and any exposure. - OFFICIAL BORAGE. Fresh or dried flowers and leaves. Narcotic plants are: BELLADONE, a very poisonous plant, to be used only as directed by a physician; leaves and roots; its berries, rather like small black cherries, are poisonous. Multiply by seed or root in warm soil. - CIGUE, very poisonous plant. Leaves and roots are useful. Sow in spring; plant in the ground or in a nursery for transplanting, keeping a distance of 1 meter between each plant. - POMME ÉPINEUSE OR STRAMOINE. Very venomous, sugary plant and leaves. - PAVOr. Petals, leaves and seed. - Morelle NOiRE. The whole plant is used. - Multiply by seed in April in any soil, at any exposure. - JUSQUIAME NOIRE. Very venomous, leaves, roots, seeds and flowers are useful. Multiply by seed in light dry soil. Refreshing plants are : REGLISS. Root. - The exciting aromatic plants are: SAUGE. Flowers and leaves. - LAVENDER. Flowering spikes and flowers. - MELISSA or LEMONWOOD. Flowering spikes and leaves. Seedlings or cuttings in light, warm soil. - MARJOLAINE. Spikes and leaves. - ROSEMARY. Leaves and flowers. Exciting antispasmodic plants: SAFRAN. Only its stigmas are used. - PIVOINE OFFICINALE. Seeds, flowers and roots. - TANAISIE. Stem tops, flowers and seeds. - OFFICIAL VALERIAN. The root is removed before the plant has vegetated. Sow indoors in spring, or sow in patches in autumn, in fresh, open soil. - PUTING CAMOMILE or MARUET. Whole plant. Multiply by seed. - PEPPERMINT. Whole plant. Multiply by suckers in spring and fall. The stomachic tonic plants are: CAMOMILE, flowers and flowering stems. - ABSINTHE. Leaves and twig tops. - WATER TREFLY. Leaves. - GENTIANE. Root. - LITTLE CENTAURY. Flowering tops. Multiply by seed in spring in light, slightly dry soil. The depurative plants are: SAPONAIRE. Whole plant; roots are split lengthwise and cut into 2 or 3-centimeter-long pieces to make herbal tea. Multiply by offshoots at the start of winter. - PATIENCE. Root. Multiply by seed in autumn. - WILD CHICORY. Root. - HOPS, flowering cones. BARDANE. Roots. Multip, by seeds in any ground. - DANDELION. Roots and leaves. Multiply by seed in any soil. The purgative plants are: GRATIOLE. Stems and leaves; multiply by bursting clumps in damp soil. - RICIN. Seeds and leaves. - NERPRUN. Fruits; multip, by seed and sprout. - ELEBORE. Root. - WILD CUCUMBER, Fruit and roots. - RHUBARBUS. Root. - BRYONE. Roots; multiply by seeds as soon as mature or by splinters; in all soils. Antiscorbutic plants are: CRESSON. Whole plant. - MUSTARD. Seed. - WILD RAIFORT. Roots; multip, by seed and by splinters, in cool, shady soil. - COCHLEARIA. Leaves; multip, by seed in spring, in substantial, light, cool soil. Plants used as expectorant-excitants are: AUNEE. Roots; multip, by seed and by splinters, in shady, damp soil. - SCILES. Onion. - LIERRE TERRESTRE. Whole plant; multip, by seed, slightly shaded dry soil. - HYSSOPE. Whole plant. Astringent plants are: PROVINS ROSE. Closed flower petals. - TORMENTILLE. Roots; multip, by seed or splinter, in dry, light soil. - BISTORTE. Roots; multip. by seed or splinters, in marshy or at least damp, shady soil. Plants used as carminative-excitants are: ANGELICA ARCHANGELIOUS, roots and leaves, sow in spring and autumn. - ANISE. Seeds, sow in light, warm soil; water frequently. - CORIANDER. Seeds. Same cultivation as Fennel. Plants used as diuretics and atonic stimulants: GENEVA. Root. - CELERY. Root. - OX-STOP. Roots; multip, by seed, warm exposure, light soil. - PETIT HOUX, Roots. Economic plants (1): ARACHIDE, PISTACHE DE TERRE, Arachys hypogœa (Papilionacées.) - From Mexico, its cultivation is very similar to that of beans. Sow in soft, light soil, warmed enough for rapid germination. Hoe between rays and clumps. Peanuts succeed in areas where melons are grown in open fields. SUGAR BEETS. - See. Beets, vegetables. CHAMELINE or CAMOMILE, Myagrum sativum (Cruciferae). - Oil-bearing plant. Sown in spring, at a rate of about 5 kilograms of seed per hectare, in soil at (1) See also Fodder plants. 8 *3 T" 1" wheat or sandy soil; harvest as soon as capsules turn yellow. CARDÈRE, CHARDON A FOULON, C. A BONNETIER, Dipsacus fullonum (Dipsaceae). - Biennial plant armed with strong, numerous hooks suitable for combing sheets. Good soil, sow in the spring in northern countries, in autumn in southern Europe; weed; distance between each plant, Om, 32. As soon as their heads turn yellow, you cut the stems, leaving a length of about Om, 30 to be able to bind them. CARTHAMUS, SAFRAN BATARD, Carthamus tinctorius (Compositae). - Dry, deep soils, sow as a broadcast crop, or better in rays, from March or early May, depending on the climate, when frosts are no longer to be feared. Space plants Om, 33 apart. Harvest florets in dry weather; store in a healthy, well-ventilated place. The seed yields an oil much used in the Orient; parrots usually feed on it. HEMP, Cannabis sativa (Cannabinis). - Hemp needs light, free, substantial soil, well loosened by ploughing in autumn and again in spring. Sow immediately after a fertilizing rain, burying the seed very lightly. Weed, thin out. Harvest the male plants, the first to mature, as soon as they turn yellow, and the female plants when the seed is almost ripe. Stir the seed often to prevent fermentation; keep it away from wind and birds. It makes good burning oil. 4 hectolitres are enough to sow one hectare. Piedmont hemp, which is taller and stronger than the previous variety, is especially suited to making ropes for ships; it thrives in very ordinary soil with little or no smoke; however, set aside a square of your hemp field, richer in humus and more fertile, for the hemp plants that are to supply you with seeds for sowing. Chinese Hemp, with wider, more extensive branches than common Hemp, sometimes reaches heights of up to 4 meters, but rarely flowers or seeds in the Paris climate, COLZA. See also CHOU. CORCHORUS TEXTILIS or LO-MA. - It differs little from Corchorus olitorius or Corette potagère, and produces a coarse filament. GARANCE, Rubia tinctorum (Rubiaceae). - Perennial and indigenous. It needs light, fresh, substantial, well-tilled, well-smoked soil; sow in March-April, broadcast or even in rays, in which you spread the seed as evenly as possible, at a distance of Om, 03 to Om, 04. Weeding, reloading in the first year. New weeding, new reloading the following year in November; you'll cut the plant as soon as it's in flower if you want to use it as fodder. The third year, in August-September, you harvest the roots, which sometimes sink into the ground to Om, 40 to Om, 50; you carry them to a very clean area, stir them with a fork to remove laterre; you put them to dry in a dry, ventilated place or in an oven. GAUDE, Reseda luteola (Resedaceae). - Biennial, usually sown in July in dry, sandy soils, among beans, etc. Weed in autumn and winter. Weed the following autumn and spring; in summer, we pull up the stems as soon as they turn yellow; we dry them in small bunches placed at a distance from each other; if they are too crowded, they risk fermenting. GUIZOTIA OLEIFERE (Composites). - Several unsuccessful attempts have been made to cultivate this plant, whose stems burst very frequently and which, in France, yields far fewer seeds than in Abyssinia, where it originated. HOPS, Humulus lupulus (Cannabinae). - Native to northern Europe and North America. Flowers dioecious, the males in paniculate clusters; the females in a scaly cone at the end of an ovular stalk, composed of large, membranous, russet-white, oval scales or bracts, concave at their base. Stems hard, angular, reaching heights of 6 and 7 meters, with the help of supports. Leaves large, rough, petiolate, opposite, saw-toothed. Hops thrive in damp, sheltered places, hedges and woodland edges; they fear heat and flower in July. Cattle like to feed on hop leaves and stems. The cones have a strong, narcotic, slightly worm-eaten odor and a bitter taste; they are used by brewers to make beer. In northern Germany and other parts of the world, young hop shoots are eaten in salads or prepared like asparagus. Its shoots, softened in water, make strong, flexible bindings; they can even be used to make a kind of coarse yarn. Hops are also used to decorate arbors, cradles, trellises, etc. As the limits of this work do not allow us to go into any detail on the cultivation of this important plant, we refer the reader to the special treatises. Suffice it to say that Hops require very rich soil and costly care. LINSEED, Linum usitatissimum (Linaea). - Cultivated for the oil yielded by its seeds and for the spun yarn obtained from its bark. Linen is sown in spring and sometimes in autumn; winter flax is preferred for autumn sowing. Flax needs light soil, ploughed in all directions and well smoked. Flax is broadcast; 1° thickly to obtain very fine flax; 2° lightly, if seed is desired. Riga seed is the most esteemed of all; its white-flowered sub-variety, also known as royal flax or white-flowered American flax, produces stalks with remarkably supple fibers. Other main varieties include: L. froid, L. chaud, L. de mars, L. de maz. White-flowered flax is distinguished from other flax breeds by its medium-sized, sparsely-branched stems, with seeds that ripen as soon as the plant is pulled up; it succeeds easily, produces regular products and does not degenerate. Its yarn is highly sought-after for mechanical spinning. Flax is harvested when the bolls have turned yellow; after removing the seed immediately, either by beating the stems or by passing them between the teeth of a rake, it is rolled on the meadow or in water. It has been calculated that between 100 and 175 kilograms of flax seed are needed per hectare. VIVACE LINSEED, Linum perenne. - This flax should be sown fairly thickly to force the stems to stand upright and lengthen; substantial, well-smoked soil. MADIA DU CHILI, Madia sativa (Compositae). - Very-rustic, fast-growing plant; yields good oil for eating, but with a flavor not to everyone's taste; also used for making soap, fulling sheets, etc.; ordinary but deep soil. Sow from mid-March to the end of June, in rows spaced Om, 40 apart, with plants from Om, 12 to Om, 15 in the row. 12 to 15 kilograms of seed are needed per hectare. Harvest when seeds take on a grayish hue. Madia's strong, unpleasant odor protects it from all insect attacks. COTTONED NETTLE, Chinese A-Poo, Urtica nivea (Urticeae). - Sow in a terrine or on a bed of soft earth, barely covering; plant out in the second year; cotton nettle is more successful in the south of France than in the north. Cultivation experiments are not yet very conclusive. PAVOT, OLIETTE OR ŒEILLETTE, Papaver somniferum (Papaveraceae). - This plant is grown particularly in our northern departments; it produces an oil that is less delicate than olive oil, but has none of the disadvantages often attributed to it. The poppy needs soft, substantial soil that is well loosened. Broadcast sow from the end of March through May and June: even in September in the Midi, on cleared clover and alfalfa, but not after oats; spread the seeds as evenly as possible, barely covering them; hoe several times, and thin so that the stems have a space between them of Om, 15 to Om, 23. In September, you'll pull up the poppies, whose maturity is announced by the gray color of their heads; you'll gather them in small heaps, beat them on the spot and drop the seeds onto cloths spread out on the ground. Two or three kilograms are enough to sow a hectare. Blind poppies (Willette aveugle) are poppies with large heads devoid of holes and opercules. The white poppy (Papaver somniferum album) is cultivated less for its seed than for its large capsules, which are used for medicinal purposes; they provide opium through incisions made on the stem. PERSICAIRE, INDIGO, RENOUÉE TINCTORIALE, LOUREIRO; Polygonum tinctorium (Polygonées, from two Greek words meaning: plants with many knots). - Perennial in China, treated as an annual in France and best propagated from seed rather than cuttings. Sow in mid-March for the Paris climate, in nurseries for transplanting, or in light, healthy, fertile soil. Cloches and frames. Plant in rows separated by a spacing of Om,50 to Om 65 to facilitate hoeing and harvesting. One square metre of nursery will give you a hundred or so good plants to plant when they have 4 or 5 leaves, in May or late April. Hoeing, weeding and watering. You'll need around two kilograms of seed per hectare for sowing in rows, and six kilograms per hectare for broadcast sowing. Water Pepper Knotweed, not to be confused with the preceding species, or Peach-leaved Persicaria, thrives in damp places, along streams; it has a pungent, burning, peppery flavor, hence its name; its whitish flowers, washed with red, bloom in the course of summer. It is sometimes combined with sorrel and raisins; its seeds are used instead of pepper in the preparation of some foods. It produces a greenish-yellow color that is rightly preferred to gaude, and is used as a fertilizer. Bistort owes its name (twice torsoed) to its large, fibrous root, folded twice on itself; all livestock, with the exception of the horse, are very fond of it; its tender leaves, like those of spinach, are prepared and eaten, and its seeds can be used to feed barnyard birds. Its root, which contains a lot of tannin and gallic acid, loses its stypticity through successive lotions, and yields a starch which, when mixed with wheat flour, even in fairly large quantities, does little to alter the quality of bread. Viviparous Knotweed, which is closely related to Bistort, likes the cold pastures of the Hautes-Alpes and the Pyrenees. The Samoyeds and Tartars grind its roots into flour. Amphibian Knotweed, with its bushy spikes of pleasant red flowers blooming in August-September, is eagerly eaten by sheep, horses and pigs, but disdained by cows; it is mown and added to the mass of manure. Renouée d'Orient, Cordon de Saint-Jean, Monte-auciel, Cordon de cardinal, Persicaire du Levant, with a six-foot stem, provides very good seeds for poultry. OLEIFER RADIUS, CHINESE RAIFORT: Raphanus sativus oleifer (Cruciferae). - This plant, brought from China to Italy and from Italy to France, yields an edible oil. It needs soft, slightly deep soil. Sow in autumn in our southern provinces; in spring in the north. Weed, hoe and thin out to leave an interval of about Om, 25 between each plant. Glycyrrhiza glabra (Papilionaceae). - The best-known species is Licorice, with hairless fruits, a long, tracing, woody root, yellowish on the inside, and a mild, sweet flavor. It has several stems three to four feet high, topped with leaves composed of six or seven pairs of leaflets, with one odd, hairless, oval, a little slimy. Requires soft, deep soil. Multiply by suckers or rooted plants, planted in spring at intervals of Om, 30. Manure. Roots take three years to develop their full potential. RHUBARB, Rheum (Polygonaceae). - We do not recommend large-scale cultivation of this plant, which requires a great deal of care and only produces its main product, the roots, after four or five years. Rhubarb needs light, deep soil that's slightly dry rather than damp, with a sunny exposure. Multiply by seed or suckers. Distance between each plant: 1 m to 1.30 m. Weeding and hoeing the first year; simple plowing in spring the following years. Harvest in late autumn. The roots are cut in fragments, about Om, 06 long; after removing the epidermis, they are gently dried, grated, the angles softened and rolled in a barrel. Commercial Rhubarb belongs to the Rheum dalmatum or Palm Rhubarb species, native to China. Wavy Rhubarb or Muscovy Rhubarb is highly prized by Russians, who eat its leaves raw or cooked like those of vegetables. The pulpy Rhubarb, native to Lebanon and Carmel, is praised as a remedy for inflammatory diseases; its stalks, eaten raw, are very pleasant to the taste, slightly acidic and refreshing; they are preserved in honey, sugar or grape must, and in this way are easily preserved all year round. Rhubarb compaete, native to Tartary and China, has large, heart-shaped, hairless leaves; its root is tonic in small doses and purgative in large. Rhubarb raponthic, native to Asia, the banks of the Volga, etc., is cultivated in our gardens under the name of Monk's Rhubarb. It has a large root, yellow inside, a little reddish outside; a strong, fleshy stem; very broad, heart-shaped leaves; small, yellowish-white flowers in paniculate clusters. In some regions, its leaves and young shoots are eaten prepared in various ways; the whole plant gives a yellow color and is used above all for dyeing leather. It has the same tonic and purgative properties as rale (1) : Eyes, Buds, Buds, Twigs, False Twigs, Branches, Stings, Bourses, Slats, Twigs, Stems, Pruning, Pruning, Pruning, Pruning, Pruning, Pruning, Pruning, Pruning, Pruning is an operation by which part of the branches or shoots of a tree are cut off, to give the tree a certain disposition, or to make it bear the most beautiful fruit, and, each year, almost the same number. Each variety of tree requires its own specific pruning; we will only discuss fruit tree pruning in this and subsequent chapters. Pruning varies according to considerations of age and terrain, as well as the state of health or disease of the plants, differences in climate and so on. However, practical experience has formulated general laws that should be known and followed. 1° Always direct the branches of fruit trees as close as possible to the (1) In the remainder of this book, we will indicate the specific pruning for each species of fruit tree. For grafting, the reader is referred to chapter III, Multiplication of plants. 2° Take care to maintain the balance between the various parts of the tree, inclining towards the ground any twig that gets carried away, and straightening, on the contrary, any twig that is not very vigorous, as the sap tends to rise. To apply pruning properly, you need to know some of the terms used in this operation. The eye is the part of the plant that gives rise to the leaves; the bud is the part of the plant that produces the flower; the bud is born from the eye; the lateral eye is the one on the side; the terminal eye is the one at the end of a shoot; the sub-eye is the rudimentary eye that is not visible, or the bud that replaces the one that has been destroyed; the gourmand bud is the one that grows larger; the single eye is the one that is solitary; the double, triple or multiple eyes are those joined by 2, 3 or more. Virtually every leaf has an eye at its base; this eye is the starting point for all pruning theories. The bud is the modified, developed eye, the proof of plant virility; it produces a herbaceous part, more or less covered with leaves, which is called a bud. Once the bud has completed its annual growth, it is called a shoot; when it is more than a year old, it is called a branch. The carpenter or mother branch is the one that determines the shape of the tree; - the wood branches, born from the carpenter branch, are much smaller than it; the fruit branches, born from the wood branches, give flowers or fruits; the replacement branches are those that are left to develop to replace the first ones struck by disease, and so on. Branches arising directly from the carpenter branch are also known as sub-mother branches or simply sub-mother branches; they are called lower sub-mother branches if they are below the mother branch; - upper sub-mother branches if they are above the mother branch; - lower sub-mother branches if they are below the mother branch. - Fig. 42. - Bursa and sting. above; - finally, the branches placed on the carpenters and intended to produce fruiting branches are called spurs. E Fig. 43 - Bourses with stalks and eyes. Fig. 44 - Twig on bursa. The short, not very large, mostly right-angled twigs, ending in a pointed eye, are stings; - the bursa is a nodosity developed by the influx of sap on a point where there are flowers or fruit. The lambourde is a short, thick twig, with closely-spaced leaves that seem to emerge from a fold or a kind of ring. Twigs are spindly, very branched branches, almost always indicating, for vigorous subjects, forthcoming fruiting; if the twig, instead of ending in a wood bud, shows a fruit bud at its tip, it is called a crowned twig. The "cochonnet" or "bouquet de mai" is a slender twig, simple if short, branched if large; it covers itself with buds and produces very good fruit; it is found on stone fruit trees, particularly peach. Notching is an operation which consists in making more or less tongued transverse cuts in the bark of trunks or branches in spring, before the sap rises, to temporarily stop the sap. If you want to speed up the development of one part of the tree, you make the cut above; if you want to slow it down, you make the cut below. De-budding consists in removing useless or misplaced eyes; this operation is performed during pruning or a little later on plants still devoid of their leaves. Disbudding is the removal of useless or misplaced buds, from the moment they have reached just a few centimetres to their full development; this operation is performed dry, i.e. on plants not yet covered with leaves; it requires great care. Pinching is an operation designed to stop or moderate the development of certain parts, by removing the bud tips. You pinch at one, two or three leaves, when you remove the tip of the bud above the first, second or third leaf from the base of the bud. Continuous pinching, which requires a great deal of reserve and care, is performed successively on the same buds, as they develop new production. Trellising consists in tying the buds of espaliered or counter-trellised trees along walls, trellises, etc., using rags or rushes. Trellising should be carried out as the tree develops, from June to August; only well-developed parts are tied. Breaking consists in breaking, towards the end of summer, the buds destined for the production of fruiting parts, stings, lambourdes, etc. Ring incision is designed to enlarge the fruit and hasten ripening. It consists in removing a piece of bark a few millimeters wide from the entire circumference of a stem or branch; a special instrument, known as shears or ring-nippers, is used for this operation. Bleeding is a longitudinal incision made in the very hard bark of certain trees: 1° to debride the tissues and facilitate the flow of sap; 2° to cure strangles in stone fruit trees. Arcure consists in bending rebellious branches to force them to bear fruit, or at least to assume a position favorable to the circulation of sap. Nursery. - General observations on tree and shrub seeds. - Stone fruit trees: Peach, Apricot, Almond, Plum, Cherry, Bigarreautier, Cherry, Olive. CONIFERS. - Many conifers are not cultivated in nurseries; their seedlings are taken from the woods, where they sow themselves. Before using the seeds, they are exposed to an oven, so that, under the action of moderate heat, the cone scales open and leave the seeds free. Cedar of Lebanon cones do not need to undergo this preliminary operation; they are carefully opened with a sharp instrument; the seedling will not remain in the nursery for more than two years; it is better to raise it in deep pots and then transplant it as a root ball; Cypresses should be treated in the same way. We classify Conifers according to their maturity. Species. Scots pine............................... Time of maturity. Pinon pine........................... Weymouth pine............................. Cembro pine............................... November. December. October. November. Species. Time of maturity. Balsam fir.............................. Spruce fir............................... September. October. Cedar (two varieties)........................ November. Cypress (two varieties)...................... January. Virginia juniper....................... December. Lebanese cedar............................ March. almonds, walnuts, hazelnuts, chestnuts, etc. - All these seeds can be sown fresh, unless they come from distant countries, in which case they must be dried. They can be preserved by hiding them in a mixture of fine sand and sifted ashes. Sow in rows at the end of February: Horse Chestnuts, Chestnuts, Chestnuts, Almonds, Acorns, Walnuts, Hazelnuts, in clean, loosened soil, to a depth of Om, 02 to Om, 03. Wait until the end of March and the beginning of April to sow Sycamore and Beech, Om, 02 deep; the seedlings of these two trees are sensitive to cold. Species. Time of maturity. Birch.................................... Almond tree.................................. Aveline Hazel........................... Staphylea.......................... . .... Maple, Plane tree, etc................... Western plane tree.......................... Walnut (two varieties)....................... Horse chestnut........................... Beech...................................... Ash..................................... Chestnut................................ Sessile oak and all other Ea oaksNovember. September. October. October. October. December. September and October. September and October. November. November, rope..................................... December. Scarlet oak............................. November. Oak yense.............................. November, Cork oak................................. November, TREE AND SHRUB WITH SMALL SOFT SEEDS. - Immediately after harvesting, you can put these very early-maturing seeds in the ground; they will give you seedlings before winter; only delay seeds of certain varieties that fear the cold until spring. Species. Time of maturity. Poplar.................................... May. Aune............ ...... .................. . Elm...................................... November. June. Willow...................................... June. Syringa..................................... October. Cistus....................................... September, TREES AND SHRUBS WITH VEGETABLE SEEDS. - Sow in February, not too tightly, at Om, 02 deep, in light, sandy soil: thin out in July and August, a critical time for this plant. Species. Time of maturity, Cytise...................................... October. Robinia, false Acacia....................... November. Baguenaudier............................... October. Gléditzia, Chinese Beech................ Nutmeg. FRUITS, BERRIES AND CAPSULES CONTAINING SEEDS. - Pips should be kept away from heat; you should preferably orient your beds from east to west. Species. Time of ripening. Linden.................................... Jasmine.................................... Troüne... .. ......... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........ Honeysuckle............................... Berberis, Barberry...................... Elderberry..................................... Dogwood................................. Vine............................... ...... November. October. October. August. September. September. October. October. Coignassier................................ November. Apple tree................................... October. Pear tree.................................. October. STONE FRUITS AND BERRIES. - Prefer February and early March for stone fruit sowing. Hawthorn and holly should be sown from Om, 15 to Om, 18 apart, and Om, 14 deep; their seedlings fear too much heat. Shelter. Species. Time of ripening." Peach..................................... August and September. Plum tree.................................... Apricot......................... ....... Cherry............................ ....... Laurel...................... . ...... . . . . . . .. Cherry laurel............. ... . ....... .... Norway ash..................... . ... . . . . . . . . . . ... Sorbier des oiseleurs......... . .. . . . . .. . ... Pinnatifid mountain ash......................... Terminal mountain ash............................ Alder.................. . . . . .... . . . . . . . . .. . Hawthorn.................... ............... Holly............. ............ . . . .. . . .. .... Buckthorn.................................... October. August and September. July. November. September. December. August. October. November. November. October. November. October. Daphne................................... June. Viorne.................................... June. Phyllirea................................... February. Rosebush.............. . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. ...... Octubre. Alaterne................................... October. The PEACH tree (Rosaceae). - Native to Persia, has produced, through cultivation, a large number of varieties, either espaliered or in the open air. The different species are: - P. with downy fruit and flesh that does not adhere to the stone; - P. with downy fruit and adherent flesh; - P. with smooth, non-adherent fruit; - P. with smooth fruit and flesh that adheres to the stone. In the first class, the main varieties are: - the Pêche admirable, large, yellow, fine, sweet, which grows well in the open air; - the P. abricotée, a little mealy, reminiscent of apricot, from seed. - Avant-Pêche blanche, with white fruit, small, sweet, but not very fragrant; early. The tree that bears it is delicate. - Belle Beauce, very good quality, but a little late. - La Cardinale, marbled on the inside, like a beet; not much appreciated. - Chevreuse hâtive and Chevreuse tardive, of good quality. - Grosse mignonne ordinary, delicate and sweet, yellow on the shady side, red on the sunny side; divided into two lobes by a wide furrow. - Déesse hâtive and Galande, excellent quality. - Ma gdeleine blanche, with fine, musky white flesh. - Alberge jaune, yellow flesh around the circumference, red around the stone. - Belle de Paris, large fruit, marbled with red and very delicate. - P. de Vénus, with large fruit, topped by a nipple; delicate flesh, the best of all. The second class includes Pavie jaune, Pavie tardive, Pavie de Pomponne and Persée. The third class includes the small, apricot-like Jaune lisse and the red-mottled P. violette de Courson. In the fourth, we find Brug non, light red, very bright on the side exposed to the sun. In terms of ripening, peaches can be classified as follows: the white Avant-Pêche and the red Avant-Péche ripen in the second half of July. - Petite mignonne, Grande mignonne, Belle de Paris and Pourprée ripen in August. - P. de Vénus, Bourdine, Chevreuses, in September. - Pavie de Pomponne and P. abricotée, in October. - Brugnons ripen from early August to late October. - Pavie tardive, in November. Exposure. - South-facing: Chevreuse, Galande, Grosse mignonne, Avant-Pêche rouge, Belle Beauce, Nivette, Pourprée, P. de Vénus, Pavie, Violette de Courson and Jaune lisse. - The other species thrive in all exposures, except north. Cultivation. - Peach trees need soil that is light rather than strong, but deep and substantial. Some varieties can be propagated from seed: Pêche abricotée, Bourdine, Admirable, Grosse mignonne; for the others, grafting is used; sometimes hard-shelled almond trees are used for this purpose, as they are not very difficult to select and are not very prone to Peach tree diseases; sometimes plum trees and especially black P. de Damas, which does well in moist, shallow soil. Scion grafting is carried out from July to mid-September, at Om, 15 of soil for espaliers and at around 2 meters for open-air trees. Planting should only take place when the sap has been completely stopped by a hard frost. - Choose young plants with smooth bark, straight, moss-free stems and well-formed roots. The soil is loosened and even replaced with new soil, if it has already been used in previous years to grow peach, plum or apricot trees. The graft is raised to Om, 50 above the ground, keeping a distance of about 6 meters between each plant; a layer of manure Om, 10-12 thick covers the whole plantation. Watering, weeding, ploughing and fertilizing in autumn: in winter, use a fine broom to remove any frost or snow covering the branches. In summer, new watering should be stopped eight or ten days before the fruit ripens. Small mats to protect against the sun's heat. Harvesting takes place in August-September. Pruning. - As a general rule, the current year's branches alone produce flowers and fruit. When a young branch, born of a woody eye from the previous year, has borne fruit, we prune it on its lower eye, so that it opens onto a bud that will later become a fruiting branch. When a bud is born on one of the branches below the good wooden eye, it must be pruned to prevent the branch from growing longer and becoming exhausted. From the first year of transplanting, we begin to prune the peach tree and give it a particular shape; the rule, which must not be departed from, is this: provide a number of spur branches, regularly distributed, so that all parts of the espalier provide their quota of good peaches, and encourage, at the bottom of the branches that have borne fruit, the birth of replacement branches. The arrangements usually adopted are as follows: 1° SQUARE SPALER. - In February-March, the one-year-old grafted peach tree is cut back to a height of about Om, 25. Four of the best buds are selected Fig. 45. - Square peach tree (1st year). Fig. 46. - Square peach tree (2nd year). They are attached in a slightly oblique direction, but without obstructing the flow of sap. In the second year, from February onwards, the inner branches are arranged in an open V, forming a 45-degree angle, to form the mother branches; the other two branches, still in the same direction, but more oblique, will be the sub-branches; the mother branches are also pruned at the same height as the sub-branches, which will be born from the lateral eyes, while the terminal eyes, as they lengthen, will contain the mother9. branches. The first sub-mothers are pruned at about Om, 30, on a good eye that will extend them. If the first year has produced only two branches, instead of four, always prune in a V-shape, with two eyes, one of which, the upper, will continue the mother branch; and the other, the lower, lateral, will provide the first sub-mother. Fruiting branches should be pruned to a length of 10 to 15 centimetres, depending on their strength and position. Care should be taken to retain at least one eye (closest to the base), which will become the fruit-bearing replacement branch the following year. In the third year, if the tree is vigorous and well-balanced in all its parts, prune to encourage elongation, drawing in another sub-tree; if the tree is weak, simply prune the mother branches much shorter, without drawing in a sub-tree. The general care to be taken in the fourth and fifth years is the same as in the third; one or more sub-heads are pulled again, and any branches that get carried away are stopped. If everything is well balanced, attach the branches to the places intended for them; if the balance is badly established, lower the strong parts, straighten or free the weak par ties. Your tree should now have six lower limbs, three on each of its two branch-mothers. You'll dehair the youngest parts; you'll garnish the inside of your espalier, taking a branch from a spur of each of the mother branches, near the fork, which, raised almost vertically, becomes the first sub-mother. Keep an eye on its development. If it gets carried away, cut it back onto a weaker bud. Prune the other parts, taking into account their strength and the place they occupy; tie gently, without hindering the circulation of sap. When the tree is vigorous, you can prune several more branches that same year, at equal distances from each other, alternating as much as possible with the sub-mothers. A well-managed, complete square peach tree should have twelve limbs, six on each mother-branch; the well-filled carpenter-branches orffent numerous spurs which are themselves rich in buds. The square espalier very quickly covers the surface of a wall, thanks to the vertical position given to the inner limbs; but this upright position makes it Fig. 47 - Square peach tree (8th year) very difficult to maintain the balance of the sap. 2° The same can be said of the open V-shaped espalier or Montreuil espalier, which is similar in size but simpler than the previous one, and is rarely used today. 3° Espalier en Palmette. - This is the simplest, most widespread and most profitable type of pruning. For the simple Palmette, in February-March, the Peach tree (grafted one year old) is cut back to about Om.30 from the ground, giving a single shoot which will become the spire or central stem of the Palmette. The first pruning produces two lateral arms which are planted obliquely at the same height, one on the right, the other on the left; only force them to take up a horizontal position at the end of summer, when the annual shoot has come to an end; the following year, the arrow produces two other lateral arms which are extended parallel to the first two, and so on from year to year, until the peach tree reaches the height of the wall. Always leave the upper eye to extend the stem. Fig. 48. - Simple palmette (third year). Fig. 49 - Single palmette (2nd year). Double pallet. - Instead of one stem, you'll have two, due to the bifurcation of the main stem at birth; each of these stems has limbs on one side only. Here's how you get these two vertical mother branches. Assuming the tree has been grafted and planted in the usual way, cut back to about Om, 35 from the ground; as soon as the buds develop, choose two of the finest, as close together as possible and coming from either side of the stem; tie them obliquely or vertically, and only bring them back to the horizontal direction at the end of summer; make sure they strengthen equally. The following spring, prune these two branches over two eyes, one of which, the terminal, will extend the stem; the other, lower and outer, will form the first horizontal limb or first arm of the Palmette. Repeat the same operation every year, paying particular attention to pinching, disbudding and the overall balance of the tree. You can also form your secondary limbs with the end of the vertical branch, inclining it when it reaches the height where the lateral branch should be placed; you then continue your 5 OO Fig. 50. - Double palmette. vertical branch using the bud born at the point of curvature. In some fast-growing peach trees, it is not uncommon to obtain two levels of lateral branches in the same year: 1° by pinching the bud that extends the vertical part as soon as this bud is at the height where lateral branches are required; 2° by encouraging the birth of early buds, which are quick to appear after the pinching operation. The double pallet is less common and less advantageous than the single pallet. 4° To get an exact idea of the size of the U-shaped Peach tree, imagine the double Palmette described above, but without the side limbs. Once the two vertical branches have been established, all you have to do is keep them in balance, well furnished with fruit-bearing branches; if, despite all your care, the upper parts get carried away, bring them together on a lower bud. In other respects, same behaviour. Horizontal palms. - Plant several peach trees along an espalier, about 4 meters apart. Make the first pruning of all their stems on a front eye, keeping all the eyes below (except those in front or behind); they will give you the fruiting branches. At the next pruning, you cut all the shoots on a front eye to obtain the extension and, on a side eye on the right, to form the first row of cords. When the extension shoots have grown, prune them in the same way on a front eye; the side eye, on the left, will form the second row of cords at Om, 45 of the first. Follow the same procedure for the other three cords. As for the sixth, bend and palisade the end of the branch intended to form it as soon as this branch has passed the Om, 45 that should separate it from the previous one. Don't cut the ends of the cords until they touch the stems of the neighbor they're heading for, after which they should be bent over a branch or a false branch, suitably palmed and cut over a front eye. Sometimes, in order to obtain cords of the same height, you will bud in August at the appropriate place, and cut the following spring. 5° For the simple oblique cordon, you will plant one-year-old grafted peach trees with a single stem, at Om 75 from each other, inclining them all at an angle of 60 degrees, which you will reduce to 45 degrees the following year. Make sure that growth is regular, and that the eyes work together to form evenly-spaced spurs on the stem. This type of espalier should not exceed 3 meters in height. Fig. 51 - Oblique cordon. PEACH TREE DISEASES. - Blanc or Meunier is caused by a fungus and manifests itself as a whitish, farinaceous dust on the leaves and sometimes even on the fruit. - Grise is caused by the presence of myriads of small insects on the underside of the leaves, which they suck off and exhaust. Remedies: freshly slaked lime, 2 kilograms; 500 grams of sulfur flower, all mixed together; soak the diseased parts in the morning, before sunrise. Against peach aphid: tobacco water; soak 1/2 kilog. in hot water for 24 hours, add about 10 to 12 liters of cold water to this dissolution; sulphur flower sprayed on leaves with a bellows or a sulphur tassel. Water with a little iron sulfate dissolved in it. ABRICOTIER (Rosaceae). - From Armenia. Blooms in February-March; reproduces by sowing or grafting. The main varieties are: early apricot or Abricotin, second quality; blane with large fruit, peachy taste, very-good quality; A. de Provence, sweet and vinous; Alberge, abundant fruit; A, black, dark wine-red color, fiery-red flesh, third quality. A. d'Alexandrie; gros hâtif de Saint-Jean; gros rouge précoce, with large, orange fruit, first quality, ripens around mid-July and does very well in full wind; A. Angoumois hâtif, small and elongated, almost reddish-yellow, with strong odor, second quality, ripens in July; A, common, with large, round fruit, a little mushy when overripe, second quality; needs northern exposure and full wind; very productive; A. de Jacques, medium-sized, rounded, reddish-yellow, first quality, ripens around mid-August; A. de Hollande or Amande aveline, small, yellow, glassy, second quality; ripens around the end of July; A. Musch de Turquie, medium-sized fruit, rounded, dark yellow, pulp transparent enough to show through to the stone, fine and very pleasant taste; ripens around mid-July; requires espalier, first quality; A. Moorpark, quite similar to the peach apricot, ripens in mid-August; A. de Nancy, large, slightly flattened and rough, orange-yellow, melting, first quality; it is even rightly declared the best of all apricots; its stone is the only one where you'll notice a pinhole, reproduction by seed, many varieties; A. Pourret, with large, vinous fruit, second quality, ripens in mid-August; A. Beaugé, with large, rounded, yellow fruit, first quality, ripens at the beginning of September; A. précoce d'Esperen, with medium-sized, flattened, yellow fruit, first quality, ripens at the beginning of July; A. Royal, with round, orange, transparent, melting fruit, first quality; ripens at the end of July; all exposures, except north. Apricot fruit is only at its best when it comes from high-stemmed trees grown in the open air, rarely pruned in the first few years, then left to grow naturally. Pruning and cultivation. - Apricot trees thrive in light, deep soil with a southern or eastern exposure. Seedlings are selected from the best fruit, stratified and planted in autumn at a depth of about Om, 055. The Apricot tree is grafted in the form of an escutcheon, with a dormant eye; it is raVb M 2 Fig. 52. - Peacock's tail fan. beaten, at Om, 25 from the ground and, after the first year, two or four of the most vigorous buds are chosen and fixed in a slightly oblique direction. In the second year, prune longer or shorter, depending on the strength of the branches; pinch off any unnecessary buds. In the third year, we lengthen the carpenter branches, keeping some buds, so that if one of these branches is missing, it can be replaced by a well-placed bud that can be reattached to the same spot. Suppression of overabundant fruit production. The result is the Peacock's tail fan, the best shape for this tree. Protect the flowers from frost and the fruit from sunburn, using canvas and straw mats. AMANDIER (Rosaceae). - From Asia. Sow in autumn, in deep, chalky soil with warm exposure, using the kernels of naturally fallen fruit as seeds. It can be grafted and pruned for open-air or espalier planting, and requires the same cultivation care as the Peach and Apricot; the same precautions against frost and sunburn. Its varieties are classified into three divisions: 1° Ordinary hard-shelled almonds, ordinatre soft-shelled almonds, Princesse, Sultane, etc.; 2° Bitter almonds, 3° Almond-Peach, a hybrid of Peach and Almond. PLUM (Rosaceae). - From Asia. Blooms in March. Its varieties can be classified according to fruit color as yellow, violet, red or black. Yellow plums. - Apricot plum; elongated shape; yellowish on one side, red on the other; firm yellow flesh, more delicate than that of the apricot plum, with which it is often confused. Ripens in early September. - Reine-Claude, diaphanous, reddish-yellow, round; ripens in September. - Prune de Catalogne or de Saint-Barnabé, small, long and yellow. - Brignole, pale yellow on the shaded side, red on the sunny side; mediocre flesh. Used to make prunes. - P. de Briançon, inedible but whose kernel provides oil. - Goutte d'or, large and oval; good quality. - Pruneimpériale white, large and elongated; firm flesh clinging to the stone. - P. Jefferson, oval, reddish-yellow; very good variety; ripens towards the end of August. La Mirabelle (large and small) round or almost round fruit; fine, sweet flesh of first quality; ripens in mid-August - La P. de Monsieur, second quality; ripens at the end of July. P. de Monsieur with yellow fruit, yellow fruit with purple spots and washes; first quality, ripens in the second half of July. P. Washington, large globular fruit, greenish-yellow or red-tinted on the sunny side; melting flesh comparable to Reine-Claude; first quality; ripens in September. - P. Sainte-Catherine, medium-sized, oval, sweet; first quality; the best species for making prunes known as Pruneaux de Tours, ripens in September-October. Purple or red plums. - P. Damas-musqué, ripens in mid-August; Damas violet, top quality; ripens in late September; Damas de Tours or P. Impériale, very good quality; ripens in mid-August. All Damas perpetuate themselves through seed. - Red diaprée plum or Impératrice, with medium-sized, elongated fruit, cherry-red on one side, firm flesh, sweet, top quality; ripens in early September. - Impériale violette, as large as an egg, very often glassy and gummy; second quality; ripens in mid-August. - The Montfort plum. - P. Perdrigon red, small and oval. - Red Reine-Claude. - Violet Reine-Claude. - Early P. Royale. - P. Saint-Julien. - P. pêche, very large and oval. - P. Victoria, very large and oval; ripens in August. - Prunes d'Agen, delicious as prunes; an important trade item. Black plums. - Black Damask plum. This tree is used for grafting Peach, Plum and Apricot trees. - P. diaprée black, small and oval, wrinkling on the tree before falling off. - P. impériale de Milan, slightly elongated, medium size; black skin, dotted with grayish black spots. Very good quality; ripens in September. White plums. - The white P. Perdrigon, very healthy, very smoky, ripens in espaliers at the beginning of September. The tree reproduces from the pit. - PruneCerisette, white and red. Green plums. - P. bifère, used in compotes; ripens in mid-July and mid-September. - ReineClaude, green apricot or Verte-bonne, large, spherical, speckled with gray and red; the best of all plums; ripens in August. Plum tree cultivation. - This tree thrives in the most ordinary soil, provided it is not marshy, loamy or too sandy; in southern countries, it thrives in all types of exposure; in northern countries, it thrives in the east or south. It can be propagated by sowing stratified cores or offshoots; the former is preferable for trees growing in the open air. Sow in spring and care for the young plant, either in a bed or in a nursery; let it gain strength before grafting, especially before slit grafting. Scion grafting is done in summer. Plum trees are planted the year after the first graft, and are cut back by 4, 6 or more eyes, depending on their vigor. Care is taken to destroy the useless offshoots, of which this tree is very prolific, by cutting them off at the root. Palmette pruning follows the general principles indicated for this operation. Plums are rarely espaliered; they like iron even less than apricots. Plum trees grown in the open air only need to be cleared of dead wood, useless branches and moss. Like Peach, this tree is subject to Gum and sometimes Powdery Mildew. Remedy: renew the soil around the base; sprinkle sulphur flower on diseased leaves; remove gum and heal wounds. Oven-dried plums keep very well. Plum wood is highly prized in joinery. CHERRY (Rosaceae). - From Asia Minor, we classify its 70 varieties into three categories: firstly, the Cherry trees proper; secondly, the Prickly Pear trees; thirdly, the Cherry trees. All these trees produce their flowers only on the previous year's wood; their fruit is round or heart-shaped, red, white, yellow or black, depending on the species. Cherry trees proper. - The German or Chaux cherry, with large, dark-red fruit, ripens towards the end of July. - L'Anglaise tardive, firm, pleasant-tasting flesh, top quality; ripens in early August. - Belle de Châtenay, large red fruit, firm, sweet flesh, first quality; ripens in early August. - Belle de Choisy or Dauphine, large, round, transparent, lightly colored, sweet flesh, first quality; ripens in late June. - Courte-queue or gros Gobet or Montmorency, very bright red; many varieties; ripens in mid-July. - Common cherry, with its varieties: Grosse, Madeleine, Cerise de pied. Small, acid fruit. Cannot be grafted; propagates by suckers. - Griotte commune, round, large, almost black, dark red flesh, second quality; ripens in early July. - C. du Nord, Belle Griotte; heart-shaped, bright red, second quality; ripens in September. Like all Griottes, it is preferred for preserving in brandy. - Cerise du Portugal, small Griotte, sweet-fleshed; ripens in early July. - C. Royale, early ripening, one of the best varieties; large, rounded fruit, turning from bright red to reddish-brown. - C. de la reine Hortense or Seize à la livre, large round fruit, bright red, fragrant; first quality; ripens in early July. - C. de la Toussaint, produced by a small tree with hanging branches like those of weeping willows, acid; third quality; ripens in July. The tree blooms for four months. - C. à Trochet, bright red, acidic, inferior quality; sometimes as many as six or eight of these cherries are found attached to the end of a single tail. Bigarreautiers - These trees are larger and stockier than the Merisiers, their twigs are more pendulous, and their fruit has a crunchy flesh that differs from that of the Guigne. Varieties: the Bigarreau, with its large red fruit, is of the highest quality and ripens at the end of July. - The B. à feuilles de tabac or four to the pound, curious for its leaves, but hardly worth cultivating, since it produces only small, few and poor-quality fruit. - B. de Metzel, with large, dark-red fruit, very pleasant taste, first quality, ripens in July. - B. hâtif, small, heart-shaped, light red, firm flesh with white fibers, first quality, ripens in June. - B. cœur de pigeon, heart-shaped, crisp flesh, the best of all Bigarreaux, ripens in July. - B. blanc, second quality, a little red on the sunny side, ripens in June. - B. belle de Richemont, with large, heart-shaped fruit of a beautiful shiny red, flesh-colored variety, first quality, ripens in mid-July. Wild cherry and guignier. - Wild cherry, the type found in our forests, is cultivated more for its wood than for its fruit. It thrives in granitic and sandy soils; its preferred variety is the Guignier, which itself gives us the most widespread varieties: the shiny black Guigne, the largest, shiniest and best of the Guignes; it ripens at the end of June. - Early black, the earliest and most common, but of third quality; ripens in the first half of June. - Early pink G., tender red, very watery. - G. grosse ambrée or grosse merise blanche, heart-shaped fruit, sweet, long from Om, 020, third quality, ripens from June to mid-July. Cherry trees with red or white fruit are used as subjects for grafting good cherry species. Cherry tree cultivation. - It's an essentially hardy, robust tree, adaptable to any kind of soil, provided it's neither too wet nor too clayey. We sow its pits in the woods. They can be grafted in buds or in slits, although the latter is less certain of success. Some good species can be espaliered; others can be planted in the open. The bark of the cherry tree is very hard and tight, compressing the sap juices; hence the custom of making longitudinal incisions in the bark from time to time, to facilitate the development of the trunk. Same diseases as stone fruit trees; same remedies. Cherries can be stored dry or in brandy. They are used to make a type of wine, kirsch, maraschino, jams and raisins. OLIVE (Jasmine). - From Asia. 8 to 10 meters high. The most commonly cultivated varieties are: O. Aglandeau or Caianne, with round fruit, very bitter, but yielding a superfine oil. - The O. d'Espagne, which produces a very large olive with very good candied, bitter oil. - Amellon or Amelline or plant of Aix, almond-shaped fruit; very good candied olive; sweet oil. - Picholine or Saurine, the best of the candied olives; sweet, fine oil. - L'O. Pointue or Rougette, esteemed oil. - L'O. Verdole or Verdau, with ovoid fruit that rots quickly when ripe. - Galininque or Laurine, with reddish fruit, resistant to cold, etc. Cultivation. - In France, olive trees require a very special region, known as the Oliviers region, and are propagated by seed, cuttings and suckers. Cuttings are the simplest way to produce good fruit; seedlings only bear fruit after 10 or 12 years and, like suckers, must be grafted. Crown grafting is preferred, although cleft and escutcheon grafting also work well. Olive trees are planted in staggered rows, at the edges, with a distance between plants of 10 to 13 meters, depending on the vigor of the species and the goodness of the soil. From time to time, they are smoked with manure made from scraps of wool rags, animal hair, horns and nails. The earliest fruits appear in November, and are harvested from then until March. In many countries, they are left on trees or fallen to the ground, but the best oil is obtained by removing them on a fine, warm day, laying them out for a week or so on a dry floor or on racks, and then pressing them without crushing the stones, as the oil from the kernels is inferior to that from the pulp. To preserve olives, they are picked before they are ripe, and their natural bitterness is corrected with a preparation based on sea salt. They are eaten ripe with a seasoning of oil, salt and pepper. Apple, medlar, orange and pomegranate trees, COIGNASSIER (Rosaceae). - From southern Europe. It is cultivated more to produce offspring for grafting pear trees, than to harvest the fruit, which is particularly prized in the south of France. Quince gives jams a delicious aroma. The Coignassier is propagated: 1° sometimes by sowing seeds, as soon as they are ripe, in light, fresh, well loosened soil, with warm exposure; weeding, hoeing; - 2° more often, by marcottes or by cépées, after having established mothers which should provide, each year, more or less rooted scions, intended for grafting Pear trees. A distinction is made between: 1° C. with fruit, in the shape of Apples; 2° C. with fruit, in the shape of Pears. The C. de Portugal is preferred for growing on trees and making mothers; its fruit is used for jellies, preserves, marmalade, etc. PEAR (Rosaceae). - Indigenous. Height from 7 to 13 meters. Blooms in April; its main varieties are listed below, according to their usual ripening period, which begins in July. 10 Poires à couteau, Poire guenette, small, fine and sweet. - P. d'Angleterre, melt-in-the-mouth flesh, fine, pleasant flavor; long, arched tail blends with fruit. - P. de Ma dame, white, tangy, pleasant, smooth skin. - P. de Do yenné, white flesh, fine, buttery, very juicy, acidulous, more or less fragrant; smooth, bright yellow skin, a little red on the side exposed to the sun; fat, short tail, slightly embedded in the fruit. Turns quickly. - P. Évargne, with fine, juicy, melting flesh, with a flavor reminiscent of Crassane; long, arched stem, placed in the axis or on the side of the fruit. Subject to blettir. - P. Mouille-bouche, medium size; long stem; thin, smooth, yellowish-green skin, tinged pink on the sunny side; excellent flesh. - P. Romaine, oblong fruit, medium size; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sweet, tangy, slightly musky; excellent quality. - P. seedless, with large, rounded, slightly flattened fruit, fairly long stem, olive skin, white, melting, very fine flesh; sweet, tangy taste. Excellent quality. No seeds. - P. lonqueverte, very elongated, spindle-shaped fruit, with a straight tail merging with the fruit; fine, sweet, very juicy flesh reminiscent of the flavor of certain Cantaloupes; P. de Montigny, medium-sized, obtuse fruit, quite similar to the Doyenné in shape, straight tail embedded in the fruit; white, melting, sweet, very juicy flesh, sometimes a little too musky. - P. Six, medium-sized fruit, with a swollen stem at the point of insertion into the fruit; very juicy, sweet flavor. Excellent quality. - P. Grésilier, round and medium-sized, gray spots, white flesh, greenish around the edges, musky and juicy. - P. de Beurré, rough skin, white flesh, fine, fragrant, juicy. - P. duchesse d'Angoulême, large, bumpy fruit; straight or slightly oblique stem, slightly rough skin, changing from green-yellow to fairly bright yellow, with a red tinge on the side exposed to the sun; firm, semi-breakable flesh; very juicy, sweet, lemony and more or less fragrant. Excellent quality. - P. Rose, long, bumpy, fine, fragrant flesh. - P. Silvange, greenish flesh, fragrant. - P. Goulu-Morceau, large quince-shaped, red on the side exposed to the sun; white, juicy, fragrant flesh, a little aci de. - P. Gros-Rousselet and Petit-Rousselet, with brittle, fragrant flesh. - P. Noireau-Poiteau, with rough skin, fine, juicy, sweet flesh; turns brown quickly. - P. Lougard, long, almost cylindrical fruit, chapped skin, salmon-colored flesh, very juicy, very fine, sweet, melting, not very fragrant. - P. Saint Germain, long, bumpy; white flesh, fragrant, juicy, slightly acidic, slightly astringent. - P. Crassane, medium size, rough, dull skin, dotted with tan spots and mottling; yellowish-white flesh, juicy, very smoky, acidic. Excellent quality. Other very good knife pears include: P. de la Pentecôte, P. Royale d'hiver, P. Bonne de Soulers, P. du Curé, P. Bon chrétien, P. de Rance, P. de Douville, Belle-Angevine. Yellow and red pears. We must confine ourselves to mentioning the most remarkable pears: P. Amirale, Belle alliance, Bellissime d'hiver, P. Arteaux, P. Chair à Dame, P. d'Amboise, P. d'Amour, P. du Cog, P. d'Abondance, P. Fin-or de septembre, P. Briffaut, P. Jacobs, Grosse queue, Louise bonne d'Avranches, Saint-Sanson, P. Tonneau, P. Vermillon, P. Truitée. No need to repeat the names of the P. du Curé, etc., etc., mentioned above. Red-fleshed pears. P. Betterave, P. Sanguine d'Allemagne, Sanguine d'Italie, Sanguinolle, P. de Sang. Pears for drying or making compotes. P. Chat-brâlé, P. Beguesne, P. Carisi, P. Caullau, Belle de Thouars, P. d'Amour, P. Catillac, Angélique de Bordeaux, P. d'Angleterre d'hiver, P. d'Aunois, P. Château-Renard, P. d'Angoisse, P. d'Angoisse, P. d'Angélique de Bordeaux, P. d'Angleterre d'hiver, P. d'Aunois, P. Château-Renard, P. d'Angoisse. d'Angoisse, P. Saint- Léger, P. Martin-sec, P. Martin-Sire, P. Gros-Gilot, P. Frangipane, P. Picru, Gros-Certeau, P. FrancRéal d'hiver, P. Double fleur, P. de Sain, P. de Loup, etc. Growing and pruning Pear trees. - This tree needs deep, cool soil that is neither damp, cold nor clayey. Pear trees reproduce from seed and sowing. In autumn and spring, sow pear seedlings that have produced a type of cider known as perry. Choose loose soil for this purpose, make rays Om, 33 deep, at a distance of Om, 16; a little litter covers the seedling and keeps it cool enough to germinate. Weeding, hoeing and thinning are carried out, and seedlings that have become strong enough are placed in a nursery. The pivot is removed to encourage preduction of lateral roots, and the nursery is visited from time to time. Frequent hoeing. Two or three years later, grafting is carried out in the form of a slit or a dormant-eye escutcheon, on franc, in deep soils with a dry surface; on coignassier, in damp, cold soils. In general, trees grafted in the latter way produce fruit quickly, but do not live as long as those grafted on Francs. A Pear tree planted in good soil and left to its own devices lives for several centuries; the same variety pruned into cattails or pyramids rarely exceeds sixty years, as it usually dies out in twenty-five to thirty years. The Pear tree is fairly indifferent to the exposure given to it, as long as it receives sun all day long; a warm exposure seems preferable for winter Pear trees, whose fruit is picked last. The Pear tree can take any shape, but is best pruned into Pyramidal, Cattail, Palmette and Peacock-tailed Fan shapes. Pyramid pruning (first year). - In February, the tree, grafted one or two years old, is cut back to a height of Om, 30 to Om, 50 from the ground, on a good eye which, as it develops, should continue the axis or stem; in summer, the Fig. 53. pyramid-shaped pear tree (1st, 2nd and 3rd years). buds are pinched off, especially the buds close to the terminal, in order to activate the development of the lower buds; above all, the base must be well furnished. In the second year, lengthen the spire by about Om 20 to Om 40; prune the supporting branches, leaving the lower ones longer than the upper ones, so as to give the whole plant the shape of a 10. cone. Keep all the stalks, twigs and shoots, and prune near their base (cut to the thickness of a shield), the twigs developed on the stem, near the spire, and which are later to be carpenter branches. Prune all your lateral branches, according to their position and strength, on one eye outwards, so as to make them take a horizontal direction. Are you forced to change this direction? Prune on a side eye, but don't forget the result you want to achieve. Lateral branches should be inserted in spirals around the stem, without any of them being perpendicular above another, without any of them having a common point of insertion with the neighbor. Sometimes voids form on the axis; in this case, you can resort to longitudinal incisions or bleeding, which you make from bottom to top, towards the weak parts and a little above them; you also have the following remedies: grafting close to a neighbouring branch, and annular or partial incision. If the shoot is languishing, cut it back below, on a vigorous shoot that will replace it. If the branch is exhausted or has only fruit on it, return it to its crown. Avoid bifurcations, or allow them only with reservation, to fill a gap, take them only on the lateral parts of the carpenter branches and not above. Pruning should be more elongated on vigorous species that are slow to set fruit. Don't neglect the use of stakes and ties, but never let them stop the flow of sap; your tree would become counterfeit instead of symmetrical. In the third year, remember the general indications given for the second year. The tree which now forms a pyramid of about 1m, 35-45, if it has been well cared for, requires above all: 1° that you maintain a suitable spacing between the carpenter branches, using small wooden forks to serve Fig. 54. - Pyramid pruning, perfect condition. of buttresses; and that those which are too far apart be brought closer together, using wicker lliens; 2° that the ends of the carpenter branches be pruned more or less long, according to their vigor; 3° that the spurs be pruned short. The spindle-shaped pyramid hardly exceeds Om, 40 to Om 50 in diameter, but can reach 7 or 8 meters in height. To obtain the Cattail shape, the tree is cut back to around Om, 50 and all the eyes are left to develop; those that are too vigorous are pinched out; in August, they are broken at Om, 20 or Om, 25 in height. The following year, branches are pruned to three, four or five eyes; excessively long twigs are shortened, respecting stings and stalks. Cattail pruning, which is often confused with pyramid pruning, is rarely used today, although it has undeniable advantages. The most sought-after shape for espalier and counter-espalier pear trees is the simple palmette. To obtain this shape, the tree is lowered to about Om.30 above the ground, and the spire or central stem is pruned successively over two eyes, one on the right, the other on the left; the upper bud continues to form the stem; the buds are lowered and palisaded into an almost horizontal position, thus beginning a tier of the framework. The following year, during which the tree has been allowed only limited growth, will produce a second tier by the same procedure. The progress of vegetation in the cords of the palmette should be monitored, so that they grow equally and are of the same strength. By pinching and breaking the buds, the balance is maintained, and fruit production develops (stings, stalks, twigs). Pinching and breaking should only be carried out partially. Visit the trees every two or three days. Each year, we continue to add a new tier of branches to the tree. If one of the branches is destroyed, it is replaced by a branch taken from a neighbouring branch. Generally speaking, you should act in the same way as for Peach trees grown as palms. Double palmette. - Start by pruning two eyes, leaving the buds to grow vertically; each of these buds becomes the base of the tree's framework; they are allowed to grow lateral buds at equal distance from each other. For the rest, we proceed as in the simple palmette. Peacock-tail or fan shape. - After bringing the tree down to about Om, 20 above the ground, choose two of the most beautiful buds, pinch off and remove the others; the two buds thus preserved will be branches the following year; cut them at Om, 30, Om, 50 and even Om, 60, depending on their strength; fix them obliquely to the wall and you'll have the first rays of the fan. Then, to fill in the gaps left between the carpenter branches by their continual tendency to spread apart, choose vigorous buds and palisade them. Keep the spurs as short as possible, and keep them clear to avoid confusion. Spindle or candle shape. - We were wrong to abandon this shape, which, while not very pleasing to the eye, has many advantages: it is very easy to obtain, requires little care, takes up little space and favors fruit production. Cut back to around Om, 50, and even Om, 70, above ground level, leaving all buds to develop. In June-July, any buds that are too vigorous are pinched off; in August, they are all broken off at around Om, 20 in length. The following year, branches are pruned to five, four or even three eyes; excessively long twigs are shortened, leaving stings and shafts intact. Pinching and breaking in the usual way; removal of useless branches; columnar, vase, basket and girandole shapes; trigonal, tetragonal, pentagonal and hexagonal shapes, which are rarely used and are less advantageous than the palmette shape; single or double cords, sinuous cords, etc., etc., etc., etc... The fruit-bearing branches of the Pear tree only bear fruit after two or three years' waiting, but they remain fruitful for several years running. They are first announced in spring by the lambourdes, which bear fruit in year L 2 Fig. 55. - Pear trees in sinuous cords, with a double tier of branches. the following year and are then called bursas. These bursae produce stings. Twigs are born on the bursas and twigs, and should be pruned to a good eye at about half their length. Every year, in autumn, plough the base of espaliered Pear trees; weed and hoe them several times during the summer; every four or five years, give the bed where they stand a layer of rotted manure, Om, 04 or Om, 05 thick; A good mulch, left in place from mid-May, prevents the soil from hardening and splitting, stops the growth of most weeds, keeps the roots fresh, and makes watering less necessary. All varieties of Pear blossom around mid-April in the Paris climate; bunches naturally lose most of their blossoms as a result of the season's bad weather, or through lack of fertility (1). APPLE (Rosaceae). - Native, medium-sized. Blooms in May and therefore fears frost less than the pear tree; its formidable enemies are caterpillars, woolly aphids and weevils (2). Cultivation makes apple trees delicate. When grown in open fields, with as much air and space as it desires, it thrives and bears fruit abundantly. Cultivation and pruning - Even easier than the pear tree when it comes to choosing soil, the apple is content with soft, slightly moist soil, where its roots, which are more tracing than taprooted, settle easily; it even accepts sandy, chalky soil. It is propagated by pepins, which come from cider pomace and provide franks (known as Egrins), which can then be grafted onto high stems to form large open-air trees or beautiful cattails. Apple trees are grafted in slits and, even more often, in escutcheons. Besides, it doesn't like iron, and the only pruning that suits it in espalier is palmette pruning. How to obtain this shape: Graft from Doucin and Paradis, never from Franc; take care to elongate the supporting branches and severely pinch the vigorous buds that develop on them. The same care is used as for pear trees (see Pear trees). Cordon pruning is also very popular. (1) See also: Insectes nuisibles. (2) See: Harmful insects. One-year-old grafted Paradise trees are cut back to about Om, 45 above the graft, leaving only one vigorous bud attached to a stake and free to grow Fig. 56 - Palmette apple tree. vertically. At the end of summer, it is fixed horizontally on a wire or on small spikes. Then, year after year, the mother branches are lengthened and Fig. 57. - Apple tree in cords. to fill out with fruit crops along their entire length. Remove unnecessary or exhausted branches; allow only small fruit-bearing branches to grow in the spurs. For the record, let's mention bush pruning and goblet pruning. Normandie is a plantation of alternating lines of half-dwarf apple trees in small pyramids 1.50 m apart, and dwarf apple trees only 1 m apart. There is a spacing of 1.50 m between these lines. If the apple trees making up a Normandie are on Doucin and Paradis, the grafts must not be buried. Fg. 58. - Apple tree in vase. Fig. 58 bis. - Pear tree in vase. Every year, the apple tree is given a shallow ploughing: every three or four years, in autumn, a layer of soil about Om, 15 deep is removed from around the base to a distance of 2 meters; after amending it, it is put back in place; a little fat manure for dry soil; marl or lime for fresh soil. Remove the lower branches when they have become too strong and too numerous, preventing air from circulating around the stem. 1 Among the hundred varieties of apples, let's mention the best: Pomme d'api rose. - Small, pale yellow, bright red on the sunny side, top quality; with the varieties : Api noir, Pomme rose, which smells of

both inferior to Api rose. - P. Calville summer red, summer white, in August; - winter red, winter white, in December; all good for eating raw: the last-mentioned is the best of the Calvilles. - Reinette des Belges, or Court pendu, or Capendu, fruit reddish-purple or brown, speckled with fawn; keeps very well until the end of March. - P. Doux d'Angers d'argent, white-fleshed, slightly acidic, ripens from December to March. - P. d'Eve, large, flattened, green for a long time, then yellowish when ripe, then oozing oily water; tender, sweet flesh; second quality; ripens from February to May. - P. Fenouillet gris ou anisé, with a first-rate fennel smell; ripens from December to February; P. Fenouillet jaune doré, with yellow skin marked with fine lines somewhat resembling letters; delicate, soft, firm flesh; ripens from December to January; P. Fenouillet rouge ou Bardin; firm and sweet; first-rate; ripens until March. - P. Figue sans pepins, yellowish-green, slightly acidic; ripens in September, October; second quality. - P. Gros-Papa, tender flesh; good for compote; ripens from November to December - P. Joséphine or Belle-desbois, very large, very tender, a little acidic; second quality; ripens in November-December. - B. Mignonne d'hiver, firm flesh, sweet, very fine; ripens from December to April. - P. Pigeon de Jérusalem, fine, delicate, pink-chair color, until February; second quality. - P. Pigeonnet blanc commun, firm, pleasant-tasting flesh; very common and highly prized in Nor183 mandia; second quality; ripens in October-November, - P. Pigeonnet rouge ou Museau-de-lièvre, red fruit with dark red stripes, sweet, delicate fruit; until December. - P. Postophe; second-rate flesh; ripens in August - P. Rambour franc d'été or Gros-Rambour, flat fruit, pale yellow with red stripes, ribbed, sour flavor; good for cooking in September; first-rate. - Winter Rambour, more acidic than the previous one. Cooked until March. - Reinettes: Reinette d'Angleterre or Pomme d'or, large, yellow, striped with red; firm, sweet, very fine flesh; first quality. Raw or cooked until March - R. de Bretagne, dark red with yellow speckles, sweet; very good quality. Fruit in December. - R. de Canada, large yellow fruit, washed with red, ribbed; very fine flesh, until February-March - R. de Caux, compressed, irregular, yellowish-green; fine flesh, a little acid; top quality; from December to February. - R. dorée or late yellow, rough skin, light gray on a yellow background; firm, spicy, sweet, slightly acid flesh; top quality; ripens in December. - R. d'Espagne, large, with raised ribs, very good quality, keeps until March. - R. franche, sweet and spicy flesh. Keeps for one year - R. grise, high quality, large, flattened, gray in color; very fine, very sweet flesh; keeps until July. - R. grise de Granville, very tender and very fine - R. de Hollande, large, very good; ripens in October-November - R. rousse or des Carmes, medium size, firm and good; ripens from December to March. - R. de Thouin, excellent, especially raw; medium size. Ripens from December to March. - Royale d'Angleterre, large, firm, top quality; ripens from September to November. When storing apples, use baskets rather than bags. Place apples at a distance from each other on shelves, in a dry, well-ventilated place, away from frosts: one rotten apple spoils all the others. NÉFLIER (Rosaceae) native. - It differs from the Alisiers only in its bony cores, which vary from one to five, and its styles. The common medlar grows naturally in the woods of Europe. Cultivation causes it to lose its hardiness, giving us the large-fruited, monstrous-fruited, stone-less Beech. This tree is propagated by grafting onto Hawthorn or Coignassier. Seeds take two years to set. It thrives in all types of non-marshy soil and in all types of exposure. Pruning would reduce the number of fruits, so it is left to grow freely in the corner of a hedge or by the side of a path. The medlars are bitter and unpalatable; they only become good to eat after lying on dry straw for a while. ORANGE (Aurantiaceae). - From India and China. This tree, less fashionable in gardens than in the last century, because many shrubs with more varied flowers and leaves are rightly preferred to it, is still one of the most beautiful ornamental plants, and the object of considerable trade along almost the entire Mediterranean coast. The twelve dwarf species, forming one hundred varieties, are still cultivated with the care they deserve. The first orange tree was introduced into France in 1333; in 1500, there was still only one orange tree in the north of France; it was transported from Pamplona, then capital of Navarre, to Chantilly, then to Fontainebleau; in 1684, it was given to the Versailles orangery, where it has remained ever since: This is the Grand Bourbon, or Grand Connétable, or François I. The orange, lemon and all trees in the same family are propagated by seedlings and cuttings. A leaf or a piece of leaf can be rooted. Bigarade orange seedlings are preferred for sowing, as they grow more quickly. - Poire du Commandeur, Perrettes, etc., can be reproduced from seed without much alteration. Lemon seeds can be obtained cheaply from confectioners; they are planted Om, 035 apart in deep terrines of O 16 to Om, 25, lined with good heather; or one by one in small pots. Place terrines and pots in a warm layer. Ordinary care: heat, watering, etc. The seedlings sprout and, eight or ten months later, and sometimes only after two years, produce plants suitable for grafting. They are left to grow in varying degrees of strength, depending on the variety to be grafted. They spend their third year under frame in pots larger than those used the previous year; in the fourth year, they are placed in the open air for the whole of the summer. Orange trees can be grafted from three months to ten years of age; for small trees, mainly Chinese dwarfs, we use Pontoise grafting at Om, 20-30 from the ground; for larger trees, we use scion grafting. Cuttings are only successful for M 9 87e Fig. 59. - Orange tree. Poncires and Cedars. The marcotte technique is all but abandoned. Young orange trees must be changed into new pots every year; later, they are placed in crates which are renewed every two years, then every six or eight years; crates with movable panels, which can be removed separately, make it easier to examine the roots. The best time to repot and re-crate orange trees of all ages and species is the beginning of March. Pruning. - For field-grown orange trees, pruning is limited to a moderate amount every two or three years; the most important thing is to remove greedy branches and try to obtain as much fruit as possible; the flower gardener, on the other hand, wants flowers above all else; if he encourages the formation of fruit-bearing branches, it is with the intention of pinching them off as soon as they bear fruit. In the case of ornamental orange trees, as soon as the fruit has formed, the dead or diseased branches and those that cause confusion are simply cut back in September, in the open air. Every four or five years, the tree is pruned back thoroughly, removing any branches around the heads that would cause shocking irregularities in the overall shape. Orange trees can be rejuvenated very easily; the wood can be brought up to four, five, six and even ten years old; but, to be on the safe side, you should leave a year's interval between this operation and the re-growth. Sick orange trees are placed in very pure compost, even on the tarpaulin of a temperate greenhouse, after having cut off all the damaged parts of the roots and reduced the head by severe pruning on the main branches. Cultivation. - Like other orange-growing plants, orange trees don't like water; one or two wettings are enough for the strongest orange trees over winter. When they arrive in Paris in mid-October, they don't leave the greenhouse until around May 15th; but from mid-April onwards, you need to give them plenty of air, when the atmosphere outside is warm. As soon as they're out, they ask for the soil around their boxes to be ploughed, and for a layer of about Om, 055-80 of fat, well-wetted manure to be added; horse dung on the surface of the boxes prevents settling. Watering, showers on the foliage. The roots are left bare, as they like to be exposed to the direct influence of the air. Not only in Paris, but also in England and Holland, orange trees espaliered along the back wall of a forcing greenhouse produce almost ripe fruit. Bigarades and Limons are used to season meat and fish; small green oranges are candied in brandy. Orange blossom used to sell for 4 francs a pound, but today it's hardly worth more than a franc. It should be picked every other day, and even every day in hot weather, spread out on a dry white cloth and used two or three days later; the dwarf Chinese orange trees are the most highly prized flowers for making orange blossom water. Lemon, citron and lime trees and their varieties are cultivated and cared for in the same way as orange trees. There's no need to describe the orange tree and its fruit. Bigaradiers are lower in stem; their fruit is full of bitter, acidic juice. - Lemon or Citron trees have tapering, flexible, often thorny branches; their oval fruit is filled with an acid, tasty juice. - Citroniers differ from Limoniers in their shorter branches, larger, more warty fruit, firmer, thicker flesh, very good for candying. - Lime trees produce pale-yellow, oval, brownish fruit with a hint of nougat, bland or slightly bitter. - Grapefruits are recognized by their very large, rounded or pear-shaped, greenish fruit, with a more or less sweet taste (1). (1) See also Oranges: Ornamental plants, part 22. GRENADER (Myrtaceae). - From Africa; naturalized in southern France, etc. It is an evergreen shrub, with beautiful bright red flowers from July to September, and red, fleshy, watery and refreshing fruit3 23 Fig. 60. - Grenadier. sant. It is propagated from seed, cuttings and strangulated marcots in pots, whose soil must always be kept moist. These marcottes can be weaned at the end of summer. The Grenadier does not like iron; however, it is pruned like the Orange tree; naturally, it would only produce flowers on the tips of the current year's shoots; by pruning, we aim to produce annual sprays strong enough to flower. In winter, the tops of new shoots are pinched off as soon as they reach a certain length. In Paris and the northern départements, Grenadier is grown in crates and brought into the orangery at the start of winter, giving almost ripe fruit. It must be watered often and the soil changed every three years. When espaliered on the back wall of a single-sided greenhouse, it produces fully ripe fruit. Among the main varieties, let's mention the G. with acid fruit, which is very suitable for grafting with other varieties; the G. with white flowers and the G. dwarf with small fruit. Raspberry, Barberry, Fig, Mulberry, Chestnut, Walnut, Hazelnut, Pistachio. VINEYARDS. - We need only refer here to species or varieties whose fruit is intended for table use, and not to those grown in large quantities to make wine. Vines require light, deep, moisture-free soil; a warm, south-facing or east-facing exposure in the Paris climate; pruning and training. - The vegetation of the Vine and that of the Peach are exactly the same; the pruning of these two fruit trees is based on the same principles; its aim is to obtain branches to replace those which, once they have borne fruit, will no longer do so; in the absence of branches capable of providing fertile shoots, there is no hope of a harvest the following year. After breaking up the soil to Om, 50 of its thickness, and loosening and even smoking it, the marcottes are placed at the foot of the wall, in a trench Om, 20-25 deep, with their heads turned towards the wall, Om, 50 apart; they are then 11. covered with earth. These young plants are planted in winter, at a good exposure, so that they can then spread out in horizontal cordons, etc., with the help of wire, trellis, etc. It's also in winter, when there's no frost, when vegetation is suspended, that each shoot is cut back on the two eyes closest to its base; in spring, these eyes will become productive shoots; this is how successive shoots are born on a first spur; if more than two buds grow on each spur, the others are removed, in order to have beautiful, well-stocked bunches. After a few years, the spur, which has in the meantime provided many good shoots, ages and becomes too long; it should be cut back on its lower eye during winter pruning. A well-pruned vine produces flowers in June, at which time the growth of shoots must be severely stopped, as they lengthen, attracting most of the sap and causing "coulure": the flowers don't set seed, and the aborted bunches turn into tendrils. Annular incision, recommended as a remedy against coulure caused by untimely rainfall, and condemned by practice in almost all cases, would be of no use here; destroy useless shoots, and also, by disbudding often renewed, at the right time, destroy all open eyes in false buds above the cutting; Without these precautions, there will be little or no harvest; disbud again after the grapes have formed; cut off the ends of the shoots; your bunches will ripen better and the lower eyes of the shoot, on which the winter pruning must be based, will become stronger. This repeated disbudding during the summer months constitutes summer pruning. Thomery method or horizontal cordon pruning. - The best method of vine training is the Thomery method. The vines are planted at Om 55 from each other, and the cordons are spaced Om, 50 apart. To line a 3-metre-high wall, plant five vines to form five cordons; the first cordon will be at Om, 50 from the ground, and the fifth at Om, 50 from the coping. Prune at two eyes above ground level; the upper eye should extend the stem; the lower eye forms the shoot. Fig. 61. - Thomery vine. The first stock forms the first cordon; the second, the second cordon, etc., each cordon will be 2.70 m long, divided into two arms of 1.35 m each. This length is sometimes exceeded, but this is almost always an inconvenience. All vines are pruned in this way: after pruning on two shoots, as mentioned above, the shoots are palisaded; at the next pruning, the bud of the extension is cut, according to its length and strength; the lateral shoot, resulting from the first pruning, is cut on its lower eye, in order to start a spur or fruit-bearing branch. Once you have reached the height of the cordon, wait until the prolona Fig. 62. - Vertical cordon vine. bud has passed the cordon line, and bend it to the right; pinch it at the top; a false bud will then emerge, which you will leave to grow freely, so that it will provide you with the left arm; you will thus have a more or less regular "T". While you're forming your cords, severely remove any unnecessary production from the stem. At the pruning that follows the formation of the T, you will cut both arms of the cordon on a terminal eye below, to extend them, and you will leave to grow only the top buds, which are necessary to you; choose two of the most vigorous at about Om, 16 one from the other; let them develop in freedom; you palisade the terminal buds in the horizontal direction, and those of the top in the vertical direction, but by pinching them by the top as soon as they arrive at the cordon immediately superior. Do the same for the other arm extensions, stopping them at the last spur as soon as they reach the desired length. Each year, you'll still have to prune the cordon spurs; you'll pinch off the shoot resulting from the first bud, and bring it back to the next pruning on the two eyes located furthest below; you'll pinch off the buds as soon as their growth requires it and, if they bear fruit, one leaf above the second bunch. L 6 - - 3 * 2 4 Q ~ 3 E ~ Fig. 63. - Serpentine vine. The following year, completely remove the farthest shoot at its heel, and prune the other on the two lower shoots. If the spur gets madly carried away, take advantage of the bud closest to the arm and cut back on it. - All pruning is done in the same way, so there's no need to go into too much detail here. Pruning shears are to be preferred to any other instrument. When the grapes are close to maturity, water them with a hand pump, expose them a little more to the direct action of the sun by removing a few leaves, and enclose them in paper or horsehair bags eight or ten days before they reach maturity, if they are to be kept on trellises until the frosts. After picking, place in a dry, well-ventilated place and sprinkle with crushed charcoal or sawdust. Always follow the principles briefly outlined above, and grow vines in vertical rows when the layout of the walls to be covered makes it impossible to use the Thomery method, which is undoubtedly the best. Vines planted in ordinary counter-spaliers or arbors are treated in the same way. We should also mention the serpentine shape, etc. (1). The main varieties grown for the table are: - Chasselas de Fontainebleau, with large green or golden-yellow grains, top quality; Chasselas rouge, which takes on color as soon as it is tied, good quality; Royal rosé, very fine; Chasselas hátif; C. de Montauban, sweet and amber; C. de Montauban with transparent grains, very pleasant to the taste, amber and fine; C. musqué; Corinthe blanc with very small, round, yellow, seedless berries, very pleasant to taste; Gromier du Cantal, a beautiful red color and very succulent when ripe; Madeleine blanche, with large, well-filled bunches; Muscat d'Alexandrie or Muscat de Rome, oval, yellow, musky and very fine berries, very warm exposure; Muscat blanc (1) We have already discussed powdery mildew in the chapter on plant diseases; let's just remind you here that triturated sulphur flower is preferable to any other sulphur. or Frontignan, crisp, tightly packed, sweet, musky grapes, white-skinned, espalier; Muscat nain or de la mi-août, the earliest of all Muscats, round, small, black grapes, third quality; Muscat rouge, bright red, musky, but not as good as the previous one; Raisin Verdot, with short, ruddy bunches, fine taste, the best and sweetest of dessert grapes; on trellises, in good exposure; Précoce de Courtillier, with large, sweet, slightly musky berries; ripens in August. We didn't feel it necessary to go into detail about vine propagation by sowing, which is far too time-consuming and is almost never used. We prefer to propagate using marcottes or provins, and often just plant crossettes. Grafting is carried out using: 1° herbaceous grafts on growing shoots; 2° slit grafts on wood that is one or more years old; 3° shuttle grafts (see the chapter on different types of grafts). See also Plant diseases, Harmful insects). GROSEILLIER (Grossulariées). - The ordinary red currant, a small native shrub, has produced a white-fruited variety with a much more delicate taste. Currants thrive in all types of soil and exposure, but do best in soft, sandy, slightly cool soil. It is propagated from seed, cuttings or marcottes in February and autumn, and dead wood and branches are cut back in February. Currants must be replanted every five years, otherwise they lose weight and degenerate. Here are the main varieties obtained through cultivation: the white Dutch gooseberry, with very good, transparent, cherry-sized fruit; the G. cerise, with large, light-red fruit; the G. with pink, flesh-colored fruit; the G. Gondouin with white fruit, with small, acidic berries; the G. Gondouin with red fruit, a late variety with long bunches; the G. Queen Victoria, with large, light-red fruit; the G. Gondouin with red fruit, a late variety with long bunches; the G. Gondouin with red fruit, a late variety with long bunches; the G. Gondouin with red fruit, a late variety with long bunches. Queen Victoria, long bunches, red fruit, good quality; G. hâtive de Berlin, very early; G. rouge de Hollande, long, well-filled bunches, light red fruit, very large and very good; G. Versaillaise, with large bunches and numerous, large, light-red fruits. - Blackcurrant with large black fruit, three varieties: C. with variegated leaves, C. with brown fruit, C. with maple leaves. - Gooseberry, with fruit sometimes as large as an egg, sometimes green, sometimes white, red, purple, etc. Varieties: smooth gooseberry; bristly gooseberry, amber fruit, flesh color, large yellow, green-white, large round; thornless gooseberry (Billard); highly recommendable variety. FRAMBOISIER (Rosaceae). - Native, trailing, biennial stems. This shrub grows in stony places, on mountains, and likes shade and cold. The fruit of the cultivated raspberry is highly sought-after for its flavor and refreshing qualities; it is used to prepare syrups, jams, ice creams, etc.; it gives wine a very pleasant taste; when fermented, it produces an alcoholic liquor; the Poles make an excellent mead from it, and the Russians a kind of wine. Raspberry should be given a special place in the garden, as it is always a bad neighbor, crumbling the soil and harming other plants too close to it. It is content with ordinary soil and half-shade exposure, and needs to be moved every four or five years, unless it is given a little fertilizer every autumn. It multiplies by suckers planted from November to March; in February, dead stems that have borne fruit are removed; pruning again from Om, 60 to one meter. Light ploughing. Just to mention a few: the common raspberry or F. des bois, with yellow fruit. - F. du Chili, with its white-fruited variety. - F. with large white fruits. - F. Gambon or red fruit, elongated and very large. - F. with flesh-colored fruit. - F. des Alpes or F. des deux saisons, with red fruit. - F. des quatre saisons, with large red fruit; the last two remain productive until frost, even in cold countries, if you take care to stuff them in autumn. Falstaff. - F. Belle de Fontenay, red-fruited and remontant. EPINE-VINETTE, VINETIER (Berberidae). - Native, forming a bush 2 to 2.5 meters high, and for this reason very often used as an impenetrable hedge; the red, acidic fruit is prized for jams. Preference is given to varieties with seedless fruit, white fruit, large fruit, purple fruit, purple leaves and sweet fruit. Propagate by marcottes, cuttings, offshoots, seeds. Separate, burst and replant in autumn. Wood and leaves, macerated in an alkaline lye, give a yellow dye suitable for coloring woodwork. The fermented berries produce an acidic liquor that deposits a salt similar to tartar. Vinetier flowers in spring, at the same time as Hawthorn. The very irritable stamens snap to the stigma as soon as they are touched with the tip of a needle. FIGUIER (Morées). - Grows naturally in the southern regions of Europe, in Greece, the Levant, etc., and has been cultivated for centuries. Cultivated for centuries, it has produced and still produces varieties whose number we won't even attempt to determine. It lives indefinitely, if not by its trunk, at least by its roots, from which new stems sprout when the old ones are cut. All it needs is a bit of good soil around its base, watering during hot spells, and the removal of dead branches or those too weak to bear fruit; we pinch off the strongest ones to force them to branch out; some gardeners rightly remove the woody bud from a newborn Fig: Other growers stick the tip of a large pin dipped in olive oil into Figs that have reached two-thirds of their normal size: the air introduced in this way, at the very heart of the fruit, activates the conversion of starch into juice. Fig trees are propagated by offshoots, cuttings, grafts and seeds: seeds are only used to obtain new varieties. Flute grafting is preferred to other types of grafting, but is rarely used, because the tree takes cuttings and suckers very well, and there are always many suckers growing from the base. Fig trees planted in staggered rows in the open ground need to be spaced at intervals of about 4 meters. Fig trees easily provide two harvests each year, one in July, the other in September-October; you shouldn't count too much on the second in Paris's climate. New Figs are pleasant and refreshing, but not very nutritious; dried, they are a great resource for the populations of Mediterranean regions. The ancients made a kind of wine from them, called sicyte (from the name of the Fig, in Greek). The juice of the fig, refined for twelve hours after picking, becomes a delicate syrup. Eaten before it has fully ripened, i.e. before it has begun to wilt, the Fig burns the lips and tongue, and causes indigestion. In addition to the huge consumption of fresh Figs at harvest time, many are dried out by placing them on racks in the sun; they are flattened as they lose their moisture. They are emollient, and are used as poultices to resolve tumors, gargles to soothe sore throats, and herbal teas to combat inflammatory diseases. Fig wood is light and spongy, easily soaked in oil and emery, and used by gunsmiths and locksmiths to polish their work. The milky, corrosive juice of the bark destroys warts, curdles milk and forms a sympathetic ink: characters traced on paper with this juice become visible only when exposed to fire. The Fig tree is remarkable for the singularity of its fruiting: the sexual organs are hidden in this fleshy, pear-shaped receptacle (commonly called fruit), pierced at the top by an umbilicus or small hole in the vicinity of which are the male flowers, while the female flowers can be seen lower down; the ancients didn't believe in the existence of these flowers; Later, they recognized the presence of female flowers in the cultivated Fig tree; but, still convinced that well-developed male flowers were lacking in the wild Fig tree, they resorted to caprification, still advantageously practiced today in many parts of the Levant. Olivier observed caprification in particular on the island of Naxos. Here's what he has to say on the subject: "The growers' methods consist in placing on Fig trees that produce only the second Fig, the species known as Fig flowers or first Figs, which appear and ripen a month and a half before the others. The second Figs ripen in August, and continue without interruption well into autumn. The Greeks thread together ten or twelve of these first Figs and hang them in various places on the Fig tree whose fruit they wish to fertilize. "The cynips psenes, a small black insect, also carries out caprification; it penetrates to the heart of the Figs, emerging covered with the dust of the stamens, which it then carries to the other Figs where it deposits its eggs. If you want a certain number of these Fig trees to bear only autumn fruit, take care to detach the summer Figs when they are as big as the tip of your finger, and cauterize the scars with a little lime or very fine plaster to prevent the milk from leaking out: the branch lengthens, the autumn Figs appear earlier and ripen before the frosts. In the Paris climate, only four or five varieties of Fig are grown, giving: the round white Fig, two seasons old, the best around the capital; the angelic yellow F., yellow with small green dots, pink flesh, not very delicate; the large red F. from Bordeaux, round, red, very good; the Madeleine, white lonque, fairly fine; the long red F. from Provence, reddish flesh, mediocre quality; the violet F., good when ripe. MURIERS (Morées). - From Asia Minor, Persia, China, etc. We can't go into the cultivation of the white mulberry for the sericulture industry, as that would take us too far. Everyone knows that its leaves are the food of silkworms; poultry love to eat its fruits, which humans rightly disdain. The main varieties of this tree are: the white Murier with shiny leaves; the M, hybrid; the M. Moretti; the M. de Tartarie; the M. Lou de Chine; M. Gasparin; M. multicaule; M. intermédia. The Red Mulberry, from North America, 12 to 15 meters high, produces a delicious dark-red fruit. The black mulberry produces an oval, almost black-purple fruit with a pleasant, refreshing taste. It is grown in espaliers or in the open air. As with other Mulberries, it needs shelter from strong winds, and soil that is somewhat mixed with rubble. Mulberries reproduce by seed, marcottes and cuttings. They are grafted onto trunks in the form of escutcheons or flutes. They don't need pruning, just the removal of dead branches. Black Mulberry fruit is used to make: 1° a delicious syrup to soothe inflammation of the mouth and back of the mouth; 2° a very fine vinegar. Its juice is used to color wines, syrups, liqueurs and certain jams. Turners value its wood; its bark is used to make rope and paper; its leaves replace those of the White Mulberry as food for silkworms. CHESTNUT (Amentaceae). - The common chestnut is a large, beautiful tree with polygamous flowers; native to southern Europe, it likes light, sandy, deep soil, and does not do well in water. There are several varieties of chestnut: the C. pourtaionne, with large, numerous fruits; the early C. printanière; the C. verte du Limousin, easy to store; the C. exalade, the best of all; the Marron de Lyon, d'Agen, de Luc, the M. d'Aubray; the latter, the largest of all, is very good, containing a single seed in each shell, instead of two or three; it lacks the tough membrane which, in ordinary chestnuts, marks the inner divisions of the fruit. In Corrèze, the main chestnuts grown are: C. hâtive noire, hâtive de mai, hâtive rousse, Huminaux, Huminaux roux, Carrive and Mastronne. The best Chestnuts are stratified before sowing and protected from frost; in February-March, they are planted in loose, unsmoked soil, Om 08 deep, Om 50 apart, in rays separated from each other by an interval of Om 80, traced in a north-south direction. Light ploughing; hoeing, the following summer, and so on until each individual has reached the right size for the nursery; it is then lifted, put in place, and the lateral branches are cut back. Ridging, trimming with thorns, a little straw or manure around the plant. - The second year, FRUITS ARE Grafted into flutes or buds with dormant eyes: pinching, delimbing. Chestnut trees should be placed 15 to 20 meters apart. The fruit is harvested when it falls off naturally. They should be exposed to the sun for a few days, and stored in a dry place. In some countries, chestnuts are dried in special ovens. Chestnut wood lasts a very long time in water, and is used to make hoops, trellises, etc. WALNUT (Juglandées). - Native to Asia. A large, beautiful tree cultivated for its wood, fruit and oil. Requires sandy or even stony soil. Walnuts are stratified before being sown in place at Om, 06 deep; at Om, 08 apart. Ordinary care of nursery plants. Young trees are grafted in slit, flute or escutcheon with growing eye or ring when they are Om, 10 or Om, 15 in circumference and one or 2 meters high. Ordinary precautions recommended for grafting. The following year, planting in Om, 80 to one-meter deep soil. At twenty years of age, the Walnut tree produces a fairly modest product; at sixty, it reaches its maximum fruitfulness; it supplies about half of all the oil consumed in France. Twenty vigorous walnut trees, in full production, on one hectare of land, can be estimated, without exaggeration, at 2,800 to 3,200 francs. When a Walnut tree comes of age, the tips of its branches dry out and must be immediately pruned back from Om, 70 to one meter from the trunk, if it is to continue to bear fruit; new scions soon form a new head. No pruning as such: just remove dead, broken, misplaced or over-vigorous branches that are detrimental to the overall balance. It is also when the Walnut has shown the signs of old age indicated above, that it should be felled to sell it as wood for joinery, etc.; left standing, it deteriorates very quickly. WALNUT (Amentaceae). - The Hazelnut is a shrub with stout, flexible stems; male catkins in groups of three or four at the same point of insertion, appearing towards the end of winter, well before the leaves. We grow: N. franc, with elongated, very delicate fruit; this species has produced two varieties: one with an almond covered by a red skin, the other with a white skin; - N. avelinier, with larger, less elongated fruit, with the following varieties: Rouge ronde, with a semi-hard shell; Rouge de Provence, with a soft shell; - N. à grappes, with very large, very delicate fruit. Hazelnuts ripen and detach from the tree in August-September. They are preserved like walnuts; they are used to make sugared almonds, and produce a more highly prized oil. They become acrid with age. The wood is used to make stiles, trellises, stakes, forks, etc. Multiplication by seed, sprouting and suckering: place Hazel in a northerly position, at some distance from vigorous trees that would smother it under their dense foliage. It requires no cultivation care, PISTACHIUM (Terebinthaceae). - From Syria. This tree is 7 to 8 meters tall, with strong spreading branches; its flowers are of different sexes, placed on separate individuals, which naturally makes it necessary to cultivate male and female individuals to obtain fruit; these fruits are oval, the size of an Olive, russet in color, wrinkled on the outside, containing a sweet, oily kernel called Pistachio. Through cultivation, the Pistachio tree has produced several varieties, all of which yield almonds of varying degrees of fineness, much sought-after by confectioners, etc.; softening, emollient, etc. They can be eaten raw or used to make sweets, ice creams, creams, etc. The most prized pistachios are the Tunis Pistachio, with its delicate green flesh; pork butchers use the Sicilian Pistachio. The Pistachio terebinth is a beautiful Barbary tree on which the Pistachio franco is often grafted, to enable it to withstand cold temperatures of 8 to 10 degrees C. Multiplication of marcottes, seedlings on a warm bed or under a frame; transplanting into pots. For three or four years, ordinary care given to orangery plants. Pistachio trees need light, open soil, south-facing exposure, espaliered, in the Paris climate; they should be placed 4 meters apart, with one male between three or four females, or better still, a male branch grafted in the middle of the branches of each female. The Pistachier-franc often freezes at 6 degrees below zero. SECTION I. - GRAMINES. AGROSTIS. - Agrostis grows, for the most part, among low turf, in arid and sandy soils; sheep are very avid for it. The largest and most remarkable species of Agrostis is Agrostis jouet des vents, common in our wheat fields. The stem reaches up to a meter in height; rough leaves, long and light panicle, with capillary peduncles, finely branched and loaded with numerous small flowers that end with long deciduous edges. It can be used to dye wool green. Agrostis traçante, or Stolonifère, or Trainasse, or Eternue, must be destroyed in well-cultivated land; but, as fodder, it has real advantages thanks to its active vegetation and its ability to keep fresh for a long time in winter. It thrives in cold, damp, peaty soils. Sow at a rate of around 10 kilograms of seed per hectare in March and September. Agrostis d'Amérique (Herd-Grass) is no more difficult than its predecessor when it comes to choosing a site; it is less successful when planted than when sown, and is an advantage12 in the formation of permanent meadows. Rough but nutritious forage. - Sow in March or September; 5 kg of seeds per hectare. Fig. 64. - Oats. - TALL OAT, FROMENTAL. - This oat needs high, not too damp ground, and the proximity of Sainfoin or some other leguminous plant, otherwise it dries out easily. It rebounds very well in regrowth. - 100 kilog. of seeds per hectare. MEADOW BROME. - If you have a chalky soil unfit even for Sainfoin, etc., etc., give it Meadow Brome, it will do well there; it can last up to fifteen or twenty years without any manuring. Bromegrass succeeds as an ornamental grass in soils where other grasses would quickly wither. Meadow FLOWER. - This plant thrives in clay or sandy soils, where it produces up to 1,000 to 1,200 bales per hectare of coarse but nutritious hay. Sow in September, at a rate of 8 kilograms of seed per hectare. PERENNIAL RYEGRASS. - Used as a mowing plant in temporary meadows on slightly cool ground. It grows back under the very teeth of cattle and becomes more vigorous the more it is grazed and trampled. It is sown in spring or autumn, at a rate of 50 kilograms per hectare for pasture; 100 kilograms per hectare for lawns. Rolling, topdressing. Lasts five or six years on average. Italian ryegrass. - Sods less than the previous variety, but recovers better after cutting and offers great continuity of vegetation. It likes humidity. It can give up to 7 or 8,000 kilograms of good dry fodder per hectare, for several years. Sow in autumn or spring, at a rate of 40 or 50 kilog. per hectare, half with red clover. Bailly ryegrass. - Succeeds in stony, half-burned soils, dry in summer, half-submerged in winter; fertilizer oxen feed on it readily. Sow at 20 to 25 kilograms per hectare. SECTION II. - LEGUMES. FÉVEROLLE. - Sow late February to April, broadcast or in rows. Hoeing. Several varieties: F. de Picardie coarse-grained; F. de Lorraine small-grained. 2 hectoliters per hectare. - Very suitable for preparing wheat harvests in clay soils. Ploughed in green, they are a first-rate fertilizer. CULTIVATED CHASTE OR SPANISH LENTIL. - Strong, light soil, but not too damp. Sow in March and April: one and a half hectoliters per hectare. Chickling is cut green as soon as the first pods ripen; it is fed to livestock, mainly sheep. In the south of France, its seeds are used to make a highly prized purée. LUPIN BLANC. - Good pasture for sheep; seed macerated in water for oxen. Sow in our northern provinces around mid-April, at a rate of 10 to 12 decaliters per hectare. Clay and gravel soils. ALFALFA. - Alfalfa needs well-tilled, very clean, deep soil, fertilized in the year preceding sowing, or at the time of sowing, with consumed fertilizers. Alfalfa is sown on barley or oats in spring, or, in summer, on flax, buckwheat or beans; or, in autumn, with spurge or rye. Hoe, lime and harrow at the end of winter. Fight dodder in May or June by cutting alfalfa plants affected by this parasitic plant to the ground; cover with dry straw and burn Fig. 65. - Field vetch. Cattle should never be allowed to graze on alfalfa still laden with dew or rain. 20 kilograms of seed per hectare. GREY PEA, LAMB PEA, EWE PEA, STRAWBERRY. - This annual plant is particularly successful on fallow land; the early varieties are sown in March; the P. gris d'hiver variety is sown in autumn at a rate of 25 to 26 decaliters of seed per hectare. Good fodder, especially for sheep. Land sown with grey pea should be smoked if it is to be used for wheat. SAINFOIN, ESPARCETTE, BURGUNDY. - Sandy, chalky soils suit it and it improves them. Sow in spring or autumn at a rate of 35 to 45 decalitres per hectare. Sainfoin à deux coupes produces a very abundant second cut, whereas ordinary Sainfoin gives only a rather weak regain; but it requires a less poor soil and a more abundant sowing: about 46 decaliters per hectare. COMMON VETCH. - It can be sown until June on strong, cool soils; its winter variety can be sown in autumn at a rate of 24 to 26 decaliters per hectare, in association with Rye or Oats. This fodder is cut as soon as it flowers and fed to livestock, but only after it has dried out and wilted. SECTION III. - ROOT FORAGES. CAVALIER CAULI (Cruciferae). - Very popular in our western provinces; rich in leaves. - Caulet de Flandre differs from the previous variety in its red hue. - C. Branchu or C. Mille-Têtes, less tall than Chou cavalier, but well furnished with vigorous shoots, is very useful for fertilizing oxen. Once the leaves have been harvested, C. moellier can be fed to livestock, cut into strips. - Perennial C. or C. de bouture is resistant to severe cold; its stems elongate, bend and root. - C. de Lannilis, with its large, blond leaves, provides good fodder for horned animals when cut into strips after the leaves have been harvested. It can withstand the winters of our northern departments. - Northern green kale differs from the preceding species in the way its leaves are cut. It withstands the harshest winters in our climates. In general, cabbages need strong, well-smoked soil. The larger species are sown from March to August in nurseries; set out in April, May, September, and in 12. rows spaced at one meter to Om, 65 apart. Hoeing, weeding. 200 to 250 gr. of seeds for a one-hectare plant. Turnip cabbage, Turneps cabbage, Lapland cabbage. - Sow in April at a rate of one and a half to 2 kilograms of seed per hectare, if sowing in the field. Resists the rigors of cold. Rutabaga cabbage, Swedish turnip. - Similar to Turnip Cabbage. Sow in rows spaced Om, 70 to Om, 80 apart. Can withstand frosts, but does not like humidity. Cabbage-Colza. - Broadcast on wheat stubble, turned over as soon as harvested; 4 to 5 kilograms of seed per hectare. Good green forage in early spring. Cultivation for seed requires more care. Sow on a bed from mid-July to the end of August, weed, transplant about two months later, in well-smoked soil, in rows spaced Om, 32. Replanting. Hoeing. Sometimes broadcast sowing in place. C. de mars is sown in March and April and produces ripe seed that summer. BETTERAVE CHAMPÊTRE, DISETTE (Chénopodées). - Biennial plant; needs soil loosened by one or two deep ploughings; sown broadcast or in rays, from mid-March to May; thin out so that plants are Om, 30 to Om, 50 apart, depending on soil quality. Weeding; hoeing. Seedlings are also sown in nurseries, to be planted when the root is the size of a finger, taking care not to let the tip fold up at the bottom of the hole. The roots are harvested in November and stored in a frost-free cellar. For sowing in rows, about 3 kilograms of seed are needed per hectare; for broadcast sowing, 4 to 5 kilograms; for transplanting, 2 to 2.5 kilograms are sufficient to provide the planting material needed for one hectare. As main sub-varieties, let's mention the Camel Disette; its length is about twice its diameter, with veined flesh. - D. corne de vache (cow's horn) with a very long root, curved and partly out of the ground, CARROT (Umbelliferae). - One of the best forage roots: it needs soil amended with well-consumed fertilizers. Sow from March to May and even June, at a rate of 4 to 5 kilograms per hectare, broadcast and preferably in rays. Light harrowing, rolling, weeding and hoeing. Harvesting takes place towards the end of November or in December. Store in cellars, trenches or frost-free pits. Among the many varieties grown for livestock, we recommend: jaune d'Achicourt, grosse blanche de Breteuil, blanche à collet vert, very productive, blanche des Vosges, whose large, clean roots are easy to store, NAVETS and RAVES (Crucifers). - Great winter resource. Sow late June to early August, broadcast or in rows. Weeding and hoeing, light, dry soil; 2 or 3 kilograms of seed per hectare. Among the best Raves are: Rave d'Auvergne à collet rouge. - Rabioule or Rave du Limousin, improperly called Turneps. - Rave du Norfolk, very good, quite late. - Turneps hâtif de Hollande, quick-growing and very strong-rooted. ALPISTE, Long millet, Birdseed, Canary seed (Grasses). - Good fodder for horses and horned animals. Sow in April in well-smoked soil. OAT-POTATO or Potato Oats. - Good quality, but a little prone to smut. Georgia oats. - Very early and very good for livestock; can be cut green first and left to seed on second growth. Siberian early oats. - Quite similar to the previous variety, but more vigorous. Joannette oats. - Gives good quality black grain, but must be harvested before full maturity. Brie black oats. - Short grain, swollen, early, good quality. Winter oats. - Straw and grain production, early, more successful in western France than in the north and east. Sow in September or January, preferably on dry land. ORDINARY FRUIT, barbless. - Its main varieties are: Blé blanc de Flandre, very beautiful and very productive, with white ears, white grain, oblong and slender. - Blé de Hongrie, white ear, narrow, white grain, very short. - Blé Touzelle or Tuzelle blanche de Provence, white grain, oblong. - B. Richelle white from Naples, very fine white grain. - Blé d'Odessa (Odessa wheat), barbless, red ear, fine straw and bent at the bottom. Sow in autumn or spring. - Blue wheat, hardy, productive, early. Sought-after for meslin and as a March wheat. - Talavera wheat, from Bellevue, with loose white ears. Sow in February or March. - Blé du Cap sans barbes, frankly from March, large grain, tight ear. - Blé de Saumur, a good sub-variety of Blé d'hiver ordinaire, with nourished ears, reddish grain, very white straw and higher than that of ordinary wheat, - Hardy red wheat, good for sowing on cleared clover, - Red March wheat, no beards, long ears. - Sicilian March wheat, grain Fig. 66. - Red, hard wheat of ordinary quality. - Hairy wheat from Crete, red, hairy head, light yellow grain. Sown in spring in Paris climate. Ordinary wheat, bearded. - Main varieties: Saissette de Provence, the best of the Bearded Wheats and perhaps of all the Wheats. - Bearded wheat from Naples, with beautiful elongated grain. - Caucasian wheat, bearded, elongated grain, reddish, hard, heavy. Sow in February. - Cape wheat, March wheat with very long ears, yellowish grain, heavy, good quality. - Ordinary bearded March wheat, early, good quality, frankly March. - Bearded March wheat from Tuscany, which provides the beautiful, fine straw used to make hats. - Victoria wheat, short straw, yellow ear, reddish grain, good quality. - Hedgehog wheat, short grain, small, reddish, heavy, good quality; spring and fall. - March wheat, bearded red, very early, therefore good for late sowing. Blé renflé, Poulard, gros Blé. - Main varieties: Nonette, semi-fine straw, coarse grain; autumn wheat. - Common Rivet wheat, blue ear, very tight, golden yellow grain, medium size, good quality, very rustic and very productive. - Black Petanielle wheat, large, almost round grain, long, hard, strong straw, very productive. - Miracle or Smyrna wheat, with stalked ears, large, rounded, yellowish-white grain; full, hard straw; needs good soil, fears severe cold and degenerates easily. Polish wheat or Russian rye, with large, long ears, very strong bales, elongated, hard, almost transparent grain, good quality, but not very abundant. Sow in spring, or better in autumn. Hard or African wheat. - Main varieties: Trimenia barbu from Sicily, abundant grain, fine straw, but a little hard; needs rich soil. - Aubaine rouge, very similar to the above. Sow in February or autumn. Barbless spelt, very good for fodder; very rustic, successful in cold, mountainous countries. - White bearded spelt, very early, very vigorous, good for spring and autumn sowing. White starch or March spelt. Sow in spring. Engrain commun or Petite Epeautre hardy, successful on siliceous soils. Sow in spring and autumn. Double grain, with rough ears and soft, unglazed grain. Sow in spring and autumn in chalky soils. Blés de mars, Blés de mai. - Blés de mars are early wheat varieties that fear the rigors of winter. Strictly speaking, there are no wheat varieties that, when sown in May, give an assured and complete harvest in the same year. CORN or TURKEY WHEAT, INDIA WHEAT, ZEA. - After rice and wheat, corn is the most useful of all grasses, and also one of the most universally cultivated. It can be sown on fallow land every two or three weeks, from May to mid-July, and will provide excellent green fodder for three or four months. Lines at Om, 55 or Om, 65 apart. Hoeing and weeding. Cut when the male flowers are showing their tips. Dry corn is a useful winter forage. It is estimated, without exaggeration, that the benefits of growing Corn are 50 per 100. SPRING BARLEY OR SPRING BARLEY. - After two-row bare barley, this is the earliest barley. Sows in May and sometimes June. Naked square barley, Celeste barley, Six-row barley. - Highly productive; grain less likely to blacken with rain; straw coarse, but soft and very good as fodder. Good soil. Sow in first spring. Guimalaye or Namto barley. - Short, rounded, greenish grain; short, firm, coarse straw. SARRASIN, BLACK WHEAT, BUCAIL, CARABIN (Polygonaceae). - Gives an abundant grain which man does not disdain and which chickens, pigeons, pigs, horses, etc., feed on very willingly. Sow for CEREALS. seed, from mid-June to early July, at a rate of half a hectoliter of seed per hectare; sow to bury as excellent fertilizer; one hectoliter per hectare. Poor, cold soils. Harvest early to avoid shattering. MARCH RYE. - Sown in March; fairly short but fine straw; very good grain. St. John's rye. - Northern rye with longer straw and ears, with smaller grains than Autumn rye, of which it is a variety. Cut as green fodder in autumn, or left to graze until late winter, to be harvested as grain the following summer. SORGHUM, MILLET. - Grain for chickens and pigeons; stalks provide good green fodder. A late-planting variety that is difficult to select. Sweet sorghum. - Stems 2 to 3 meters high, leaves smooth, flexuous and drooping, panicles of flowers first green, then purple, then crimson, seeds black and shiny. Same cultivation care as for Corn END OF PART ONE. GARDENER'S CALENDAR (1) January. - Fine days are rare at this time of year, under the foggy, cold skies of northern countries; however, you can have : 1° in the open ground, sweet coltsfoot, black hellebore or Christmas rose, Japanese calycanthus, tin laurel, common laurel, red and white laurel or Bois-Gentil, Alpine Iberid; 2° in greenhouses, a few Geraniums, Narcisse de Constantinople, Tulipe Duc de Thol, Clérodendrons, Ruellie à fleurs bleues, Begonias, a few hardy Orchids, some Cape Heather, Richardia, Canna, a few varieties of Rose du Bengale, a few early Camellias. In your hot greenhouses, place: Narcissus, Hyacinths, Daffodils, Cinereas, Chinese Primroses, Parma Violets, Frutescent Chrysanthemums, Lilacs, etc.., (1) This calendar was drawn up for the climate of Paris; it must therefore be modified if applied to the south of France; you must also take into account the changes in temperature that occur every year, and bring forward or postpone sowing, depending on whether the season is early or late. 19 transplant them, lining them with gravel, rubble, coarse gravel, fine gravel or river sand; destroy worn-out lawns with deep ploughing, and prepare the places where you will plant your Rosages, Bengals and Heather in March, in clumps or beds. From time to time, remove the litter from your herbaceous plants, but don't expose them to the still frequent frosts. February. - In the open ground, you'll have : Daisies, a few sweet-smelling violets, snowdrops, herbaceous heather, hill daphne, spring saffron and its many varieties, helleborine, small periwinkle, rosemary, gardeners' corchorus, hepatica and so on. In greenhouses, Jasmine, Peonies, Purple Cinerea, Camellia, variegated Oxalis, several Corréas, Ethiopian Richardia. Remove dead wood and harmful branches; plough your groves and flowerbeds, using a forked hoe rather than a spade, for fear of cutting the roots; sow your lawns; line the pits intended for your March rosages with heather soil; your flowerbeds will receive Julienne, Giroflée, Soleil vivace, Astère, Poetic Carnation and a few other perennials and biennials that you won't have to worry about in autumn. If you're no longer afraid of heavy frosts, plant your borders with Sage, Lavender, Hyssop, Daisy, Mignardise, Boxwood, etc., and place them in borders or posts. If the sun shines and heats up a little, carefully open some of your frames and renew the air in your greenhouses; hoe the soil in your pots, water, remove dead leaves; wage war on insects. March. - In the open ground you'll have: Sorbs, a few Spireas, some Thorns and Alisiers, several heathers, the dwarf Almond tree, the satin Almond tree, the A. Georgia, Andromeda, Tulips, Narcissus, 1ris, Hornbeam, Primrose, Spring Cynoglossa, Bear's Ear, Spring Orobium, Saffron, Arbouria, Leucoïum, Iberides, Double-flowered Populus, Sylvie and Apennine Anemones, and so on. Thanks to the forced heat, greenhouses and frames will easily give you several Acacias, Roses, Diosmas, Carmantines, Indigotier austral, Heather, Alisier de la Chine, Sparmannia d'Afrique, Camellias, etc., etc... Complete all your ploughing and planting of trees, shrubs and perennials, reserving only green and resinous trees for April. Rake and sand your driveways, keep an eye on your lawns, and follow up your autonine seedlings with borders, clumps or beds of annual flowers such as: Larkspur, Reseda, Poppy, Poppy, Mahon's Wallflower, etc. Sow on beds: Quarantaines, Zinnies élégantes, Balsamines; lay Dahlia tubers bare on a bed, cover them with a frame; when the heat brings out the buds, divide the clumps and put them in pots, but continue to keep them on a bed or at least under a frame; remove your diseased orange trees and other plants and revive their roots by laying them bare in the soil of the bed. Start taking cuttings under cloche and marcottes; protect your greenhouses with a light canvas, where young shoots have to fear the sometimes scorching rays of the March sun. April. - In the open ground : Bear's Ears, Primroses, Anemones, Narcissus, some Tulips, Corydalis, Bulbous Fumitory, European and Asian Trollius, Pansies, Chinese Glycine, Paulownia, False Ebony, Lilacs, Double-blooming Cherry and Cherry Trees, Cytises, Garden Coronilla; in greenhouses and under frames, Rhododendrons in trees, Indian Azaleas and the rest of the Camellias, many of which were in flower the previous month, wage war on caterpillars and other insect pests; clean your trees and shrubs; mow your lawns; plough your flowerbeds and beds. Your field-sown annuals are in full bloom; save your châsssis for sowing tropical seeds, or for weak or diseased plants. Cut under cloche, graft on approach, etc., give air to the greenhouses; multiply your watering as the heat increases and vegetation develops. May. - It would be superfluous to name all the many and varied flowers that have given this month its name: Bengal Roses, May Hazelnuts or Cinnamon, display their beauty and herald the thousands of Roses that will soon be in full bloom. From May 10 to 15, put your Dahlias in place, if you no longer fear frost; hoe your flowerbeds and beds; remove weeds from your lawns and mow them. Carry out your repottings instead of postponing them until autumn; take cuttings under cloches and make herbaceous, English and approach grafts. Towards the middle of the month, take out orange trees, and, at the end of the month, all orangery plants. Clear your greenhouses of their frames; place your heathers facing east, but keep them out of direct sunlight; provide soft light for Protées and Diosmas. June. - Roses are opening and spreading their fragrance; Dahlias are blooming. Flowers everywhere that it would be pointless to enumerate. Water, hoe; dry out your paths; mow your lawns; stake Asters, Primrose Roses, Dahlias, etc., stiles for Cobeas, Convolvulus, Clematis and other climbers. Leave weak or diseased plants in your unoccupied beds, bare or in pots, for varying lengths of time. Protect plants kept in greenhouses from excessive sunlight. Take cuttings under cloche and approach grafting, as in the previous month. July. - If June brings with it the most beautiful and fragrant Roses, July still has Bengale-Bourbon and Noisette, the King's Rose, Perpetual Roses, Hopper Roses, Dahlias, etc., not to mention many foreign shrubs to which the heat of this month is favorable. Raking, pruning, watering, autumn flower nurseries, marcotting carnations, separating onion cloves - there's plenty to keep you busy. Shelter your chests, frames, etc., keep a layer for sowing seeds in warm countries, and for your sick or delicate greenhouse plants. Re-tan your layers if you weren't able to do so in June. August. - We continue to enjoy Perpetual Roses, King Roses, Bengal Roses, etc., Asters, Dahlias, etc., to which we add Petunias, Verbena, Clematis, Phlox, Perennial Sun, Matricaria, Calf's Mufles, Julibrizin, Japanese Privet, Constantinople Acacia, Chinese and Virginia Bignones. In temperate greenhouses, Gesneria, ŒEchmea, Tillandsia, Stéphanotis, Passiflora, Fuchsia, Polygala Cordata, Metrosideros, Melaleuca, Lagerstrœmia, etc., etc., shine. At the beginning of this month, if you haven't been able to do so in July, lift all your autumn annuals into rootballs and put them in place: marigolds, daisy queens, balsamines, etc. Sow in place: Poppies, Poppy, Bluets, Adonis, Larkspur, Thlaspis, etc.; re-pot plants whose pots have remained buried during the summer, re-cutting roots and branches that have become too long; if you leave these plants in the shade, their vegetation will be re-established when you return them to the greenhouse or orangery. September. - This month's most beautiful and abundant flowers include: Cinereas, Amaryllis-Belladonna, Autumn Colchicum, Sarretes, Goldenrod, Silphium, Coreopsis and other radiata; always Asters, Dahlias, Oenotheras, Petunjas, Balsamines, Queen Daisies, Indian Carnations, Clarkias and so on. Same care and cleanliness as in previous months; in addition, watch the seeds and harvest them as they ripen; sow Quarantaines for transplanting on soil or in crates; sow Renoncules, Anémones, etc. If you need to make considerable changes to your gardens, choose this time of year: the soil transported will settle sufficiently before the next planting. Towards the middle of the month, you'll bring in your warm greenhouse plants, and finish repotting your temperate greenhouse and orangery plants; moderate arrangements in the morning rather than in the evening. Replace panels on tarpaulins, frames and temperate greenhouses at the end of the month. October. - You don't have to say goodbye to flowers just yet, because you've still got them: Roses de Berigale, Noisette; Muscades; Scarlet sage; Dahlias; Late gladioli; Asters; Phlox; Datura; Erica; Zinnia; Menziesia polyfolia; Hélianthus; XimenesiaEnceloïdes; Cosmos bipenné; Capucine; Hibiscus speciosus, militaris, roseus, palustris; Œnothera tetraptera, odorata; Tamarix gallica; Symphoricarpus; Chélone campanulata, rosea, glabra; Véronica præalta; Plumbago; Fuschia; Begonia discolor: - if you remembered to put these plants in the ground in May. Carry out your planting and planting out, finish your paths, collect dead leaves, remove the stems of perennials that no longer flower: Balsamines, Indian Carnations, Dyer's Coréopsis, Queen Daisies; in your cleaned, ploughed and smoked flowerbeds, plant, without delay, Scabieuses, Campanulas, Greek Valerian, Poetic Carnations, Calf's Mufles, etc., which will give you their flowers in spring, which will give you their flowers in spring; bring in large Giroflées before the frosts. Around October 15th, orange trees and orangery plants will be brought in and arranged so that those plants that do not need light (rose laurels, orange trees) form the back of your greenhouses, leaving room in front of them for evergreen, woody, herbaceous plants that like air and daylight; plough pots and crates, water moderately; graft in slits and cut Camellias under cloches, unless you reserve this operation for spring. Remake your layers of tannin in the hot greenhouses, giving them a thick bed of new manure or leaves as a base, and letting them build up their great fire and settle properly. Push the pots right up to the edge into this tannin, the larger ones at the back, the smaller ones at the front. November - If flowers are now becoming increasingly scarce, look after the ones you have left all the better: Bengal roses, Indian Chrysanthemums capable of withstanding four or five degrees of cold, the latter, potted, will last a long time in the temperate greenhouse. Collect dead leaves to cover delicate plants and make compost. Replace wilted annuals with perennials; plant 1° most of your ornamental trees, reserving resinous trees and heather shrubs for spring; 2° from November 1st to 15th, Narcissus, Hyacinth and Tulip Onions, etc. Monitor the temperature of your greenhouses and renew the air carefully. Water and keep clean. December. - Despite the cold, you will still be able to have, at the foot of the walls, Violette odorante; in sheltered places, Hellébore noir or Rose de Noël, Chimonanthus flagrans and its variety, Jasmin à fleur jaune; under frames come: Violette de Parme, Tulipe duc de Thel, Jacinthes blanches; in greenhouses: Cyclamens, Narcisses, Jacinthes, if you have taken care to plant them in October. Ripping for new lawns, repairing paths, pruning. Maintain the temperature of hot greenhouses at 10 to 20 degrees above zero, renew the air, and water around midday: if you squirt the water on your plants in the form of rain, you'll get a steam that's favorable to the development of vegetation. The same temperature applies to the pineapple greenhouse, where you can also place pots of Strawberries of the Four Seasons, Comte de Paris and Princesse Royale on the shelves. All you have to do is not let the thermometer fall below O degrees, but let the sun shine in at 5 to 10 degrees, and take advantage of the moment when it shines to renew the air and expel humidity by carefully opening the frames and windows, which you will close again before nightfall. There's no need to water large boxes of orange, pomegranate and rose-laurel in winter. Cover and mat the glass roof and the front of the windows, day and especially night, to prevent frost. Parterre. - Borders. - Lawns. - Assortment of flowers of various colors; laws to be observed in this respect. - Bedding plants, Fancy plants, Collection plants. - Parterre accessories. The Parterre or florist's garden is particularly intended for outdoor, hardy or semi-hardy plants, worthy of cultivation for their fragrance, their beauty, the brilliant shine of their corollas. The Parterre should never be too large; otherwise, the eye would not be able to take in the whole and the main details at the same time. Place it close to your home, so that it can be seen from the windows of your apartments. In northern countries, where the sky is often dark and rainy, you'll prefer the parterre to face south, south-east or south-west; never north. The proximity of tall trees, high walls and monumental greenhouses is detrimental to the parterre; at most, leave a few clumps of trees near the parterre to shelter it from the cold winds. In southern climates, follow instructions that are in many ways contrary to the above; remember, as a general rule, that it's enough for flowers to receive the sun's rays for a few hours each morning and evening. Rainwater should not be allowed to remain in the flower garden; the best soil is an average soil composed of roughly equal parts of ar ́ N C AHStI alllolan E 18 * M VIEI Fig. 1. - Parterre. gileous substance, calcareous substance and siliceous substance; this soil should be very loose and not subject to hardening or cracking in the sun. Use guano and odorless fertilizers. For very special crops, you'll need to set aside squares where the soil will offer the most suitable elements for the flowers you want to plant; primroses need 13. clay soil; Kalmias and Rosages need heather soil; bulbous plants need silica, etc. Sometimes the Parterre is flat throughout, sometimes it offers artistic reliefs rising from Om, 10 to Om, 15 and even to Om, 25 above the alleys; these reliefs must form gentle, rounded slopes from their perimeter to the center. Sometimes the parterre is shaped like a square, rectangle, trapezium, etc., sometimes it presents an irregular figure bounded by curved lines, with islands of flowers amid green lawns; unless you need to preserve the very style of an antique garden or constructions of some kind, avoid stiff, purely geometric shapes. Straight or curved paths determine the design of the parterre; in the largest gardens, they are rarely more than 4 meters wide; in the smallest, one meter is enough; they are sanded or covered with a layer of gravel one centimeter thick. For edging paths and walkways, we recommend: 1° Boxwood, planted in rooted splinters in a single row, 7 to 8 centimetres apart; allow it to reach an average height of around Om, 12 to Om, 18 by 6 to 8 centimetres thick, or even more, depending on the size of the parterre, the relief of the compartments to be bordered, etc.; 2° Thyme, planted in a single row, 7 to 8 centimetres apart.2° Thyme, large and small Periwinkle, double-flowered Daisy, Strawberry, Olympus Grass, Ivy, etc. Dry borders are those made of wood, iron or brick. Wooden edgings are usually made from thumb-sized strips of Oak, Beech or Hornbeam. Bricks should be well-fired, very hard, Om.25 by Om.60 c. long by Om.07 thick. Iron borders have the disadvantage of oxidizing rather quickly, despite the layers of minium. Lawns are made of a common grass that is allowed to grow quite high, and to which less care is given than to Turf; the latter is better suited to gardens of little extent. Never cut your lawns or turfs abruptly, by your flowerbeds whose true place is at the sides or towards the middle of the carpet of greenery, but on condition that you do not destroy the symmetry and overall view. You can establish your lawns by sowing or transplanting. Sowing is done by broadcasting on soil that has been well loosened, levelled and smoked; then you tread and water. Among our common grasses, preference is given to perennial species, which grow tall and fill out the ground well. Meadow grass (Poa pratensis), Timothy (Phleum pratense), Cynosure (Cynosurus cristatus), Sweet vernal grass (Anthoxanthum odoratum), Sheep's fescue (Festuca ovina), Perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne), Bentgrass (Agrostis canina and A. vulgaris); but we rightly recommend rejecting Cocksfoot (Dactylis glomerata), Bromes (Bromus erectus), etc.., Hoes (Holcus mollis and H. lanatus), large oats (Avena elatior). For transplanting, we take lawn tiles from the meadow and lay them, with all the soil adhering to their roots, on previously loosened and smoked soil; we carefully adjust them, roll them and water them. There are two main ways of distributing plants in a parterre: 1° Mixing species; 2° Growing or bedding flowers of the same species. In the mixing mode, remember that a parterre does not admit tall trees, and that simple shrubs two to three meters high are generally better on the sides than inside the compartments; a plant that is too large must not mask a smaller plant. The matching of flower colors requires special attention and a taste that nature inspires, but which the rules can leave a little guesswork. Especially in France, the harmonic arrangement of flowers is far too neglected in terms of color. The simple or primitive colors from which all the others are formed are red, yellow and blue. If you combine them two by two, they will give you orange from red and yellow, green from yellow and blue, violet from blue and red; mixing primitive colors two by two gives an unlimited number of intermediate shades between the darkest and the lightest. The complementary color is that which, added either to a combination of colors or to a single color, reconstitutes the triad of elementary colors; thus orange, derived from red and yellow, is complementary to blue; violet, composed of red and blue, is complementary to yellow; green, composed of blue and yellow, is complementary to red. Certain colors enhance, accentuate and nuance each other through their proximity. As a general rule, remember that: 1° All simple colors contrast happily with each other; 2° The binary combination of compound colors, presenting in each group the combination of three simple colors, is pleasing to the eye; for example, violet (red and blue) blends very well with orange (red and yellow) and green (yellow and blue); 3° Colors that are complementary to each other offer very attractive contrasts: blue and orange, violet and yellow; 4° White lends great relief to all colors, simple or compound, and softens the clash between colors that are naturally opposed to each other: red and orange, violet and red, blue and violet; 5° Black weakens the effect of all colors placed in too direct contact with it, with the exception of white; 6° Never bring simple colors closer to the composite colors in whose formation they enter; yellow contrasts unfavorably with orange (yellow and red) and with green (yellow and blue); blue with violet (red and blue) and with green (yellow and blue); red with orange (yellow and red) and with green (yellow and blue), and so on., etc. We've often seen binary and ternary combinations try out in flower gardens, rarely quaternary ones. The best binary combinations are obtained: 1° by contrasting white with all single or compound colors: bright yellow and white, orange and white, violet and white, green and white, pink or red and white, light blue or dark blue and white; - 2° by using single colors together or with their complementaries: yellow and blue, yellow and violet, orange and blue, red and yellow, red and blue, etc. Ternary combinations, where white almost always enters, are more varied than binary combinations: - white, yellow, blue and white; - white, yellow, green and white; - white, orange, white and violet; - white, orange, green and white; - white, red, blue and white; or white, red, white and blue; - yellow, red, white and yellow; - blue, orange, blue and white; or white, orange, white and blue, etc., etc., etc. The main bedding plants are: Balisiers or Canna. Caladium with green or colored leaves. Wigandia Caracasana. Juniperus and Biota. Cupressus sempervirens, etc. Retinospera. Ferns (Onoclea, Struthiopteris). Heather (Arborea, Scoparia, etc.). Tree Ricins. Broad-leaved Colocases. Rhubarb. Ferulas. Verbesina. Polymnia. Gunnera Scabra. Palms (Chamœrops humilis, Ch. Excelsa), small date palms. Japanese medlar (Triobotrya). Rose Laurel. Myrtles. Lagerstrœmia. Cocculus laurifolius, Agave. Passiflora, etc. Plants are divided into Fancy Plants and Collection Plants. Fancy plants must be hardy and easy to grow; for the most part, they are annuals or cultivated as such; they are almost always reproduced from seed; sowing is done in the field or in a nursery; the finer the seeds, the less soil they should be covered with (1). Among the main fantasy plants are: Acanthus. Achilleas. Aconites. Pink-flowered Acronilia. Adonides. Ageratories. Alysse corbeille d'or. Aubrietie. Amaranths. Amaranthines. Anemones. Anthemis. Asters. Balsamines, Basilics. Begonias. Belles de jour. Night beauties. Scarlet heather. Caicéolaires. Campanulas. Centaureas. Chrysanthemums. Cinereas, Clarkias. Coréopsides. (1) For the rest, see the name of each plant, chap. Iv, Brief description and cultivation, etc. L. AEAT 2 ---S eA Dielytra. Digitales. OEnothères or Onagres. Ephemera. Erigérons. Escholtzies. Ficoides. Fraxinella. Gaillardia. Geraniums. Giroflées, Godélies. Helianthemums. Heliotropes. Hellebores. Immortals. Ipomopsides. Ketmies. Lins. Linaria. Lobelia. Lunaria. Lupins. Lychnids. Lysimachus. Matricaria. Mallows. St. John's wort. Mimulus. Venus Mirror. Molenas. Garden snapdragon. Forget-me-nots. Nierembergies. Oriental Nigella, etc. Ornithogales. Orpins or Sedums. PARTERRE. Oxalis. 231 Daisies. Poppies. Pelargoniums. Penstemons. Perilla Nankinensis and others. Periwinkle, Petunia. Phlox. Larkspur. Polemonies, Potentillas. Purslane. Lungwort. Reseda. Rudbékias. Bunching Sainfoin. Sage. Saxifrages. Scabious. African groundsel. Silenas. Marigolds. Spirea. Statica. Tagetes. Thlaspis or Iberides. Thymes. Trollius. Valerian. Marigold Venidium. Veronicas. Verbena. Violets, Waitzias. California Zauschnerias. Zinnias, etc., etc. Collector plants, long known, studied and cared for with the greatest zeal by gardeners and amateurs of all nations, have provided admirable varieties from century to century; these plants are essentially the foundation of floriculture. Here are their main groups: Roses. Hyacinths. Tulips. Lilies. Hemerocallis and other second-order Liliaceae. Amaryllids. 1Iridaceae. Primroses and Auriculas. [Chinese Chrysanthemums and Carnations. Indian Garden Pansy. Daisy Queen. Anemones and Ranunculus, Dahlia. Parterre accessories are the various things that, without being necessary or really part of the garden, add to its pleasure or facilitate its upkeep, such as water fountains and basins, nurseries, benches, boxed trees, vases, fences, and so on. Don't make your fountain spin a tin dervish, or your pond carry badly-painted vessels: a water lily and goldfish will adorn it much better; no gilding on the seats; let them offer the means to stretch out comfortably and rest. As far as possible, and with a few exceptions established in practice, allow the trees in your boxes to grow naturally; it's enough for them to be cramped at the base, let the head spread out freely. Antique-shaped white vases are preferable to ugly pots laden with fantastic flowers which, even if well-painted, have too formidable rivals in your parterre itself. The nursery should be kept out of sight of visitors; it should contain all the utensils and equipment necessary for sowing, bedding, cuttings, grafting, etc., etc., etc., etc. It must be kept extremely clean. Landscaped gardens; their composition. - Rivers, streams, lakes, water features. - Paths and driveways. - Cuttings, embankments, artificial valleys and hills. - Tree and shrub distribution, etc. Fashion has caused the composition, arrangement and organization of landscape gardens to vary from century to century. If, in this area as in all others, beauty did not have its fixed rules, the simplest notions of taste and harmony would have been lost; On the one hand, French gardens sinned by an excess of symmetry; on the other, English gardens displayed a disorder that was not always an effect of art, nor an imitation of nature; moreover, this very imitation must have as its object only the beautiful and not the monstrous, the strange or the grotesque. Don't place, over an area of a few meters at the entrance to a middle-class house, confused masses of stones piled one on top of the other, under the pretext of representing rocks; don't dig under the feet of the over-confident walker holes of varying widths and depths which, in your opinion, will represent precipices, etc. Our fathers didn't admit the use of the word "precipice" in the French language. Our forefathers were accustomed to straight lines and flat surfaces; large areas of rough terrain were converted into terraces with rigorously geometric contours. Any tree, no matter how precious or ancient, disappeared if it had the misfortune to find itself out of Fig. 2. - Landscaped garden. alignment; in a word, our fathers proceeded in the construction of their vast landscaped gardens in a manner analogous to that of an all-too-famous modern aedile, whose love for the inflexible straight line will be attested to in future ages by the new Paris; but the Lenôtre, etc., thanks to their good taste, their skill and their ability to adapt to the new situation, were able to create their own landscaped gardens, thanks to their good taste and grandiose conceptions, created true marvels by means of processes that were in themselves ungrateful: the Gardens of Versailles, for example. Today, we prefer the picturesque effect to everything else; we're trying to get closer to nature; that's all well and good, but we mustn't conceal from ourselves the difficulties to be overcome. First of all, it's important to know all the details, all the accidents of the terrain on which you're operating; the general effect of the site, its natural resources, the objects to be preserved, their relationships with each other, deserve a great deal of attention. You draw your plan on paper, then on the ground. Milestones and stakes indicate the artificial hills and valleys, large and small elevations, the place of woods, copses and massifs; no steep, abrupt lines, but curves joined by gentle transitions; the capital S and half-circumferences are overused; good taste and the accuracy of the eye often replace the compass, an instrument that is always a little pretentious. If you have wide watercourses, trace or boldly modify their edges; don't let the detours be too close together; for narrow watercourses, you can multiply their sinuosities. Water is essential to a landscape garden; it gives it life. If your artificial river is 2 or 3 meters wide, you'll do well to divide it into two more or less equal arms, so as to form a small oblong island well planted with flowers, with a few rocks crowned with green trees or shrubs, with branches hanging down into the water: weeping willow, etc., etc... Artificial water features should be laid out in such a way that at least one of their edges is uncovered, allowing the view to extend over the entire body of water. On the shores, plant tall, isolated trees and low shrubs here and there. If the shores are too steep, boaters will be deprived of any perspective. There should always be a sufficient difference in level between the pond and the water outlet, so that the pond can be easily emptied when it's time to clear the water or fish in large quantities. In parts of the garden where you can easily bring in water, in basins or in tubs full of water, grow: Arundo donax; Typha; Lythrum; Butomus umbellatus; Spirea venusta and ulmaria; Epilobium spicatum rose and blane; PIris pseudo-acorus; Myosotis palustris; Caltha palustris flore pleno, etc.; Salix schubertea; Caltha palustris flore pleno.Salix schubertea; Cordamine pratensis flore pleno; Alisma flotant; Fléchière aquatique; Trèfle d'eau; Macre flottante; Nénuphar blanc, etc. If, with the help of a few millstones or other stones that retain moisture easily, you create an artificial rock, plant in the interstices : Cynoglossumomphalodes; Pulmonaria Virginica; Phalaris rubané, Marsh marigold; Trollius, Alyssum-saxatile; Crucianella odorata et stylosa; Alchemilla alpina; Doronicum caucasium; Ononis natrix; Rubus speciosus; Primula veris; Hepatics, Dianthus deltoides; Gypsophylla striata; Sedum sempervivum, Saxifraga géranoïdes; Lotus corniculatus flore pleno; Thymus serpillum; Thymus tomentosum; Narcissus poeticus; N. pseudonarcissus; Veronica-prostrata, etc. Populate your lakes and ponds with carp, tench, barbel, etc., and put goldfish in small basins. Bridges are built of wood, iron or stone; sometimes they are flat, sometimes domed; they must always retain a rustic appearance; ashlar abutments are preferable. Suspension bridges are becoming increasingly fashionable, but their elegance often detracts from their solidity. Alleys should not be so tortuous as to tire the walker; their edges should always be parallel to each other, whatever the shape and multiplicity of the circuits. Make the paths intended for cars 5 to 8 meters wide, and don't make them too winding; pedestrians need to be able to see crews and riders coming from afar. It's not in a landscaped garden that a coachman should have to show his skill at turning obstacles. Make pedestrian walkways 2.50 to 4 meters wide, so that several people can walk abreast, chatting, instead of being obliged to follow one another, as in a procession. A width of Om, 90 to 1m, 30 is sufficient for paths. If you can establish or preserve a few sunken paths, never incline their side slopes by more than 45 degrees; cover these slopes with Honeysuckle, Clematis and other shrubs or saplings with sarment stems; here and there, plant Hawthorn, Blackthorn, Dogwood. In general, remember: 1° don't over-multiply your paths, otherwise your tree beds and copses will look too thin and fragmented, and the picturesque effect will be destroyed; 2° don't let your paths end at the garden fences; 3° that the paths leading to the property's exit gates should only reach them via skilfully designed detours, so that the exits can only be seen from a short distance away; otherwise you'll destroy the illusion you've sought to create about the real extent of your garden. Once the layout has been completed, the earth and stones removed for the digging of lakes, basins, streams, etc., are immediately used for the artificial elevations, valleys, hills, etc. Assign a place in advance for the earth and stones to be removed. Assign a place for these materials in advance; organize the dumper service well, for the digging of bodies of water and valleys; always start by clearing a sufficient space for the dumper to circulate. When digging an artificial valley, proceed with transverse trenches in the direction of the width of the planned valley, rather than with random trenches; this way, you can easily follow the irregularities of the open line before your eyes, and the cross-section of the still-intact terrain will guide you as to the depth of the excavation. If you want to create a hill on level ground, place it not in the center, but at one of the ends, and let other well-planned undulations bring this hill into harmony with the garden as a whole. Leave the added soil to rest for a while, and then give the artificial hill its outward appearance, with plantings, pathways, etc.: the settling that occurs after these steps will have a positive effect on the garden. The settling that occurs after this work has been carried out will upset the hill from top to bottom. Tree distribution. - Here again, it's important to imitate nature as much as possible, which is never ridiculously symmetrical. There should be no overly fixed lines in your flowerbeds; no clashes in the contrast offered by trees of different greens; no trees whose strength of vegetation would so far outweigh the strength of vegetation of neighbouring trees, that the latter would soon wither away for lack of air, light and space. Each tree has its own particular kind of beauty: the Oak spreads its broad, rounded crown majestically; the Fir soars proud and bold; the Elm is both graceful and regular; the Poplar, noble and elegant. In general, Conifers have a serious, sad appearance, but their greenery withstands winter, and the snow that then covers their branches is very picturesque. Plant fir trees in groups of five, six or even ten; not far from them, plant trees of a lighter green. Here are a few tree associations that always succeed in favorable soil: Samaria Elm and Cytise, both with trifoliate leaves; Beech, Elm, Birch and Hornbeam. - False Acacia (Robinia), Japanese Varnish (Alianthus glandulosa). - Gleditschia and Sumae, etc., etc. Softwood trees recover with difficulty, or not at all, when planted after their fourth year; if they are over Om.03 or Om.04 in diameter, even if they are only three years old, nine times out of ten they die within a few weeks or months. A transplanted pine never acquires the vigor of one that grows in the place where it formed its pivot. Larch can be planted after two years in the nursery. Elm, Ash and Sycamore need only be nursed for one year. Oak, Beech and Chestnut need only spend two years in the nursery, provided they have been transplanted at one year old into deep, rich soil. Ornamental trees are planted in spring or autumn; the latter is generally preferable when the soil is of mediocre or poor quality and the plants have little strength; otherwise, it's better to choose spring. If a large tract of land is involved, planting should not be carried out simultaneously: light, dry soil should be planted in December-January; strong, moist soil in February-March; resinous trees, at the foot of which as much of their native soil as possible should be preserved, should be planted in the second half of April, if spring is far enough advanced. Care should be taken to compress the soil around the root collar. We recommend soaking the roots in a mixture of cow dung mixed with water. Stakes, thorn or iron surrounds, etc. List of some of the main trees and shrubs that go to make up a Landscape Garden. Constantinople Acacia. Alaterne, evergreen tree. Alisier (tree 8 to 10 meters tall). Sea Buckthorn, with silvery foliage and thorny branches, making it ideal for hedges. Alder, very easy to grow in swampy areas, where it can reach heights of 20 meters, braving both heat and cold; it forms coppices that are exploited after seven or eight years of growth. Birch, 14 to 16 meters high, grows without deformities or knots, growing only flexible, hanging, tapering branches at the top. It thrives in arid, stony soils. The Catalpa, 10 meters high, native to America. The Common Hornbeam, so well-suited to forming graceful, thick hedges. Oak, king of our forests. Cypress, 10 to 12 meters high. Cytise des Alpes, with its beautiful clusters of hanging flowers. Maple and Sycamore, trees of great picturesque effect. Ash, tall, with a straight trunk, well-proportioned in its size, ending in an elegant but somewhat loose crown; it fears neither shade nor the proximity of other trees, which it quickly overtakes. Flowering Ash, etc., etc. Juniper (Juniperus), a hardy shrub, bristling with hard, sharp, very prickly leaves, with misshapen, twisted twigs, gathered into bushes, with a wild appearance; it is suited to arid, stony sites. The Beech, with a very straight, very large trunk; 30 meters high; vast crown; thick, glossy, light-green foliage; slightly pendulous branches; rivals the Oak itself; suitable for isolation. Holly, not very tall, with supple, bending branches, white flowers and bright, cheerful red fruit; it keeps its beautiful foliage and bright fruit even in the harshest winter weather. Magnolia trees, evergreen, with very large, beautiful flowers; the large-flowered M., which grows to 8 and 10 meters. - Deciduous Magnolias, all of which can grow in the open ground; the Yulan Magnolia, the Cordata Magnolia, with very large and beautiful flowers.

greenish-yellow, etc. Horse chestnut, remarkable for its magnificent foliage and graceful flowers. The Larch, with its thin, narrow, cheerful green leaves, arranged in rosettes along the branches. Micocoulier or Celtis, 15 to 16 meters high, with a noble habit and numerous, well-spread branches. Walnut, which should be placed at a suitable distance from other trees, which it would rather kill than support. Poplar, which has such a beautiful effect along streams and ponds. Pine, content with dry, arid, sandy soil, where no other tree could succeed. The Platane d'Orient, with its superb foliage and rounded green head, spreads shade and coolness all around it. It's one of the most beautiful and suitable trees for forming avenues and bordering large clearings in parks. Robinia or False Acacia, with clusters of elegant, fragrant white or pink flowers. Sumac, with winged leaves and bright red berries; dry, stony places. Elder, very fast-growing. Lime, ideal for shady alleys. It is less common in the modern landscape garden than in the old French garden. Japanese varnish (Ailanthus), 20 meters high and fast-growing. Picturesque accessories. - A landscape garden should be enough to please the eye, without borrowing anything from architecture; however, it does not reject artistic decorations, provided they are appropriate, well-understood and in the right proportions. If you find some ancient ruins on your property, preserve them with care, framing them in the landscape. If you're building a few pretty temples to rural divinities, to Pan, Flora, Pomona or the Seasons, prefer Greek architecture to Roman architecture, as it is purer and more graceful. It's better to copy a familiar model than to expose yourself to the ignorance and bad taste of many modern architects who, under the pretext of inventing new orders or adorning old ones, make a ridiculous mix of different styles. Never allow pagodas or Chinese pavilions; the elegance of some of their details does not prevent the bad effect of their whole. Since the last Paris exhibition, some large landscaped gardens have featured remarkable reductions of Moorish buildings, more suited to the climate of southern France than to our northern provinces. The Romanesque, Gothic and Renaissance styles are the only ones suitable for private chapels; reserve the Greek and Roman styles for temples dedicated to the pagan divinities mentioned above. Obelisks are still allowed in landscaped gardens, provided they are well-cut and well-proportioned; pyramids are ridiculous. Isolated columns may be whole or truncated; in the former case, they are topped with busts or statues; in the latter, they are topped with urns in antique form, with a few inscriptions, preferably borrowed from poets who have sung of the joys and brevity of life: Horace, Anacreon, etc. The statues must be few in number, but of truly remarkable craftsmanship. To the Faun, the grove and the thick thicket full of coolness and shade; to the Nymph, the limpid, murmuring water, the pond, the Weeping Willows, the Water Lilies, etc., etc., etc., etc. A simple but clean thatched cottage, well isolated in clumps of trees where birds sing and nest, and whose path the unwelcome visitor could not easily find, forms a pleasant contrast to the magnificent châteaux, and has always seemed preferable to those pretentious pavilions, with facades adorned with moldings, with windows trimmed with yellow, red, white glass, etc. A few antique marble vases, garnished with flowers rather than left empty, are a fitting ornament for the landscape garden as well as the parterre (1). (1) Readers wishing to study the history of landscape gardens in greater detail should consult Théorie et la Pratigue du jardinage avee un Traité d'hydraulique convenable aux iardins, by Leblond, large in-8°. Paris, 1722. Plans des beaux jardins pittoresques de France, d'Angleterre et d'Allemagne, by J.-Ch. Krafft, 2 vols. in-folio. Paris, 1809-1810. Encyclopœdia of gardening. Landscape gardening, etc. London, 1835. Highly esteemed in England, covering all branches of gardening. The book of the garden, by C. Mac-Intosh. London, 1853. In two volumes. The first deals with horticultural architecture: construction of greenhouses, orangeries, layout of gardens and parks. Liebeck. Landscape gardens. Atlas of 24 plans with explanations, 1858. Paris, France. Rothschild, publisher. Thouin. Plans raisonnés de toutes les espèces de jardins. Paris, 1823. main natural families (1). SECTION ONE. - CRYPTOGAMES. 1st CLASS, Acotyledons. - Plants lacking embryos, cotyledons, stamens, pistils and true seeds, but having reproductive bodies called spores: in this first class, only the following are cultivated as ornamental plants: 1° Ferns of our climates: cool, shady places; exotic ferns: special greenhouses. Among the most common are: Adiantum, Gymnogramma, Osmunda, Polypodium, Pteris; 2° Lycopodiaceae, as ornaments for hot greenhouse rock gardens; as borders: Selaginella, etc. SECOND SECTION. - PHANEROGAMS. Plants with obvious reproductive organs (pistils, stamens). 2nd CLASS. Monocotyledons. - Plants characterized by (1) For a brief description and cultivation of ornamental plants, see chapter iy and the tables in chapter vi. the single cotyledon embryo and parallel-veined leaves. We grow: Flowering rush, Limnocharis, Stratiotes, Vallisneria (aquatic plants). - Acorus, Arum, Caladium, Calla, Dracontium, Richardia (Cool plants). - Carlodovica, Pandanus (Pandanaceae). - Sparganium, Typha (Typhaceae). - Cyperus, Papyrus (Cyperaceae). - Agrostis, Ægilops, Andropogon, Arundo, Bambusa, Bromus, Briza, Gynérium, etc., etc. (Grasses). - Areca, Caryota, Ceroxylon, Chamædorea, Chamærops, Cocos, Latania, Phœnis, etc. (Palms). - Commelyna, Tradescantia (Commelyneae). - Juncus (Juncaceae). - Pontederia (Pontederiaceae). - Agapanthus, Aloe, Asphodelus, Fritillaria, Hemerocallis, Hyacinthus, Lilium, Ornithogalum, Scilla, Tulipa, Yucca, etc. (Liliaceae). - Convallaria, Cordyline, Dracœna, Smilacina, Trillium (Asparagineae). - Colchicum, Helonias, Merendera. Uvularia, Veratrum (Melanthaceae). - Dioscorea, Tamus (Dioscorea). - Anomotheca, Aristea, Crocus, Gladiolus, Iris, Ixia, Tigridia, Wastonia, etc. (Iridaceae). - Anigosanthos, Xiphidium (Hæmodoraceae). - Hypoxis (Hypoxidae). - Agave, Amaryllis, Chlidanthus, Leucoïum, etc., etc. (Amaryllidaceae). - Heliconia, Musa, Ravenala, Strelitzia, Urania (Musaceae). - Ananassa, Æchmea, Bilbergia, Neumannia (Bromeliaceae). - Canna, Thalia, outdoors in summer. - Globba, Hedychium, Zingiber; warm greenhouse (Zingiberaceae). - Acineta, Angrœcum, Brassia, Calanthe, Cattleya, Cœlogyne, Cyprépedium, Dendrobium, Epidendrum. Lælia, Ophrys, Orchis, Renanthera, Saccolabium, Stanhopea, Vanilla, Zygopetalum (Orchids); warm, humid, dimly lit greenhouse, on dead or living tree bark, in old coconuts and in baskets suspended on a bed of moss, on clods of heather soil, temperature maintained between 15 and 25 degrees centigrade above zero. Multiply by pseudobulbs. 3rd CLASS. Dicotyledons. - Plants having an embryo with two opposite or divided cotyledons; leaves rarely sheathing without parallel veins; flower whorls in groups of five or multiples of five. We grow: Ceratozamia, Cycas, Dion, Zamia (Cycads). - Caryotaxus. Dacrydium, Phyllocladus, Podocarpus, Taxus, Abies, Araucaria, Cedrus, Laryx, Picea, Pinus, Callitris, Cupressus, Juniperus, Taxodium, Thura (Conifers). - Ephedra (Gnetaceae). - Casuarina (Casuarinées). - Camptonia, Myrica (Myricaceae). - Liquidambar (Balsamifluaceae). - Pla tanus (Platanaceae). - Garrya (Garryaceae). - Carpinus, Castanea, Corylus, Fagus, Quercus (Quercineae). - Populus, Salix (Salicinaceae). - Alnus, Betula (Betulinae). - Planera, Ulmus (Ulmaceae). - Celtis 14 (Celtineae). - Buxus, Croton, Jatropha, Ricinus, Xylophylla (Euphorbiaceae). - Saururus (Saururea). - Piper (Piperaceae). - Carya, Juglans (Juglandées). - Cannabis (Cannabinaceae). - Artocarpus, Cecropia (Artocarpées). - Broussonetia, Ficus, Morus (Morées). - Nepenthès (Nepenthea). - Aristolochia (Aristolochiaceae). - Elœagnus (Eleagineae). - Daphne, Dirca (Thymeleae). - Embotryum, Protea (Proteaceae). - Benzoin, Cinnamomum, Laurus, Sassafras (Laurinaceae). - Polygonum, Rumex, Rheum (Polygonaceae). - Atriplex, Beta, Chenopodium, etc. (Chenopodaceae). - Phytolacca (Phytolaccaceae). - Amaranthus (Amaranthaceae). - Abronia, Mirabilis (Nyctaginea). - Plumbago, Statice (Plumbaginaceae). - Globularia (Plantagineae). - Myoporum (Myoporineae). - Acanthus, Justicia, Thumbergia (Acanthaceae). - Cariopteris, Clerodendron, Lantana, Verbena (Verbenaceae) - Selaga (Selagineae). - Betonica, Coleus, Dracocephalum, Hyssopus, Lamium, Lavandula, Melissa, Mentha, Origanum, Rosmarinus, Salvia, Satureia, Scutellaria, Stachys, Teucrium, Thymus, etc. (Labiatae). - Salpiglossis, Verbascum, Calceolaria, Hemineris, Antirrhinum, Linaria, Digitalis, Paulownia, Manulea, Erinus, Veronica (Scrophularinea). - Mandragora, Petunia, Datura, Nierembergia, Nicotiana, Solanum (Solanaceae). - Borrago, Cynoglossum, Eschium, Héliotropium, Myosotis, Pulmonaria, Symphytum (Borraginées). - Hydrolea (Hydroleaceae). - Cosmanthus (Hydrophylaceae). - Convolvulus, Ipomœa, Quamoclit (Convolvulaceae). - Cobœa, Phlox, Polemonium (Polemoniaceae). - Bignonia, Calampelis, Catalpa (Bignaniaceae). - Sesamum (Sesameaceae). - Gentiana, Exacum, Chironia, Orphium, Villarsia (Gentianaceae). - Spigelia (Spigeliaceae). - Apocynum, Vinca (Apocynaceae). - Asclepias, etc. (Asclepiadae). - Fraxinus, Ligustrum, Ornus, Syringa (Oleineae). - Jasminum, Nyctanthes (Jasmine). - Dyospyros (Ebenaceae). - Anagallis, Cyclamen, Lysimachia, Primula, Soldanella (Primulaceae). - Ardisia (Myrsinées). - Styrax (Styraceae). - Andromeda, Azalea, Erica, Vaccinium, Rhododendron, etc. (Ericaceae). - Pyrola (Pyrolaceae). - Campanula, Specularia (Campanulaceae). - Lobelia (Lobeliaceae). - Gesneria, Besleria, Chrysothemis (Gesneriaceae). - Achillea, Aster, Bellis, Centaurea, Chrysanthemum, Cineraria, Coreopsis, Cosmos, Dahlia, Erigeron, Eupatorium, Gaillardia, Gnophalium, Helianthus, Inula, Rudbekia, Santolina, Senecio, Solidago, Tagetes, etc., etc. (Compositae). - Dipsacus (Dipsaceae). - Valeriana, Centranthus (Valerianaceae). - Asperula, Coffea, Rubia (Rubiaceae). - Lonicera, Sambucus, Viburnum, etc. (Caprifoliaceae). - Angelica, Buplevrum, Coriandrum, etc. (Umbelliferae). - Hedera (Araliaceae). - Aucubas, Cornus (Cornaceae). - Adonis, Anemone, Aconitum, Clematis, Delphinium, Erantuis, Hepatica, Helleborus, Nigelle, Pœonia, etc., etc. (Ranunculaceae). - Berberis (Berberidae). - Illicium, Magnolia, etc. (Magnoliaceae). - Sarracenia (Sarracenia). - Water lilies, Nymphea, Victoria (Nympheaceae). - Nelumbium (Nelombonaceae). - Escholtzia, Papaver, etc. (Papaveraceae). - Aubrietia, Chiranthus, Cochlearia, Iberis, Lunaria, etc. (Crucifers). - Reseda (Resedaceae). - Capparis (Capparidae). - Acer, Negundo (Acerineae). - Æsculus (Hippocastaneae). - Citrus, Limonia (Aurantiaceae). - Ampelopsis, Cissus, Vitis (Ampelidae). - Balsamina impatiens (Balsaminaceae). - Oxalis (Oxalidae). - Linum (Linaea). - Erodium, Geranium, Monsonia, Pelargonium (Geraniaceae). - Alcea, Althæa, Malva, etc. (Malvaceae). - Corchorus, Tilia (Tiliaceae). - Bombax, Sterculia (Bombaceae and Sterculiaceae). - Dictamnus, Diosma, etc. (Diosmées). - Ruta (Rutaceae). - Polygala (Polygalaceae). - Violet (Violaceae). - Dionœa (Dionaceae). - Cistus (Cistineae). - Tamarix (Tamaricinées). - Dianthus, Gypsophila, Lychnis, Saponaria, Silene (Sileneae). - Calendrinia, Portulaca (Portulaceae). - Mesembrianthemum (Mesembrianthemaceae or Ficoides). - Cereus, Echinocactus, Mamillaria, etc. (Cactaceae). - Crassula, Sedum (Crassulaceae). - Saxifraga, etc. (Saxifragaceae). - Passiflora (Passiflora). - Callistemon, Caryophyllus, Myrtus, etc. (Myrtaceae). - Cuphœa, Lythrum (Lythrariae). - Rose and all its varieties; Dryas, etc., etc.; Spirea, etc. (Rosaceae). - Acacia, Mimosa (Mimosées). - Callistachys, Cicer, Coronilla, Cytisus, Dioclea, Genista, Giycine, Lathyrus, Melilot, Robinia, etc. (Papilionaceae). - Ilex, Prinos (Ilicineae). - Celastrus, Evonymus (Celastrinaceae). - Staphylea (Staphyleaceae). - Rhamnus, etc. (Rhamneae). Brief description and cultivation of ornamental plants in alphabetical order. A ABACA, textile banana from the f̂les Philippines, V. Musa. ABELIA rupestris, ABELIE DES ROCHERS (Caprifoliaceae). - Dedicated to Dr. Abel Clarke. Shrub with glossy green leaves; fragrant white flowers arranged in a similar way to those of the Honeysuckle. Light soil; temperate or cool greenhouse. Three species: one from China, the other two from the Himalayas. Multiplication by smothered cuttings. ABIES, SAPIN (Conifers). - Name given particularly to a species of the Pinus genus. Pinus Abies is a resinous tree that grows very tall, although its roots are proportionately very small. Leaves are smooth green above and glaucous green below; male and female flowers are placed separately on the same individual; the fruit is called Cone, hence the name Conifer given to these trees. Fir wood is highly prized as firewood, for masting, etc.; it is fairly resistant to decay and rot; its maximum growth, in favorable soil, is 115 years; 76 years in poor soil. Fir does not do well in chalky soils, where it is better to plant Scots Pine and Maritime Pine. - Propagation by grafting for rare species; by seed for others. o Main species. Sapinette blanche, rising to 15 or 16 meters, pyramidal in shape and closely resembling the Epicea; - Abies Balsamifera, with aromatic leaves, hence its name Gilead's Balsam, although Gilead's balsam comes from another tree; - Abies du Canada, 7 to 8 meters high in Europe, 25 meters high in America; remarkable for the elegance of its young twigs; its bark contains a lot of tannic acid and is very suitable for tanning leather, and its twigs are used to make certain beers. Stems twiggy; branches inclined and then rising; very small cones. It can be pruned, like Yew; - Abies Excelsa; graces our forests; at flowering time, it spreads a large quantity of pollen which, blown by the wind and mixed with water from the sky, has often resembled sulfur rains; very upright; severe appearance as it ages, whorled branches; dark green foliage; cylindrical cones; multiplication by seed; - Abies Douglasii; S. of Douglas. de Douglas, 35 to 50 meters high; slender, twisted branches, buds wrapped in scales, acute leaves; valued for reforestation of the Landes; - A. Dumosa or S. buissonneux, 20 to 25 meters high, very thin and very stuffy; fears the winters of northern France; - Abies Pectinata or Sapin Blanc, S. à feuilles d'If, S. de Normandie; beautiful pyramidal tree of the first size, verticillate branches, horizontal; leaves notched at the top, white underneath. Supplies Strasbourg turpentine. Wood valued by luthiers for stringed-instrument soundboards; good for carpentry, joinery, etc. ; A. Grandis, S. Géant; in California, it reaches heights of over 60 meters; obtuse, cylindrical cones, with connivant scales like Cedar; -A. Nobilis, S. Noble, with linear leaves, curved or reflexed towards the upper part of the twigs; silvery on the underside; cones covered by the tops of the toothed wings of the seeds; - A. Religiosa, S. Sacré, from Mexico, with whole leaves, silvery below; cone quite similar to the cone of the Cedar of Lebanon; - A. Pinsapo, S. Pinsapo, 20 to 24 meters high, very beautiful pyramidal shape, braves the harshest winters; - S. de Numidie, quite similar in size and arrangement of green leaves above, glaucous below; cones grouped from 3 to 5; monumental appearance; - A. Spectabilis, from Nepaul and the Himalayas, 25 to 30 meters high, with notched leaves at the top, white below; fears severe cold; - A. Nordmanniana, S. de Nordmann, from Georgia, silvery leaves, much sought-after as an ornamental tree; - A. Pindrow, S. à feuilles dentées (Himalaya), height 25 to 30 meters, linear leaves, silvery beneath; two-toothed at the top; - A. Cephalonica, A. Luscumbeana, S. de Céphalonie, height around 20 meters; branches bristling with stiff, scarlet-tipped leaves, black-green above; cones Om, 18 long; - S. de Cilicie, height around 30 meters, well-filled branches, flat, long, tight leaves, silver beneath; cones Om, 20 long, deciduous scales. ABIES CEDRUS, V. Cedar of Lebanon ABIES LARIX. V. Larix. ABOBRA VIRIDIFLORA, ABOBRA A FLEURS VERTES (Cucurbitaceae). - Perennial root; long, broad foliage from Om, 05 to Om, 10; green, downy, solitary, fragrant flowers borne in leaf axils; egg-shaped fruit, red when ripe. Hardy. Good for arbors and cradles. ABRICOTIER. V. Armeniaca. ABRONIA, from a Greek word meaning delicate, elegant. ABRONIA (Nyctaginea). - Herbaceous, perennial plant, native to California; leaves opposite, petiolate, very entire; remarkable long-stalked, sweet-smelling flowers; arranged in terminal clusters, pale in the center, bright pink around the circumference. Sow in August in a nursery; pot over winter in a greenhouse; plant out towards the end of May. AGSINTHE. V. Artemisia. ABUTILON (Malvaceae). - Native to Brazil; about 50 species are known. Striated Abutilon has heart-shaped leaves at the base, and solitary, bell-shaped, golden-yellow flowers with purplish veins; orangery in winter; planted out in May, flowers until the first frosts. Multiplication by cuttings. ACACIA (Mimosées), from a Greek word meaning spike (Leguminosae). - Not to be confused with the tree commonly known as Acacia, which belongs to the Robinia genus (false Acacia). Corolla funnel- or top-shaped, longer than the calyx, with qninquifid or, less often, quadrifid limb; indefinite number of stamens (8 to 200) inserted either in the style of the ovary, on the receptacle or at the bottom of the corolla; indefinite number of seeds contained in a bivalve envelope. - Trees or shrubs with or without prickles; leaves simple or compound or decomposed, stipulate; petiole and rachis often glandular; inflorescence axillary or terminal veryvaried; flowers sessile or rarely pedicellate, bracteolate, yellow, white or greenish. The Acacia genus comprises some 300 species, most of them native to the tropical regions of the Old and New Worlds: remarkable for the hardness of their wood and the materials they provide for medicine and industry; for example, Acacia Catechu yields a very astringent juice known as Cachou; Acacia Nigra is a tonic much-appreciated by Americans; tanners use the green fruits (neb-neb) of A. Nilotica; Senegal gum comes from A. Verck. Acacias with spines or prickles. A. AGREABLE, with flowers in clusters, numerous branches, bipinnate leaves; axillary heads of beautiful golden-yellow flowers. Temperate greenhouse. A. DE FARNÈSE, Casse du Levant, 5 to 6 meters high; unattractive appearance, but small, very fragrant yellow flowers; - A. à petites feuilles, approx. 2 meters high; solitary or geminate heads of pretty yellow flowers in March-April; - A. Grandis, with very fine foliage composed of 10 to 12 pairs of glaucous leaflets; beautiful golden-yellow flowers; heather soil; temperate greenhouse. Acacias without thorns. A. BLANCHATRE, from Australia. - Height 6 to 10 meters; small whitish fruits cover its stems, twigs and leaves; yellow, fragrant flowers. Grows outdoors in southern France; in cold or temperate greenhouses in the north. A. DE CONSTANTINOPLE. - Silk tree. Height 10 meters; pinkish-white flowers in paniculate heads, with stamens forming aigrettes; finely cut bipinnate leaves. Used as an orangery in winter in our northern provinces. Seed multiplication on beds and under frames in spring; - A. à deux épis (Australia), height 3 to 4 meters; small, acute, oblong leaves; sulfur-yellow flowers, blooming in spring. Orangery or temperate greenhouse. Acacias with catkin-shaped, cylindrical spikes of flowers, A. VERTICILLÉ. - Flowers bloom from March to May; this shrub is very reminiscent of the juniper; - A. with very long leaves, leaves long from Om, 16 to Om;22; -- A. with numerous flowers, height 2 meters; sulfur-yellow flowers in pairs, blooming in spring. A. WITH LONG LEAVES. - Height from 4 to 7 meters and more; long spikes of lemon-yellow flowers; all Australian species are grafted onto this species; - A. glaucous, hanging branches, oblique, mucronate leaves, integral, pedunculated spikes of yellow flowers. Acacias with flowers in globular heads; clusters of flowers in panicles. A. DE SAINTE-HÉLÈNE. - It has the habit of the weeping willow, with long clusters of yellow flowers blooming in autumn; -A. lame de couteau, thick, almost triangular leaves, long clusters of flowers; -A. à feuilles de lin, height 3 to 4 meters; pointed, linear, long leaves; fragrant, pale yellow flowers bloom all summer; -A. à fleurs bleuâtres; numerous flowers bloom in spring; -A. trompeur (Australia), flowers in pedunculated clusters; orangerie. Acacias with simple leaves. - Phyllodes. A. with Juniper leaves; pendulous, linear, prickly twigs with setaceous stipules; small, pale-yellow flowers bloom in spring; - A. fausse asperge, almost cylindrical twig, multiflorous, solitary heads of sulfur-yellow flowers bloom in April-May; - A. with heart-shaped leaves; acute leaves; sulfur-white flowers, blooming in April-May; - A. with round leaves; height: 1.50 m; golden-yellow flowers, marking the branches; stake or trellis. Acacias are propagated from seed, which should be placed in a warm bed in early spring; very early plants can be planted about three weeks after their birth, in a new bed at Om, 10 or Om, 12 from each other, lightly watered, well sheltered by glass at night and aerated during the day; carefully removed after a month, leaving as much soil as possible on the roots, and placed separately in small pots filled with vegetable garden soil; immersed in a warm layer of tan; kept in the shade until they have formed new roots and, finally, treated like other tropical plants. Some species can be propagated by separating old plants when they have put down roots; perennial species survive the winter in warm greenhouses and produce ripe flowers and seeds the following summer. In June, remove creeping species from pots and expose them to the south; under cloches they live through the summer, but without gaining much strength; they are then condemned to perish at the first cold of autumn. ACACIA BLANC, ROBINIA, Pseudo-Acacia (Papilionaceae). - H. 16 to 23 meters. White flowers in May-June. Multipl. by seed or offspring in March-April: R. de Decaisne; R. sans épines; R. visqueux; R. rose. Multipl. by split grafting. H. 2 meters. All soil; mid-sun. A. PULCHERRIMA, very elegant Inga (Mimosées). - Crimson-red flowers with brown stamens. Multipl, by cuttings; warm and temperate greenhouse. - Inga ferrugineux. Flowers with purplish aigrettes, Warm, humid greenhouse; sandy soil. - I. anomala. H. 1 to 2 meters. Greenish flowers with dark purple-purple aigrettes. Warm greenhouse. A. PUDICA. V. Mimosa pudica. ACANTHUS MOLLIS, Acanthus without thorns. Branc-ursine. From a Greek word meaning thorn (Acanthaceae.) - It was the beauty of its leaves surrounding a basket placed on a tomb that gave Callimachus the idea of the Corinthian capital. Perennial; single stem from Om, 70 to 1 meter; elegant, large, smooth leaves; graceful flowers; singular corolla: lower lip with three lobes, calyx with four divisions, one very large posterior, two very small intermediate and one anterior. Multiplication by seed or root division. Sow in dry, light soil towards the end of March, and if the season is mild, the plants appear in May; in damp soil, the roots rot over winter. Preferably grow A. du Portugal with long spikes of pinkish flowers; A. épineuse with tight, hairy, white flowers, spotted with lilac; in July and August. ACER, ERABLE (Acerineae). - Flower: calyx usually divided into five, more rarely into four, nine parts; pre-flowering imbricate; petals in equal number inserted on the circumference of a fleshy, hypogynous disk, sometimes missing; stamens inserted on this same disk, always in definite number, sometimes equal to the other parts of the flower, usually larger, rarely proportional to the number eight; ovary with two lobes; style. with two stigmas. Fruit separates into two mono- or di-sperm samaras. Seeds attached to inner corner of lodge. Fine, tight, white or gray wood, sought after by cabinetmakers for making musical instruments and for heating; it contains a certain amount of sugar. Maples grow to considerable size in our climates; they multiply easily by their seed, which should be sown in spring immediately after maturity and covered with about Om, 14 of light soil; it will then sprout within the year, fresh and substantial Sol. Propagate rare species and varieties by grafting them onto Sycamore or other common species. The native A. Pseudo Platanus or Sycamore, or False Platanus, reaches heights of 20 and 25 meters; yellowish-green flowers; - A. Platanoïdes or Plane is less tall, but more ornamental than the former; it has yellow flowers in graceful corymbs; - Montpellier Maple, very large, but not very tall. Yellowish flowers in corymbs; short-winged fruits that turn red when ripe. Finally, let's mention: the Country Maple, 6 to 10 meters high; the Cottony Maple, 10 to 12 meters high; the Sugar Maple, native to America, from which a sugar similar to cane sugar is extracted, etc., etc. ACER, NEGUNDO. V. Negundo. ACHILLEA (Compositae). - From the name of Achilles, pupil of the centaur Chiron; allusion to the real or supposed virtues of this plant. The main species are A, mille feuilles. Indigenous, perennial, cultivated for its variegated, blond, corymb-like flowers, which have an aromatic fragrance; purple-flowered variety much sought-after by sheep. Blooms all summer long. Multiplied by splinters. - A, tomentose, perennial, almost similar to A. with pectinate leaves; good for borders. Dry soil. Multipl. by splinters in spring. - Filependula, native to the East. Stems 1.50 m long; many yellow flowers in tight corymbs. Sow the seeds in a bed in March, and they'll give you flowers in September. Thanks to their long, fibrous roots, Achillea plants solidify embankments and slopes. LONG LEAF ACHIMENÈS (Gesneriaceae). - Native to Mexico. Stems from Om, 20 to Om, 30; flowers of a beautiful blue mixed with white. - Several species and numerous varieties: Achimenès with large leaves; A, with open leaves, etc. They are cared for in greenhouses like Orchids (see this word). Multipl, by rhizomes and cuttings. ACHYRANTHES. - From two Greek words meaning straw and flower (Amaranthaceae). Twelve species, most of which grow in the equatorial zone. A. de Vershaffelt is a tall plant of Om, 30-40, reddish-purple and crimson. Sought-after for borders and baskets. Multipl, from cuttings; warm, humid greenhouse; part-sun. ACONIT (Ranunculaceae). - From a Greek word: pointe, because savages used it to rub the tips of their arrows. A perennial plant growing in the open ground; from Om,70 to 1m,30 tall. Large, beautiful blue or yellow flowers, somewhat helmet-shaped and arranged in clusters or terminal panicles. Propagates easily by seed sown in light, soft soil in mid-shade, or by splitting and dividing clumps. Blooms in summer. The main species are: A, pyramidal, the first to produce long flower spikes of Om 70 in May and June. A, tueloup blooms from mid-June to August. A. des Pyrénées, 4.50 tall; yellow flowers in July. A. napel, 1.20 m high, with three varieties: one with white flowers, one with pink flowers and one with variegated flowers. Multipl, by splinters in spring or autumn. Water in dry weather; place in flowerbeds in the shade, leaving a distance of about Om 12 between plants. ACORUS CALAMUS, Sweet rush (Aroidea). - From two Greek words: without sloe, because, according to the ancients, this plant cured eye ailments. Native and herbaceous; attractive green leaves; fragrant flowers in cylindrical catkins. Japanese A. gramineus, with its green, white and pink ribboned leaves, is grown in orangeries or cold frames, in damp, shady heather soil. Multip, by splinters. ACROLINIUM ROSEUM, Pink-leaved Acrolinium (Compositae). - From Texas. Annual plant; stem about Om, 30 tall, leaves glaucous, linear: flowers with involucre of scarce leaflets, with golden-yellow disk in center. Sow outdoors in April. Sow outdoors in March-April; flowers keep as long as those of immortelle. ADHATODA VASICA, Indian or Ceylon walnut (Acanthaceae). - Height 3 to 4 meters. Leaves pubescent, large, acute, evergreen; flowers white, two-lipped; blooms in July-August. Orangery; orange soil; warm exposure; frequent watering. Cutting in spring on bed and under frame, in terrine. - A. à feuilles de Coignassier (Brazil); erect, twiggy stem; oval, entire, opposite leaves; geminate flowers with white upper lip and red at the top; yellow stripe on lower lip. ADIANTE (Ferns). The best-known species is A. Cheveu de Vénus, with light-green tufts and ebony-black stems. Warm, shady greenhouse. ADONIS (Ranunculaceae). - Summer Adonis is an annual native plant, Om, 35 high, with very fine leaves, bright red-purple flowers and black at their base, blooming in June and July. Light soil; multip, by seed sown in situ. ÆCHMEA FLAMBOYANT (Bromeliaceae). - Peru. Panicle of yellowish flowers. Heather soil. Warm greenhouse. - The Æchmea discolor differs from the above by having purple-purple leaves underneath. - Æ. Fulgens. - Æ. Spectabilis (Guzmania). Æchmea Maria regina. ÆRIDES (Orchids). - Asia. The Æ. attaches itself to trees and lives very sparingly at the expense of their bark; we have seen Ærids that borrowed their food from the air only, by means of their leaves. This genus includes many species, most of which are native to Asia; for example, Lindley's Æ., whose flowers are first lilac, then pure white. - Æ. très-suave, with long clusters of pink-washed flowers on a white background; a variety is Æ. noble. - Greenish Æ., with white flowers, petals empurpled at the tip and red-dotted labellum. - The fragrant Æ.; one meter high; clusters Om, 50 long, composed of beautiful white flowers; pinkish tint at the top of the perianth divisions. - The Æ. crispé, beautiful hanging, elongated clusters of white flowers, pink labellum edged with white. - The pink-flowered Æ. (Nepaul), with mucronate, slightly curved leaves; numerous flowers, mottled pink and dark red; red spots in the middle of the labellum, which is itself more colorful than the rest of the flower. Warm, humid greenhouse. Peaty soil; moss. ÆSCHYNANTHUS TRES-RAMEUX (Cyrtandraceae). - East Indies. Saremose plant with thick green leaves, edges rolled underneath, purple-red flowers, purple-black line outside on blade divisions and cordate spot inside; autumn and winter. Elegant Æ. (Java). May-red flowers, with bright yellow veins at the entrance to the tube. - The Æ. de Java, with bright red flowers, yellow throat; flared calyx, noticeably wider than the corolla tube. - Large-flowered Æ. (Bengal). Beautiful, large red flowers. - Æ. tricolor (Borneo). Long Om, 03, scarlet or yellow flowers. - THE Æ. Boschianus (Java). Red flowers; yellow and red stripes at the throat; purple-brown calyx. - Elegant Æ. (Java). Height Om, 60 to Om, 70; large, beautiful flowers with bright yellow tubes and vermilion limbs. - Lobb's Æ. (Java). Flowers with dark-red calyx, scarlet corolla, throat marked with double lines. - Long-flowered Æ. (Java). Crimson flowers, yellow and black throat inside. Orchid greenhouse, pure heather soil, frequent watering. Mult, by cuttings. ÆSCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM, Horse chestnut (Hippocastaneae). - Native to the temperate climates of Asia; cultivated in Europe as early as 1591. Beautiful tree, 20 to 25 meters high; beautiful flowers dotted with pink spots on a white background, arranged in numerous vertical pyramids at the top of each branch; ample green foliage; strong, majestic trunk; astringent, bitter bark used for dyes; fruits of a repulsive harshness and quite similar in shape to those of the chestnut tree; sown in the ground or in troughs to transplant the seedling in the nursery. - M. d'Inde lives in all types of soil, but prefers substantial, cool soil; it tolerates pruning and shearing. We also grow the red-flowered Æsculus, with more embossed, greener foliage than the previous species; it flowers in the third or fourth year. AGAPANTHE OMBELLIFERE (Liliaceae). - Native to Africa, Om, 70 to 1 m high; beautiful umbel of 30 or 40 blue, odorless leaves, blooming in July. Propagate from splinters or seeds; sow in heather soil. Cover with litter during severe cold. AGATHEA, Blue-flowered Cinerea (Compositae). - Stems of Om, 50; blooms almost all year round. Open, nourishing soil; orangery, multip, seeds, cuttings, marcottes and offspring. AGAVE OF AMERIA, from a Greek word: Admirable (Amaryllidae). - General characteristics: tubular corolla, six deep divisions, six protruding stamens attached to the tube; ovary integral with the base of the corolla; three-located capsule; leaves large, numerous, very thick, armed with prickles; bare, candelabra-shaped spike 3 to 8 meters long, each branch terminating in a corymb of yellow flowers. Originally from America, this plant is now widespread in Italy, southern France, etc. It flowers quite often. Flowers quite often. Seed and carnation propagation; orangery. Aloe cultivation. For example: American aloe. Its leaf fibers are used to make ropes, fishermen's nets, carpets, wrapping cloths, etc., etc.; a honey-like juice, wine and vinegar are extracted from its stalk. Strong thorns make this plant sought-after for forming sturdy fences. - Yucca leaves. - Artichoke. - Variety mediapicta, yellow in the center. - Other: stricta, with striated and variegated leaves. AGERATUM MEXICANUM, Mexican Ageratum (Compositae). - Annual; very vigorous, height. Om, 30-40; azure flowers in a terminal corymb; July and November. Sow seeds in March and April on bedding; prick out on bedding and plant out at the end of May; multiply again in A, by cuttings overwintered under frame. AGROSTIS, from a Greek word: Field (Grasses). - Very graceful, long-lasting, purplish-blue flowers; height: Om, 20-40. Sow in place in April or September. AIRA PULCHELLA, Elegant Canche (Grasses). - Native, annual; sow in April or September. Edges, flowerbeds, beds. Grown in pots, this graceful plant is used to decorate apartments; take care to lightly cover the seed. ALCÆA ROSEA. V. Althœa rosea, ALIBOUFIER STYRAX (Styraceae). - Indigenous. Height 3 to 4 meters. White flowers in July; seeds sown in terrines on a bed as soon as mature; soft, substantial soil; sheltered exposure; can also be propagated from suckers and marcottes. ALISMA PLANTAGO, Water Plantain (Alismaceae). - Perennial. Height: Om, 60 to Om, 80; white or pink flowers in June and September; suitable for decorating water features; propagates from splinters in autumn and spring; 15. or from seed sown in pots with only the bottom in direct contact with water, ALLELUIA. V. Oxalis. ALLOUCHIER. V. Cratœqus. ALLIUM MOLY, Moly or golden garlic (Liliaceae). - Large, golden-yellow, star-shaped flowers in June. Dry soil. Multiply from seed or cloves, separating in July-August. ALNUS, Common Alder (Betulinae). - 20-meter high. Very common. Male catkins short, oblong and obtuse; female catkins oval; leaves broad, rounded and unevenly toothed. Marshy and even dry, chalky soils; very fast growth, especially in coppices. Its wood is used to make poles, water conduits, clogs, etc. - The Heart-leaved Alder is highly sought-after as an ornamental tree; other examples include: A. laciniata; A. oxyacanthifolia; A. glutinosa aurea, recently imported from Belgium. ALOCASIA WITH METALLIC REFLECTIONS (Aroids). - Borneo. Beautiful leaves, Om, 40 long and Om, 30 wide, bronzed above, purple below. Tubular spathe bright pink. Heather soil. Warm, humid greenhouse. - A. de Veitch, with hastate leaf, Om, 40 long by Om, 15, prominent ivory-white veins. Warm greenhouse. - L'A. de Low, peltate leaves, length Om, 40 on Om, 20, with beautiful yellowish veins. Warm greenhouse. - A. zébrée (Philippines), with large green, sagittate leaves; petiole zebra-striped with green streaks on a white background. Warm greenhouse. Frequent watering. ALOE, Aloe (Liliaceae). - Native to the Cape of Good Hope. Corolla tubular, almost cylindrical, divided into six lobes at its opening, enclosing six stamens attached to the receptacle; free ovary which converts into a capsule with three chambers, occupied by seeds arranged in two rows; - leaves are stiff, very fleshy, overlapping one another and forming pyramids or rosettes, sometimes glaucous green, sometimes with yellow or blood-red stripes; most are thorny or have strong, prickly teeth along their edges; - stems are very strong, sometimes woody; beautiful, short-lasting flowers; leaves yield a juice widely used in medicine (Succotrin). Aloes are treated like cacti, in light, nourishing soil; in winter, temperate greenhouse, no watering. - A. from Bourbon Island. Tall stem; flat, broad, hanging leaves with red margins; spikes of greenish-yellow flowers. - A. à corne de bélier (Africa). Height: Om, 70; leaves strongly toothed, inverted; very bright red flowers - Socotrin or commercial A., with dichotomous stem, straight, lanceolate leaves, with white serration; spikes of red flowers. - A. féroce (Cape), spiny leaves on both sides, amplexicaules; dense spike of saffron-red flowers. - A. mitre (Cape). Height: Om, 70 to 1 meter; mitred leaves, spiny at the edges; red flowers. - The A, umbellate (Cape); with banded leaves, armed with red spines; saffron-red flowers, blooming in May-June. - A. fan (Cape); dichotomous stem; tongue-shaped leaves, slightly denticulate at the apex; single cluster of red flowers. - Cat's tongue (Cape), stemless; leaves marked with white; flowers green at the top, red at the base. - Duck's beak, with duck's beak leaves; white flowers with green stripes at the top, red and powdery at the base. - L'A. toile d'araignée (Cape spider web); rosettes of leaves covered with white threads; greenish flowers. - L'A, pouce écrasé (Cape Town), with thick, flattened leaves. Flowers in spikes. - A, warty (Africa), with wart-covered leaves; hanging clusters of red flowers. ALOÉS. V. Aloe. ALONZOA DE WARSCEVICZ (Scrophularinées) - From Chile. Height; 1 meter; spindly, erect, numerous branches; lanceolate leaves; bright red flowers all summer. Multipl. by seed and cuttings. Sow in March-April; plant out in May. Orangery, winter. Also worth mentioning: A. with incised leaves (from Chile). Height: Om, 70; almost herbaceous shrub; unevenly incised, toothed, dark-green leaves; small flowers in clusters blooming in July. Cuttings, seedlings, orangery in winter. ALSTROEMÈRE PELERINE, Inca lily (Amaryllidae), from Peru. Height: Om, 35 to Om, 50; white flowers striped and washed with bright pink, with yellow-purple blotch. Propagated by root separation and seed. Pot culture; light soil; little watering. Blooms in second year. Cover in winter; shelter from sun. - A. à fleurs rayées (from Peru); reddish stems; leaves in a rosette at the top of the stem; fragrant flowers; 6 divisions, three of which are white and red, and the other three all red - A. àfleurs pâles (South America); umbellate flower with the two inner divisions yellow, veined with red, the four outer divisions pale pink - A. Perroquet (Mexico). Height: Om, 40 to Om, 70; beautiful violet-purple flowers with black spots at the top, blooming all summer. - A. with changing flowers (from Chile). Height: 1 m. Flower umbels with six divisions, two of which are narrower and longer, yellow with pink stripes, and four oval, pale pink. Sow in May-June, in heather soil; prick out in nurseries; plant out in September-October. Braves harsh winters with the help of a blanket. Many colorful varieties - A. orange (from Chile), perennial. Long flowers from Om, 04 to Om, 05; with six divisions, the upper two of which are purple-striped, and the lower four a beautiful orange-yellow, blooming from July to September. Same culture as the previous one. ALTERNANTHERA PARONYCHIOID (Amaranthaceae). - China. Perennial; narrow leaves, first pinkish-white or reddish-brown, then green. Multiply by cuttings; warm, humid greenhouse. Mid-sun, rich, cool soil; A. amœna; A. spatulata. These three plants are highly sought-after for borders, flowerbeds, baskets and carpets. - Space plants about Om, 15 apart in all directions. ALTHÆA ROSEA, Marshmallow, Primrose Rose, Passe-rose (Malvaceae). - Trisannual and hardy; stems from 2 to 3 meters; single, semi-double or double flowers, varying from pure white to dark yellow, red and crimson-black, blooming in July-September. Multiply from one- or two-year-old seeds in light, well-prepared soil in July and August; transplant in September-October; split graft or cut varieties that cannot reproduce. - G. de Chine is highly prized by connoisseurs. ALYSSUM SAXATILE, Corbeille d'or, Thlaspi jaune (Crueifères). - Perennial, sub-woody, bushy, with whitish, lanceolate leaves; bouquets of golden-yellow flowers in May. Dry, stony soil. Multiply by splinters, seeds, marcottes; transplant in spring and set out in autumn. AMANDIER. V. Amygdalus. AMARANTE QUEUE DE RENARD, Discipline of nuns (Amarantaceae). - Annual, from Om, 70 to 1 meter; oblong, oval, reddish leaves; crimson flowers in long, hanging clusters, blooming from June to September. Sow outdoors in May. - A. gigantesque, with crimson-purple flowers. - A. sanguine, with blood-red leaves and crimson flowers. - A. mélancolique, with purplish flowers. - A. tricolore, with leaves spotted yellow, green and red, and greenish flowers. Sow in a bed in March-April; transplant to the garden in May. AMARYLLIS, from a Greek word meaning "I shine"; A. belladonna (Amaryllidae). - Its large, pink, fragrant, campanulate, nodding flowers bloom from August to October, at the end of an Om, 50 to Om, 70 high spike; the leaves, very glabrous, elongated, canaliculate, only come a long time later; A, prefers open ground to pots; onions are planted Om, 20 deep in light, well-exposed soil; they are protected from the cold, and the cloves are separated every three or four years; they are planted by renewing the soil. These include: A. à fleurs changeantes; A. de Guernesey; Lis de Saint-Jaques, the most brilliant of all the species, a velvety red tending towards carmine, with admirable golden reflections when exposed to the sun; the flower lasts barely a day or two; A. à longues feuilles, which in our region is the most popular. à longues feuilles, which in our greenhouses, in mid-winter, displays an umbel of 10 or 20 fragrant, beautiful crimson-red flowers; A. à fleurs roses, which blooms in September and is easy to keep in the open ground, in good exposure; A. purpurea, a very floriferous variety; all highly recommended plants. AMELANCE VULGAIRE (Rosaceae). - Native shrub, 2.50 to 3 meters high, with oval, rounded leaves, whitish underneath, large sulphur-white flowers and blackish-blue fruit. - A. à grappes (from Canâda); height: 3 to 4 meters; flowers with white, linear petals; black fruit; free, light soil, sow in spring. - A. à grappes can be grafted onto hawthorn. - A. à épi, flowers smaller and less quick to bloom than those of the preceding variety; red fruit. AMHERSTIE NOBLE (Legumes). - Asia. Leaves formed of six to eight large, oblong pairs of leaflets; flowers similar to those of Orchids; the standard is scarlet red with a broad yellow spot bordered with purple at the top; warm greenhouse. AMMOBIUM AILÉ (Compositae). - Australic. Height Om 50; silvery hairs spread all over the plant; white flowers with yellow discs, involucre of shiny scales; blossoms from July to September; sow in bed in March-April; plant out in May. AMORPHE FRUTESCENT, bastard indigo (Leguminosae). - North America; 2 to 2.50 meters high; 267 blue-purple flowers, with only the standard. Grow in slightly dry rather than damp soil; propagate by seed and cuttings. Groves. - A. Lewisii, glabra and pumila, are smaller than the previous one. AMPHICOME EMODI (Bignoniaceae). - Height Om, 40; perennial by the root; tubular leaves with a beautiful flesh-pink blade; orange corolla tube. Multiplication by stem fragments and seeds. Grows outdoors in southern France; in cold frames in northern France. WIDE LEAF AMSONIA (Apocynia). - North America. Perennial. Height: Om, 50; oval leaves, terminal corymb of blue flowers. - A. with Willow leaves; with Om, 05 wide blue flowers. LINDLEY AMYGDALOPSIS (Rosaceae). - China. Shrub with numerous, upright branches; toothed, grayish leaves, covered with hairs below; large flowers of Om, 03, of a beautiful flesh pink, half full, which give way to aggregated fruits, rather like small almonds. Multiplication by grafting on Plum. AMYGDALUS NANA, Dwarf almond tree (Rosaceae). - Pretty little shrub, 1 m to 1.30 m tall, with bushy stems and bright red or soft flowers that bloom in early spring and produce a very good effect in beds, copses and large flowerbeds. Mult. of suckers and cores; needs sun and light, warm soil. ANAGALLIS FRUTICOSA, tree clover (Primulaceae). - Attractive brick-red flowers all year round, darker in the center; light, open soil; frequent watering in summer; temperate greenhouse; bedding cuttings. Varieties with pink or lilac flowers. Sow in April, transplant and plant out in May. ANANASSA BRACTEATA, Pineapple with bracts (Bromeliaceae). - Magnificent red bracts; grows like all Pineapples and Orchids. ANCHUSA ITALICA, Italian Bugloss (Borraginaceae). - Perennial, tufted, Om, 50 cm high; hairy, oblong leaves; azure-blue panicle flowers; sow in autumn in light, sandy soil; transplant in spring to bed. ANCOLIE. V. Aquilegia vulgaris. ANDROMEDA MARIANA (Ericaceae). - Height from Om, 70 to 1m, 30; purple twigs; oval leaves, punctuated below; clusters of white bell-shaped flowers, July; damp, swampy places, cool exposure. - A. Pulverulent; underside of leaves covered with fine white dust; blooms in June-July. - A. tree; 16 to 20 meters high, small white flowers in straight, terminal clusters. - A. Polyfolia, almost the only shrub of this genus that we have in Europe; the corolla is bright purple mixed with white. ANDROPOGON NARDUS, from two Greek words: man's beard (Grasses). - Native to India. Perennial; its leaves give a kind of tea. Warm greenhouse. Multipl. of splinters. -A, rough; its roots, known as Vetiver, keep insects away from woollen fabrics and perfume linen. Warm greenhouse. - Long-leaved A.; tall clumps; multip. of splinters in spring or autumn. ANDROSACE VELUE, from two Greek words: man's shield (Primulaceae). - Native to the Alps; stems from Om, 04 to Om, 06, umbel of white flowers with purplish or yellowish throats, opening in May-June. Widely used to decorate artificial rocks. Sow in May-June in a terrine full of heather soil, overwinter in a greenhouse and plant out in spring. ANDROSÆMUM OFFICINALE, Androsème officinal, from two Greek words: man's blood, in allusion to the color of its juice; all healthy (Hypericinia). - Native; height approx. 1 m; oval, sessile leaves, blushing in autumn; yellow flowers in terminal umbel all summer; slightly cool soil. Mult. of splinters and seeds; autumn. ANEMONE, from a Greek word: Wind Flower (Renonculaceae). - Characteristics: bipinnate or digitate radical leaves, spike bearing a solitary flower at the apex; calyx replaced by an involucre with three simple leaflets. Corolla composed of five or six petals arranged in two or three rows. Numerous stamens borne on fillets half as short as the corolla; numerous pistils and ovaries; capitulum-shaped polysperm fruit; indehiscent seeds crowned with aigrettes or covered with a lanuginous down - The Florist's Anemone is a charming perennial flower with tubers or legs; it blooms from mid-April to the end of May. Varieties Fig. 4 - Anemone pulsatilla. numerous, double or semi-double, decorated with the most magnificent colors: purple, crimson, red, white, violet, etc. To obtain varieties, prefer single Anemones with large, regular flowers and strong stems. Multiply by sowing and more often by tubers, which should be kept in a dry place and replanted in February or October, protecting them from frost. - Peacock's eye, crimson flowers. - A. de l'Apennin, beautiful blue flowers in March and April. - A. du Japon, large lilac-purple flowers; light soil, in the shade; suckers or splinters. A. pulsatilla, pretty violet-blue flowers; dry, siliceous soil. HEPATIC ANEMONE. V. Hepatic. SPINY Anemone or Spiny Anemone (Araliaceae). - North America; height 2 to 4 meters; spiny, tripinnate leaves; small, dirty-white flowers, arranged in a very wide panicle itself divided into small umbels. Multiplies from offshoots or root sections in fresh, light soil. Half-sun exposure. - Angélique de Chine, leaves lose their thorns in the third year. - Paper angelica (from Formosa Island); height: 2 meters; cottony leaves; small greenish flowers; China paper is made from the pith of this plant. Multiply by cuttings. Cold greenhouse in winter; open ground in summer; shelter from sun. - A. de Siebold (Japan); broad, cut leaves like those of the Platanus. Outdoors in summer; orangery in winter. Multiply with cuttings, stems and young buds, under cloche, in a hot greenhouse. - A, thick-leaved; height: 1 meter; elongated, very serrated leaves, simple at first, then ternate, spatulate; flowers bloom in May. SALICAIRE LEAF ANGELONIA (Scrophularinea). - From Caracas. Perennial; height: Om, 65; saw-toothed leaves; lilac-blue flowers, blooming in summer and autumn. Multiply by seed, cuttings and splinters; temperate greenhouse. - A. minor; A. hirta, with very hairy leaves; same cultivation as A., with loosestrife leaves. ANGROECUM CAUDATUM, Tailed Angree (Orchids). - Simple stem; ribboned leaves; greenish flowers with white labellum and russet spur. For cultivation in peat soil. Warm greenhouse. - A. à long éperon (Madagas- car), height Om, 70; bright white, fragrant flowers, labellum armed with a greenish spur, length Om, 35 to Om, 40. ANGULOA DE CLOWES (Orchids). - Very large yellow flowers, frequent watering. Temperate greenhouse. ANIGOSANTHE JAUNATRE (Hemodoraceae). - New Holland; height: Om, 65; 15 or 16 pale yellow flowers washed with green, with purple-marked divisions, panicled, summer; multip. of suckers under frame, winter. ANOMATHEQUE JONCIFORME (Iridées). - From the Cape; height: Om, 40 to Om, 60; bright pink flowers, each with a very short spathe; blooms in May-June. Multiply by cloves. ANSELLIA D'AFRIQUE (Orchids). - Height: 1 meter; fragrant, greenish-yellow flowers spotted with brownish purple. Warm humid greenhouse. ANTENNARIA MARGARITACEA, Virginia Immortelle (Compositae). - Hardy perennial; height: Om, 50; linear leaves; corymb of sulfur-yellow flowers; silver involucre. Trace multiplication; any soil; southern exposure. ANTHEMIS PARTHÉNIOÏDES, Anthémis faux-Parthénium, Matricaire (Composées). - Panicle of white flowers. Ordinary soil. Multiply with cuttings or seedlings from April to July. Open ground. - Roman chamomile. - Arabian; free, dry soil. ANTIRRHINUM MAJUS, Mufle de veau, Gueule de lion (Scrophularinées). - Indigenous, biennial or perennial; stems from Om, 70 to 1 m; large, irregular, spiky flowers, simulating a calf's nose; red or sulphur-white; pretty varieties have been obtained, almost crimson, violet-red, fire-orange etc.; flowers from May to August; blooms May-August; sow in June-July, in nurseries, for autumn planting. If sown in April, in nurseries, Mufles de veau blooms in the same year, but with less strength. AOTUS LANIGERE (Papilionaceae). - Australia. Height: Yes.50 to Om.60 in our European cultivations; very beautiful yellow flowers with purple blotches on the standard, united in terminal spikes, blooming in April-May. Temperate greenhouse; heather soil. L - Fig. 5 - Antirrhinum majus, Lion's mouth, etc. APHELANDREA CRÊTE (Acanthaceae). - South America; height: 30 to 1.60 m; beautiful, bright vermilion-red flowers in quadrangular spikes, blooming in August-September. - A. éclatante (Mexico); height: 1 m, hair-covered leaves; bright red flowers, blooming in September-October. Heated cuttings; light, substantial soil, frequent watering. Warm greenhouse. - A, variegated (Brazil), height Om, 60 to 1m, 10 and more; very beautiful green leaves, with white or pale yellow veins; brilliant yellow flowers with bracts of the same color. - A. orange; height: Om 70; golden-yellow flowers with yellow-green bracts. Warm greenhouse. TUBEROUS APIOS (Papilionaceae). - Perennial; succulent roots, sometimes as large as an egg; stems 2 to 4 meters long; small, fragrant, purplish flowers bloom in July-August. Multiplied with tubers in spring and autumn. DOUBLE-IPP APONOGETON (Naiadea). - Cape Town. Perennial; spike of white, fragrant flowers; basin, temperate greenhouse. AQUILEGIA VULGARIS, Ancolie commune, Gant de NotreDame (Ranunculaceae). - Indigenous, hardy perennial; height approx. 1 m; colorful calyx, cornet-shaped petals, single or double, purplish-red, white or variegated. Multip, from shards or seeds sown in May, June and July; set out in autumn; sensitive to damp and cold. - A., remarkable for its red-tinted leaves, flowers topped by five spurs, petals of a beautiful violet or bright yellow; requires a northern or eastern exposure; multip. of seedlings and offshoots; heather soil. - A. de Sibérie, Height: Om, 32; beautiful blue flowers with white petals; outdoors. - A. des Alpes. Perennial. Height: Om, 30; large, light-blue flowers bloom in July-August. - A, odorante (Thibet). Height: Om 70; lilac or carmine-white flowers, sweet-smelling. Open ground. - A. de Skinner (California). Height: Om 70-75; flowers inverted, red outside, yellow on the blade; blooms May-July. Sow outdoors in April.-A. from Canada. Height: Om, 50; flowers bright red outside, saffron and greenish inside. Shady exposure in cool, light soil. Multip, from seed. ARABIS VERNA, Spring Arabica (Cruciferae). - White flowers bloom in March. Multiply with rooted branches in June to obtain strong clumps that you can put in place in September. A sought-after plant for forming borders in the driest sands. - A. des Alpes. Perennial, with pure white flowers in a terminal spike, blooming in April-May. Sow in pots in April-May, or June-July. Rockeries, borders. ARAUCARIA DU CHILI (Conifers). - Beautiful tree up to 30 meters high; broad, acute, loosely intertwined leaves; male and female flowers on different individuals; Araucarias differ from other ARI conifers in that the cylindrical embryo has two cotyledons pressed together, which do not emerge from the seed during germination. Pure or mixed heather soil. Multip, from seed or smothered cuttings. - Not sensitive to cold. ARBOUSIER. V. Arbutus unedo. ARBUTUS UNEDO, Arbutus (Ericaceae). - Height: 5 meters; young red twigs, red-stalked leaves; white or pink flowers in September-January; fruit rather like strawberries, but tasteless. Multip, from marcottes or seeds. Soil mixed with marl and cow manure; frequent watering in spring; warm exposure; protect from severe winter cold. ARECA, Arec, Palm cabbage. - West Indian origin. Very easy to grow in a warm greenhouse; light, nourishing soil. L'A, red. ARENARIA, Areca or Sabline (Caryophylae). - Pretty white flowers bloom in May; decorates rock gardens, forms borders for winter gardens. Multiply by seed or splinters. BIG-FLOWERED ARGEMONE (Papaveraceae). - Mexico. Height Om, 70 to 1 meter, with slightly thorny leaves; large white flowers bloom all summer. Sow outdoors in March-April; transplant into pots. A. Mexicana has pale yellow flowers. ARISTÆA MAJOR, Headed Aristaea (Iridaea). - From the Cape, with leaves from Om, 60 to 1 meter long; whorls of blue flowers bloom in July. Temperate greenhouse or orangery; warm exposure. Light soil. Multiply by seed and splinters, on bed, under cloche or under frame. - Cape blue-flowered A.; beautiful flowers bloom in April and May. Multip. from suckers and seeds. ARISTOLOCHIA SIPHO, Aristoloche siphon (Aristolochiées). - North America. Height 6 to 10 meters; pipe-shaped flowers of mixed yellow, red and black; blooms in May and June. Aromatic wood. Light soil; multi-purpose, seeds and marcottes with two-year-old wood incised at a node. Suitable for arbors, walls, etc. - A. with three-lobed leaves (South America). - Large, solitary flowers, first oval, then flared, brown-green, with a long strap of Om, 16 on the upper lobe. Strong, light soil. Warm greenhouse; infrequent watering in winter. Multipl. by cuttings and marcottes. - A. de Goldie (Africa), heart-shaped leaves, with a greenish cone-shaped bract enclosing a foul-smelling flower; this cone measures up to Om 35 long; it looks rather like an elongated funnel, very flared at the top and divided into three lobes. Hot, humid greenhouse. - A. large lip. South America; large flowers with helmet-shaped upper lip, pale yellow with a mixture of dark carmine, blooming from July to October. Warm greenhouse. - A. brodée, with heart-shaped leaves; long flowers from Om, 08 to Om, 10 with golden-yellow blade; azure and purple background. Warm greenhouse. - A. gigas (Jamaica), with heart-shaped leaves; large flowers from Om, 16, with dark purple spotted blade, with lobe topped with a long strap from Om 32. ARMENIACA DE SIRÉRIE. Siberian apricot (Rosaceae). - Height: 2 meters; flowers with reddish calyx, with red petioles twice as long as the calyx. Hardy. ARMERIA COMMUN, Olympe grass (Plumbaginea). - Native, perennial; from May to July, red, pink or white flowers, attached to long peduncles. Multipl. by splinters. Cool, light soil. Suitable for borders. - A. maritime; height: Om, 12 to Om, 15 - False Arméria (Barbary) with large pink flowers. Multip, by dividing plants in spring, or sowing in March-April on bedding; transplanting in May. Suitable for borders, beds, etc. Chassis, in winter, in cold countries. Outdoors in the south. ARMOISE. V. Artemisia. ARTEMISIA ABROTANUM, Artemisia aurone, Citronella (Compositae). - Height from Om 70 to 1 meter; small, yellow, fragrant flowers in clusters; warm exposure. Light soil. Also worth mentioning: perennial wormwood. A. argentée de Madeère. ARUM CRINITUM, Gouet chevelu, Attrape-mouche (Aroïdées). - Spathe stained green on the outside, lined on the inside with purple bristles; cadaverous odor. Soft, cool soil. Multiply by separating tubers; protect from cold. - A. dracunculus or serpentine. - G. from Italy. - Variegated, light soil; half-shade exposure. ARUNDO DONAX, Cattail Reed (Grasses). - Height 3 to 4 meters; purple flowers in panicles. Water's edge. Multip, marcottes, cuttings, by separating lateral sprays. ASCLEPIAS INCARNATA, Incarnate milkweed (Milkweed). - A beautiful perennial native to Virginia; 1 m to 1.30 m tall; in July-August, it produces umbels of beautiful purple-red, vanilla-scented flowers. Sun exposure, in cool, light soil. Propagate from splinters or seeds sown in May-July, in a nursery; plant out in autumn or spring. - A. de Syrie, cotton-wool herb; pinkish-white flowers, July-August. - A. tuberose, beautiful saffron-red flowers, July-September. ASPERULA ODORATA, Sweet woodruff (Rubiaceae). - Native, perennial; forms clumps of Om, 30; corymb of white flowers; likes the shade of trees and is content with all kinds of soil. Multip, by separation. ASPHODELUS LUTEUS, Yellow Asphodel, Jacob's Rod (Liliaceae). - Height: 1 meter; long spike of yellow flowers, May-July. Likes warm weather, requires no fertilizer. Multiply by seed sown in spring in the garden, or by suckers. Double-flowered variety. ASTER, ASTÈRE, Etoile, Reine-Marquerite (Composées), - Very numerous, tall species, forming beautiful clumps in large flowerbeds, thanks to their corymbs of white, purple, dark blue or lilac flowers. These plants would quickly exhaust the soil; they need to be moved every three or four years. Multiply by sowing, or better by separating clumps. For example: A. des Alpes, purple flowers with a yellow disk; white-flowered variety. Can be propagated from seed or splinters in any soil. - A. floribonde (North America). Height: 1m, 50; beautiful purple flowers, with purplish disk; blooms in September. - A. de Révers. Height: Om, 25 to Om, 30; numerous small, flesh-white flowers, covering the entire plant; blooms in September-October. - L'A, rose (North America); large, tight, purplish-pink flowers; blooms in September-October. - Large-flowered A. (North America). Height: 1 meter; blue-purple flowers with yellow centers; blooms in September-October. - New England A., large-flowered, violet-blue. - L'A, versicolor (North America). Perennial. Height: 1m,50. 16 Flowers first white, then turning pink and violet, with yellow disk; blooms in August-September. - A. very elegant. Perennial. Height: 1 m to 1.10 m. Lilac-blue flowers, with yellow-purple disk; blooms in August-September. - A. bicolor. Perennial. Height: Om, 25 to Om, 30. Flowers first white, then lilac, blooming in August. - A. Amellos, Œil-de-Christ, Perennial. Height: Om 35; flowers with blue rays, yellow disk; blooms in August-September. - A. Smooth (North America). Height: 2 meters. Bushy plant with light lilac flowers; blooms in October. - A. des Pyrénées. Perennial. Height: Om.50; long-stalked flowers. Peaty heath soil. In general, all asters are sought-after as garden ornaments; when they fade, winter is near. ASTRAGALUS VARIUS, Astragale varié (Papilionaceae). - Height :Om, 65; in July, its flowers are white-purple with yellow markings. - A, onobrychis offers clusters of celestial-blue flowers. Sandy soil, south exposure. Multiply from seed or splinters. ASTRANTIA RADIAIRE, Female Sanicle (Umbelliferae). - Indigenous. Perennial. Height: Om, 65; reddish-white flowers with white collar; open all summer; variety with yellow variegated leaves. South exposure. Any soil. Propagates from seed or splinters. HANGING-FLOWER ASTRAPEA (Buttneriaceae). - Madagascar; cordate leaves, broad from Om, 20 to Om, 25; long petioles from Om, 25 to Om, 35; 40 to 50 rose-purple flowers, gathered in flower heads, themselves borne on a long stalk. Multip, from smothered cuttings in warm greenhouse; substantial soil. ASYSTASIA, Coromandel Asystasia (Acanthaceae). - East Indies. Variegated flowers with long corolla from Om, 04 to Om, 05, yellow tube, blue blade; blooms from August to September. Warm greenhouse. Light soil; frequent watering. Multiply with cuttings. - L'A, climber (Africa). Funnel-shaped, creamy-white flowers with blue tints. Warm greenhouse. Light, substantial soil. ATACCIA CRISTATA, Crested Attacie (Taccaceae). - Malaysia. Flowers with dark purple limbs intermingled with long filaments. Open, moist soil. Warm greenhouse; frequent watering; same cultivation as Caladium. See this word. ANNUAL ATHANASIA (Compounds). - Indigenous. Height: Om, 35; flowers bloom from July to September. Sow in light, south-facing soil; cover with fine compost; water frequently to strengthen the plant, which is then left to grow into clumps. ATRIPLEX HORTENSIS, Very red arrowroot (Chenopodea). - Asia. Annual; height: 2 meters; beautiful purplish-red, toothed, heart-shaped leaves; spike of flowers without beauty. Sow outdoors, March-April. AUBRIÉTIA DELTOÏDE (Cruciferae). - Perennial; sublinear; whitish-green leaves; light-blue flowers; blooms in spring and summer. Multiply by separating clumps in July and August, or sow in May-July; transplant in nursery, set out in autumn or spring. Light soil suitable for rock gardens. - A. Purpurine (Armenia). Long spike of purpurine flowers; blooms from April to June. Light soil. Clumps, rock gardens, borders. JAPANESE AUCUBA (Horned). - Height: 1 m to 1.30 m; evergreen; small, insignificant brown flowers, open in April: clean, light, non-moist soil; half-sun exposure. Multip, cuttings in spring and bedding in pots. Some varieties, including: Himalayan azalea with dark, glossy green, toothed leaves; - other species, all brought from Japan, have yellow variegated leaves. AZALEA, Azalea (Ericaceae). - Azaleas are divided into two distinct groups: 1° the Azaleas of America and the Caucasus, all of which are grown in light soil, or better still, in heather; 2° the Azaleas of India, which require a temperate greenhouse. The former are grown in the open air, in slightly shaded positions; flowerbeds. Temperate-greenhouse Azaleas bloom from April to June. As soon as they have finished flowering, they should be repotted with fine, rich heather soil, put back in the greenhouse, or left in the open air, but in the shade, then bury the pots up to Om, 06 from the edge, in a place well exposed to the sun. Drain pots; water moderately, preferably with rainwater; basin leaves in hot weather; slightly damp Dutch greenhouse in winter; plenty of light. Pinch after flowering, as it sprouts. Multiply by approach grafting, split grafting, veneering; reproduce by marcottes, by rooted splinters, under cloches, in a hot greenhouse. Seedlings produce the most beautiful varieties. Open-ground azaleas. A. visqueuse (North America), red or white flowers, covered with viscous hairs; these hairs are also found on the leaf branches. Bare-leaf A. (North America). Quite similar to the previous one, but with longer leaves underneath. - A. gracieuse (Caucasus). Height: Om, 50; yellowish-red flowers bloom in June-July; several varieties. - L'A, pontique (Caucasus). Yellow or red flowers, with deciduous bracts. - Marigold-colored A. (North America). Scarlet or fire-colored corollas, topped with non-viscous hairs. - Bare-flowered A.; red, non-viscous flowers, appearing before the leaves. Several beautiful varieties. Temperate greenhouse azaleas. L'A, ponceau (China). Deep lilac-pink flowers, blooming in February-March. - A. à fleurs crispées; purplish-pink flowers, with fringed, frizzy divisions; blooms in February. - A. de l'Inde; flowers in twos and threes, in terminal clusters. A, striated (China). Height: Om, 50 to 1 meter; flowers with white background, streaked with pink; purplish, streaked with coccine red, etc., in terminal clusters. B BACCHARIS HALIMIFOLIA, Halime-leaved baccharide, Tree ragwort (Compositae). - North America. Height: 2 to 4 meters; evergreen leaves; unremarkable whitish flowers. Multiplied by marcots and cuttings. Warm exposure; sandy soil; - suitable for hedges. BECREA EFFILÉE (Myrtaceae) - New Holland. Umbels of pretty little white flowers; blooms in July-August. Heather soil; orangery in winter. Multip. of marcottes. Sow in spring in terrines; transplant in autumn. BAGUENAUDIER ORDINAIRE, Faux-Sené (Papilionaceae). - Indigenous. Height; 3 to 4 meters; clusters of yellow flowers, golden-brown at the center, greenish fruit, bursting with noise under finger pressure. Light soil; half-shade exposure; multiply from suckers or seeds. - B. du Levant. Height: 2 meters. Purple-red flowers, with two yellow spots at the base of the standard. Midday exposure; light, open soil; sow on 16. * "" ne1C Y CRM layer. - B. d'Alep. Height: 1m,40 to 1m, 50; yellow flowers; reddish fruits. BALISIER. V. Canna indica. BALSAMINE. V. Impatiens Balsamina. BANANIER. V. Musa Paradisiaca. JACOB'S STICK. V. Asphodelus. BATON DE SAINT-JACQUES. V. Althœa. BEGONIA DISCOLOR, Begonia discolor (Begonias). - Native to China. Large, heart-shaped leaves, green above, dark red below; elegant panicles of bright pink flowers all summer long. Cool soil, shady location. Multipl, by splinters or axillary bulblets. The Begonias tribe includes many greenhouse species: - B. toujours fleuri, with white flowers. - B. luisant, with pale pink flowers. - Imperial begonia. - Emerald green. - Silver-green B. - B. Ricin leaves, mottled, green veins, red underside at edges and center; petioles red and bristly. - B. king of Assam, dark green leaves, with silver circle, irregular in the center. - B. with Fuchsia flowers, saw-toothed leaves, bright red flowers; blooms in winter. - B. from Bolivia, lanceolate leaves; stems Om 50 to Om 60 high; scarlet flowers. Cold greenhouse. - B. de Clarke, beautiful soft pink flowers. Temperate greenhouse. - Bulbous begonias grown outdoors, for beds in summer: Agathe, Carnelian, Emerald, Charles RœSs. Charles Vermeire. François Marchand. These plants are sown in December and January. Hybrid Begonias include : B. de Beucher, with purple-green leaves and dull white stripes. - B. Bettina Rothschild, with carmine-red star. - B. inimitable, with silver leaves and dark green star. - B. Madame Périer, velvety green leaf with silvery-white zone. - B. Princesse Charlotte, large silvery zone on upper surface of blade, dark green on edges, violet tint with mixture of white and yellowish on lower surface. - B. M. Jules Joly, erect petioles, red with white hairs, dull white on green background. - B. Président van den Hecke, very large leaf attached to a reddish-brown peduncle covered with long white hairs; green blade with dull white spots; underside amaranth-colored. - B. Reicheneimii, toothed leaves, dark green with pearly white spots; underside carmine red. - B. secrétaire Morren, silvery leaf blade, red on the edges and in the center. - B. Victor Lemoine, dark green leaf with broad silver-white zone. In general, Begonias require temperate greenhouses, nourishing heather soil mixed with consumed compost; multip, by cuttings and rooted lateral stems, watered with guano every eight days from March-April; 500 grams of guano per 100 liters of water. Re-pot from time to time; once the vegetation period is over, suspend watering to let the B. rest. Some species lose their stems in autumn each year, and their tubers sprout new shoots in spring; others flower until mid-winter; in our southern provinces, we should try to put Bolivian and Clarke's B. in the ground, at a good exposure: they would probably succeed. 1 PANICULATED BEJARIA (Ericaceae.) - Height: 1 m to 1.30 m; pointed leaves with reddish edges; fragrant, purple-pink flowers, blooming from June to September. Multip, from seed, cuttings and marcots on bed and under frame in temperate greenhouse; light, nourishing soil. - B. à feuilles de Lédon, Height: Om, 70 to 1 mêtre; irregular corymbs of large red flowers. - B. tricolor, with white and pink flowers, marked with yellow. BELLE-DE-JOUR. V. Convolvulus tricolor. BELLE-DE-NUIT. Y. Mirabilis. BELLE-D'ONZE-HEURES, V. Ornithogale. BELLIS PERENNIS, little daisy, Easter flower (Compositae). - Everyone knows it. It comes in dark red and pale red varieties, with red or white tubular flowers; proliferates, etc., etc. Give it fresh, light, half-shaded soil and prick it out every year if you don't want it to degenerate. BENZOIN ODORIFERANT (Laurinées). - Yellowish flowers in May. Light soil or heather; temperate exposure. Multiply from seed on a warm bed and from marcottes by incision. BERBERIS VULGARIS Barberry (Berberidae). - Yellow flowers in spring; yellow, red or blue fruits persist into winter. Open ground. - Sweet-fruited. - E. with rounded leaves. - Holly-leaved, box-leaved. - Empetrum-leaved. - Darwin's, etc. MARBLE BERTOLONY (Melostomaceae). - Brazil. Perennial; dark green leaves with broad white spots; pink flowers united at the top of a radical scape. Warm greenhouse. - B. bronzée; Brazil; green leaves with metallic sheen, Hot greenhouse. - B. Guttata; Brazil; leaves dotted with pink spots. - B. Margaritacea; Brazil; leaves dotted with white spots. Temperate greenhouse. BETONICA ORIENTALIS, Levantine Betony (Labiatae). - Pale green leaves; pale purple flowers. - Large-flowered Siberian betony; hairy stems; cordate leaves; pink flowers with large bracts. - Multip, seed and chip. Ordinary soil. For borders. BETULA ALBA, Common birch, Broomwood (Betulinae). - Height: 13 to 16 meters; content even with very arid soil, although it prefers cool, substantial soil; insensitive to the cold and heat of our climates, its wood is suitable for lathe work: its bark is used to tan leather; its sap yields a fairly pleasant liquor. -- B. lenta; B. odorant. South America; grafted on Common Birch; deep, cool soil. - Poplar-leaved B. - Black B. - Canoe bark. The savages of North America prefer to build their light canoes from the bark of this birch. BIGNONIA CAPREOLATA, Bignone with tendrils (Bignoniaceae). - A beautiful, flexible climber with geminate, evergreen leaves and tawny-red flowers blooming in May-June; able to withstand the rigors of the cold with the help of a litter placed on its base. - Bignone with large saffron flowers, July and August. - B. grimpante, Virginia Jasmine with clusters of vermilion-red flowers; its stems cling easily to trees and walls. - Multiply by seed, sown on a bed or, better still, by root sections. BILLARDIERA SCANDENS, Billardier sarmenteuse (Pittos- porées). - Australia. Height: Om, 60 to 1 meter; climbing branches; yellowish-green flowers. Heather earth or light soil. Temperate greenhouse. Multip, seeds and cuttings. - B. with long, pale-yellow flowers; blooms in July. Temperate greenhouse. Heather soil. BILLBERGIA PYRAMIDAL (Bromeliaceae). - Brazil. Height: Om, 40; greenish flowers, with wine-colored bracts. Same culture as epiphytic Orchids. - B. à fleurs versicolores; pretty pink flowers, with an azure tint at the tips of the petioles. - B. de Morel; blue flowers. BLAREA TRINERVIA, Three-veined Ram (Melastomaceae). - Height: 4 to 5 meters; large, solitary, pink flowers bloom in July-August. Warm greenhouse; light soil. BLITUM CAPITUM, Spinach-Strawberry, Coptic Beetle (ChénoBIU podées). - Europe. Unremarkable flowers; blooms from May to August; strawberry-like fruit. Sow outdoors April-May, ORANGE BOBARTIE (Iricae). - Africa, yellow-orange flowers. Multiply by separating bulbs. Free soil; cold frame. BOLTONIA ASTEROÏDES, Aster-leaved Boltonia (Compositae). - Hardy perennial, from Om, 60 to 1 m; flowers in panicles, with white rays on a yellow disk; from August to October. Light, moist soil. Multipl. by seed and splinters. BOULEAU. V. Betula. Snowball, V. Viburnum opulus. BORAGE. V. Lithospermum. BOUSSINGAULTSIA BASELLOÏDE, Boussingaultie à feuilles de Baselle (Chénopodées). - A sarmentose plant with spikes of very fragrant white flowers; useful as trellis and wall decoration. Multiply by taking stem and tuber cuttings, storing them in a healthy place over winter and planting them at the end of April. IBERID LEAF BRACHYCOME (Compositae). - Annual plant, with blue radiating flower heads. White-flowered variety; sow in a bed in March, transplant into pots or in the field in spring. BRANC-USINE. V. Acanthus, BROUSSONNETIA PAPYRIFERA, Mârier à papier (Morées). - Male flowers in catkins, female flowers in small greenish heads; in autumn, the calyx releases seminal red threads. Multiplies by seed, grafting and marcotting, in all soils. BROWALLIA ELATA, High broomrape (Scrophularinae). - Annual plant from Peru, with purplish-blue flowers and yellow tube. White variety. Light, nourishing soil; southern exposure. Multiply from seed in March-April, on a bed, for transplanting in mid-May. BRUNELLE A GRANDES FUEURS (Labiatae). - Perennial. Purple, blue or white flowers, very large, swollen, open in July. Light, stony soil, not damp. Multiply by seed in April-June or by splinters. BRUYÈRE, V. Frica. BRYONIA DIOÏCA, White vine (Cucurbitaceae). - Climbing, native perennial; dioecious, yellowish-white flowers; attractive red fruits; sought-after for trellises, arbors and cradles. Sow in April-June; plant out in autumn. RED FRUIT BRYONOPSIDE (Cucurbitaceae). - Asia. Height: Om, 40 to 1 meter; cherry-sized fruits, first whitish-green, then carmine-red. Multipl. by seed in April. BIG CALICE BRYOPHYLL (Crassulaceae). - Australia; large greenish flowers, purple at the base, dark red at the top. Multiply by cuttings in spring, on bedding and under cloche. BUDDLÉIE GLOBULEUSE (Scrophularinées). - South America. Height: 2 to 3 meters; small, fragrant, golden-yellow flowers. Multip, seeds, marcots and cuttings; orangery for the first two years; outdoors thereafter, but with winter cover. - Frizzy-leaved B.; Central Asia. Fragrant lilac flowers. - B. de Madagascar; flowers light yellow at first, then dark yellow. - B. de Lyndley; Central Asia; wine-red flowers outside, purple-purple inside. Multip, cuttings and splinters. Light soil. Warm exposure. BOUGAINVILLE FASTUEUX (Nyctaginea). - Brazil. Sulphur-yellow flowers, accompanied by bracts, first lilac-green, then vivid purplish-pink. Warm greenhouse. Multiply by cuttings. Prune its greedy stems, which are easily carried away and reduce the number of flowers. - B. Splendens; quite similar to the preceding one, but with bright pink bracts. Same culture. BUGLOSSE. V. Lithospermum sericeum. BUGLOSSE D'ITALIE. V. Anchusa italica. BUGRANE, V. Ononis à feuilles rondes. BUIS. V. Buxus. BUISSON ARDENT. V. Cratœgus. BIG-FLOWERED BUPHTALM (Compositae). - Indigenous. Perennial. Om, 50 tall; large yellow radiate flowers in summer. Mult. of flakes or seeds in free, light, well-exposed soil. BUPLÈVRE FRUTESCENT, Hare's ear (Umbelliferae). - Shrub 1.30 to 1.60 m tall; evergreen leaves; small yellow flowers in umbels, June-August. Slightly moist soil; part sun. Multip, seed, marcots and cuttings. BUTOME A OMBELLE, Flowering rush (Butomées). - Indigenous. 1 m high; graceful, long-lasting pink flowers in July. Multipl. of blossoms; moist soil and waterside. BUXUS SEMPERVIRENS, Common Boxwood (Euphorbiaceae). - Native, evergreen; whitish flowers of little appearance in April. Highly sought-after wood for lathe work. Varieties with yellow and white spotted leaves. Light soil preferred. Multiply by seed for the species; by marcottes, cuttings or grafts for the varieties. CACALIE ÉCARLATE (Composites). - Native to Java. Height Om, 35; red flower heads, somewhat similar to Pompon Roses, July-September. Sow outdoors in April-May. CACTUS. V. Cereus, Epiphyllum, Mamillaria. COFFEE. V. Coffea arabica. CAJOPHORE WITH RED FLOWERS (Loasées). - Chile. Large brick-red flowers; spiral fruit. Multip, from seed or cuttings. Sow indoors in March; plant out in May; cool exposure. CALADIUM BICOLOR (Aroids). - Brazil. Shield-shaped leaves, red in the center, green at the edge. Warm greenhouse. Multiply by seed and offspring. Shoots every April. - C. odorant, with fragrant greenish flowers. Warm greenhouse. - C. peint, with irregular white blotches. - C. with courtyard leaves, white spathe. Multiply by suckers. Clean, slightly moist soil. Warm greenhouse. - C. purplish, perennial. Leaves glaucous green above, reddish purple below. - C. argyrites; its name, taken from the Greek, indicates the large silvery-white spots that cover its leaves. - C. argoyrspilum, with a red spot in the center of the leaf blade and dull white spots on the rest of the glossy green leaves. - C. de Brongniart; bright pink, ribbed blade; black lines on the petiole. - C. Perrieri, bright green leaves with red macules. - C. Chantinii, bright pink veins on a green background. - C. Wigtii, pink or white spots on a velvety green background. - C. Schœlleri, with white dotted veins standing out against a green background CALAMINTHA GRANDIFLORA, Large-flowered Calamint (Labiatae). - Perennial, with beautiful pink-purple flowers; blooms from May to September. Multip, from seed and splinters; light soil. - C. scarlet. Temperate greenhouse. Multip. from splinters and cuttings. CALANDRINIA UMBELLATA, Umbel Calandrina (Portulaceae). - Native to Chile; pretty pink-purple flowers in clusters; used in borders and beds; sow in April or May, and you'll have flowers in July-September. CALCEOLARIA, Calceolaria (Scrophularinae). - Named for its yellow, purple, etc., clog-like flowers (calceolus). Woody species multiply by smothering cuttings and rooting splinters; herbaceous species multiply by dividing clumps. Prefer sowing in spring or autumn, in damp heather soil at moderate heat. Drain the bottom well and top with 17 CAL of heather soil. Sow and cover evenly with fine sand. Beat the top a little so that the seed receives the moisture more easily. Do not let the surface dry out; sowing should be done in half-shade. Transplant seedlings at their fourth leaf in potting soil or under a frame. When the young plants are strong enough, place them in pots of Om, 10. The best soil for them is a mixture of one-third heather soil, one-third potting compost and one-third free earth. Re-pot in November and December in om, 20 pots, leaving plenty of air and light. Smoke your plants every day to protect them from aphids. CALENDULA OFFICINALIS, Garden Marigold (Compositae). - Annual. Very bright, saffron-yellow flowers. Sow in September, March or June, in light, well-exposed soil. - S. à bouquets. - S. de Trianon. - S. de la Reine. - S. Anemone. CALIMERIS INCISA, Calimerides à feuilles ineisées (Composées). - Native to Siberia; large, light lilac flowers, which will follow one another until October, if you cut the spent stems. Ordinary soil; separate clumps. CALLIRHOE PEDATA, Callirhoé with purple flowers (Malvaceae). - Height: Om, 60. Bright purple flowers with white eye in July-October. Sow indoors in March, transplant mid-May. CALLISTEPHUS HORTENSIS, Queen Daisy. - So widespread, so easy to grow, so lavish with its charming plain or variegated blue, purple and white flowers, from July to frost. Multiply by sowing in March-April and early May; plant out as soon as the first cuttings appear. Good soil, distance: Om, 25 between each plant. Highly sought-after for baskets and flowerbeds, many varieties; Early Dwarf, Double, Pipe Anemone. CALLITRIS A QUATRE VALVES (Conifers). - Quadrangular fruit. Orangery; free soil. Multip, by seed. CALODRACON NOBLE (Liliaceae). - Japan. Leaves with red-amaranth stripes. Multipl. by cuttings. Temperate greenhouse. - Purple-leaved (China). Height: Om 90 to 1m, 30; red or variegated leaves; purplish flowers; blooms in June. Temperate greenhouse. Mult. of cuttings. - C. Rouillé. CALTHA PALUSTRIS, Marsh marigold, Water marigold (Ranunculaceae). - Indigenous. Perennial. Height: Om, 34. Heart-shaped leaves; bright yellow flowers, blooming in May, September. - Double-flowered. CAROLINA CALYCANTH, Anemone tree (CaIycanthae). - Shrub from 2 meters to 2m, 50; beautiful red-brown flowers. Multiply with offshoots or marcottes by incision, which you will only raise in the second year. Cool, light soil or heather. - C. glaucous. - Smooth-leaved. Same culture. CALLYSTEGIA DE LA DAHOURIE (Convolvulaceae). - Voluble, twining stems, 2 to 3 meters long; dark pink, funnel-shaped flowers bloom in June-October; - sought-after for cradles, arbors, etc. Multip, by root division, CAMELIA JAPONICA, Japanese Camellia (Ternstrœmiaceae). - Introduced to France in 1786. Height: 6 or 7 meters; in winter gardens or in the ground in temperate countries. There are over 700 varieties with double, white, red, pink or variegated flowers. Use heather soil to which you add a little leaf compost; dry your Camellias after a year and pot them; the following year they will be good for grafting; water with rainwater or river water, infrequently in winter, quite abundantly in summer. Take the Camellias out of the greenhouse in July and let them grow in spring under glass, in semi-shade, in a well-ventilated spot. If you wish to obtain single-flowered Camellias, cut off the previous year's shoots from the single-flowered plants, about Om, 12 in length, and plant them in cloche-covered terrines of fine heather in the shade of a tarpaulin; remove the mist from the inside from time to time, and baste with reserve. Despite some growers' claims to the contrary, new varieties can be obtained from seed. Camellias love the sun and wither in the shade. Repotting is best done in February or July. Here are a few varieties: Camellia Adrien Lebrun, cherry-pink mixed with brown. - C. Bella Romana, pinkish-white with carmine streaks. - C. Bice-Rosazza, ivory-white spotted with blood-red. - C. Candidissima imbricata, very pure white. - C. Beauty of Hornsey, bright pink with small lilac-white veins. - C. Baron de Vrière, whitish pink in the center with crimson veins. - C. Archiduchesse Marie, bright red with white stripes. - C. bijou de Firenze, white streaks in the center, red around the circumference. - C. Carlota Pappudoff, white with red stripes. - C. Chandlerii elegans, large, well-spreading pink flowers. - C. Cimarosa, pink with white lines. - C. Colletii, blood-red with white spots. - C. comte de Chambord, bright velvety red. - C. Countess Marianna, very pure pink. - C. cup of Beauty, milky white with pink lines. - C. de la Reine, white background with lacquer. - C. Duc de Bretagne, pink with white spots. - C. Duchesse d'Orléans, pinkish white with carmine. - C. Polar star, white with carmine stripes. - C. G. Franchetti, pale pink with white and carmine spots. - C. imperator, very large vermilion incarnate. - C. impératrice Eugénie, light red with darker veins. - C. Iride, light center against bright red. - C. Japonica alba marginata, variegated foliage. - C. Jubile, light yellow center with white flesh. - C. Napoléon III, pure white with pink veins. - C. van Dyck, cherry-red with bluish lines. - C. Vittorio Alfieri, bright pink, white-striped center. - C. Voltaveredo, soft pink center, bright pink circumference. - C. Reine des Beautés, light pink. - C. Rubens, dark pink with white lines. CAMOMILE. V. Anthemis parthenoides. CAMPANULA MEDIUM, Sea Violet (Campanulaceae). - Biennial; height: Oo,65 or Om, 70; large, beautiful, elongated flowers, more or less pale violet-blue, pink or white, hairy inside, single or double; sow in spring and plant out in July-August. - C. pyramidale, biennial, hardy; height: 1 m to 1.50 m; beautiful blue flowers in long bunches and bouquets, July-September; very flexible stems; open soil, rock gardens, old walls, half-sun. White-flowered variety. - C. à feuilles de Pêcher, perennial; pale blue flowers. Varieties with single or double white flowers. Sow in May-July and plant out in October or March. - C. gantelée, Gant de Notre-Dame; native and perennial; height: Om 70 to one meter; blue or white flowers in July; only the double-flowered variety, etc., is grown. CANNA INDICA, Balisier, Canne d'Inde (Cannées). - Perennial and bulbous; height: 1.50 m; beautiful red flowers, August-October. Sow in beds in spring; transplant into pots in mid-June for planting in the spring of the following year. - C. gigantesque, with very long-lasting scarlet flowers; stem 1.70 m high; one of the most beautiful genera; cover tubers like those of Dahlia; divide into clumps and replant in spring. - C. superb. - Edible. - C. with bordered flowers. - C. of the year. - Nepaulus, etc., etc. SUGAR CANE. V. Saccharum. INDIAN CANE. V. Canna indica. CANNEL. V. Cinnamomum. CAPUCIN. V. Tropœolum. CARAGANA FRUTESCENS, Robinia frutescent, Siberian Acacia (Papilionaceae). - Height: 2 meters; yellow flowers in May. Sow in ordinary soil; multiply from seed or by grafting. The large-flowered species is preferred for groves. CARDAMINE (Cruciferae). - Native. Perennial; height: Om, 30; pink-lilac flowers, blooming March-May. Double-flowered variety. Multip, April-May. CARMANTINE. V. Justicia. CAROUBIER. V. Ceratonia. TEINTURIERS' CARTHAMUS (Compositae). - Annual plant; height: Om, 75; capitulum of beautiful saffron flowers. Sow in ordinary soil in spring. MARYLAND CASSE (Caesalpinaceae). - Perennial; height: 1 m to 1.30 m; bright yellow flowers in clusters. Open ground. Multiply by seed or splinters, water frequently. CASTANEA VESCA, Common Chestnut (Quercinia) - see Fruit trees. We will only say here that the C. deserves to be grown as an ornamental tree for its beautiful, broad foliage and bushy crown. CATALPA BIGNONIOÏDES, Common Catalpa (Bignoniaceae). - Height: 9 to 10 meters; large girandoles of white flowers spotted with yellow and purple. Sow in March in trays under a frame; transplant to a nursery the second year and plant out the fourth. Can also be propagated by cuttings. ACKLAND CATTLEYA (Orchids). - Large, beautiful flowers of olive-green mixed with red and yellow. Warm greenhouse; in hanging boxes filled with sphagnum moss (a kind of very fine moss) or in heather mixed with moss. - C. Atrina or Cattleya with yellow flowers, turned towards the ground, as are its leaves. - C. d'Harrisson. - C. superbe. - C. à deux lèvres. - Skinner's C. - Moos's C. - C.

elegant. - C. Pinelli. - C. Dowiana. - C. Lobata. - C. Maxima. - C. Janthina. - C. Leopoldii. - C. Amethystina, etc., etc. LEBANON CEDAR (Conifers). - Remarkable for the size of its trunk and the width of its crown; green-black leaves arranged in a rosette; large, depressed cones. Multiply by seed, sowing in spring in heather soil in terrines protected from the sun but kept in warm humidity; plant out in the fourth year, in deep, nourishing soil. - C. Argenté. - C. Déodar, grafts onto Cedar of Lebanon. CÉLASTRE GRIMPANT, Tree killer (Celastrinées). - Height: 4 meters; voluble stems; small greenish flowers, May-June; red fruits. Any cool soil and any exposure. Multiply by seed and root cuttings. CELOSIE A CRÊTE, Passe-velours (Amarantaceae). - Annual; native to India; red or yellow flowers, June-August. Sow indoors and prick out with root ball. Varieties with bizarre ridges; purple-pink, amaranth, violet, golden yellow, etc. Dwarf varieties. CENTAURY BLUEBERRY (Compositae). - Indigenous, annual; all soils, sow in autumn and spring. Varieties of all colors, except yellow. - Centaurea odorante. - Yellow barb. - Mountain C. - Nile. - Musk. - Depressed C. - Big-headed. - Feathery. - Babylonian. - Tomentose. - Bare-fruited. - American, etc. CENTRANTHUS RUBER, Red valerian. - Native, perennial; height: Om, 65; purple, red, white or lilac flowers, open, June-October. Multip. from splinters or seedlings in nurseries, April-May. - C. with large stems, forming several varieties. Very rustic, good for borders. Can be sown several times a year. SURINAM CENTROPAGON (Lobeliaceae). - Height: 1 m to 1.30 m; long, solitary red flowers, blooming in March-April. Multipl. by cuttings. Warm greenhouse. - Heart-leaved (Central America). CENTROS TEME MULTIFLORE (Asclepiadae). - Oceania. Very elegant white flowers with yellow staminal crown. Warm greenhouse. Light, nourishing soil. CÉPHALANTE OCCIDENTAL, Bois-Bouton (Rubiaceae). - North America. Height: 2 meters; small white flowers bloom in summer. Multip, seeds, marcottes, cuttings, roots. Heather soil. CEPHALOTUS FOLLICULARIS, Urn Cephalote (Cephaloteae). - Oceania. Urn-shaped leaves; reminiscent of Sarracenia and Nepenthes; small, unremarkable whitish flowers. Peaty soil kept moist; temperate greenhouse. It's a good idea to keep the pot in a dish always filled with water. CERASTIUM TOMENTOSUM, Cottony Ceratius (Caryophyllaceae). - This perennial, trailing plant forms a rounded clump; white flowers in May-June. Sow in March, or separate from traces; dry soil. CERATONIA SILIQUA, Carob tree (Caesalpinaceae). - 2nd largest tree; clusters of small, dark purple flowers; edible fruit with reddish pulp. Multiply from seed on a bed; overwinter in orangeries. INDIA BERRY (Apocynia). - Leaves similar to cherry laurel; large, pure-white flowers with red spots; blooms in July. Multiplication by cuttings on bed and under cloche. Warm greenhouse. Tanned. - C. frutescent (India). Height: 1m, 60; long, lanceolate leaves; pink, tubular flowers; blooms in June-July-August. Warm greenhouse. CERCIS SILIOUASTRUM, Judas tree (Caesalpinaceae). - Tree of 3rd size, small bunches of pink flowers, very numerous; in light soil; at noon; multip. of seedlings in rays; transplanting in spring, white-flowered variety. CEREUS, Cierge (Cactaceae). - Cereus with large flowers; very large flowers indeed, white inside, yellow outside, opening in the evening, spreading a sweet vanilla scent at night, but flowers doomed to die at dawn the next day. Warm greenhouse. Many species of Cereus: Angular Cereus, Azure Cereus, Bluish Cereus, Crested Cereus, Whip Cereus, Large-flowered Cereus, Tall Cereus, Hooker Cereus, Martin Cereus, Pectinated Cereus, etc., etc., etc. Easy to propagate by taking cuttings from stems or twigs, the wound of which must first be allowed to dry, DOUBLE-FLOWERED CHERRY (Rosaceae). - Beautiful bunches of large, full, pure-white flowers. - C. Cherry laurel, small white flowers; black fruit; its leaves are a poison that is wrongly used to give milk an almond taste. Multiplied by seed and marcotte. Shady exposure. CUMING CELOPEGIA (Asclepiadae). - Oceania; long flowers from Om,04 to Om, 06, purple-brown with green stripe. Warm greenhouse; light soil; supports. Multiply with smothered cuttings. - C. candelabra (Malabar). Brown hairy flowers. Same culture. CÉROXYLON DES INDES (Palm trees). - Part of its stipe is covered with wax. In temperate greenhouses; outdoors in our southern provinces. CESTRUM or Galant de jour (Solanaceae). - Cuba. Height: 2 m to 3.50 m; beautiful, fragrant white flowers, blooming in November. - Evening gallant. Height: 2 m to 3.50 m. Violet flowers bloom from May to July, giving off a delicious vanilla scent at sunset. - G. nocturne; greenish flowers opening at night, in November. These three Cestrum are warm-hothouse varieties. - G. with large leaves. Height: 2m, 50; sulphur-yellow flowers open in September-November. Multipl. by seed, sprouts and cuttings. Warm greenhouse. - Cestrum with black berries. Height: 1 m to 1.30 m; yellowish flowers, giving off a sweet jasmine scent at night. Outdoors. - C. with pink flowers. Pale pink flowers on long stalks. Seed and cuttings propagation; temperate greenhouse. - C. with orange flowers. Height: 1 m, 90 to 2 m; lemon-yellow flowers, white fruit. Seed multiplication. CHÆNOMELES JAPONICA, Japanese nightshade (Rosaceae). - Height: 1 to 2 meters and more; large, dark-red flowers; blossoms in April-May. Varieties 17. with slightly pink-tinted white flowers, variegated pink and white leaves; double flowers. - C. umbilicata, with pink flowers and umbilicated fruit, giving off a pleasant violet scent. Heather soil. Multiply with root cuttings; shade. CHÆNOSTOMA WITH NUMEROUS FLOWERS (Scrophularinea). - Africa. Lilac-pink flowers with yellow throats, open all summer. Multiply from seed and cuttings in March; light soil or heath. - C. fastigié, small reddish flowers; blooms in July-October. Same culture. - C. velu, lilac-pink flowers with yellow disk; blooms all summer. CHAMÆDOREA DE SCHIEDE (Palms). - Mexico. Height: 2 meters; finger-sized stipe; temperate greenhouse; light, open soil. Multipl. by seed and suckers. - C. élevé, same culture. - C. aurantiaca, whose red or orange bunches resemble pretty coral branches, CHAMÆROPS HUMILIS, Dwarf palm (Palms). - Native to Mediterranean regions. Height: 6 meters or more; fan-shaped, long leaves with nine digitations; small diet in leaf axils. Multiplied by seed and eyelet. MARIE THISTLE. V. Silybum Marianum. CHEIRANTHUS CHEIRI, Yellow Wallflower, Violier, etc. (Cruciferae). - Native; biennial, highly improved by cultivation. Sow in loose soil, prick out in nursery, plant out in autumn. Among the most beautiful double-flowered varieties are: G. brune. - Purple G. - Golden stick. VENUS HAIR. V. Damask nigella. CHÈVREFEUILLE. V. Lonicera. CHRYSANTHEMUM CORONARIUM, Crown Chrysanthemum (Compositae). - Annual. Height Om, 65; white or yellow flowers in solitary heads, July-September. Multipl. from seed in place, April-May; free, light soil. - C. large-flowered, white-rayed flower heads. C. earéné. - C. frutescent, etc., etc. Multipl, from cuttings and seeds sown in spring on bedding and under cloche. Wintering in orangeries, etc. CIERGE. V. Cereus, CINEARYA PEPPER LEAVES. - Canaries, Disc flowers with yellow rays; light soil. Same culture as Purple Cineraria. Multipl. by cuttings in summer or offshoots in spring. Activate flowering by watering once a week, starting in March, with Peruvian guano; 500 grams per 100 liters of water. Drain the bottom of pots to avoid humidity, which is harmful to these plants; plenty of air and light. Frosts kill Cineraria. Plant in clumps in gardens, apartments, etc. For use in temperate greenhouses around December 15 (see also Groundsel). MARITIME CINERARY (Composites). - Native; height: Om, 65; beautiful yellow flowers, open all summer. Exp. to south. Substantial soil; little watering. Sow in June-July in carefully sifted potting soil. Transplant into wintered pots in frames. Set up in May; orangery by autumn. - C. Perennial purple; h. Om, 33 to one meter. Light purple rays, darker purple disk. It is the purple Cineraria that has given rise, through its seedlings, to Cineraria with pink, purple, carmine, lilac, violet, white, azure blue or soft blue flowers, as well as hybrid Cineraria with such varied colors. CINNAMOMUM, Cinnamon tree (Laurinea). - Height: 6 to 10 meters. Small, whitish, dioecious flowers in axillary or terminal panicles. Multipl, marcottes and cuttings. Warm greenhouse. Its bark is called cinnamon in the trade. CITRUS AURANTIUM, Orange tree (see Pome fruit trees, Part 1). COR CLARKIA PULCHELLA, Clarkie gentil (Œnothérées). - Annual. Native to California; height: Om, 35 to Om 65; pink flowers with cross-shaped petals. Sow on site in spring or autumn. - C. Elegant. - C. Full-flowered. Many varieties with pink-chair, double or semi-double flowers. CLÉMATITE ODORANTE (Ranunculaceae). - This plant has sarmentose stems 6 or 7 meters long, clusters of very fragrant white flowers, blooming in July; it loses its leaves in winter, but leaves perennial roots that grow back in spring; it is a good garnish for cradles, arbors, etc. Multipl, by cuttings and marcottes. -. C. azurea, native to Japan, perennial through its roots; large, beautiful blue flowers in May-July. Requires light, open soil and litter in winter. - C. bicolor; white flowers mixed with purple. - C. with blue flowers, blooming in July-August-Sept. Variety with white-purple flowers. - C. des montagnes; fragrant white flowers in May. Marcottes and cuttings. - C. Viorne, native to North America; perennial through its roots. Stems 2 to 3 meters long. Flowers purple outside, yellowish-white inside. Seedlings or root chips. - C. du Mogol; flowers first greenish, then white, very durable. Double-flowered variety. Light soil, south exposure, etc., etc. CLETHRA TOMENTOSA (Ericaceae). - Height: 1.50 to 2 meters. Spikes of fragrant white flowers, blooming in August. Heather soil, shady location. Multipl. by seed or separate marcots in second year. - Alder-leaved. - Oak-leaved. CLINTONIA CHARMANTE (Lobeliaceae). - Annual. Blue flowers bloom in July-August. Sow in light soil, in part shade, in spring, without covering the seeds. GRIMPING COBEE (Polemoniaceae). - Large purple flowers all summer long. Light, open soil; south exposure; frequent watering. Multipl, from seed on a warm bed in March, or from slips and cuttings at any time. Very useful for covering cradles, etc. COBURGIA MULTIFLORA, Amaryllis candelabra (Amaryllidae). - Height: Om, 70. Pink flowers borne on a blood-red stem. These flowers together form a crown about Om, 90 in diameter. Very large onions. Heather soil mixed with animal compost. Seed and clove multiplication. Open ground under frame, or temperate greenhouse. COCCOLOBA UVIFERA, bunch grape (Polygonaceae). - America. Attractive tree; whitish flowers; warm greenhouse. - R. Pubescent. Beautiful foliage. Warm greenhouse. Multip, from smothered cuttings. - R. large-leaved; height: 3 to 4 meters; scarlet flowers. Warm greenhouse. Multiply from cuttings. COCGULUS LAURIFOLIUS, Cocculus à feuilles de laurier (Ménispermées). - Nepaul. Attractive, glossy green foliage; small, rather insignificant flowers. Orangery. Light soil. Succeeds in open soil in our southern provinces and in Algeria. COCOS NUCIFERA, Coconut palm. - Warm greenhouse. C. Flexueux. Brazil. Club-shaped stipe base. Ordinary care given to Palm trees. CRYSTAL COELOGYNE (Orchids). - India. Beautiful white flowers with bright yellow tint at base of labellum. Warm greenhouse. - C. flaccid, white flowers with yellow tint inside the labellum. Hang in baskets filled with a mixture of peat soil and moss, or filled with sphagnum moss. COFFEA ARABICA, Arabian coffee tree (Rubiaceae). - Height: one to 5 meters; white flowers quite similar to those of Jasmine; orange-tree soil, warm greenhouse; frequent watering in summer; seedlings in pots sunk in tan; annual repotting. AUTUMN COLCHIQUE (Melanthaceae). - Bulbous, perennial COR; pink or purplish flowers similar in shape to those of Crocus; blooms in autumn; its leaves do not appear until the following spring. Multipl. by seed and cloves. COLORED COLLINSIA (Scrophularinae). - Native to California. Annual. Height: Om, 20 to Om, 33; whorls of white flowers mixed with pink or violet; sow outdoors in early spring or fall, for use in borders. - C., with large, purplish-blue flowers, blooms in June-July. - The multicolored C., with its variegated white, lilac and violet flowers, is very effective. CONVALLARIA MAIALIS, May Lily of the Valley (Liliaceae). - Indigenous. Perennial; very fragrant, bell-shaped white flowers bloom in May. Multipl. from offshoots or roots in autumn or spring, or from seed sown in the field in April-June. Any cool, shady soil. CONVOLVULUS TRICOLOR, Belle-de-jour (Convolvulaceae). - Annual. Height: Om, 35; solitary blue flowers, mixed with white and sulfur-yellow. Sow outdoors in May. Several varieties; Convolvulus with white flowers. - C. à grande fleur. - C. satiné, liseron de Provence. - Algerian bindweed. - Olive leaf bindweed, etc., etc. COQUELICOT. V. Papaver somniferum. COQUELOURDE. V. Anemone, SILVER CORBLE. V. Iberid. CORBEILLE D'OR. V. Alyssum saxatile. CORCHORUS JAPONICUS. V. Kerria. DRUMMOND'S CORÉOPSIS (Compositae). - Attractive yellow ray flowers with brown spot at base, purple disk. Multipl. from seed or splinters; May or March-April. BLOOD CORN (Hornwort). - Indigenous. Height: 5 to 6 meters; attractive red twig; umbels of white flowers, blooming in June; blackish-red wood. Can be propagated from seed, marcots, traces or by grafting onto blood dogwood, in ordinary shady soil. GARDEN CORONIL (Papilionaceae). - Indigenous. Height approx. 1m, 30; beautiful yellow flowers mixed with red, in spring and autumn, if mowed after the first flowering of the anea. Light, semi-shaded soil; clump separation in March. CORYDALIS BULBOSA, Bulbous fumitory (Fumariaceae). - Perennial. Indigenous. Clusters of white, purple or flax-gray flowers in April. Multip, from seed or bulb. Several varieties. CORYLUS, Coudrier (Quercinées). - Among the ornamental hazelnut trees, we need only mention Corylus du Levant, 14 to 16 meters high; beautiful foliage. Multiplied by seed, marcottes and suckers (for further information, see Arbres fruitiers: Noisetier). COSMOS BIPENNÉ (Compositae). - Native to Mexico. Annual. Height; 1m,25 to 1m,60. Flowers with violet-pink rays and yellow Fig. 7. discs, open all summer. Sow indoors in February; transplant in May. COTONEASTER, Cottony medlar (Rosaceae). - Yellowish-white flowers in April-May. Red fruit in autumn. Ordinary cultivation. CRATÆGUS TORMINALIS, Wood Sorb (Rosaceae). - Indigenous. 7 to 9 meters tall; corymbs of white flowers in May; red fruit. - Hawthorn or White thorn; native; 10 meters high, living for centuries; used for hedges. - C. pyracantha, Buisson ardent du Midi, 2 meters high; white flowers tinged with pink in May; fiery red fruit. - Ergot de coq, bunches of white flowers in May. - Petit corail; red-coral fruit in late summer. - Azero, red or yellow fruit. Multip, from graft or seed. - Allouchier. Height: 8 to 10 meters; white flowers, red fruit, etc., etc. CREPIS ROSE (Composites). - Native to Italy. AnFig. 8 - Cunninghamic lanceolate. nuel. Height: Om, 25 to O 30; large, pretty pink flowers in June-August. Sow outdoors in autumn or spring. White-flowered variety. PERUVIAN CRESS. V. Tropœolum majus. CROCUS PRINTANIER, Florist's saffron (Iridées). - From the Orient. Purple-purple flowers with gold-red stigmas; dried, these flowers give commercial saffron. Light, dry soil. Onions are raised every three years and replanted in October. LONG STYLE CROISETTE or Crucianelle (Rubiaceae). - A perennial plant, very bushy, recumbent, quickly forming beautiful, strong clumps with pink flowers that follow one another all summer long. Multiply from seed in May and by separating clumps in March. LANCEOLATED CUNNINGHAMY (Conifers). - Medium-sized tree, similar to Brazilian Araucaria; same cultivation as Araucaria imbricata; propagation by suckers. Hardy. MINIUM COLOR CUPHEA (Lythrarias). - Small shrub with violet-brown flowers at the throat, with reddish-green petals. Temperate greenhouse. Mixed soil. Multipl. by seed and cuttings. - C. with fire-colored flowers. - Varied purple C. - Large-flowered false Silene. BLUE-FLOWERED CUPIDON (Compositae). - Height: Om, 40. Pretty blue flowers. Sow indoors in April and plant out in May; seeds or flakes. Light soil; little watering; bedding in winter. INDIA CYCAS (Cycads). - Height: 5 to 6 meters. Warm greenhouse. Seed and shoot propagation. Fig. 9 - Persian Cyclamen. EUROPEAN CYCLAMEN (Primulaceae). - Indigenous. Perennial; purplish or white flowers in autumn; grown in pots or in light soil or heather; northern exposure; covered in winter. Sow seeds as soon as mature. - Persian Cyclamen; blooms from March to May. Multiplication by sowing in pots; seeds are sown as soon as mature; they germinate easily; after the leaves have fallen, transplant the plant either in potting soil, in the open ground or under a frame. By the third year, the tubers are strong, well-developed and ready to flower. CYNOGLOSSE OMPHALODES. V. Omphalodes verna. CYPERUS PAPYRUS, Papyrus (Cyperaceae). - Height 2m, 50; elegant umbel. Multiplied by dividing clumps. CYPRIPEDIUM, Sabot de Vénus (Orchids). - Om, 35 tall; fragrant, purple-brown flowers with hoof-shaped yellow labellum. Moist heather soil. Multiply by separating clumps. - C. bearded. India. Large green and purple striped flowers, white background. Warm greenhouse. Heather soil. - C. gracieux. India. Flower greenish outside, red inside, with four petals, the upper and lower ones ribbed and the two lateral ones punctuated on the edges. Potted heather. - C. hérissé; lower divisions of flower blackish brown, outer ones shiny violet; stem red. - C. de Veitch; white flower with green sheen, terminal sepal striped with purple. - C. remarquable; white flowers with pink veins. Full shade heathland. - C. de Low; flowers gracefully blend soft yellow, green and violet shades. Plant in well-drained pots; light soil. Multiply by separating clumps. -C. pourpré, purple line on upper sepal; petals and beautiful solid purple with darker purple lines. - C. de Stone; white sepals; violet-pink labellum; inner divisions of perianth spotted with dark carmine. - C. admirable; large Om, 07, purple flowers on a yellowish ground; labellum with two appendages; warm greenhouse. Potted heather soil. CYRTANTHERA GHIESBREGHTIANA, Ghiesbreght's Cyrtanthera (Acanthaceae) - Mexico. 4-meter high; pumice or vermilion flowers; light, substantial soil; multip. of cuttings; temperate greenhouse; blooms in January-February. - C. with meaty flowers, united in a terminal spike; temperate greenhouse. Same culture. - C. pubescent, pink flowers. Same culture. - C. à feuilles de Catalpa, yellow flowers. - C. magnifique, pink or red flowers; all from temperate greenhouse. STRAIGHT LEAF CYRTANTHUS (Amaryllidae). - Bright red flowers; blooms in May or September. - C. with oblique leaves, bright red flowers and abundant water droplets. Multip, by cloves; orange and heather soil, potted; warm greenhouse. CYTISE AUBOURS, False Ebony (Papilionaceae). - Long clusters of yellow flowers; blooms in May. Dry soil; half sun. Multiply from seed sown in spring in loose soil; plant the following year. - C. des Alpes, yellow flowers slightly larger and later than those of Faux-Ébénier. - C. pourpre, violet-red flowers. - C. d'Adam, with pink-chamois flowers. - C. with head-shaped flowers. - C. d'Autriche. - Welden, pale-yellow flowers. - Volga C. - White-flowered broom. D DAHLIA (Compositae). - This admirable plant was brought to France from Mexico in 1800; it was simple and orange in color; seedlings have produced all shades of white, red and yellow, pure or mixed in delicately blended hues; only blue has not yet been obtained. D. is propagated by cuttings, herbaceous grafts, seedlings and tubers; the last of these methods is preferred. Tubers should be planted in a warm layer, under a frame, leaving at least one growing eye on each portion; you then place in well loosened, substantial and soft soil, or in pots kept under a frame if frosts still seem to be a threat; frequent but moderate watering in summer; stakes. To obtain varieties, graft into slits on the sides of the tuber and keep in a bed under a bell. Sow in March-April, transplant when the plant has five or six leaves; flowers in July, August and September. Just to mention a few: Cosmos-flowered Dahlia, with purple disk and lilac rays. Multip, seeds and cuttings. - D. Decaisne, purplish disk with purple lines. - D. impérial with white half-flowers and yellow disk. DALEA A FLEURS POURPRES (Papilionaceae). - Annual; height Om, 50; spikes of purple-purple flowers, all summer. Sow outdoors in spring, any exposure except north. LADY OF ELEVEN O'CLOCK. V. Ornithogalum umbellatum. DAPHNE LAUREOLE, Bois-gentil (Thymelyae). - Height from Om, 70 to Om, 80; greenish flowers, fragrant in winter. Multipl. from seed, half-shade. - D. Garou. - D. Thymélée des Alpes. - D. Pontique. - D. odorant. - D. of the hills, etc. DATTIER. V. Phœnix, DATURA FASTUOSA, Stramoine fastueuse (Solanées). - Annual; height Om, 70. Beautiful double, purplish-white flowers. Light soil mixed with compost. Sow in April, in the garden; southern exposure; frequent watering in summer. Variety with white and violet flowers. - D. Métel. - D. faux Métel. - D. cornu. - D. with yellow flowers. DELPHINIUM AJACIS, Garden dolphin, Larkspur (Ranunculaceae). - Annual; height: Om, 30 to Om, 40. Single or double flowers, red, pink, violet, blue, borne in spikes; blooms in July. Free soil. Multip, by seed. - P. d'Alouette, perennial (Siberia). Height: 1.50 to 2 meters. Azure-blue flowers with whitish upper petals, June-July. Warm exposure. Propagate from seed or splinters, in light, open soil. Many outstanding double-flowered varieties. - D. à grandes fleurs (Sibérie), azure-blue flowers. Mult, from seed or splinters, in open soil. - D. with heart-shaped petals; blue flowers inside, reddish outside. Full soil. Little fear of drought. - D. des blés, double-flowered, it has given rise to double-flowered varieties, reproducing from seed and, like their type, taking on all colors except yellow and red. - Perennial. Hybrid. Height: Om, 70. Flowers vary from soft blue to dark purple; petals blackish or white, throat hairy and velvety. Multipl. from splinters and seeds sown in February-March. - D. with large flowers; height: Om, 50; dark indigo flowers, the largest of all varieties obtained; blooms from July to October. Multip, from seed sown in pots, indoors, in February-March. - D. obscur. Perennial, bluish flowers; blooms in June-July. Sow in April, transplant in nursery; plant out in autumn or spring; light, sandy soil. - D. azure. Perennial. Single or double azure flowers. Full soil. - D. scarlet; flowers with yellow inner divisions, red outer divisions. - D. de Barlow, with semi-double, brilliant azure flowers. Light soil. Half-shade exposure. Multiply by splinters. In general, Dauphinelles are best used either in clumps of a single color, or in clumps of various colors; in borders, wide flowerbeds, etc.; sow in place, in September-October, or in March-April, in light soil with a small layer of compost spread over the seed. DENDROBIUM ANOSMUM, Odorless Dendrobrion (Orchids). - Pretty light lilac flowers, with purple-purple labellum in the center and white margin. Peaty soil and moss. Hanging basket. - D. bluish; bluish-lilac flowers, with crimson labellum at center and yellow margin. Warm greenhouse - D. long-leaved; redcarmine flowers. Hot greenhouse. - D. with tight flowers; light yellow flowers with bright orange labellum. Hot greenhouse. - D. Dalhousie; white flowers with soft pink and pale yellow tints; two brown spots on the labellum. - D. noble. - D. Pierardii, etc., etc. DESMODIUM CANADENSE, Canadian Sainfoin (Papilionaceae). - Height: one meter. Leaves with 3 lanceolate leaflets; purple-purple flowers. Multipl. from seed and splinters, outdoors. - S. oscillating, with 3 leaflets, of which the odd one is the largest, and the other two are aniL F AV 3 Fig. 10 - Carnation. Fig. 11 - Polymorphous carnation. movement, the more precipitous the heat; bluish flowers with an orange tinge on the carina and wings. Sow in warm beds and under cloches; light soil; warm greenhouse. DEUTZIE CRÉNELEE (Philadelphias). - Height: 2 meters; large white flowers in terminal clusters; blooms in May-June. - D. with rough leaves. - D. with flowers in corymbs. - D. with spindly branches. Full soil. Multipl. by splinters and cuttings. BLUE DIANEL (Liliaceae). - Height: 0.80 to one meter. Beautiful white flowers; blooms in March. Multiply by separating plants; substantial soil; half-shade exposure. DIANTHUS CARYOPHYLLUS, Florist's carnation (Caryophylaceae). - Stems from Om, 50 to Om, 60. Flowers of several colors, single, semi-double or double. Sow in spring in heather soil, prick out in flower beds. Double carnation seeds are used to obtain varieties. For example: O. de poëte, biennial; flowers white, pink or the most beautiful red. Marcottes, seedlings. - Flemish OE. - Curly Œ. - Dwarf and very dwarf OE. - Broad-leaved Œ. - Gadner's Œ. - ŒE. with daisy leaves. - Œ. d'Espagne, with larger flowers than the preceding one, but of the same color. - O. mignardise, with small single or double flowers, white, red or pinkish; widely used as a border. - Œ. de Chine, biennial, with small, very variegated flowers of bright red and purple, violet, variegated, etc. Cultivation of annuals. - Œ. deltoïdes, with numerous purple flowers; used in borders. - OE. polymorphic, etc., etc. See also Insect pests. The Œ.'s bitter enemy is the earwig, which is lured by sheep's leg debris; in the morning, it buries itself in this debris, of which it is very fond; it is caught and crushed. Cuttings; marcottes in lead cornet. Frequent watering. Return to orangeries or well-ventilated rooms at frost. DICLYTRA. V. Dielytra. DIE DICTAMNUS ALBUS, Fraxinelle (Diosmées). - Native to southern France. Perennial; height: Om, 70 to one meter; leaves quite similar to those of Ash; large clusters of purplish flowers striped with dark purple, in June-July. Multip, from splinters or seeds sown as soon as mature in terrines or flowerbeds; transplanted in nurseries; planted two years later. Especially in hot weather, all parts of this plant produce a volatile essential oil, flammable on contact with a lighted match. DIELYTRA A BELLES FLEURS (Fumariaceae.) - OrigiFig. 12 - Dielytra de Chine. naire de l'Amérique du Nord. Perennial. Height Om, 28, hanging clusters of pink flowers in May and August. Multiply by splinters in spring or autumn, or by cuttings. Light soil, warm exposure. - D. remarkable; pink flowers mixed with yellow and flax grey; elegantly cut leaves like those of the Tree Peony. Same culture as above. - Dielytra de Chine, very elegant and well-furnished. DIGITALE POURPRÉE, Glove of Notre-Dame (Scrophularinées). - Indigenous. Biennial. Height: 1 m to 1.30 m; spikes of numerous purplish-brown flowers; June and July. Multiply by sowing seeds as soon as they ripen; transplant in October. Varieties with paler flowers. - D. large-flowered; yellow flowers spotted with purple. - D. ferruginous; height one meter; large, swollen flowers, white inside, yellow outside. A light, sandy soil is preferable for all Digitales. - Cottony D., with brown flowers and purple lower lip. DIONÉE ATTRAPE-MOUCHE (Drocéracées). - Native to Carolina (North America), the cilia on its leaves catch and suffocate any insect that lands on them. In winter, this plant needs a constant temperature of 7 to 8 degrees centigrade. Multiply by sowing seeds when mature, or by taking leaf cuttings. Soil composed of plant detritus, covered with moss to maintain humidity. DIOSCORÉE CULTIVÉE, cultivated yam (Dioscorées). - Native to India; cooked, edible roots. Highly sought-after for its evergreen foliage, as an ornamental on cradles and trellises; unremarkable whitish flowers. Multiplied by root division and bulblets. DIOSMA UNIFLORE (Diosmées). - Open star-shaped flowers, pink below, white above, ciliated at the edges, blooming in May. - D. doubtful, with pinkish-white flowers, blooming from January to April. - D. ciliate; clusters of pale purple flowers, blooming in spring. Broad-leaved. Height: 1m, 25; milky-white 18 flowers, June-July-August. - D. with oval leaves; flowers pure white above, pretty pink below with purple line through the middle. - D. with headed flowers; height: 1.50 to 2 meters; white flowers in July. Diosma can be grown in temperate greenhouses; in heather soil. Multiply by sowing seeds in pots; transplant in September. DIOSPYROS LOTUS, Plaqueminier lotus (Ebenaceae). - Height: 7 to 10 meters; blooms in July. Light, slightly damp soil. Seed multiplication, sown on warm soil in terrines. - P. Kaki; white flowers; pleasant fruits, known as Figs. Light loam or earth, can be grafted onto the preceding plant. - P. de Virginie, greenish flowers in June; edible berries. Multiply by sowing seeds in terrines on warm soil. Cool exposure. Other varieties include: Diospyros calycilna, D. pubescens, D. angustifolia. DIPLACUS VISQUEUX (Scrophularinea). - North America. Height: Om, 50; yellow-orange flowers bloom June-October. Free soil mixed with heather and kept slightly moist. Multiply from seed sown in warm soil and under a frame. Orangery, winter. - D. écarlate; height: one meter; scarlet flowers - D. à grandes fleurs; flowers carnées, bien échancrées. Multip, cuttings, splinters and seeds. DISPLADENIA A TIGE NOUEUSE (Apocynées). - Brazil; pretty pink flowers bloom all summer. Warm greenhouse; light, open soil; moderate watering. Multipl. of offshoots cut at their point of attachment to the tuber. - D. with trailing leaves. Brazil. Axillary flowers, bright pink with gold star at throat. - D. black purple; axillary flowers funnel-shaped, dark purple. Multipl. of offshoots. DIRCA PALUSTRIS, Dirca des marais, Bois-cuir (Thymelées). - North America, Large red flowers with two lips, the upper one longer. Multiply with cuttings. Warm greenhouse; light soil. We should also mention D. lateritia, magnifica, bulbosa and Blasii; the latter is undoubtedly one of the most remarkable Gesneriaceae. DISPORUM FULVUM. V. Uvularia. NUN'S DISCIPLINE. V. Amarante. DODÉCATHÉON, from two Greek words: the twelve gods; Gyroselle de la Virginie (Primulacées). - Graceful. perennial-rooted plant with a rosette of radical leaves from which emerges, in spring, a spike Om 30 to Om 35 high, bearing at its tip a bunch of a dozen pretty, hanging pink flowers; light soil. Multipl. by seed, sown as soon as mature, and by root division. COURT LEAF DORONIC (Compositae). - Native to the Alps. Hardy perennial; height Om, 65; large, solitary yellow flowers in June. Any soil, any exposure. Multip, of bursts. - D. du Caucase, bright yellow flowers in spring; multip, by clump bursts. DRACÆNA, Dragon tree (Liliaceae-Asparaginea). - Tree of great proportions. Temperate greenhouse; substantial, slightly moist soil. Multiply by offshoots or, better still, by seed. Leaf cuttings with heel, on warm bed and under cloche. Old leafless stems can be cut in portions of Om, 10 to Om, 15 in length; like Yuccas, Dracaenas produce turions or underground buds which are placed in terrines at a temperature of 30 degrees centigrade; as soon as the turions have developed a few centimetres, repot them to be placed in the open ground, on a warm bed, at the end of April, beginning of May. - D. with whole leaves. - Red-ribbed. - D. Balisier leaves. - Rumph. - Umbrella-shaped. - D. lilac. AUSTRIAN DRACOCEPHA LE (Labiatae). - Perennial; height Om, 30; tender blue flowers in long spikes, July-September. - Sow in April in nursery; plant out end of May. - Dracocephale de Mold avie. Annual; height Om, 70; purplish flowers, in leafy spikes, July; etc., etc. EIGHT-PETAL DRYADOM (Rosaceae). - Native to the Alps; pretty bluish flowers in June. Multiplied by separating clumps in September; northern exposure. DUCHESNEA, INDIAN STRAWBERRY (Rosaceae). - Flowers yellow all summer; very useful for trimming glacis and for trellising, as it traces a lot. Any soil is good for it. E ECCREMOCARPE RUDE (Bignoniaceae). - Native to Chile. Height; 5 to 6 meters; lateral cluster of tubular, scarlet flowers; blooms in July-August. Warm exposure; covered in winter. Sow outdoors in March. ECHINOCACTE DE CACHET (Cacti). - Numerous brilliant yellow flowers; warm greenhouse or good temperate greenhouse; substantial soil mixed with heather; water frequently in summer, keep dry in winter. - E. aux cent dards. Rosette of yellowish flowers with purpurine tint. - E. dénudé; large white flowers. - Gibbous. White flowers with pink band. - E. agréable; yellow-orange flowers, large Om, 08, blooming in June. -E. horned; purplish thorns; violet-purple flowers with pearly edges. - E. with foliaceous spines; small yellowish flowers. - E. d'Otto; graceful rosette of lemon-yellow flowers. - E. varié; purplish-pink flowers with purplish line. - Thousand-spotted; beautiful golden-yellow flowers; ebony-black tips on outer petals. - E. à mamelons; straw-yellow flowers with fine down at the base. - E. de Mourille; reflected white flowers. - E. multiflora; white flowers with pink line on each petal. - E. with hexahedral nipples; silvery-white flowers. All these plants need a warm or temperate greenhouse; nourishing soil mixed with heather; frequent watering in summer; no watering in winter. RITRO ECHINOPS (Compositae). - Native. Perennial. Height, Om, 70; pretty blue flowers in globular heads, blooming in July; sow in March; any soil; warm exposure. - E. à tête ronde, native, perennial; height: 2 meters; large balls of light-blue flowers. - E. de Russie, perennial; height: one meter and more; azure-blue flowers in a spiny ball, blooming from July to September. EYRIES ECHINOPSIDE (Cacti). - Cottony nipples armed with spines, on which a greenish-yellow flower is born in summer, Om, 15 to Om, 22 long, with a pure white tint on the blade divisions. - E. à côtes aiguès; pink flower. - E. proliferate; purplish flowers. Echinopsis require a temperate greenhouse, nourishing soil, frequent repotting, frequent watering in summer, and little or no watering in winter. ODORANT ECHITES (Apocynoea). - South America. Fragrant, funnel-shaped white flowers bloom in June-July. Multiply by seed or cuttings. Open ground; cold or temperate greenhouse. - E. de SanFrancisco, funnel-shaped, violet-pink flowers with greenish star on throat. Warm greenhouse; light soil; - E. splendens. - E. spicata. - E. paniculata. - E. hirsuta, etc., etc. ECHIUM CANDICANS, whitish viperine (Borraginae). - Madeira. Height: 2 meters. Clusters of blue flowers in July and September. - Large-flowered varieties with soft pink flowers, blooming in spring. Vipers need light soil, warm exposure, repeated watering in summer; repotting 18.  * -4 b. gd, 318. EPA as these plants grow. Temperate greenhouse in winter. BIG-FLOWERED SEDWARDSIA (Papilionaceae). - Height: 3 to 4 meters. Hanging clusters of yellow flowers, blooming in April and May. - E. with small leaves; flowers larger, but less elongated than those of the preceding plant; blooms in April-May. For both plants: light soil, orangery. Multip. from seed sown on a bed. ELGLANTIER. V. Rose bush. ÉLÆGANUS ARGENTÉ, Bohemian Olive (Eleagineae). - Small, rather insignificant yellowish flowers in June; olive-shaped fruits; pretty silvery leaves. - E. with reflexed branches; leaves with a metallic sheen; flowers in October. BLUE ELÆOCARPUS (Eleocarpus). - Australia. Height: one meter. Clusters of hanging white flowers with fringed petals; blue-indigo, olive-shaped fruits. Heather soil. Multip, cuttings; temperate greenhouse in winter. SAND ELYMUS (Grasses). - Europe. Perennial; tracer. Height: one meter; used to maintain sand. WILLOW LEAF EMBOTHRYUM (Proteaceae). - Australia. Height, 2m, 50; reddish leaves; pale yellow, fragrant flowers, blooming in May; orangery or temperate greenhouse; siliceous and loamy soil; moderate watering. Multip, seeds and marcottes. - E. silky, light purple or lilac flowers almost all year round. Pure heather soil. - E. coccine red, scarlet flowers. Pure or mixed heather. CINO FLOWER ENKYANTHE (Ericaceae). - China. Height: one meter; bell-shaped flowers, carmine colored then turning white, blooming in February; cool or temperate greenhouse; non-humid heather soil. Good light exposure. LONG-FLOWERED EPACRIS (Epacridae). - Oceania. Height: one meter and more. Garlands of tubular, carmine-red flowers with white divisions, blooming in March-April and sometimes in August. - E. purpurescente; funnel-shaped flowers, first purpurescent, then white. - E. élégante; garlands of white flowers. Multiplication by seed, cuttings and, better still, marcots. - E. Copeland; purple-red flowers, same cultivation. - Epacris needs all the care given to Cape Heather. EPERVIERE. V. Hieracium. VIRGINIA EPHEMERE (Commelinae). - Height: Om, 50. Numerous, violet flowers with blue petals, arranged in umbels, June-October; moist, light soil, mid-sun. Multiply by roots in October or spring. ÉPILOBE A ÉPIS, Laurier de Saint-Antoine (ŒEnothérées). - Perennial. Height 1m, 50; clusters of numerous purplish-pink flowers, June-July. Sow outdoors from May to July or divide into clumps. ÉPIMÈDE DES ALPES, Chapeau d'évêque (Berberidae). - Height: Om, 35. Small yellow flowers with reddish-brown calyx, April-May. Multipl. of splinters; in light soil; in mid-sun. - E. with large flowers. - E. de Colchide. - Violet-leaved. - Pinnate-leaved. VINE-PINE. V. Berberis. EPIPHYLLUM, Epiphylle with yellow flowers (Cactus). - Height: Om, 70; flowers yellowish or reddish - E. d'Ackermann; height: Om, 35 to Om, 65; flowers light coccine red. - E. with pink flowers, about Om, 50 long, developing at the top of the stems. - E. truncated; carmine-red flowers, smaller than in the preceding species. - E. with wide branches; pure white, fragrant flowers. BICOLOR EPISCIA (Gesneriaceae). - New Granada. Perennial; white flowers edged with purple, blooming for several months. Warm greenhouse. Same care as for Orchids. MAPLE. V. Acer. MAPLE NEGUNDO. V. Negundo. NERVOUS LEAF ERANTHEMUM (Acanthaceae). - Flowers purplish outside, azure blue inside. Rich soil; warm greenhouse; multip, from cuttings. - E. scarlet, scarlet flowers; warm greenhouse. - E. sanguinolent, lilac flowers punctuated with purple at the base of the upper lip; warm greenhouse. Enemy: kermes. ÉRANTHIS D'HIVER, Helléborine (Renonculacées). - Indigenous. Yellow flowers bloom in the first days of spring; covered, slightly damp exposure. ERICA, Heather (Ericaceae). - We can only indicate the general divisions into : Native heathers. - Cape heather. Over 300 species in all. A well-lit greenhouse that needs only to be protected from frost; we prefer the Dutch greenhouse. We multiply the B. by sowing; when the young plant is vigorous enough and Om, 50 high, we put it in a pot filled with heather soil, kept under a frame in a very slightly warm layer, in the shade; watering; air; light. Layering is difficult; it is only used for certain beautiful species aged 2 to 3 years, whose shoots must be carefully peeled before being laid down. Wean, lift and pot in October. Cuttings are taken in May and June, either in Om 08 pots, sheltered by a drinking glass, or in wide pots of Om,26 to Om, 28, under a bell; gravel at the bottom; moist, sandy heather soil, well packed. Take one-year-old twigs or sprouting twigs, strip them of their leaves at the bottom, and plant them, packing the soil tightly around them; leave them to dry out in the air and sun for a day; then press them up to Om, 28 from the edge of the terrine in a warm tan and cover with a cloche; light watering (for further information, see the chapters on cuttings and greenhouses). The main native heathers include: Erica arborea, with fragrant white flowers. - E. ciliaris, with purple or white flowers. - E. vulgaire, with small pink or white flowers, single or double. - E. scoparia, with small greenish flowers. - E. cinerea, with purplish flowers. Among the Cape heathers: E. Albertus superba, pale yellow flowers washed with pink. - E. hyemalis, with pink-white flowers, blooming from October to February. - E. Hartwelli, with red-white-pink flowers; March-April-May. - E. Capressina, large square flowers, tightly packed at the head. - E. Andromedœflora, spherical flowers, few in number, carmine pink. - E. jasminiflora nana, Fig. 13 - Erica. with white flowers striped with pink, May-June. - E. vestita alba, upright spike of tubular white flowers; March-May. - E. vernia ovata, yellow-orange flowers. - E. vernia coccinea, orange-red flowers, January-February-March; E. tubuliflora coccinea, hairy, coccine-red flowers, May-June. - E. translucens rubra, dark pink, reflexed flowers; January-February. - E. syndriana, campanulate flowers, dark carmine at the base, pale lilac at the throat and on the blade; May-June. - E. propendens, lilac-pink flowers; May. - E. persoluta alba, small reflexed white flowers; February-April. - E. patersoni, yellow flowers; March-August. - E. mirabilis, white flowers, March-May. ERIGERON GLABRE (Compositae). - Native to North America. Perennial; yellow disk flowers with purple-purple rays. Height: Om, 50. Sow early April or divide roots; ordinary soil. - E. remarkable, yellow disk flowers with purplish-purple rays. Ordinary soil. ALPES ERINE (Scrofularinea). - Perennial; short stems emerging from rosette-shaped leaves; clusters of pretty rose-purple flowers. Multiply in April-May in heath or divide clumps in autumn. ALPES ERODIUM (Geraniaceae). - Tuberous root; short stem; purple flowers with purple veins in umbels; May-June. Multip, from seed and splinters; outdoors. ERYTHRINE COQ'S HEAD (Papilionaceae). - South American shrub. One to 2 meters high. Very attractive terminal clusters of red flowers in July-August. Orangery in winter. Multiply by seed and cuttings in June; substantial soil; outdoors mid-May. CALIFORNIA ESCHSHOLTZIA (Papaveraceae). - Biennial or perennial plant; Om, 50 tall, with large, saffron-yellow flowers. Sow outdoors March-April. Variety with creamy-white flowers. EUCALYPTUS GIGANTESQUE (Myrtaceae). - Native to Australia. Height; 50 meters or more; beautiful foliage; very-small flower umbels; white-netted stamens with yellow anthers. Very rapid growth: 4 to 6 meters in three years. Sow in February or September, prick out in pots when 5 or 6 leaves are present; overwinter in greenhouse or under frame; place indoors in May. - E. braves 3 or 4 degrees of cold. - Heart-leaved. - Resinous E. - E. globulus, etc., etc. EUPATOIRE POURPRE (Compositae). - Perennial. Height: Om, 70; purplish flowers in September. Multiply by seed sown in late March or by root division; plant permanently in May. EUPHORBE PONCEAU (Euphorbiaceae). - Height: 2 meters in our greenhouses; large, glaucous leaves; rather insignificant flowers with red bracts. Propagation from seed and cuttings on a hot bed and under a frame. - E. variegated. - E. brillante. - E. de Bréon. - Jacquinia-flowered. ÉVONYMUS, Fusain commun (Celastrinées). - Native, 3 to 4 meters tall, with small, whitish flowers and red, priest's-cap-shaped capsules. Multiplies from seedlings and offshoots in any soil, any exposure. F FABAGELLE COMMUNE (Zygophyllaceae). - Native to Syria. Perennial; height: Om, 70; orange-red flowers, white at base, July-September. Sandy soil; southern exposure. Multiply by seed or splinters. FAGUS SYLVATICA, Common beech, Fayard, Fage (Quercinées). - Height: 20 to 25 meters. Content with mediocre, chalky soil. Valuable wood; fruit called ridge, which yields a fairly fine oil. Sow in autumn or spring, covered with leaves. Main varieties: - H. fern-leaved. - H. crested. - H. coppery. - H. weeping. - H. purple, with blood-red leaves, then dark red-black. - H. redwood. - H. Carolina. - H. broad-leaved. FAYARD. V. Fagus. FELICIA DÉLICATE (Compositae). - Pale blue flowers with yellow disk. Sow on site. FENZLIA WITH STARFLOWERS (Polemoniaceae). - New California. Pale pink flowers bloom in June. Sow indoors in September; transplant into pots in April. Long-lived in apartments. FRA COMMON FLOWER (Umbelliferae). - Perennial, large leaves cut into narrow strips; yellow flowers. Sow in March-April in nurseries; transplant in May-June; plant out the following spring. GLAUQUE FESTIVAL (Grasses). - Stiff leaves; sought-after for forming borders. - Multiplies from seed and by dividing clumps. FICOIDE ANNUELLE, Mesembrianthemum (Mesembrianthemaceae). - Native to the Cape. Flowers with white, purple petals and numerous dark purple stamens. - F. in the afternoon, beautiful yellow flowers, opening only in the evening, etc., etc. Many varieties must be kept in a warm or temperate greenhouse. - F. crystalline; small, white flowers; leaves covered with blisters resembling frozen drops of water. Sow annual Ficoides at the beginning of April, in beds; transplant into the open ground, in a warm spot; if you sow in autumn, bring your plants into a temperate greenhouse as soon as the cold approaches. FICUS ELASTICA, Figuier élastique (Morées). - An admirable tree for its foliage; it can be left in the ground during the summer, but must be brought in before the first frosts; a much sought-after houseplant in recent years. It produces one of the commercially available rubbers. Multiply by taking cuttings, leaving them to dry, and placing them in pots on a warm bed and under a frame; water moderately. FRAXINUS EXCELSIOR, Common Ash (Oleineae). - Height, 20 to 25 meters, native; rather unremarkable yellowish flowers; leaves come later and fall quickly. Sought-after wood for wheelwrighting, etc. Dry or swampy soils do not prevent ash from reaching full growth. Multiplied by grafting. Varieties: - F. crépu; blackish, crackled leaves. - F. silvery; variegated, almost white leaves. - F. golden; young branches with yellow bark. - F. horizontal; horizontal branches. - F. with simple leaves. - F. variegated; bark with yellow stripes. - F. weeping, with branches pointing upwards and downwards, the tips touching the ground. - F. warty, bark covered with asperities. - F. d'Amérique; height: 25 meters; leaflets almost entire, petiolate, glaucous on underside. - F. quadrangular. - Walnut-leaved. - F. pubescent. - Long-leaved F. - F. Elder-leaved. - F. with large fruit. - Mastic-leaved, etc. Ash is not very ornamental. CALIFORNIA FREMONTIA (Malvaceae). - 2 to 3 meters high; solitary, golden-yellow flowers. Hardy in northern France. FRITILLAIRE, Imperial Crown (Liliaceae). - Very large onion. Stems up to a meter high, topped in April and May by beautiful saffron-red flowers, similar to upside-down tulips. Deep, light, non-smoky soil; warm exposure. Multiply by seed or cloves. Replant in April, Om 30 deep, to produce flowers the following year. - F. Méléagre or Damier: flowers marked with checks of different colors according to variety, more than forty in number; cool, shady soil; plant bulbs about Om, 10 deep; cover during very cold weather. FUCHSIA (Œnothérées). - According to a book written by President Porcher, here are the conditions that Fuchsia must meet in order to be perfectly beautiful: "It must have a pleasing habit; preference should be given to bushy or medium-sized plants, which are generally more floriferous. The peduncle must be elongated so that the flower has a graceful habit; the calyx tube must be proportionate in all its parts; if it's too thin, it's a capital defect; the calyx segments must be wide, reflexed or at least wide enough 19 to clear the corolla; when they're long and narrow, they give the flower an ungraceful appearance; the corolla petals must have fullness;.... as for coloring, although inviolable rules cannot be laid down, only bright, vivid colors should be admitted, and dull, false or mediocre shades rejected, etc..., etc." Fuchsia is easy to grow. Put it in a pot filled with light rather than heavy soil: give it light; water it. Take suppressed cuttings at any time of year, but preferably in spring. Sowing provides new varieties; in sandy heather soil. For further information, see the chapter on cuttings, etc. - F. éclatant, with light vermilion flowers. - F. corymbiferous, with red-carmine flowers. - F. toothed leaves. - F. remarkable. - It is impossible to list all the varieties, as they are so numerous. F.'s main enemies are slugs and puerons. FUSAIN. V. Evonymus. G GAILLARDE VIVACE (Compositae). - Perennial; height from Om 35 to Om, 70. Very pretty radiate flowers, with brown disc, orange and purple rays. Shards or seedlings; cuttings under frame. Light soil. Several sought-after species. GANT DE NOTRE-DAME, V. Aquilegia vulgaris. TURF (1) (Grasses and Legumes). - Base your lawns on English ryegrass, which should be mowed often to prevent flowering, and watered sufficiently: 600 grams of seed per acre; mix in a few legumes. Shallow harrowing with a rake; roller. Weed once or twice a year; remove dandelions before they flower. If frosts and thaws (1) Voy, part 1, word Ivraie. have raised and cracked your soil, consolidate it with well-consumed compost mixed with dry, pulverized pond sludge. BALANCED OAK (Papilionaceae). - Indigenous and hardy, with beautiful golden-yellow flowers in summer. Multipl, by sowing in sandy soil. - Linen-leaved G. - G. de l'Etna. TIGELESS GENTIANA (Gentianaceae). - Native and perennial; small scape, terminating in a large blue funnel-shaped flower, May-June-July. Sow from April to June, or separate clumps in autumn, prick out in pots with drained bottoms, plant out in spring. - Yellow-flowered Gentian; 1.30 to 1.50 m tall, with whorls of yellow flowers in July. Multipl. by seed or carnation. GERANIUM STRIÉ (Geraniaceae). - Geraniums should not be confused with Pelargoniums (V. Pélargonium). - Native to Italy. Perennial. - Height Om, 30; flowers white, streaked with purple; blooms May-June. Blooms in spring or autumn. Dry soil. - G. broad-petalled, perennial; the most beautiful plant of the genus; blue flowers streaked with purple, July-September. Multip, by splinters. - G. sanguin, bushy plant about Om, 30; ine fl4s, Fig. 14. - Geranium. digene, perennial, not very delicate; purple-pink flowers, etc., etc. GESSE ODORANTE, Sweet Pea (Papilionaceae). - Annual, hardy; sow in April-May. Any exposure; suitable for arbors, etc. - Bouquet pea, beautiful pink-purple flowers. Sow in summer; transplant in nursery; set out in spring, etc. GILIA WITH HEADFLOWERS (Polemoniaceae). - P. native to California; annual; pretty blue flowers; blooms in summer and autumn. Sow in April-May or September. - G. tricolor; corymbs of blue, purple and yellow flowers. Same culture. GARDEN GIROFLY (Cruciferae). - Biennial plant, with white, carmine or violet, red or pink flowers, depending on variety, May-October. - G. quarantine, rich in varieties, red, white, etc., etc. Sow in beds; good exposure. YELLOW WALLFLOWER. V. Cheiranthus Cheiri. MAHON WALLFLOWER. V. Malcolmia maritima. GLAIEUL (Iridées). - This genus comprises forty species, only two of which can be grown simply in the open ground; the others must be covered with a frame, with leaf litter around them, at the onset of winter. - G. commun. Native; height: Om, 50; carinate flowers, white, red or pink, depending on variety, May-June. Light soil; warm exposure. Multiply from seed or cloves in October. - G. de Constantinople; larger, more colorful flowers than common G., borne on a taller stem. Same cultivation. - Pink G. - Flowering G. - G. triste. - G. parrot. - G. Gand. - G. cardinal. GLEDITSCHIA TRIACANTHOS, Honey Locust, American Beech (Caesalpinaceae). - Height: 15 to 18 meters; clusters of flowers, dirty white, unremarkable - G. sans épines. - G. Bujot. - G. monosperm, greenish flowers. - G. de Chine, bluish flowers. - G. with large spines. - G. from the Caspian Sea. Gleditschia are propagated by sowing fruit in the open ground in April; germination sometimes takes three years: GLOBBA PENCHÉ (Amomées). - In des orientales. HauTRE MEI Fig. 15 - Gynerium argenté. height: 1 m to 1 60; very long, pendulous cluster of pure-white corolla flowers with yellow and red inside. Multipl. of offshoots. Frequent watering during vegetation, warm greenhouse. GLOBULARIA SALICINA, Willow-leaved Globularia (Globularia). - 2 m to 2.50 m tall; bluish flowers; blooms in September-October. Multip, from cuttings. SPOTTED GLOXINIA (Gesneriaceae). - South America. Perennial. Purplish-blue flowers; blooms in autumn. Light soil; warm greenhouse. - Tubular-flowered. Brazil. Height: 1 meter. Fragrant, white flowers in panicles; blooms in July-October. GNAPHALE LAINEUX (Compositae). - Silvery leaves; insignificant flowers; border; grows like Helichrysum. See this word. DOUBLE-FLOWERED GRENADER (Myrtaceae). - Evergreen shrub with beautiful bright red flowers. Southern exposure. Light but nourishing soil. Frequent watering. Seedlings and transplants. In greenhouses during cold weather, or in open ground (Paris climate), but with mulch, straw or dry leaves, shelter wall (V. Fruit trees, Part 1, Pome fruit trees). GRENADIL, V, Passion flower. GYNERIUM ARGENTÉ (Grasses). - Native to Paraguay. Stems 2 to 3 meters long; leaves 1 meter long; magnificent spikes drooping in a graceful plume. For sowing or root division; deep, moist soil. Varieties with yellowish, pinkish-purple panicles. ELEGANT GYPSOPHILE (Caryophyllaceae). - Annual. Height: Om, 40; thread-thin stems; small white flowers. Sow outdoors in April. Sought after for bouquets. - G. Paniculata, perennial. - Sow outdoors. H SPANISH HARICOT (Papilionaceae). - Voluble stems. 4 from 3 to 4 meters; beautiful clusters of ecariate flowers all summer long. White-flowered varieties. Sow in April. HEDERA HELIX, Climbing ivy (Araliaceae). - Indigenous. 10 to 13 meters high; small greenish flowers; black berries. Any soil; any exposure. Multiplies by seed, cuttings or rooted branches. Varieties with yellow and white variegated leaves. - L. from Ireland. - L. from the Greek Archipelago, with yellowish berries. HEDYCHIUM CONORARIUM, Gandasuli with bunches (Amo mées). - From India; yellowish-white flowers. Multiply from seed and offspring in light, moist soil; warm greenhouse. - H. narrow-leaved (Coromandel), with red, dark-orange flowers and long, scarlet stamens. Heather soil mixed with orange earth. Warm greenhouse. - G. de Gardner. Height: 1m, 30 to 2 meters. Thyrse of large yellow flowers. Heather and orange earth. Warm greenhouse. HEDYSARUM CORONARIUM, Buckthorn (Papilionaceae). - Biennial. Fragrant red flowers bloom in July. Sow in spring in light soil mixed with compost; cover in winter. White-flowered variety. - S. Caucasus. Height: Om, 50; violet-purple flowers, blooming in May-July. WILLOW LEAF HEIMIA (Lythrariae). - Mexico. Height: 1.50 to 3 meters; long spikes of yellow flowers, open all summer. Multipl. by seed and cuttings; orangery in winter, in our northern provinces. AUTUMN HELENIUM (Compositae). - North America, hardy perennial. Height: 2 meters; corymbs of beautiful yellow flowers, blooming from August to November. Multiplies in autumn and spring. Any soil, any exposure. - H. de la Californie; perennial; height: Om, 50; yellow flowers, blooming in August-September. Multiplies from seed and by dividing clumps. - H. with black-purple flowers, perennial. - H. large-headed, yellow flowers with purple-brown edges. - H. with small leaves, greenish-yellow disc flowers, Sow in bed in April. HELIANTHEMUM POUDREUX (Cistinae). - Perennial; pure white flowers in May-June-July. Sow in April-July in a pot lined with sandy heather; transplant in a nursery. - H. with large yellow flowers. HELIANTHUS ANNUUS, Garden Sun, Sunflower (Compositae). - From Peru. Annual plant from 2 m to 2.50 m; yellow ray heads on blackish discs in summer. Varieties: H. uniflora. - H. double-flowered, etc., etc. Rich, moist soil. Multiply from seed in April-May, in situ or in nurseries. HELICHRYSUM ORIENTALE, Yellow Immortelle (Compositae). - Cottony perennial; Om 35 tall; shiny yellow flowers, April-August. Renew often from cuttings; water carefully. Flowers dye easily in several colors. - H. de la Malmaison, golden-yellow flowers, blooming from June to October, - H. with white flowers. - H. à grands capitules, large flowers of Om, 05, with scales varying from carmine pink to amaranth and violet. Sow outdoors in April; transplant outdoors. HELICONIA BIHAï, West Indian Bihai (Musaceae). - Height: 1 m, 90 to 2 m; flowers contained in spathes edged in green, yellow and red. Moist, peaty soil. Multipl. of offsets. Warm greenhouse. HÉLIOPHILA VELUE (Crucifers). - Africa. Bright blue flowers. Multiply from seed sown in heather; moderate watering. PERU HELIOTROPE (Borraginaceae). - Height: Om, 70, to 1m,50; corymbs of small, bluish, vanilla-scented flowers, June-November. Southern exposure in open, light soil; frequent watering in summer. Multiply by seed and cuttings on warm soil, May-June-July-August. - H. with large flowers. - H. triomphe de Liége, etc. HELLÉBORE NOIR, Christmas Rose (Renonculaceae). - Indigenous. Perennial, with large pinkish-white flowers blooming in winter. Strong, moist soil; mid-sun. Multipl. by seed and splinters. - H. d'Orient. - Purple H., etc. JAUNE HEMROCALLE, Asphodel lily (Liliaceae). - Height: 1 meter; yellow flowers quite similar in shape to those of the white lily; in June. Light soil. Multiplies from separate clumps. - H. tawny, dark red flowers, July; same cultivation. PRINTANIÈRE HÉPATIQUE (Ranunculaceae). - Indigenous. Perennial; white, pink, violet, blue, single and double flowers, depending on variety; in March. Multiply by sowing or separating clumps in cool, shady soil. HERACLEUM PERSICUM, Persian Hogweed. - 2 m tall; beautiful white-white flowers in May-July; foliage dark green at first, then brownish. - H. pubescens or Pubescent Hogweed, 3 m high; yellowish-white flowers, blooming in June-July. Also worth mentioning is H. de Welhems, with large, beautiful umbels of whitish flowers; and Heraclea barbue. Sow in nurseries in April-June; transplant in nurseries; plant out in autumn and spring. These plants can also be propagated by dividing clumps. Fig. 16 - Heraclea bearded umbelliferous. COTTON HERB, Wadding Herb (Asclepiadae). - 19. 3 Perennial. Height: 1m, 50; white flowers washed with red, fragrant, blooming in July-August; seeds topped with silky aigrettes. Cool, light soil. Propagate from seed in May, in nurseries. STARTER HERB, Ptarmica vulgaris, Buttercup (Compositae) - Native. Height: Om, 35 to Om, 70; corymb of white, double flowers, open for most of the year. Multiplied by separating clumps in spring or autumn. - Large-leaved Ptarmica. Light soil, frequent watering. - P. de Clavenne; perennial; white flowers, yellowish in the center. Multiply in spring. Northern exposure. SPIDER GRASS. V. Nigelle de Damas. CARPENTER'S GRASS. V. Achillea. HERBE A LA REINE. V. Nicotiana. HERBE AUX ÉCUS, Lunaire annuelle (Crucifères) - Biennial; clusters of purplish, red, white or variegated flowers in April-May. Suitable for all soils; self-sowing. BEGGAR'S GRASS. V. Clematis vitalba. HERBE A LA TRINITÉ. V. Hepatic. WIND HERB. V. Anemone pulsatilla. LONG LEAF HERMANNIA (Buttneriaceae). - Africa. Height: Om, 70; small, fragrant flowers, yellow blade, greenish mitre, April-October. Multip. from seed, sown in pots, on a warm bed or from cuttings on a bed and under a bell. Orange-tree soil. BEECH. V. Fagus. HEXACENTRIS DE MYSORE (Acanthaceae). - Flowers half velvety purple, half golden yellow, united in panicles Om, 40 long. Warm greenhouse; frequent watering. Palissage. Multiply with cuttings or splinters. Recovers easily in warm or temperate greenhouse. HIBBERTIA GRIMPANT (Dillemaceae). - New Holland; silky leaves underneath; beautiful yellow flowers. Orangery; heathland. Multiply by cuttings on bed and under frame in spring. HIBISCUS ABELMOSCHUS, Musk ambrette, Musk ketmia (Malvaceae). - India. Height: 1.30 m; sulphur flowers with brown base; open soil; temperate or warm greenhouse in winter. Sow indoors or outdoors. - Ketmie with changing flowers; height: Im, C0 to 2 meters. Flowers white, then pink, then purple as the sun sets. Multiply with cuttings; warm greenhouse. - K. des jardins; height 1m,50 to 2m, 50; offering varieties: purple-purple, simple red, pure white or with bright red tabs; nankin, double nankin; with white or yellow variegated leaves and double flowers. Any soil, preferably with southern exposure. Sow seeds, in terrines, on warm soil, April-May; transplant into pots; orangery the first two years. - K. rose de la Chine; height: Om, 80 to 1m, 60; single or double red flowers, double aurora, white, double yellow, blooming most of the year. Warm or temperate greenhouse. Multiply cuttings on warm bed and under frame. - K. purple; height: 1 m, beautiful bright red flowers, Om wide, 12. Multiply from cuttings, temperate greenhouse. - K. with lily flowers; height: 1 to 2 meters. Large, orange-red flowers, blooming in autumn. Warm greenhouse. - K. with pink flowers. Deep, open soil, dry in winter; frequent watering in summer. - K. des marais; height: 1m, 30; pale pink flowers, Om, 11 wide. Same cultivation as above. - K. de Thunberg; annual. Height: Om 75; yellow-nanking flowers, July-October. Sow outdoors, April and May. - K. de Caméron; height: Om, 40 to Om, 60; large, coppery-yellow flowers with blood-red macule at base and pink tint at top. Multip, from seed or cuttings. Warm greenhouse in winter. - K. éclatante (Oceania); pale pink flowers, Om, 13 wide, with purple spots and white veins inside. Multiply from cuttings under cover, in mixed soil; water generously in summer. Temperate greenhouse for stem storage. - Cooper's K. Leaves variegated with dark green, pink, yellow and white; scarlet flowers, large Om, 15. Temperate greenhouse. - K. militaire; height: 1m, 30; dark pink flowers, Om,11 wide, blooming in September. - K. coccinea; height: 1m, 40 to 2 meters; bright red flowers, blooming in September-October. - K. vesicular; sulfur-yellow flowers with a brown tint on the tab. Sow outdoors in spring. - K. d'Afrique; sulfur-yellow flowers, very large, very open. Sow outdoors in spring. HIERACIUM, Orange hawkweed (Compositae). - Native, perennial and trailing, Om, 35 high; fairly large, very bright yellow-capucinous flower heads; June-September. Multiply by eyelet and seed in May-June, in nurseries. Remove and replant every two years in the first spring. HIMANTOPHYLLUM ROUGE MINIUM (Amaryllidae). - Height: Om, 30 to Om, 40. Umbel of orange-red flowers. Temperate greenhouse. HIPPEASTRE A RUBANS, Belladone de Rouen (Amaryllidae). - Leaves tinted red; flowers with greenish tube with red tint, white divisions with three carmine lines inside. Multip, from seed or cloves; pot culture; warm exposure; winter storage in orangeries. - H. long-flowered. South America; white flowers with bright carmine stripes down the middle of the petals, June-July. Temperate greenhouse or in the garden with cover. Bright red flowers with darker red stripes. In a temperate greenhouse, or in the garden with cover. - H. de la Reine or du Mexique; greenish-pink flowers with base, March-April-May. Warm greenhouse; open soil mixed with heather; potted. Multip, of cloves. - H. équestre, brick-red flowers, yellowish at base; July and August. Grow in pots filled with light, sifted heather; light watering. - H. parrot; green, purple-striped flowers with white and carmine-red blades. July and August. Warm greenhouse. - H. lattice; violet-pink flowers with darker lattice lines. Warm greenhouse, light loam mixed with heather. Multip. of cloves. - H. bright; reddish-green flowers with yellowish-white inside. - H. high; lilac-purple flowers, substantial soil. Temperate greenhouse. - H. Alberti; large flowers from Om, 12 to Om, 14, orange-red, gradually taking on a pale yellow hue in the center; they last a week; they are sterile, all their floral onions having become petals. - H. pordinum; large flowers from Om, 12 to Om, 15; pale yellow with carmine spots inside and out. HIPPOPHAE RHAMNOÏDES, Seabuckthorn rhamnoid, Griset (Eleagineae). - Height: 2 meters to 2.50 meters; pretty silver leaves with russet spots; yellow-nankini flowers bloom in April. HOHENBERGIA WITH RED EPIS (Bromeliaceae). - Brazil. Beautiful leaves, Om, 70 long; spikes with bright red bracts. Warm greenhouse. HOITZIA COCCINÉ (Polemoniaceae). - Height: 1 m. to 1m, 30; beautiful red flowers in full bloom, all winter, in temperate greenhouse; multiply by cuttings. HOTEIA FROM JAPAN (Saxifragaceae). - Height: Om, 30; panicle of white flowers, blooming in June-July. Open ground; half-sun exposure. Multip, by splinters, March-April. HOUBLON. V. Humulus. HOUTTEA WITH TIGERED FLOWERS (Gesneriaceae). - Brazil, tiger-red flowers. Light loam; multiply with cuttings. Warm greenhouse. HOUTTUYNIA WITH CURVED LEAVES (Saururaceae). - From Japan; perennial. Height: Om, 40; flowers united in a short spadix having itself a white involucre, Full soil; very frequent watering. HOUX, V. Ilex. LINEAR LEAF HOLE (Papilionaceae). - Height: Om, 70; leaves long from Om, 50 to Om, 55; small, bright blue flowers bloom in winter. - H. with lanceolate leaves; larger blue flowers than the previous plant, blooming in March-April. Hovées multiply by seed and are cultivated like Cape Heather. Light soil; moderate watering. HOVENIA A FRUIT DOUX (Rhamnées). - Japan. Flower stalks swell, are edible and taste like buttered pears. Orangery. Multiply with cuttings. HOYA CHARNU (Milkweed). - Porcelain-white flowers, with amaranth-red staminal crown. Light loam. Multiply by cuttings on bed and under cloche. - H. elegant; silver-white flowers with amethyst-colored staminal crown. Warm humid greenhouse; heather soil. - H. with leathery leaves; flowers smaller than the previous one. Same culture. - H. fraternal; five macules, light buff, on the staminal crown. Warm humid greenhouse. - H. varié; flesh-colored flowers with pink shades. Warm greenhouse. - H. imperial (Oceania); large purple flowers from Om,07 to Om, 08, with yellowish-white staminal crown. Warm greenhouse. - H. Cannellier (Java); greenish flowers with dark purple staminal crown. Warm greenhouse. - H. with Campanula flowers (Java); pale yellow flowers, rightly compared in shape to Campanulas and, even better, to Kalmias. Warm greenhouse. As a special feature, you'll notice that the peduncles of Hoyas are persistent and serve as a support for the new flowers that follow one another from year to year. Hoyas are propagated from leaf cuttings and sections of cut stem. Light soil mixed with a little vegetable compost; frequent watering in summer, very little in winter; warm exposure. HUGELIA CORULEA, Blue Didisk (Umbelliferae). - Oceania. Umbel of light-blue flowers. Sow outdoors in April; transplant into pots; water sparingly. HUMEA ELEGANT (Compositae). - Oceania. Biennial. Height: 2 meters to 2m, 60, large, graceful panicle; brown capitula with purple tint on edges. Multipl. by seed and lateral twigs. Orange-tree soil; orangery, winter; open ground, summer. HUMULUS LUPULUS, Cultivated hop. (Cannabinis). - Not strictly speaking an ornamental plant, but its stems can be used to garnish cradles and arbors. ORIENTAL HYACINTH (Liliaceae). - This plant, originally from the Levant, has reached its most perfect state of cultivation in Holland, where it produces a considerable number of outstanding single and double varieties in all shades of red and blue. Sowing takes place in September, and requires a few precautions against extreme cold. Onions are not lifted until the third year, when they are treated in the same way as flowering onions. Cultivation by onion is preferable to sowing; loosened soil, mixed with one-sixth leaf compost or heather soil; cultivation in pots; cultivation in decanters on the necks of which you place the onions so that the roots are bathed in the liquid and the crown only touches it; always keep the decanters full and renew the water every month; throw in a few grains of salt to prevent it from corrupting; plenty of air and light. - J. double white. - J. red and pink double. - J. single and double blue, etc. Here are some of the main varieties of Dutch Hyacinths: Nemrod. Single blue. L'Ami du cœur. Regulus. Orondatus. Blackest. Dying blue. Baron van Tuyll. Single yellow hyacinths. King of the Netherlands. Prince of Orange. Golden rain: Heroine. Anne-Caroline. Simple red and pink hyacinths. March. M. de Fesch. L'Eclair. Talma. L'Amie du cœur. Renan Hasselour. Homère. Amphion. Loving Rosette. Cochenille. Simple whites. Madame de Talleyrand. Montblanc. La Candeur. Hercule. Pretty Blanche. Grand victor. Great white imperial. Themistocles. Voltaire. Anne-Marie. Red hyacinths and double roses. Pollux. Panorama. HYD Purple red and black. Moore. Marie-Louise, Joséphine. Grootvorst. Comte de Nassau. Comtesse de La Coste. Actor. Royal bouquet. Tender bouquet. Gœthe. Double yellows. Duc de Berry, golden. Bouquet d'Orange. Grandeur. Heroin. Ophir. Louis d'or. Plant gold. Double blue. King of the Netherlands. Dark violet. Murillo. La grande Vedette. Mehemet-Ali. Bonaparte. Alfred the Great. Activity. A la mode. Globe. Double white hyacinths. White crown. Herman Lauge. Diana of Ephesus. Gloria florum. La Tour-d'Auvergne. Miss Thettr. Og, king of Bazan, Sultan Achmet. Blandina triumph. Superb violet. HYDRANGEA HORTENSIA (Saxifragées). - Height: 1 to 3 meters; purplish-pink flowers fading to violet-blue, sometimes bright red. Cool, shady soil; protect from very hard frosts. Multiply by offshoots, rooted in sandy soil mixed with leaf compost. - H. with involucre. Japan; height: 1 meter; double variety with flowers similar to pompon roses, in lilac, pale yellow and pink. - H. paniculata; white flowers; hardy. - H. du Japon; bluish-pink flowers. Multip, from cuttings; heathland. - H. à feuilles panachées; leaves covered first with yellow spots, then with silver. - H. with Oak leaves; height: 1.30 to 1.60 m; white flowers. Cool, light soil. - H. white; flowers similar to those of the Viorne-Obier. Cool, light soil; half-shade exposure. - H. de Virginie; height: 1 to 1.30 meters. White flowers; those in the center are fertile, those around the circumference are sterile. Multip, suckering or bedding. Half-shade exposure. Cool, light soil. CANADA HYDRASTIS (Ranunculaceae). - White, double flowers. Multiply by separating plants in March. Heather soil renewed every two years. HYPERICUM CALYCINUM, Large-flowered St. John's Wort (Hypericinaceae). - Height: Om, 35; yellow flowers, Om, 08 wide, bloom from June to September. Multiply by separating the stem; light, open soil; half-shade exposure. - M. de Mahon; height: Om, 70 to 1 m; yellow flowers, open all summer; light, open soil. Orangery. - M. de la Chine; height: Om, 50; large, golden-yellow flowers, blooming from September to December. Orangerie. - M. à odeur de bouc; height: Om, 80 to 1 meter; yellow flowers with long stamens, open all summer. Seed multiplication. - Prolific; yellow flowers in July-August. Seed and bedding multiplication. - M. pyramid; perennial; height: Ow, 30; yellow flowers, open from June to September; large fruit. - Japanese M. Bushy shrub; golden-yellow flowers all summer. Multipl. by seed and cuttings. 1 Perennial Thlaspi (Cruciferae). - Pretty white flowers in corymbs, blooming from March to October. Light soil; southern exposure; multiply by cuttings in pots in the shade. - Iberian umbel; tight, flax-gray flowers. Sow in place in spring. - I. odorante, annual; white, fragrant flowers bloom in August. Sow outdoors in April-May. - I. bitter. Native. Annual. Conical clusters of white flowers in June-August; same cultivation. - I. Linen-leaved. Annual or biennial; corymb of carmine-white flowers, September-October. - I. de Lagasa; height: Om, 40; white flowers all summer. - I. evergreen; small flowers. Multiply by seed or cuttings. For borders. IF COMMON (Conifers). - 10 to 15 meters high; seeds with a pretty red cup at the base. Can be propagated from seed or cuttings in any soil. Several varieties. IGNAME. V. Cultivated dioscorea. ILEX AQUIFOLIUM, Common Holly (Ilicinae). - Indigenous; beautiful, evergreen foliage; small, rather insignificant, whitish flowers, May-June; red berries dropping only in spring; much sought-after for winter bouquets; lives several centuries. Sow seeds as soon as they are ripe, in light soil covered with a little moss and leaves. The following varieties can be grafted onto the species, of which we indicate the main ones: Holly with variable leaf shapes. I. Angustifolia, with narrow flowers. 1. Altaclorensis, with broad, thornless leaves. I. Ciliata, with small leaves, whole margin with spiny cilia. I. Crassifolia, with thick, fleshy leaves. I. Elegant, with oval, slightly flat leaves. I. Hedgehog, spiny leaves, rolled underneath. I. Heterophylla, variable leaves. I. broad-leafed. I. Laurel-leaved, thornless. I. Recurva, with contoured and curved leaves. I. Saw-leaved. Holly, with whole or almost flat leaves. I. Integrifolia, with oval, flat or sinuous leaves. I. Rounded oval leaves. I. Laurel leaves, whole or with a thorn. I. with yellow fruits. I. with white fruits. I. with black fruits. Holly with fruits of varying color, Holly with leaves of varying color. I. Albomarginata, with white-edged leaves. I. Hedgehog, with yellow variegated leaves. I. ¡Hedgehog, with white variegated leaves. 1. Albo-Picta, with white variegated leaves. I. Auro-Marginata, with leaves edged and spotted with yellow. ILLICIUM ANISATUM, Star anise, Badiane (Magnoliaceae). - China. Height: 3 to 4 meters; yellowish flowers in April; multip. of cuttings or bedding; orangery in winter, in the open ground, with cover. Substantial, light soil. - B. de la Floride; height: 1m, 30 to 1m, 70; fragrant, red-brown flowers in April; star-shaped fruits. Same culture. - Sacred B. (Japan). Yellowish-green flowers; temperate greenhouse; moderate watering. IMMORTELLE VIOLETTE, Gomphrena globosa (Amarantaceae). - Native to India; annual; height Om, 50; violet flowers in globular heads, very durable, June-October. IMPATIENS BALSAMINA, Garden balsam (Balsaminae). - Native to India; annual; height Om, 60; 343 red, pink, purple and single or double flowers. Many varieties. Sow in a bed in April and transplant in clods, well top-dressed. Balsamines are, with R. Marguerite, autumn flowers and last until the first frosts. The name Impatiente was given to the Balsamine because its seeds are enclosed in capsules which, when ripe, open and curl up abruptly at the slightest touch. Balsamine double, ordinary. Varieties: yellowish white, flax grey, pink, aurora, sulfur color, flesh color, light tan, variegated light violet, light tan, etc. - B. camellia. Varieties: white with lilac highlights; crimson; dotted with purple, crimson, pink, tan; flesh color. - B. à rameau. Varieties: flesh color, fire color; violet color. - Dwarf B. Semi-double flowers, white, variegated with violet, tan; dotted with tan, violet, crimson. Variegated flowers with large, well-fused white spots. Sow in seedbeds; prick out in terra-cotta flowerbeds; plant out in damp weather. - Three-horned B. (India). Yellow, helmet-shaped flowers, lower petal finished in a horn, upper petal with two small horns. Light, cool soil; half-shade exposure. - B. glandular, with purplish-red, brown flowers; light, shady soil. IMPERIAL, V. Fritillary. CHINESE INCARVILIA (Bignoniaceae). - Annual or biennial. Height: Om, 80 to 1 meter. Whitish flowers, washed with pink. Multip, from seed, sown in June-July; indoors in winter; outdoors in spring. INDIGO BATARD. V. Amorphous frutescent. AUSTRALIAN INDIGO (Papilionaceae). - Australia. Height: Om, 40; fragrant pink flowers, blooming in June. Multiply from seed on warm bed; orangery. Light soil. - I. dosua (Nepaul). Height: 1 m to 1.50 m; pink-purple flowers in May. - I. élégant (China); soft pink flowers with purple spots and stripes, blooming most of the year. Cool greenhouse, sandy soil. - I. with white flowers. Light, nourishing soil. - I. black purple; purple-brown flowers on lighter purple, blooming in September-October. Heather soil; temperate greenhouse; multiply from cuttings. - I. jonciforme; height: 1 m; clusters of purplish flowers, September-October. Same culture. - I. with long spikes (China); large, short-lived pink flowers, August. Temperate greenhouse; multip, from cuttings. INGA TRÈS-ÉLÉGANT (Mimosées). - Mexico. Crimson-red flowers with brown stamens. Multip. of cuttings; heather soil; warm and temperate greenhouse. - I. anomal; height: 1 to 2 meters; greenish flowers open in summer, with stamens Om long, 08, with pretty anthers doFig. 17. - Ipomea. rees. - I. ferruginous (Brazil); flowers with purplish aigrettes formed by the staminal threads. Vegetable compost mixed with a little sand. Warm, humid greenhouse. LINDLEY IPOMY (Convolvulaceae). - Voluble stem, heart-shaped leaves; pretty pink-carmine flowers, but only last a few hours. Multiply by seed or tuber and plant in a temperate or warm greenhouse, in well-nourished soil, in the South. - I. thorny. - I. veined. - I. ivy-leaved; pretty blue or violet flowers, August-October. Sow outdoors, late April-May, etc., etc. IPOMOPSIS ELEGANT (Polemoniaceae). - Annual; 1 m to 1.60 m tall; very long cluster of reddish-occine flowers with purple dots inside; August-September. Sow outdoors in spring; prick out in warm locations; good protection against high humidity and frost. GERMAN IRIS (Iridées). - Large, fragrant dark purple, white or yellow flowers bloom in May-June. Multiply in the garden by dividing rhizomes in September and spring. - Marsh I.; yellow flowers; likes the water's edge; 1.30 m tall. - I. dwarf, height Om, 12 to Om, 15, with violet-blue, white, yellow or purplish flowers, depending on variety; suitable for borders. - I. xiphon or bulbous; with flowers of the most varied and richest colors, blooming in June. - I. yellowish; pale yellow flowers outside, dark yellow inside. - I. de Florence, with white flowers and fragrant root. - I. variegated; white flowers with purple veins. Many varieties. Outdoor. - I. dwarf. Petite Flambe; bluish-purple or light flowers, February-April. Yellow, white, purplish, reddish and yellow varieties. - I. forked, perennial, purplish-blue flowers. - I. bare-stemmed, perennial; violet-blue flowers in May. - L. de Monnier. Perennial; height: 1 meter. Yellow-orange flowers, June-August. - I. fetid, dirty yellow flowers with purple highlights; pretty red-seeded fruits. Varieties with white ribbons. Cool soil. - I. de Sibérie, blue, russet flowers. Open ground. - I. from Russia, variegated white, purple and yellow flowers. Open ground. - I. versicolor, purple-purple flowers, variegated with yellow and white, blooming in May-June. - I. with gramen leaves, purplish flowers with swollen tube. Open ground. - I. de Virginie, blue-washed white flowers with purple spot and yellow-orange line. Under frame. - I. magnifique; yellow flowers streaked with brown on the outside, olive-purple on the inside. - I. de Suse, with purplish-white or violet-brown or crimson flowers; May and June; southern exposure; litter cover against severe cold, etc. "Iris multiply by seed, and better by roots or rhizomes. For bulbous irises, we prefer cloves, which should be kept in a dry place and replanted in autumn. IXIA BULBOCODE (Iridées). - Native to Europe; flowers may be red, blue, violet, white or yellow, depending on the variety. Multiply by cloves in light, sandy soil, October. Other Ixias: I. orange; I. maculée, require great care; temperate greenhouse. 2 JACINTHE. V. Hyacinth. COMMON JASMIN (Jasmine). - Native to Asia; 3 to 4 meters high; pretty, fragrant, pure-white flowers; grows all summer in the open, in a warm spot; covers with thick litter in winter. Multiply by cuttings and marcottes; mow often; water well in summer. Variety with white and yellow variegated leaves. - J. triomphant, 2.50 to 3.50 m tall; very fragrant yellow flowers. Multiplied by bedding, cuttings and grafting in light free soil; blooms all winter in temperate greenhouses; easily braves several degrees of cold. - J. jaune à feuilles de Cytise; green leaves; small flowers bloom from May to September; offshoots and marcottes; any light soil; southern exposure. - J. Jonquille; Jonquille-scented flowers bloom most of the year. - J. d'Italie; pale yellow odorless flowers, winter cover. - Bare-flowered J. (China); can be pruned into a shrub. - J. à grandes fleurs or J. d'Espagne; large, fragrant flowers, white on the inside, washed red on the outside. Semi-double-flowered variety. Can be grafted onto white Jasmine; pruned in spring to 3 or 4 y them. Orangery, light free soil. - J. des Açores; fragrant flowers, blooming in August, same cultivation as above. - J. de l'Ile de France, warm greenhouse, light soil. - J. à feuilles de Troëne, blooms in August, light free soil, orangery. - J. multiflore, fragrant white flowers with 7 lobes, autumn. - J. d'Arabie Sambac; height: 3 to 4 meters; white flowers divided into 8 lobes, very fragrant especially in the evening, blooming all summer. Double-flowered varieties. Warm greenhouse or hot frame; frequent watering in summer. Multiply with cuttings or bedding on a warm bed. Can be grafted onto white jasmine. JATROPHA ACUMINATA, Medicinal (Euphorbiaceae). - Height: 1 to 2 meters; corymb of scarlet flowers blooming in summer. Multip, from seed or hot cuttings. Light, substantial soil. Warm greenhouse. TWO-LEAF JEFFERSONIA (Podophyllaceae). - North America. Perennial; white flowers with 8 divisions. Heather soil. Multiplies in February. JONC FLEURI. V. Butome à Ombelle. JONC MARIN, Common Ajone (Papilionaceae). - A double-flowered variety is grown in gardens (a rare phenomenon in leguminous plants); all soils except those too full of chalk. DANDELION. V. Narcissus, ROOF JOUBARBE (Crassulaceae). - Perennial; Om 35 high; rosette-shaped leaves; small, reddish-white flowers. Multiply by separating or dividing rosettes in dry, light soil; does not require watering. JULIENNE DES JARDINS, Hesperis matronalis (Cruciferae). - Biennial; height Om, 70 to 1 m; fragrant flowers quite similar to those of the Giroflées, June-July. Ordinary but nourishing soil; moderate watering. Multiply by splinters or cuttings in the open ground in the shade. Perennial variety with double flowers. JUSTICIA PICTA, Painted Carmentine (Acanthaceae). - Height: 2 to 2.50 m. Spikes of bright scarlet flowers March-June. Warm greenhouse; light, cool soil. Multiply by cuttings and seed. - Bright J. - J. gnarled stem. - J. yellow. - J. scarlet. K JAPANESE KADSURA (Schizandra). - Height: 2 to 5 meters; white flowers with six divisions. Open ground. LONG LEAF KOEMFERIA (Zingiberaceae). - Flowers with purple-striped spathes; white and purple perianth. Warm greenhouse. - K. Roscœana. KALMIA WITH WIDE LEAVES (Ericaceae). - Height: 2 meters; carmine or pink flowers, June and sometimes September. White-flowered variety. Warm greenhouse. - Rosemary-leaved glaucous K.; bushy plant, Om, 50; pink flowers bloom in May. Kalmias need slightly moist heather soil and half-shade exposure. Multiply with cuttings, offshoots and seeds. Seedlings are sown in fine, sifted soil, in a shady frame; two or three years in an orangery are needed to enable the young plant to withstand the open air. BIG-FLOWERED KENNEDIA (Papilionaceae). - From Oceania, like all those listed below. Height: 1 to 2 meters in pots, 5 to 7 meters in the ground: deep purple flowers in May. Multiply by seed and cuttings; temperate greenhouse. - K. de Makoy, violet-blue flowers. Trellising. Cold greenhouse. - K. glabre, deep purple-red flowers, blooming in February-March; temperate greenhouse. - K. de Saint-Omer, pink flowers, spotted with yellow in March-April; temperate greenhouse. - K. écar20 late, flowers with scarlet flag spotted with yellow, carina of a beautiful bright purple, blooming in March-April. Temperate greenhouse. - K. with ribbed leaves, red flowers spotted with very bright purple. Temperate greenhouse. - K. with oval leaves; blue flowers bloom in February. Temperate greenhouse. - K. with large leaves; very blue flowers in clusters, blooming from March to May. - K. monophyllum; violet-blue flowers with two greenish spots on the standard. Temperate greenhouse. - K. couchée, red flowers with green spot at base of standard. Temperate greenhouse; open ground. - K. with black flowers; black-purple flowers with yellow-marked standard. Temperate greenhouse. K. reproduce from seed and cuttings. KERRIA or Japanese Coret (Rosaceae). - Height: 1 to 2 meters; very elegant yellow flowers from spring to autumn. Shady exposure; ordinary soil. Multiply by cuttings. GARDEN KETMIA. V. Hibiscus. KOELREUTERIA or Panicled soap tree (Sapindaceae). - China. Height: 3 to 4 meters; yellow flower panicles with 4 divisions, each with a petaloid appendage. Multiply by branch or root cuttings, sow outdoors. L LABICHÉA DE HUCGEL (Papilionaceae). - Oceania. Evergreen shrub with yellow flowers spotted with purple, blooming in April. Temperate greenhouse; heather soil. Re-pot every spring. LACHENALIA TRICOLORE (Liliaceae). - Height: Om, 30 to Om35; flowers yellow-lemon outside; greenish-purple inside. - L. with yellow flowers; yellow flowers with green edge outside, greenish inside. - L. with hanging flowers; flowers with red outer divisions, green and purple inner divisions; December and January. LACHNEA WITH COTONNEOUS HEADS (Thymelia). - Height: Om, 70 to 1m, 30; white or pink, tubular, silky flowers in May. Temperate greenhouse, heather soil. Multip. of marcottes and cuttings. - L. purpurine; purpurine, silky flowers; May; same cultivation. These two pretty plants are native to the Cape. LOELIE ANCIPITÉE (Orchids). - Mexico; flowers Om-wide, 10 to 12 centimeters, purple-purple with pale purple labellum, striped with red at the base. - L. de Perrin, Brazil; pretty rose-lilac flowers with bright purple labellum. Both in the Orchid greenhouse; ordinary care for plants in this family. - L. d'automne; large Om, 12 flowers with striped labellum punctuated with violet-brown; flowers bloom in autumn. Same culture. - Giant L. Height: Om, 60; a single wide flower of Om 12 to 15, greenish with tawny tinge at the tips of the leaflets; reddish-blue labellum. Same culture. LAGÉNARIA VULGARIS, Gourde des Pèlerins, Calebasse commune (Cucurbitaceae). - India. Height: 3 or 4 meters; monoecious white flowers with a musky fragrance; vases, etc., are made from its delicately emptied fruit. - C. gigantesque. - C. plate de Corse. - Powder flask. - Gourd siphon. - G. massue d'Hercule or Gourde trompette, very long, with a collarless variety. Sow in May; in a manure pit covered with potting soil; warm exposure; grow in isolation to avoid cross-breeding and alteration of varieties. LAGERSTROEMIA DES INDES (Lythrariées). - China. Height: 5 to 6 meters; purple, curly flowers bloom from August to October. Open, nourishing soil. Orangery in winter; southern exposure; outdoors in summer. Root propagation on warm soil and under frame. Variety with violet flowers. - Elegant L.; brighter pink flowers than the previous variety, but later. L. can be grown in crates like Myrtles, Pomegranates, etc. LAGURUS A ÉPI OVALE (Grasses). - Indigenous. Annual; attractive, upright, velvety spikes in June-August. Sow in April in warm locations. Keeps for a long time dried out. LEMON, Sonchus (Compositae). - Perennial and native, with large terminal panicles of deep blue-purple flowers, July-August. Sow or take cuttings in shady places; cool, deep soil. LANTANA, Snowball (Caprifoliaceae). - 2-meter-high native shrub with very white flower heads blooming in May; cool soil. Multiply with offshoots and single marcots; mow when deflowering. - Laurel-tin 2.30 to 2.60 m tall; evergreen;

Small red flowers on the outside, white on the inside. Light, open soil; shady exposure; in the North, it should be brought in when the cold approaches. LANTANA CAMARA, Lemon balm (Verbenaceae). - South America. Height: 1m, 30; flowers yellow, then aurora; blooms all summer. Warm or temperate greenhouse; open soil; southern exposure; frequent watering in summer; multip. of cuttings on bed and under frame and of seed. - L. flava; from Mexico; orange flowers. Temperate greenhouse. - L. odorant. Height: 1.50 m; pale lilac flowers. - L. bicolore; white and purple flowers. - L. de Sellow. Height: Om, 70 to 1 meter. Red-purple flowers with white tint. Multip, from cuttings. Temperate greenhouse. Among the varieties of Lemon balm-leaved Lantana, let us mention only : L. Annei. - L. Arethusa. - L. coquette. - L. conqueror. - L. Ceres. - L. très-brillante. - L. Eugène Bourcier. - L. Le Nain. - L. Roi-des-Pourpres. - L. de Ferdinand. - L. Solfatarre. - L. Souvenir de Pékin. - L. Volcano. - L. Marcella. - L. Star of Provence. - L. atropurpurea, etc., etc. LAPAGERI WITH PINK FLOWERS (Smilaceae). - Chile. Hanging, solitary flowers, very reminiscent of the White Lily; but they are carmine-red with white spots inside; September. Cool greenhouse; fresh, substantial soil; half-shade exposure. - L. albiflora; creamy-white flowers with sulfur tint and pink macules at base. LARDIZABALA BITERNATA (Lardizabalea). - Chile. Purple flowers with chocolate hue; good eating fruit. Multip, cuttings under frame and cloche. LARIX EUROPÆA, European larch (Conifers). - Height: 35 to 40 meters; the only coniferous tree on the old continent to drop its leaves in winter. Cool climate; fears the sun; likes crisp, pure air; light, siliceous or chalky soil, but a little deep. Sow as for pine and fir. - Siberian spruce; lower and slower-growing. - Red spruce or American spruce. Height: 30 meters; very small cones. LASIOPETALUM PURPUREUM. Lasiopetalum with purplish flowers. - Oceania. Height: Om, 35 to Om, 70; small clusters of purplish flowers blooming in June. Temperate greenhouse; heather soil: multip, from seed and cuttings. - L. Quercifolium. - L. Solanaceum; same cultivation for both as above. LATANIER ROUGE (Palms). - Bare trunk; reddish, spiny, fan-shaped leaves; warm greenhouse; multip. of seeds. - L. de Bourbon; leaves of same shape, but more spreading. LATHYRUS ODORATUS, Fragrant chickweed; Sweet pea. V. Fragrant chickweed. LAURENCELIE A FLEURS ROSES (Composites). - Oceania. Fresh pink flowers; very elegant. Temperate greenhouse. Multiply by cuttings. LAUREOLE. V. Daphne-laurel. LAURIER AMANDIER. V. Double-flowered cherry. 20. ORDINARY ROSE LAUREL, Nerium oleander (Apocynées). - Attractive shrub, 6 meters high, with pretty pink, white, single or double flowers, blooming during summer and early fall. Grow in the open; sheltered exposure; cover in winter. Easy to propagate from seed, sown on a warm bed in pots as soon as harvested, and kept over winter under a frame or in an orangery. Many varieties: L. latifolia. - L. salicifolia, etc., etc., which can be propagated by cuttings and grafts. - Camphor, whitish flowers bloom in summer; dark purple fruit. Propagated by cuttings or marcots. - L. with wavy leaves. - L. with variegated leaves. Varieties can be propagated from cuttings or by grafting. LAVANDULA SPICA, Lavender Spic (Labiatae). - Bluish flowers in whorls of interrupted spikes; outdoors; warm exposure; multip, from seed. LAVATEREA GRANDES FLEURS (Malvaceae). - Native plant; annual; height from Om, 80 to 1 meter. Axillary flowers quite similar in shape to those of Mallow, but wide from Om, 05-06, of a pretty carmine-pink, July-September; sought-after for baskets, flowerbeds and on-site sowing in April; watering during hot weather. - L. in tree. 1 to 2 meters high; purple flowers June-November. Multiply from seed, in the open ground in summer; bring in during winter in orangeries. - L. large-flowered, native, annual. Height: Om, 80 to 1 meter. Om, 05-06, and white-flowered variety, blooming from July to Sept. - L. maritime-indigenous. Height: 1 to 2 meters; flowers with a white background washed with delicate pink, with a wide, fringed, bright-carmine spot on each petal. Orangery in winter, outdoors in summer. LARGE LEAF LEDON, Labrador Tea (Ericaceae). - Height: Om, 65; corymb of small white flowers. - Marsh L., umbels of white flowers, April and May. Shady exposure, cool, light heather soil; multip. of offshoots and marcottes in spring. LEMONIA SPECTABILIS, Elegant Lemonia (Diosmées). - Very bright, dark-red flowers with 5 deep, unequal divisions. Light, nourishing soil; care given to ordinary greenhouse plants. LION'S TAIL LEONOTIS (Labiatae). - Cape Town. Attractive shrub, about 2 meters high, with large, long, aurora-violet flowers from August to October, arranged in spikes of closely spaced whorls. Fears humidity in winter; orangery; then outdoors. Multiply from seed or cuttings under a bell; prune with care. LEPACHIS COLUMNARIS, Columnar Rudbeckia (Compositae). - Texas origin. Perennial with golden-yellow flowers with a bronze spot at the base; disk florets on a kind of central column. Warm exposure; ordinary soil. Multip, from seed or splinters. DENSE-FLOWERED LEPTOSIPHON (Polemoniaceae). - California origin. Height: Om, 35; corymb of flowers, first soft pink, then light blue, all summer. White-flowered varieties. Sow in March-April in the field or in pots in autumn, and plant out immediately. - L. with Androsace flowers. - L. with golden yellow flowers, etc., etc. LESSERTIE VIVACE (Papilionaceae). - With clusters of pink flowers veined with darker lines. Warm exposure; light soil. Multiply from seed sown in warm soil, in pots and under frames, to be planted in the open ground in spring; lives for three years if brought into the orangery each year as the cold approaches. LIATRIDE EN ÉPI (Composites). - Native to North America. Height: Om, 60. Pretty, more or less bright purple flowers, depending on variety. - L. scaly. Beautiful plant, with large, violet-red flower heads. Multiply by sowing seeds in light, sandy soil or by separating. LIERRE. V. Hedera. CAULESCENT LIGERIA (Gesneriaceae). - Brazil. Large, violet-blue flowers. Multipl. by cuttings. V. for cultivation: Achimenès. In general, Ligerias, like Gloxinias, require heather soil mixed with one-quarter free soil and one-quarter compost. Seedlings have given rise to many varieties, including: L. Espérance. L Beauty. Legeria or Gloxinia with nodding flowers. L. Cream and violet. L. Constance. L. Bird of Paradise. L. Angelina. L. pink cochineal. L. Lady Cecilia Malgneux. L. Leviathan. L. Impériale blanche. L. Maculata insignis. L. Most beautifui. Ligerias or Gloxinias with upright flowers. L. Laque extra. L. Lady Grosvenor. L. Juliette Valerand. L. Henri Husson. L. Émile Husson. L. cherry-violet. L. scarlet and lilac. L. Cobalt ring. L. Valérie. L. Star. L. souvenir de Thun. L. princess of Prussia. L. Marie Talleyrand. L. Myrcostigma. L. M. Carcenac. L. la belle de Meulan. BIG-FLOWERED LIGERIA (Gesneriaceae). - Blue flowers with long pedicels. It has given rise to many varieties of all colors, including: L. Fyfiana with white flowers with soft violet shades on the outside; purplish-blue at the throat and entrance to the tube. - L. Souvenir d'Henri Tops, with white corolla and purplish-blue edge; purple tint at throat. BIG FLOWER LIGULAR (Compositae). - Perennial. Height: 1 meter. Yellow flowers, June. Propagates from seed and by clump division. Suitable for slightly cool soil and shady exposure. - Siberian L. Perennial. Height: 1 meter. Dark yellow flowers. Large gardens. LIGUSTRUM VUIGARE, Common Privet. - Small white flowers in spring; black berries; suitable for hedges; any soil and exposure. Multip, from seed, offshoots and cuttings. LILAC. V. Syringa. VIVACE LINSEED. V. Linum vivace. LILIUM, Lily (Liliaceae). - This genus includes many native and foreign species, some with white flowers, others with yellow, saffron or purplish flowers, etc. Any light, cool soil with warm exposure is good for growing Lilies. Any light, cool soil with a warm exposure is good for growing Lilies; every three years, the onions are lifted at the beginning of October, the old roots removed and the plants immediately replanted, so as to have flowers the following year. Defend the lily against its particular enemy, the lily beetle, a beetle with red elytra, whose female lays her eggs in the thickness of the leaves. White-flowered lily. Common white lily. - Remove onions every 3 or 4 years; separate cloves and replant immediately at a depth of about 15 cm. Varieties: - L. with bordered flowers. - L. variegated leaves. L. double white or monstrous. - Bloody L. with red petals. - L. de Brown (Japan). Height: Om, 50; corolla divisions washed purplish purple on the outside. Open ground; winter hardy. - Long-flowered L. Long, pure-white flowers; short stem. - L. eximium; narrower leaves; horizontal flowers of Om, 11 in length. - L. gigantesque (Nepaul). Height: 2 to 3 meters; very thick stem; flowers spotted or washed with purple inside; mid-shade, light or slightly damp soil. Saffron-flowered lily. Orange lily. Height: 1 meter. Saffron-red flowers with numerous small black spots. Any soil. Three varieties: - L. umbellatum - L. umbellatum punctatum. - L. umbellatum fulgidum; orange-red flowers with yellow tint. - L. élégant; bright orange-red flowers with purplish streaks at the base; slightly curved at the top. Multiple cloves and seeds. - L. superb. Height: 4.50 to 2.50 m. Some forty hanging flowers, reddish-orange with purple-brown dots. Heather soil. Cover against frost. Repeat every 3 or 4 years; separate cloves, replant immediately in semi-shade; multip, by onion scales. Fears humidity. - L. hœmatochroum hybridum (Japan). Blackish-blood-red flowers with black spots inside; width: approx. Om, 15 to Om, 17 diameter. Open ground. - L. de Catesby or L. de Caroline, very slender stem; height: Om, 80 to 1 meter; yellow-orange flowers, tigered at the gor8e, borne on peduncles about Om, 10 long. Pleine terre de bruyère. Yellow lily with saffron or red flowers. Martagon lily. Stem marked with black dots; flowers Fig. 18. purple-red with black dots, blooming in July and August. Varieties: - White lily. - L. purple-streaked. - L. M. with double flowers. - L. Canada. Height: 1 to 1.30 m. Yellow-orange flowers dotted with purple, blooming towards the end of June. - L. bulbifère. Height: Om 80 to 1 meter. Reddish-orange flowers with large, paler spots and brown dots, blooming towards the end of May. - L. des Pyrénées; lemon-yellow flowers with reddish-brown dots inside. - L. à petites feuilles. Perennial. Height: Om, 50. Dark-red flowers open in May-June. Heather soil. - L. de Pompone, - L. Turban, Leaves edged with whitish hairs; flowers reddish-pink, curled somewhat like the folds of a turban. Var. with yellow flowers or Lis Martagon à fleur jaune. Half-shade; cool, light soil. - L. from Kamtschatka. Height: 1m, 50; slightly hairy leaves; golden-yellow flowers with purplish dots inside, blooming in July. - L. de Thunberg (Japan). Height: Om, 50. Perennial; orange-red flowers with purple dots, open in May-June; light, sandy, cool soil. Multip, by bulb division. - L. éclatant (Japan). Height: Om, 60. Perennial. Bright red flowers. Varieties. - L. atrosanguineum. - L. Titan, etc., same culture. - L. monadelphe (Caucasus), lemon-yellow flowers with red dots. Hardy. - L. tigré (China), purple, woolly stem. Height: 1m, 70; large, deep-red flowers with purplish-black dots. Hardy. Edible bulbs. - L. de Leichtlin (Japan). Height: 1 m, pale golden-yellow flowers with purple macules. Hardy. Nanking lily. Brick-colored lily or Isabella lily, Height: 2 meters. Flowers with buff background. Field grown. White or red-spotted lily. Japanese golden lily. Height: 1.50 to 2 meters and more. Very sweet-smelling flowers, Om, 20 cent. in diameter, usually white with a pale-yellow band of gold across the middle of each corolla division, purple-brown spots and stripes; sometimes the background is almost clear and the spots then appear darker brown; very rustic. - L. with lanceolate leaves (Japan). Height: 1 meter. Flowers about Om, 12 wide; white, topped with papillae. Several varieties: - L. lancifolium Schramokersii, with purple-pink flowers and darker pupils. - L. lancifolium rubrum, with soft pink flowers with a carmine tint, and purple pupils. - L. lancifolium grandiflorum rubrum, with flowers of Om, 15 in diameter with purplish dots. - L. lancifolium monstruosum rubrum, very large white flowers with carmine spots and flecks. - L. lancifolium punctatum, flesh-white flowers with tender-pink spots. - L. lancifolium corymbiflorum album, roseum, rubrum, with white flowers speckled with carmine or pink. All these varieties do well in open heather soil; raise the onions each year in autumn; remove old, exhausted roots and replant immediately. PINK-FLOWERED LIMNANTHES (Limnanthaceae). - North America. Annual; pale pink, five-divided flowers with long stalks. Sow in spring and autumn; overwinter in a greenhouse and plant out in spring. - L. Douglassii, corolla half yellow, half white. Same culture. LIMNOCHARIS DE HUMBOLDT (Hydrocharidae). - Ephemeral sulphur-yellow flowers, with orange tint at the tab. Temperate greenhouse; pond. LIMODORUM DE TANKERVILLE (Orchids). - Height: Om, 65. Flowers white outside, russet inside, with purple-brown-shade labellum. Multip, suckers in pots. Heather soil mixed with leaf compost. LINARIA WITH BIG FLOWERS (Scropnularinea). - Perennial and often biennial. Om, 70 tall; large, purple flowers with yellow veins and elongated spurs; all summer. In the garden; under cover in winter. Sow in spring. - L. des Alpes with light blue flowers. - L. à fleurs d'Orchis, blue-violet, varieties with purple and white flowers. Sow from March to June. LINUM VIVACE (Linnaea). - Indigenous. Om high, 35-70; pretty blue flowers, June-August. Varieties with white, pink, violet and yellow flowers; light free soil; multip. of seeds and shards. The perennial L. must be moved every year when it deflowers. - L. with large flowers, forming clumps of Om, 20, with large bright red flowers. Multip, from seed sown in spring in well-smoked soil; blooms all summer. All linseeds are sought-after as ornamental plants, not to mention the uses and economic properties of common flax. - Tree flax. - L. sub-frutescent. - L. with three styles. - L. viscous, etc. LIPARIA SPHÉRIQUE (Papilionaceae). - Africa. Height: 1m, 30; deep yellow flowers, open in summer. Multiply by cuttings; light free soil. LIPPIA A TROIS FEUILLES, Lemon verbena (Verbenaceae). - Chile. Height: 1 to 2 meters. Spike of small blue-purple flowers inside, white outside, with a lemon scent, blooming from July to September. Exp. to south; light open soil; frequent watering in summer; orangery in winter. Multiply with herbaceous cuttings on bed and under cloche. LIQUIDAMBAR COPAL, Copal d'Amérique (Balsamifluées). - Height: 12 meters. Reddish shoots; red leaves as they fall; greenish flowers in a ball. Warm, sheltered exposure; moist soil. Multiplication of seeds, offshoots and marcottes in autumn - L. du Levant. Same culture. LIRIODENDRON TULIPIFERUM. Tulip tree (Ma21 gnoliaceae). - Very attractive tree, 30 to 40 meters high, with a graceful, solemn effect; beautiful green and yellow tulip-shaped flowers with orange blotches in June and July. Sown in autumn, in terrines, the seeds usually sprout the following spring; covered with litter in winter; transplanted in the third year, in open, deep, cool soil; no transplanting; the Tulip does not flower until it is about 25 years old. LIS. V. Lilium. LIS ASPHODÈLE, V. Hemerocallis, LIS D'ESPAGNE. V. German iris. LIS JACINTHE. V. Italian scilla. LISERON LISET. V. Convolvulus. LISCANTHUS PRINCEPS (Gentianaceae). - Height: Om, 70 to 1 meter; long-tubed flowers of Om, 15, bright orange color; green colors on the leaf blade. Cool greenhouse in winter; well-drained soil; two or three repottings each year. LITHOSPERMUM SERICEUM, Virginia Bugloss; Orcanette (Borraginae). - Pretty yellow flowers in spikes in summer. Heather soil; southern exposure. Orcanette is used as a dye. CARDINAL LOBELI (Lobeliaceae). - Native to North America; perennial. Om high, 30-50; large, red-petal flowers in clusters, July-October. Light, open soil; mid-sun. Multip, by seed on bed, under frame or cloche. - L. syphilitic; Om,50 tall; terminal spike of blue flowers. August-October. Sow in loose, cool soil, without covering seeds; preferably near water. - Bright red flowers. Multiply by cuttings and roots. Cover in winter. Light, open soil, cool in summer; half-sun exposure. - Brilliant L., bright red pubescent flowers. Same culture; orangery in winter. - L. rameuse, Height: Om, 40; bluish-bobalt flowers, glazed white outside. Varieties with white flowers. Sow indoors in March; overwinter in tinted greenhouse; set out in spring; light, open soil. - L. with tobacco leaves; 2 to 4 meters high. Pale lilac flowers, digitaliform. Warm or temperate greenhouse. - L. Érine (duzCap), winged, bluish flowers, dotted with purple on a white background at the throat. Pots; beds; rocks. Sow indoors in March-April, outdoors in May-June. - L. Erinus grandiflore; deep azure flowers with purple highlights, blooming all summer long. - E. gr. superba; dark blue flowers with white centers. - E. speciosa, dark blue flowers with white throat. - L. E. marmorata. - L. E. gracilis alba. - L. E. gracilis erecta. - L. Pubescens, etc., etc. MAGNIFICENT LOCHERIE (Gesneriaceae). - Height: Om, 30-40; flowers about Om, 06 wide, bright crimson with purple-black flecks. V. Achiménès for cultivation. - L. tan; very beautiful orange-red flowers. - L. pedunculate. Height: Om, 60. long Om, 05 orange-red flowers with orange blade, often with purple macules. - L. bristly. Height: Om, 60. OXALID LEAF LODDIGESIA (Papilionaceae). - From Cape Town. Height: Om, 70; corymb of pink-purple flowers, with short standard. Multip. from cuttings; temperate greenhouse; heather soil. SILAUS LEAF LOMATIA (Proteaceae). - Oceania. Height: Om, 65. Whitish or sulphur-yellow flowers bloom from June to August. Heather soil. LONICERA, Honeysuckle (Caprifoliaceae). - A distinction is made between true Honeysuckles, which are climbing and voluble, needing stakes and support points, and Shamrocks, with twiggy stems, strong enough to do without foreign help. Honeysuckles proper. Garden honeysuckle; red flowers outside, blooming in May and June. Oak-leaved and variegated varieties. - Chinese or Japanese honeysuckle; flowers first white, then pink or carmine, with a very sweet fragrance. Nin-Too or gold and silver-flowered variety; flowers first white, then yellow. - C. des bois. Native; flowers white or pinkish, then yellow; very sweet-smelling. - C. de Brown, coccine-yellow or blood-red flowers; very broad foliage. - C. pubescent; long, infundibuliform flowers, yellow inside, red outside, with a short, almost regular blade. - C. evergreen, very similar to the previous one, but with larger leaves. - C. with yellow flowers; very bright yellow flowers, pubescent at the base; sweet-smelling. - C. Éclatant; large purple or purplish flowers on the outside, yellowish-white on the inside. - C. entrelacé; purple-red flowers outside, blooming in summer and autumn. These species can withstand the rigors of winter in the Paris climate; half-sun exposure. Cool, light soil; they multiply from bedding, rooted suckers and seeds. Chamerisiers. Chamerisier de Tartarie, Dwarf cherry. Height: 3 meters; small white flowers inside, pink outside; red berries. Can be propagated from suckers and seeds in any soil and at any exposure. Red-flowered and white-flowered varieties. - C. de Ledebour (Central Asia). Height: 1 to 2 meters; reddish-yellow flowers with red bracts; black berries. Cool, loose soil; multi-purpose for bedding and cuttings. - C. des Pyrénées; pinkish-white flowers, blooming in May. Light soil; sunny exposure; many cuttings and seeds. - C. à courts pédoncules (Japan). Yellowish-white geminate flowers inside, washed with purple outside. - C. Xylosteon, 2.30 to 2.60 m tall; yellowish-white flowers; hedges. - C. d'Ibérie; pink flowers; red fruits similar to small cherries. - C. des Alpes, very similar to the above and, like it, multiplying in every way. GRAPE LOPEZIA (Œnothérées). - Mexico. Annual; reddish-pink flowers bloom from May to frost; warm exposure; light soil; multiply from seed sown in pots on a warm bed in spring; transplant in situ. GRIMPING LOPHOSPERM (Scrophularinea). - Mexico. Climbing plant, 3 meters or more in length; long flowers, about Om O4, pink with white or yellowish spots, blooming from August to October. Sow indoors in March; transplant into pots left indoors; plant out at the end of May. - L. d'Henderson, variety with white speckled flowers, etc.; multiply from cuttings; from seed; rich soil; temperate greenhouse. LOTUS JACOBÆUS, Lotier de Saint-Jacques. - Biennial; height Om, 70 to 1 m, with dark-brown flowers in threes. Sow in spring in a greenhouse; flowers in August; light soil. LUNAIRE ANNUELLE, Monnaie du pape (Crucifers). - Biennial; height: 1 meter; clusters of red, purplish, white or variegated flowers in April-May. Propagates from seed in any soil where it sows itself. LUPINUS, Lupin (Papilionaceae). - This very numerous genus includes: 1° perennials, which must be sown in pots and transplanted in place; 2° annuals, which are best sown immediately in place; heather soil and even siliceous soil with good exposure is sufficient for these plants, among which we will limit ourselves to mentioning: 1° Among the annual Lupins: - L. Dumretti superbus; purple-purple, white and yellow flowers. - L. varius with white and blue flowers. - L. venustus with dark blue-purple standard and dark purplish wings. - L. sulfureus, long spikes of sulfur-yellow flowers. - L. subramosus, bright blue standard, blue wings, white carina with blue tint at top. - L. nanus with small blue flowers. - L. changeant, tall, 1m, 60; blue and yellow flowers, very sweet-smelling. - L. luteus with yellow flowers. - L. hirsutus with blue flowers. - L. Cruikshanksii. These annual Lupins are content with any soil, except limestone. 2° Among the Lupins with perennial roots: L. triste with brown flowers. - L. rivularis. Height: 1 meter; pale yellow flowers. - L. polyphyllus with long clusters of pretty blue flowers, white-flowered variety. - L. macrophyllus with purple-brown flowers. - L. Hartwegii with light blue flowers mixed with white. - L. H. flore pleno, white flowers, then purplish-white. - L. arboreus. Mexico. Height: 1 to 2 meters, pale yellow flowers; lives 4 to 6 years. LYCASTE DE SRINNER (Orchids). - Flowers from Om, 1518 to pink with crimson spots and yellow dots. Heather earth and moss. Temperate or cold greenhouse. - L. gigantesque, flowers with a greenish-olivish tint and purple-orange labellum. CHALCEDOINE LYCHNIDE, Jerusalem Cross (Caryophyllaceae). - Perennial; height: 1 meter. Flowering tops with 5-petaled, indented, opposite, Maltese-cross-shaped corolla, very bright red, June-July. Varieties with white, saffron-white, pink or scarlet double flowers. South exposure in dry, light soil; multiply from seeds or cuttings in June, or from splinters in autumn and February. - Oiliet de Dieu. - Poppy. Biennial. Height: Om, 35; corymb of single or double flowers, scarlet, reddish-purple, white. Multiply from seed as soon as mature; transplant in March-April. - Fleur de Jupiter; purplish flowers; multip. of flakes in March; same cultivation. - Garden Speedwell. Native; perennial; height Om, 35; red and white laciniate flowers, similar to small Carnations, May-August. Multip, by eyelets. Same culture. - Lychnide dioïca, Gardeners' Jacée. Perennial; pink or white flowers, single or double, May-June, etc., etc. COMMON LYCIET (Solanaceae). - Bushy shrub; solitary or geminate pale violet flowers; brilliant red fruits. Ordinary soil. Suitable for hedges, cradles and arbors. - Lyciet with lanceolate leaves; white-purple flowers. Multiply with cuttings and offshoots. Both species thrive in the open ground. DENTICULATED LYCOPODE (Lycopodiaceae). - Very suitable for decorating artificial rocks, waterfalls and fountains; it forms a lawn; it lines greenhouse walls well. - L. ombreon, parasol-shaped stem with fine, graceful fronds. - L. arborescent. 1 meter high; fronds with a metallic sheen. - L. bluish; same uses as Lycopodium denticulate; metallic color. - L. stoloniferous; same uses. LYCORIS AUREA, Golden yellow lily (Amaryllidae). - China. Height: Om, 65; umbel of 6 or 10 pretty yellow flowers, blooming in July-August; heat causes their anthers to twitch very sensitively for several minutes. Light soil, renewed every year. Temperate greenhouse. LYPERIA VIOLACEA (Scrophularinea). - From the Cape, lilac flowers, about Om, 15 to Om, 20 long; light soil or heather. LYSIMAQUE EPHÉMÈRE (Primulaceae). - Height: 1 m; spikes of white flowers in July-August; open, slightly moist soil; northern exposure. Propagate from seed sown in fresh soil, or from splinters; frequent watering. LYTHRUM SALICARIA, Purple Loosestrife. - Indigenous and perennial; spikes of purplish flowers in July-August. Moist soil; waterside. Sucker propagation. - S. virgatum; more numerous black flowers than the preceding species, but larger, purple-pink. Same culture. M MACLEANIA or COURT LEAF MACLEANIA (Ericaceae). - Peru. Height: 1.50 m; orange-red flowers, yellow at the top. Temperate greenhouse. - M. with coccinated flowers. Height: 1 metre; reddish-orange flowers, with a yellowish tinge inside. These two plants can be grown like heathers. MACLEYA WITH CURVED LEAVES (Papaveraceae). - China. Perennial. Height 1 to 2 meters; white flowers bloom from July to September. Open ground; multip, chips and seeds. PINE MACLURE, Osage orange, Bois d'arc (Morées). - North America; greenish female flowers in globose catkins; male flowers in spiciform catkins, June and July. The Indians use the wood of this tree to make their formidable bows, fresh and substantial earth; multip, by root sections and branch cuttings. LONG STAMEN MACROMERIA (Borraginae). - Mexico. Beautiful yellow, funnel-shaped flowers open in summer. Temperate greenhouse; light soil. ELEGANT MADARIE (Compositae). - Chile. Height: 1 metre; yellow flowers with reddish rays at base, open in summer and autumn. Sow in spring or autumn. MAGNOLIA, Magnolia (Magnoliaceae). - North America and Asia. Some species tolerate the cold very well, in full soil, in the Paris climate. In general, they need light, deep, cool soil; pure heather is preferable. Multip, seed 4 and cuttings. Pink varieties are grafted onto common species. Among the evergreen Magnolias are: M. à Fig. 19 - Large-flowered Magnolia. large leaves; large flowers from Om, 18 to Om, 22 in diameter, white, very fragrant, blooming from July to November. Multiply from seed, sown in terrines as soon as mature, in light, slightly sandy, terra-cotta soil, 21. warm layer and frame in spring; transplant into pots the following autumn; then two years in orangeries before planting in the ground. Shelter during winter. Main varieties: Ferruginous magnolia. - M. grandiflora oxoniensis. - M. La Galissonnière. - M. à petites feuilles. - M. La Maillardière. - M. tomentosa. - M. stricta. - M. à feuilles rondes. - M. prœcox. - Dwarf. Om,40 high; white flowers, from Om,05 to Om,08 wide. Flourishes all year round in temperate greenhouses. - M. with brown flowers. China, Height: 1 m to 2.70 m. Reddish flowers with dark carmine line; orangery. Varieties: M. anonœfolia, with darker flowers and broader leaves. Deciduous Magnolias include: M. parasol, 7 to 10 meters high; large white flowers with 9 or more divisions, carmine-red fruit. Very versatile. - M. à grandes feuilles; height 7 to 10 meters; flowers from Om, 14 to Om, 16, white with a purple tint at the base of the three lower petals. - M. small, bright purple flowers. - M. discolore; height: 1 meter to 4 meters, milk-white flowers inside, purple outside, from April to June. - M. de Thompson; large flowers from Om, 14 to Om, 16 - M. glauque. Beaver tree; height: 5 meters; white flowers, from Om, 08 to Om, 10 in diameter; heather soil or ordinary non-moist soil. - M. auriculé; height: 7 to 13 meters; white flowers, from Om, 10 to Om,15 wide. - M. acuminata; greenish-yellow flowers, wide from Om, 08 to Om, 11. Very-rustic. - M. de Campbell (Central Asia); admirable, very large flowers, dark carmine-red on the outside, soft pink or carmine-white on the inside. - M. Yulan; height: 10 to 12 meters; large, numerous flowers with 7 or 9 divisions; shady exposure; heather soil. - M. de Soulange, similar to the previous species; purple flowers outside, white inside. All species of deciduous Magnolias do well in the open ground; but they should first be raised in heather, in part-shade, before being planted in light, slightly cool soil. MAHONIE RAMPANTE (Berberiaceae). - Height: Om, 40; clusters of yellow flowers; black berries. Cool, light soil. Multiply by seed and offspring. Clumps, groves. - M. de Fortune. Any soil. - Large leaves; large fascicles of yellow flowers. - Intermediate M. Height: 2 to 3 meters; panicles of yellow flowers. - M. glumaceous. Flowers in thin, elongated clusters. - M. Cu Japon. The largest species we know. - M. de Béal (China). Height: 2 meters; leaves Om, 50 long, from eleven to seventeen leaflets, with long spiny teeth; beautiful yellow flowers in clusters. Multip, from buds, pricked out on bed, in heather soil. - M. with fasciculated flowers. Height: 2 meters; panicles of yellow flowers, April and May. - M. à feuilles de Houx; 1 mètre à 1m, 50; yellow flowers bloom in April and May; berries can be candied. Light, cool soil. MALCOLMIA MARITIME, Giroflée or Julienne de Mahon (Crucifers). - Annual; fragrant flowers, first lilac or red, then violet or white; white-flowered variety. Sow in place in autumn or spring, for beds and borders. MALVA CRISPA, Curly mallow (Malvaceae). - Grown for its beautiful green leaves. Multip, from seed sown as soon as mature; warm exposure; all soils. - M. campanulate, with soft lilac flowers; all summer. Sow indoors in spring, then plant out in the garden. - M. musquée, pink or white flowers. - M. de Mauritanie, with white flowers streaked with purple and violet. - M. with scarlet flowers, blooming from July to October, sown in the ground in spring. MAMILLARIA, Mamillaria (Cacti). - This genus comprises fat plants covered with conical nipples (hence the name), each terminated by bristles and spines. They are propagated by seed and cuttings, with the germs or buds. - M. bicolor; proliferous stem with white balls; small purple flowers, with monstrous variety. - M. cristata, snake-shaped. - M. à épines cuisantes; bundle of white, setaceous, radiating thorns, with stronger thorns arising in the middle of these bundles. - M. versicolor; purple flowers. - M. with tendrils, pink flowers, proliferous plant, tendril-shaped lower spine. - M. crowned; bright carmine-red flowers. - M. discolored; flowers red outside, pink inside. - M. long-spined; flowers first pink, then brick-red, crowning the top of the plant. - M. with long nipples; often measuring Om, 02 in size, adorned with long, soft, radiating spines; flowers Om, 50 wide, daffodil-yellow inside, reddish outside. Multiplied by cuttings from the nipples - M. polyhedral; polyhedral nipples armed with spines; greenish-red flowers with white edges; prolific stem. - M. polythèle; height: Om, 30; conical nipples armed with four prickles, the lower one longer; purple flowers; varieties: M. setosa, tentaculata, stuberii, columnaris; cold greenhouse. - M. elongated, thin-stemmed, spiny, purple-white; purplish flowers. Cold greenhouse. - M. very thorny, white thorns and red thorns, larger than the former; violet flowers, gathered in a crown at the top of the plant. - M. de Shiè de, with whitish flowers and bright red berries. - M. bright; nipples with cottony areoles; purplish-red flowers; prolific stem. Cool greenhouse. Other temperate greenhouse varieties include: M. viridis. M. tenuis. M. uncinata. M. sulcolanata. M. sphacelata M. sphærotricha. M. rodantha. M. pusilla. M. pycnacantha. M. pachytèle. M. hystrix. M. gracilis. M. mutabilis. M. formosa, M. erecta. M, deapiens. M. crocidata. M. cornifera. M. crinita. M. Medusa head. M. semperviva. MANDIROLA LAINEUSE (Gesneriaceae). - Down-covered plant, large digitaliform flowers, lilac with purple veins on the side lobes, and carmine line on the middle lobe. - M. multiflora; purple flowers; warm greenhouse. M. are cultivated like Achimenes. AUTUMN MANDRAGER (Solanaceae). - Perennial, campanulate flower, then bluish-violet stars; poisonous fruit. Full soil; warm exposure; litter or leaf cover in winter. - M. verna, same culture. CURVED LEAF MANETTIE (Rubiaceae). - Brazil. Twiggy, voluble plant; long Om, 04, crimson-coccine flowers bloom all summer. Multiply from cuttings; cut back on old wood; heather soil; temperate greenhouse. - M. with vermilion flowers; red flowers, first vermilion, then pale and soft pink, with 4 cross-shaped divisions. Temperate greenhouse; light, substantial soil. MANGIFERA INDICA, Indian mango (Anacardiaceae). - South America; small, reddish flowers; walnut-sized fruit. Multiply with smothered cuttings; warm greenhouse. MANIHOT, Cassave, Manioc (Euphorbiaceae). - Height: 2 meters; the pulp of its roots, dried and then divided, gives tapioca. MARANTA or Zebra Galanga (Marantaceae). - Brazil; leaves approx. Om, 50 to Om, 65 long; purplish-white flowers with blue stripes. Multip, from dra geons; free, light soil; warm greenhouse. - G. argenté. - G. de Porte. - G. remarkable; leaves Om, 20 long; ferruginous yellow, with white stripes on blade. - G. lined with white; dark green leaves with 8 or 10 parallel lines, dull white above, dark purple below. - G. lined with red; 8 or 10 lines, rougeminium, on the leaves. - G. fasciate; broad, dull-white stripes. - G. banded; 12 to 15 yellowish-white bands. - G. metallic; soft violet flowers, blackish border along midrib. - G. de Warscewicz; dark-green leaves with light-green tinge; white flowers with yellowish bracts. - M. illustré; leaves Om, 20 to Om 30 long; carmine-purple beneath, dark green above, with white or pinkish macules. - M. de Veitch; leaves from Om, 30 long, to Om, 28 wide, dark and light green, with circular macules; variety with purple ground. - M. with striated leaves; light green with straw-yellow ribbons. - M. with rounded leaves; leaves Om, 15; pale green below, bright green above. - M. ornate; long leaves from Om, 12; glaucous green with curvilinear stripes, coppery red and dark green. M. requires moist, sandy soil; shady exposure; warm greenhouse; frequent basking of leaves. MARGUERITE. V. Bellis perennis. MARJOLAINE. V. Origanum majorana. HORSEMARY, V. Æsculus, MATHIOLA, V. Wallflower. MATRICAIRE COMMUNE (Compositae). - Quite similar in shape and scent to Chamomile; only the double-flowered Matricaria is grown; multip, from seed or shards in cool soil. ALWAYS FLOWERING MAURANDY (Scrophularinea). - Annual, climbing, woody plant; Mexican; height 1.50 to 2 meters; large, beautiful purple-pink flowers, March-September. Multiply with seedlings and cuttings in substantial light soil; set out in May, in a warm spot; keep the plant in an orangery or cold greenhouse in winter. - M. Barclayana; native to Mexico. Flowers twice as large as the preceding ones, of a beautiful dark blue with brown, slimy hairs on the calyx. Several varieties. MAUVE. V. Malva. MAXILLAIRE PEINTE (Orchids). - Brazil. Height: Om, 15; flower large Om, 08, orange-purple within, """ * almost white without, with yellowish-white labellum speckled with red. Basket full of sphagnum moss. Warm, humid greenhouse. YELLOW FLOWERED MÉCONOPSIS (Papaveraceae). - Native; perennial; large, long-stalked yellow flowers. Light, moist soil; borders. RED FLOWERED MEDINILLA (Melastomaceae). - India; bunches of pink flowers. Multiply from cuttings; heather soil; warm greenhouse; good light exposure. - M. magnificent; pink flowers with pink bracts. MELALEUCA (Myrtaceae). - New Holland. Spikes of white, yellowish or purplish flowers; heather soil, mixed with siliceous earth; orangery. Multip, from smothered cuttings or seeds, sown in spring, in terrines, under a frame, on a bed; these seeds only ripen after two years; transplanting in autumn. Annual planting. Mélaleuques with alternate leaves include: M. armillaire, with yellowish or pinkish-purple leaves; M. gentil; height: 1 m; lilac flowers, fringed at the edges. - M. with Styphelia leaves. - Heather-leaved. - M. with Diosma leaves; long spikes of greenish-yellow flowers. Among the opposite-leaved Melaleucas, the main ones are : M. d'Otto, with soft lilac flowers, blooming in April. - M. éclatant, with bright red flowers. - M. à feuilles en croix, with pale lilac flowers in glabrous, oval spikes. - M. à feuilles de Millepertuis; height: 3 to 5 meters; red flowers with yellow dots; red stamens, very numerous and very long. - Myrtle-leaved; cylindrical spike of yellowish flowers, blooming in June. MELASTOMA DU MALABAR (Melastomaceae). - Height: Om, 70. Beautiful pink flowers, about Om, 08 wide; blooms in greenhouse, November-December; shady exposure. EUROPEAN LARCH. V. Larix europœa. MELIA AZEDARACH. False sycamore, Holy tree, Indian lilac, Rosary tree (Meliaceae). - From India. Large panicles of flowers reminiscent of lilac flowers in color and fragrance. Multiply from seed on a bed; transplant into pots; orangery for the first three or four years; then in light soil; warm exposure. - Margousier. Orangery in winter. These two trees cannot withstand the rigorous cold of the Paris climate. MÉLIANTHE PYRAMIDAL, Pimprenelle d'Afrique (Zygophyllées). - Height: 2 to 2.60 m; small red flowers, blooming in June-July. Suitable for planting in the open ground, sheltered by a wall, with good warm exposure; can be covered in winter or planted in an orangery. - Narrow-leaved. Height: 1m, 60: spikes of reddish-yellow flowers in August. MELILOT BLEU, Peruvian Balsam (Papilionaceae). - Annual; hardy. Height. Om 70; very fragrant, pale-blue flower heads; August. South exposure in light soil; sow on site in March-April. MELISSA. V. Calamintha. PEPPERMINT (Labiatae). - With purplish, very fragrant flowers, it is used to make mint pastilles. Cool, shady soil. - M. crépue. - M. with variegated leaves. MESEMBRIANTHEMUM. V. Ficoide. MICHAUXIA CAMPANULOIDES (Campanulaceae). - Trisannual. Height 1m, 30; eight-divided, pinkish or white, reflexed, wheel-shaped flowers all summer. Multiply from seed in spring in dry, light, deep soil; moderate watering. - Smooth. Biennial. 1.50 to 3 m tall; withstands even harsh winters; yellowish-white flowers June-July. Self-propagating in dry, warm soil. MIMOSA PUDICA, Sensitive (Mimosées). - Native to the West Indies; well known for its curious sensitivity; a breath, a smell, anything frightens it, making it withdraw into itself. It grows to a height of Om, 70, and in summer produces small, reddish-purple flowers in tassels. Sow indoors or outdoors; one seed per pot. Fears the cold and should be kept in warm soil or under a frame. MIRABILIS JALAPA, Belle-de-nuit (Nyctaginea). - From Peru. Height: Om, 65; numerous clusters of axillary flowers, opening only at night; July-September. Multiplied from seed in spring; planted at the end of May. Roots can be replanted. Several varieties with white, yellow, variegated flowers, etc. MONARDE ÉCARLATE, Oswégo tea (Labiatae). - Height: Om, 70; whorls of bright red, well-scented flowers; June-August. Multiplied in autumn by roots. MORÉE DE LA CHINE, Iris tigrée (Iridées). - Height: Om 50; saffron flowers with red macules. Light, slightly moist soil. Multip, from seed sown on a bed in a terrine; or separate plants in March. Cover with litter in winter. MORELLE. V. Solanum laciniatum. LONG LEAF MORINA (Dipsaceae). - Perennial; height: Om 70 to 1 m; long-lasting, pinkish-white, whorled flowers; July-September. Open ground. Multiply by seed sown at maturity and by splinters. MORNA LUISANT (Compositae). - Height: Om, 30. annual; yellow-orange flowers as long-lasting as those of Immortelle, July-November. Sow indoors in March; plant out in May. - M. à grandes feuilles. CALF'S MUFF. V. Antirrhinum. MAY LILY. V. Convallaria maialis. MUSA PARADISIACA, Banana, Adam's Fig (Musaceae). - Stems 3 to 4 meters long; trunk covered with fleshy purplish flowers; those at the base of the trunk become fruit, those at the top remain sterile. Pots, crates and, preferably, tarpaulin or casing in a warm greenhouse; mixture of light soil, heather soil and potting compost; maintain temperature 15 to 25 degrees above zero, if B. is to bear fruit. Minimum 4-meter elevation under greenhouse glazing. Multiply by eyelets. B. de la Chine rarely exceeds 60. MUSCARI ODORANT, Musk hyacinth (Liliaceae). - Bulbous plant with yellow-purple flowers, musky scent; late April. Multiply by seed and cloves in July. Replace every three or four years, in October. MYOSOTIS DES MARAIS, Remember me (Borraginae). - Hardy perennial; height Om, 35; celestial-blue flowers with yellow dots, April-August. Moist soil. Multip, from seed, cuttings or splinters. - M. des Alpes, with softer blue flowers than the previous variety, from April to June. Sow in June-July in nurseries; transplant in September. Makes pretty borders. - M. des Açores. Sows in August-September. Transplanted into pots in winter; set out in May. COMMON MYRTA (Myrtaceae). - This shrub, native to western Asia, northern Africa and southern Europe, can be propagated from seed or, more commonly, from cuttings, marcottes and offshoots in light, nourishing soil; water frequently in summer, rarely in winter; shelter from the first frosts; orangery. The common Myrtle, with white flowers, offers varieties such as the Roman Myrtle with small and large leaves; the M. with double flowers; the M. d'Andalousie with orange leaves. Other varieties include the small-leaved M. Temperate greenhouse - Cottony M. Temperate greenhouse; cuttings on warm bed. N NARCISSE DES POETES, Porion Claudinette (Amaryllidae) - Native. Height: Om, 32; white flowers edged with purple, fragrant; May. Light, open soil; multiply from seeds or cloves separated from onions, lifting in the second or third year and replanting in October. Frequent watering in hot weather. - Tazetta à bouquets, native; large, fragrant yellow flowers in May; many varieties and sub-varieties with single or double flowers. - N. Soleil d'or, sulfur-yellow with thick orange-yellow crown. - N. Grand Monarch. Large, whitish flowers with pale yellow crown. Blooms in January-February in pots, or in carafes full of water if exposed to light and brisk air, and protected from frost. - N. daffodil. Native; single or double flowers of beautiful yellow, very fragrant, in April. Plant in September. In the open ground; covered in winter. Advance by potting or decanting. - False Narcissus, Aiault. Native; yellow flowers; very common in meadows; good for borders. - N. incomparable, native. Perennial. Height. Om, 30-40; solitary yellowish-white flower with dark yellow crown. - N. multiflora. Le Tout-Blanc, very fragrant; later than other species and very successful in decanters. The onions of double-flowered Narcissus must be lifted every year; the onions of single-flowered Narcissus, which do not fear the cold, remain in the open ground with impunity. NARDOSMIA FRAGRANS, Winter Heliotrope (Compositae). - Height Om, 35; purplish-white flowers, with a scent of Heliotrope. Multip, from roots and splinters; open soil, mid-sun. NEGUNDO ACEROIDES, Maple negundo (Acerinae). - With Ash leaves, green dioecious hanging flowers. Multiply by seed and preferably by cuttings in fresh soil. - N. variegatum with pinkish-white, then yellowish foliage mixed with green. Same culture. NELUMBIUM, Nélombo (Nélombonées). - Native to India; large leaves from Om, 35 to Om, 80 in diameter; large flowers from Om, 20 to Om, 25, deliciously fragrant. Plant rhizomes, in April, in tubs of muddy soil with a water table of about Om, 15, under well-closed, south-facing frames; set out (still in tubs) in June; flowers around mid-August. Grown in hot greenhouses in northern France. REMARKABLE NEMOPHILE (Hydrophyllaceae). - Annual, with azure-blue axillary flowers; several varieties with variegated white flowers, etc. - N. maculée with 3-centimeter-wide flowers, with a dark purple or azure-blue wedge-shaped spot dividing each petal down the middle. Nemophiles are widely used in borders. Sow in Sept.-Oct. in nurseries for replanting in April; or sow in March-June on site to obtain, for the first sowing, flowers from May to June; for the second sowing, flowers from June to August. DISTILLATORY NEPENTHES (Nepenthea). - Remarkable for its ascidians, a kind of small vase with a lid, always filled with water; these vases are formed by the dilation of the tendrils holding the leaves of this plant; small, insignificant flowers. Orchid greenhouse; grown in pots of raw heather mixed with moss. NICOTIANA TABACUM, Ordinary tobacco (Solanaceae). - Annual. Height 1m,40, purpurine flowers; in July. Sow in substantial soil in situ or for transplanting. Can be potted for use in greenhouses when the cold weather approaches. NIGELLE DE DAMAS, Cheveux de Vénus (Renonculaceae). - Annual plant with white or blue flowers and ruffles, June-September. Sow in light soil; warm exposure. SPRING NIVEA, Snowdrop (Amaryllidae). - Native; solitary white flowers with a greenish spot on each division. SUMMER NIVEA (Amaryllidae). - Trompe ending in 5 or 6 snow-white flowers with a green spot on each division. Open soil, half-shade. Multiply by cloves planted in October. ARROCH LEAF NOLANIA (Nolanaceae). - Annual; twiggy, recumbent stem; large blue and yellow flowers in summer and autumn. Used for rock gardens. NUPHAR LUTEUM, Yellow water lily (Nymphaeaceae). - Submerged or floating leaves, fragrant yellow flowers. Multiplied by dividing the rhizome or by sowing seeds, when mature, in soil always covered with water. SELAGIN LEAF NYCTERINE (Scrophularinea). - Annual; high D Fig. 20 -- Nicotiana tabacum: from Om, 15; fragrant pink flowers all summer; good for borders and beds. Sow outdoors in March-April; transplant outdoors for planting in May. NYMPHÆA ALBA, White water lily (Nymphéacées). - Indigenous, with large, beautiful pure-white flowers floating gracefully on the surface of calm waters, blooming in June-August. Multipl, by rhizomes or seeds. N. bleu d'Égypte, with its superb, fragrant blue flowers, can be grown in the aquarium of a warm or temperate greenhouse. O OCIMUM BASILICUM, Common Basil (Labiatae). - Height Om, 32; white or purplish flowers. Several varieties. Multip, from seed or cuttings. Small Basil with white flowers blooming all summer long. - B. with large white flowers. - Ceylon B., Warm greenhouse. - Sweet-smelling, pinkish-white flowers with purplish stamens. Sow in March; warm greenhouse. ODONTOGLOSSE AGRÉABLE (Orchids). - Pure white flowers, orange labellum, with reddish-vine dots. Warm greenhouse; peat and moss. EYE. V. Dianthus. OENOTHERA, ONAGRE (ŒEnothérées). - This genus contains many species, of which we shall mention only: the large-flowered Œ. Donkey grass; large, yellow, fragrant flowers bloom in June-October; sow outdoors in August or September. - L'Œ. versicolore; annual; axillary flowers, red tinged with yellow, Om,03 wide. - L'OE. pompeuse, from Om,70 to 1 meter high; large, fragrant white flowers from July to the first frosts, etc., etc. Multiplying in spring. LINSEED LEAF OMPHALODS (Borraginées). - White flowers bloom in June-August. Sow in spring or autumn. For borders and clumps. ONAGER. V. ŒEnothère. ONONIS A FEUILLES RONDES, Round-leaved Bugrane (Papilionaceae). - Hardy; clusters of yellow flowers streaked with bright pink. Multiply by seed or root cuttings in any soil, any exposure; renew the plant every two or three years. ARABIA ONOPORDE (Compositae). - Biennial plant, 2m,20 to 2mn,60; very large purple flowers in large heads. Sow in spring for flowers the following year. OPHRIS, V. Orchis, ORANGER, CITRUS AURANTIACUM (Aurantiaceae). - Orange trees are propagated by sowing, cuttings and marcottes in pots lined with orange-tree soil, a very complicated form of compost that used to be widely used, but is now replaced by free-range soil with the addition of one-third leaf compost and oily manure or heather soil. The young plant remains under a frame for three years, and in the fourth year is exposed to the air in summer. Escutcheon or Pontoise graft. V. Fruit trees, pome fruits, chap. xn, for further details that need not be repeated here. ORCHIS (Orchids). - Native orchids will do well in gardens if you give them the soil and exposure they find in meadows or woods, where they originally come from: Orchis fusca; with large spikes of brownish and white flowers. - O. militaire; with helmet-shaped flowers in various shades of purple and white. - O. taché; leaves and stem spotted with red, flowers punctuated with white and purple. - O. simia or O. singe; so named because it more or less imitates a hanging monkey. - O. de Robert; spike of greenish flowers with light purple labellum, etc. (1). ORIGANUM MAJORANA, Marjoram (Labiatae). - Native to the Orient. Grown in borders. - O. Dictamus from Crete; purplish flowers in June-July. Multiply from seed and smothered cuttings; in light soil. ELM, Ulmus (Ulmaceae). - Native, first-growth tree. Must be grafted to Om, 16 de terre. Exposure similar to that which works well in the primitive state. (1) See also Cypripedium, etc. ORNITHOGALE PYRAMIDAL, Milk ear, Virgin's ear (Liliaceae). - Indigenous. Height: Om, 50; starry white flowers in spikes. Light, nourishing soil; take care to lift the onion every two or three years to separate the cloves, which should be replanted in October. - Eleven o'clock lady. Height from Om, 15 to Om, 18; beautiful white, starry, fragrant flowers, in May-June; they open around eleven o'clock and close again around three o'clock in the afternoon, for two weeks, when the sun shines. Ordinary open ground. ORNUS EUROPÆA, Flowering Ash (Oleineae). - 6 to 10 meters tall; flowers with colored petals; produces a kind of manna. Like the Manna Ash; native to the East and Italy. ORPIN. V. Sedum orpin, OSMONDE ROYALE (Ferns). - Indigenous; with large bipinnate leaves 1 to 2 meters high, and terminated by a compact cluster of yellowish globules. Place in the shade, at the foot of rock gardens bathed in water, where it produces a very nice effect. OXALIDE (Oxalidae). - This genus includes numerous species with very pretty white, yellow, pink, purple or red flowers, and tuberous food roots. They can be propagated by bulbils, by cuttings or by separating the stems; all need daylight or air, all like pure or mixed heather soil, and can be placed in a hot greenhouse, temperate greenhouse or cold frame; annual species are planted in clumps or borders, in the open air, in spring. The pink-flowered Oxalis, 15-20 cm high, produces small pink flowers in loose clusters all summer long. Sow outdoors in April-May. Baskets, borders, flowerbeds. - O. De Deppe, with ten or twelve dark-red flowers, makes beautiful borders in vegetable gardens, etc., etc. OXIPETALE BLEU (Asclepiadae). - Voluble plant with clusters of azure-blue star-shaped flowers in summer. Sow indoors in autumn and transplant in spring, either in the garden or in pots; soft, smoky soil, moderate watering. P PÆONIA, Peony (Ranunculaceae). - Has several stems, from Om, 35 to 2 meters high, bearing large, multi-colored flowers in April, May and June. Multiply by dividing roots, taking cuttings, grafting or sowing; free soil or orange-tree soil with the addition of a quarter of heather soil. - P. Moutan produces beautiful double or semi-double flowers with golden-yellow stamens in April. Many varieties. - Adonis peony. PANDANE ODORANT (Pandanaceae). - Gladiate leaves, 1 to 1.30 m long; very fragrant male flowers in panicles; ball-shaped female flowers. Warm greenhouse; pineapple soil. Multip, by seeds brought from the plant's country. PANICAUT AMETHYSTE (Umbelliferae). - Indigenous. Height: Om 65; numerous blue-amethyst flowers. Multip, from seed sown in a terrine as soon as mature, or in the garden in March. PAPAVER SOMNIFERUM, Garden poppy (Papaveraceae). - Annual; height from Om, 70 to 1m, 30: double varieties of all colors, except blue. Multip, from seed sown in place in any soil. If you sow in autumn, you'll have flowers in June-July; if you sow in February and March, they'll come in August. - Poppy, with its vivid ponceau flowers in June and July, offers numerous varieties with single or double flowers, white or pink, or scarlet-red; sow on the ground in April-May or at the end of September. - The yellow-flowered P. Camrique should be sown in light, moist soil in a shady spot and cannot be transplanted. - 22 Papaver involucré; bright red flowers with a beautiful effect; transplant the young plant in place. - P. de Tournefort. - P. à bractées. - P. safrané. PAQUERETTE. V. Bellis perennis. PASSE-FLEUR. V. Althœa rosea. PASSIFLORE GRENADILLE, Passion Flower (Passiflora). - A numerous genus of climbing plants, armed with tendrils, remarkable for the beauty and singularity of their flowers, which appear to be the instruments of the Passion, hence their name : Passiflora. - Passiflora edulis, 6 to 8 meters high; native to Mexico; its fruits are edible; it bears blue flowers; it is grown in a warm greenhouse and in the open ground, covered in winter, PAULOWNIA IMPERIAL (Scrophularinea). - Native to Japan, a tall, handsome tree about 12 meters high, with broad leaves and violet-blue flowers dotted with brown and yellow lines, with a violet fragrance. Multiplies by cutting root sections. Full soil. PAVOT. V. Papaver. PELARGONIUM (Geraniaceae). - This genus, which comprises nearly 600 species, almost all of which are native to the Cape, is wrongly confused with the Geranium genus, from which it differs in having flowers with unequal petals, whereas the Geranium has regular flowers. New varieties are obtained by sowing in spring in trays or terrines lined with light soil; as soon as the young plants are strong enough, they are transplanted into small pots, and later into large pots. If you're not looking for varieties, take cuttings from selected individuals from July to September. Water moderately; keep them clean; keep the greenhouse temperature 5 to 12°C above zero until April, when your Pelargoniums will flower; then give them some air: never keep them more than 1.40 m away from the glass. Bring Pelargoniums into the greenhouse at the beginning of October. These include: P. d'Endlicher with pink flowers. - P. zonale with flowers changing from brilliant scarlet to pink and pure white. - P. à feuilles tachantes. - P. triste. - P. à fleurs en tête or Geranium rosat. Large-flowered Pelargoniums. P. Alphonse Duval. P. Anacreon. P. ardens. P. belle Milanaise. P. Clara. P. de Candolle. P. Egérie. P. Galathéa. P. Gloire de Paris. P. Linnée. P. P. Vesuvius. Florence. P. Neptune. P. Thisbé. P. Vulcan. P. Theophrastus. P. Royal-Albert. P. Reine blanche, etc. Fancy pelargoniums. P. Adonis. P. Arabella. P. Bella. P. delicata. P. Edith. P. king of Roses. P. Rachel. P. Sarah. P. Venus, etc. Pelargoniums with scarlet flowers for open ground. P. Comtesse de Chambord. P. Beauty. P. Alice. P. Archbishop of Paris. P. bel demonio. P. Diogènc. P. Gloire des Roses. P. prince of Wales. P. Sobiesky. Pelargoniums with variegated leaves. P. Alma. P. bijou. P. brillant. P. purple cord. P. élégans. P. Fairy queen. P. Mary Ellen, P. M. Lenox. P. perfection. P. Reine d'or. P. Talma. PENSTEMON CAMPANULE (Scrophularinées). - With campanulate flowers, red on the outside, whitish on the inside: multiplies by seed, cuttings and splinters; outdoors in summer; in orangeries in winter. Several varieties: with carmine-red flowers, light blue, etc., etc. SNOWBED. V. Spring snowflower. PERILLA NANKINENSIS, Nanking perilla (Labiatae). - Om, 60 to Om, 80 tall; purple-black foliage with metallic sheen; rather insignificant violet-pink flowers from Sept. to Nov. Edges. Sow outdoors in March or April; grows like Basil. PERSICAIRE. V. Polygonum: PERVENCHE, V. Vinça. PÉTUNIA ODORANT (Solanaceae). - Height: Om, 70 to 1 meter; large, fragrant white flowers, summer-autumn. Multiply by seed, splinters and cuttings in loose, light soil. Sow indoors in March-April, or outdoors in April-May in a nursery. - P. with violet flowers, purple-purple flowers, fragrant towards evening. Beautiful varieties obtained by sowing. Trellises, railings, balconies, cradles. PHLOX (Polemoniaceae). - Phlox vary in color from violet to purple, pink to lilac and purpurin, depending on the species; they can reach heights of up to 1 meter; multiply from cuttings or by dividing clumps in mid-shade heathland; water generously in hot weather. The main species include: Drummond's P.; annual. - Oval-leaved P. - Spring P. - P. acuminata. - Setaceous P. - P. pyramidal, etc., etc. - P. with subulate leaves. Enthusiasts especially appreciate the Phlox: Alphonse Karr; purplish salmon. - Docteur Parnot; bright red. - Madame Antin; purplish red with purple center. - M. Delamarre; the most beautiful of all. - Comte de Lambertye; purplish-red, purple center. - Pius IX; salmon color. - Professor Kock; salmon-purple. - Souvenir de Rouen; salmon-purple. - Souvenir des Ternes; white background. - Madame Levrat; pink with purple center, etc. PHOENIX, Dattier (Palms). - This tree almost always withers in our greenhouses, where it needs a temperature of -22°. PIED D'ALOUETTE. V. Delphinium. PINUS ABIES, V. Abies sapin. The limits of this book do not allow us to go into greater detail on Conifers than is given in the article ABIES. PISTACHIER TEREBINTHUS, Pistachier térébinthe, P. sauvage (Anacardiaceae). - Twiggy shrub, leaves composed of seven to nine oval, oblong, obtuse leaflets, green and shiny, a little whitish underneath, small, paniculate flowers (June-July), replaced by pea-sized drupes. In warm climates, this shrub releases a resin known as turpentine through the cracks in its bark. At first liquid, then yellowish, then bluish, it thickens on contact with air. P. can be planted in the ground when five or six years old. - Cover in winter. Multiply from seed sown on a bed and under a frame in spring; transplant into pots. Orangery. Fig. 21 - Pistachio tree. PITTOSPORUM ONDULÉ (Pittospora). - Canary Islands. Height: 2 meters; white, jasmine-scented flowers bloom in spring. - P. with thick leaves, white flowers bloom in May. Multip, from marcots and cuttings. - Rolled P. Fruits resemble small lemons and contain coral-colored seeds. - P. de la Chine. Height: 3 meters; white, orange-blossom-scented flowers bloom all summer. Multiplication by seed, cuttings and marcots; orangery or outdoors. The various Pittospores can be grafted onto P. ondulé; they require light, free-form soil; pots or crates. PLAGIUS A GRANDES FLEURS (Composites). - Algeria. 22. Perennial. Height: 2 meters. Disk of yellowish florets, without rays. Propagates from seed or splinters. Orangery and outdoors. Water infrequently in winter. PIVOINE. V. Pœonia. PLANERA CRÉNELÉ, Siberian elm, Zelkoua (Ulmaceae). - Can be grafted onto common elm. - P. à feuilles d'Orme. PLATANE D'ORIENT (Platanaceae). - Height: 20 meters and more. Blooms in May. Any soil, but preferably light, deep and sheltered. Multipl. by seed, bedding and cuttings. - Maple-leaved P. - Corner-leaved P. - P. d'Occident or Virginia. Cool soil; seeds sown as soon as mature, and covered with soft, moist moss. JAPAN PLATYCARYA (Juglandées). - Its habit is reminiscent of Sumac; its male flowers are united in catkins like Willow flowers; its fruits resemble those of the Aune. BIG FLOWER PLATYCODON (Campanulaceae). - Large blue flower, Om,07, opens in July. Mixed heather soil; mid-sun; sow in spring; transplant in autumn. Varieties with double flowers, white, blue, etc. - Autumn planting. Very rustic. PLATYLORIUM ELEGANT (Papilionaceae). - Australia; large orange-yellow flowers with carmine spot at base of standard. - P. with lanceolate leaves. Height: 1 meter; yellow standard, attractive red carina. Orangery; heather soil. Seeds sown on bed and under frame; temperate greenhouse. PLECTRANTHUS WITH NETTLE LEAVES. - Height ? Om, 70; light blue flowers with purplish tint. Light, non-moist, free soil; multiple seeds. Sow in spring on warm bed and under frame. - P. nudiflore; temperate greenhouse. E PLEROMA DE BENTHAM (Melastomaceae). - Brazil; large Om 05 flowers, purple-purple with white nails. Multip, from cuttings; light soil; warm greenhouse. PLUMBAGO ZEYLANICA, Ceylon lacewort (Plumbaginea). - Height: Om, 50; white flowers in August-September. Very warm exposure; free soil; frequent watering in summer, infrequent in winter. Warm greenhouse. Multiply by seed, sow in bed. - Climbing P. - P. rose. Root propagation. - Cape P. Height: 3 meters. Tender blue flowers. Temperate greenhouse. - P. de lady Larpent (China). (Cobalt-blue flowers, then violet. Light, dry soil. Multip. of splinters; temperate greenhouse in winter; outdoors in May. PLUMIERA RUBRA, Red Frangipani (Apocynia). - Fragrant, light-red flowers; tanned and warm greenhouse. Multip. of cuttings. - P. with yellow flowers. Same culture. PODALYRIA ARGENTÉE (Papilionaceae). - Height: 1m, 60. milky-white flower with rust-colored calyx; multip. of seeds and cuttings; bright strap; orangery. - P. silky, with pink flowers. - P. with two lovely purplish-blue flowers. Temperate greenhouse; clean, light soil. PODOCARPUS EFFILÉ (Conifers). - From Cape Town. Mixed heather soil; orangery. - P, nuciferous. Same culture. PODOLEPIS WITH GOLDEN YELLOW FLOWERS (Compositae). - Height: Om, 30-33; flowers bloom in July-October. - P. with meaty flowers. Height: Om, 70; flowers vary from soft pink to pure white. For both these plants, sow in April on bed, requip on bed; plant out in May. TRILOBED LEAF PODOLOBIUM (Papilionaceae). - Australia. Height: 1m, 60. Yellow flowers bloom in June-July; heather soil; temperate greenhouse. Multiply with cuttings. PODOPHYLLUM WITH PELTED LEAVES (Berberiaceae). - North America. Hardy, perennial. White flowers with 9 divisions, 3 of which are smaller. Multiply by offshoots. - P. palmate. - P. of Emodus. POGOSTEMON, Patchouly (Labiatae). - Indo-China. Pale violet flowers; its leaves provide a well-known perfumed oil. Light soil; temperate greenhouse; multiply from cuttings. POINCIANA or Magnificent Poincillade (Caesalpinaceae). - India. Height: 3 meters and more; reddish-white flowers; yellow-flowered variety; warm greenhouse. - P. de Gillies. Height: 2 meters. Yellow flowers; very long stamens, purplish-purple, forming an aigrette. Light free soil. Multiply by cuttings and seed. Temperate greenhouse. POINSETTIA ÉCLATANT (Euphorbiaceae). - Mexico. Height: 2 meters. Greenish flowers with greenish-red or bright ponceau collars; variety with yellow bracts. Cut back branches after bracts have fallen off. - P. heterophylla. Height: 1 meter. Flowers with scarlet bracts. Warm greenhouse. Multip, from smothered cuttings. Temperate greenhouse. SWEET PEA. V. Chickweed. PLEMOINE. Greek valerian (Polemoniaceae). - Height: Om, 30 to Om, 40; clusters of blue flowers in June-July. Sow in May in nurseries, plant out the following spring. Renew the plant every year. POLYGONUM ORIENTALE, Persicaria del Levant. Renouée, du Levant (Polygonées) - Annual. Height: 2 to 3 meters; flowers: white, amaranth-red, carmine-red. Sow in March, transplant to fresh, substantial soil. - P. with pointed leaves. Height: 1m 40. Perennial. White flowers. Sow in March. - Siebold's P. GOLDEN POLYPODIUM (Ferns). - South America. Soft soil. Warm greenhouse. - Thick-leaved. Height: 1 meter. Same culture. PONTEDERIA WITH CURVED LEAVES (Pontédériacées). - Virginia; blue flowers, blooming in May. Edges of ponds deprived of water, etc.; peaty soil. Multiply by separating stumps. - P. azurea; warm greenhouse. - P. crassipes, remarkable for the swelling of its petioles, which serve as swim bladders. MARSH MARIGOLD. V. Caltha. POPULUS, Poplar (Salicinaceae). - Height: 25 to 30 meters. Multip, cuttings and seedlings. - P. alba. - P. blanc. - Dutch white. - Ypréau. Native to France. Height: 32 to 40 meters, heart-shaped leaves, dark green above, downy and white below. - P. grisard or grisaille: often red leaf petioles - P. Tremble; oval, hairless leaves. - P. argenté; height: 22 meters. - P. cotonneux; green leaves above, very cauterized and white below. - P. de Virginie; height: 32 meters; cordate, red-stalked leaves. - Carolina P.; fears frosts. - Hudson Bay P. - P. d'Italie likes cool soil. - P. noir; cool soil. - P. à grandes dents; height: 16 to 17 meters, oval, acute, deeply toothed leaves. - P. du Canada; height: 22 to 26 meters; leaves with yellowish petioles, with a reddish gland at the base. - Lake Ontario P.; height: 8 meters; leaves cordate, glaucous, with pubescent petioles. - P. Caumier. - P. Liard, Tacamahac (Canada); dull green leaves above, glaucous below; balsamic-scented wood, resinous buds; yields Tacamahac gum. Fresh soil 2 PORION. V. Narcissus. PORPHYROCOMA LANCEOLATA, Porphyrocome with lanceolate leaves (Acanthaceae). - Bluish purple flowers with purplish bracts. PORTULA GRANDIFLORA, Large-flowered Purslane (Portulaceae.) - Flowers large Om, 06, purplish-purple, with white star at center. Multip, from seed, sown in April; light, slightly sandy soil; sunny exposure; moderate watering. - P. de Gillies; purple-purple flowers. Multiply by buds or sow in April; light soil. - P. flore pleno. Multip. by seedlings and cuttings. - P. Thellussoni, coccine-red flowers, with double-flowered sub-variety, offering shades of red, orange and yellow. POTENTILLE FRUTESCENTE (Rosaceae). - Height: meter. Corymbus of yellow flowers all summer; hardy; multip. of suckers. - Blood-colored, dark red flowers bloom in June. Varieties : P. Hopwoodiana, with less red flowers. - P. Mac-Nabiana, brilliant red flowers. P. Smoutii, golden-yellow flowers with crimson lines. - P. du Népaul. Perennial; height: Om, 65; amaranth-red flowers, blooming in summer and autumn. Ordinary soil; half-shade exposure. (Multipl. by seed and splinters. - P. black-purple (Nepaul). Perennial. Height: Om, 65. Beautiful purple-black flowers, blooming all summer. Same culture as the previous one. PRIESTLEYA LANCÉOLÉ (Papilionaceae). - Height: 1 m, yellow flowers; blooms in June-July; multiply from seed sown in light soil or heather. Temperate greenhouse. LARGE-FLOWERED PRIMEMER (Primulaceae). - Indigenous and perennial; with uniflorous trunks, sulfur-yellow flowers turning green with drying; numerous varieties. - Bear's ear; flowers yellow, purple or variegated purple, red and white. Light, cool soil; north or east-facing exposure. Multiply by separating plants in autumn or by sowing, from December to March, in good heather soil. - P. officinale, Cuckoo flower; yellow, cup-shaped flowers. - P. élevée; with higher stems than the preceding one. - P. de Palinure; yellow flowers. - P. à feuilles de Cortuse; umbel of purple flowers, blooming in April-May. Multip, from seed and splinters. Light soil, part shade. For borders. - P. Sinensis, or P. de la Chine. - P. candélabre. 8 to 12 flowers, pink blade, yellow disk, swollen calyx, heather soil mixed with well-consumed compost; temperate greenhouse. Varieties: double-pink; white, double-white, white with brown heart, variegated, copper. - P. S. fimbriata, with fringed corollas; several varieties with fringed flowers, white; pink fringed; variegated fringed; red fringed, brown-hearted; copper fringed; white fringed, brown-hearted, etc. - P. S. erecta superba, with pinkish-copper flowers, with carmine or purplish highlights. Multiplied by cuttings, seeds and splinters. Other varieties include: P. formosa. - P. integrifolia. - P. longiflora. - P. marginata. - P. viscosa. - P. villosa. - P. capitata. PRINOS VERTICILLÉ, Green Apalanche (Ilicineae). - North America; height: 2 meters; white flowers in July, red fruits. Multip, from seed and marcots; cool, heathery soil; shady exposure. - P. glaber. - P. lucidus. - P. lanceolatus. VELVETY-FLOWERED PROTANTHERA (Labiatae). - Height: 2 meters; white flowers with purplish spots, blooming in July. Light soil, mixed with a little heather. Multip, marcottes and cuttings on bed and under frame. Orangery. BIG LEAF PROTEA (Proteaceae). - From the Cape; flowers variegated purple, white, yellow, black at the top, with colored bracts. - P. Lagopède; spikes of flowers, red inside, white outside, blooming in June. - P. with platy flowers; russet flowers, white inside, hairy outside. - P. with pine leaves; pale yellow flowers with long, thread-like petals. - P, repens, cordata, pulchella, triternata, canaliculata, etc. Heather cultivation; well-lit greenhouse; sandy, light, well-drained soil; moderate watering. BIG-FLOWERED PLUM (Labiatae). - Native, perennial; spikes of blue, purple, pink or white flowers. Open exposure; light soil. Multiply by seed in March or by splinters. JAPANESE PLUM (Rosaceae). - Height: 1 meter; varieties with coccinated flowers, double white flowers. - P. Myrobolan. - P. glanduleux; pink flowers. - Blackthorn with double white flowers. PSIDIUM PYRIFERUM, Gouyavier-Pear (Myrtaceae). - Height; 3 to 4 meters, white flowers. - G. de Cattley. Temperate greenhouse. PSORALEA ODORANTE (Papilionaceae). - Cape Town. Height: 2m,50; white or flax-gray flowers. Blooms in May. Sun exposure; frequent watering in summer, moderate watering in winter; open soil; orangery. Multiply from seedlings sown in warm soil and under frame. PSYCHOTRIA WITH WHITE HEAD (Rubiaceae). - South America. Bunch of white flowers. Multiply with cuttings; warm greenhouse. PTARMICA COMMUNE. V. Sneezing herb. PHELEA WITH THREE LEAVES, Samaria elm (Panthoxylaceae). - From Carolina. Corymbus of greenish flowers; aromatic seeds. Multip, from seeds sown as soon as mature and from marcottes; light free soil; semi-shade. PTERIDE ARGENTÉE (Ferns). - Leaflets divided lengthwise by a whitish zone. Pot filled with heather; orchid greenhouse. - P. tricolore (India). Leaflets divided by a pink stripe first, then white. Warm greenhouse. PTEROCARYA WITH FRENCH LEAVES (Juglandées). - Height: 7 meters. Pendent spike of greenish flowers; multip, marcottes; full soil; cold. BIG-FLOWERED PTEROSTIGMA (Scrophularinea). - Purplish-blue flowers, light soil; temperate greenhouse; multip, seeds and chips. VIRGINIA PULMONARY (Borraginaceae). - Height: Om, 30. Bouquets of pretty blue flowers in April-May; varieties with white or red flowers. Multip, by root division in cool soil, mid-sun. PUNICA, Y. Grenadier. PYRÈTHRE DES INDES, Indian Chrysanthemum (Compositae). - Height: 1 meter. Yellow, white or purple flowers. Many remontant varieties, etc. Some bloom in July, others in late autumn. - Matricaria commune. - Pink P. - Large-flowered P. - Balsam rooster. - P. odorless. - Pompon, etc. Propagate with splinters or cuttings in autumn, sow in spring; substantial soil. Q QUAMOCLIT ÉCARLATE (Convolvulaceae). - Height: 2m, 50; scarlet campanulaceous flowers from July to September. Sow indoors in April and plant out towards the end of May. QUERCUS CHÈNE (Cupuliferae). - There are two main species of Oak, which we'll simply call here: the Pedunculate Oak with flowers and fruit; - the Sessile Oak with flowers and fruit. Oaks of the old continent: C. commun. - Sessile oak. - Hairy oak. - C. cypress. - Black oak. - C. Velani. - C. A. Zang. - C. des teinturiers. - C. Kermès. - C. green or C. yeuse. - Cork. Oaks of the new continent and eastern Asia: C. with large fruits. - C. with olive acorns. - American white. - Lyre-leaved. - Starry. - Lemon quert. - C. red. - C. black. - Chestnut. - C. icolor- C. prin.- C. aquatic. - Mountain C. C. latte. - Green, etc. To give oaks the exposure where they naturally thrive, and to defend them against the insects that relentlessly attack23 them: the Cynips. V. Harmful insects. V. Eye. FOX TAIL. V. Amaranth. R RAMEAU D'OR. V. Cheiranthus cheiri. QUEEN DAISY. V. Callistephus. GARDEN WORTH (Ranunculaceae). - Perennial; root (claw) with finger-like divisions, joined to a trunk which bears 1 to 3 eyes at the top. Height: Om 16 to Om, 50; beautiful white flowers with 5 yellow or red petals and numerous pistils and stamens. There are many varieties with single, semi-double and double flowers in very bright and diverse shades. In general, Ranunculus needs light, fresh soil, even a little sandy, but substantial and not too stony; add a little leaf compost. Exposure to the east. Multiply from seeds which, on average, take about 40 days to sprout; the young plant needs to be protected from frost by a good bedding. The first year's plant should be lifted and placed in new soil. A strong stem; a full corolla devoid of any hint of stamens or pistils; a regular circumference of the whole plant, about Om.50 in diameter - these are the characteristics of the most remarkable varieties. Weeding; watering until deflowering - Monkshood. Silver bud. Native; pretty, very double flowers of pure white, blooming in May-June. Multiplying in the third year after leaf fall. - R. acre. Buttercup. Indigenous. Charming, domed, bright-yellow flowers in June; change location every two years. - R. creeping, Cocksfoot; double yellow flowers in the cultivated variety. Multiply by nets and runners in light free-rooting soil in part shade. Renoncules planted in autumn flower earlier, are larger and more durable than those planted in winter. Seeds can be stored for several years in paper bags in a dry place. RÉSÉDA ODORANT (Résédacées). - Perennial; greenish, very fragrant flowers. Any soil, not too damp. Sow outdoors from April to June. If you want beautiful specimens, cut the rising stem as soon as it begins to bear fruit; in a temperate greenhouse, you'll get a shrub that lives two or three years and flowers all winter long; it sometimes reaches 2.50 m. - R. with large flowers. Height: Om, 40; sow outdoors in April or in August, but need a frame to protect them from the winter cold, and put them in place in April. In England, fragrant Reseda can be seen 8 to 10 years old. OBTUSE LEAF RETINOSPORE (Conifers). - Japan. Height: 25 to 30 meters. Multipl. by cuttings. Cold greenhouse. - R. with golden foliage. - R. variegated foliage; same cultivation. RHAMNUS ALATERNUS, Buckthorn. - Height: 3 to 4 meters; greenish flowers bloom in April and June. Varieties: narrow-leaved. - R. Hispanicus. - R. auro variegatus. - R. albo variegatus. Northern exposure; shade; strong, cool soil: multiply by seed and marcotte. RHAPIS EN ÉVENTAIL (Palms). - Multip. of rooted offsets. Temperate greenhouse. VIRGINIA RHEXIA (Melastomaceae). - Perennial. Height: Om, 50; red-carmine flowers. Heather or marsh soil; shady exposure. Sow outdoors; prick out in pots and leave in greenhouse over winter. Separate plants every two years. RHIPSOLIS A TIGE DE SALICORNE (Cactus). - Reddish-yellow flowers; white fruits quite similar to those of the Gooseberry. - R. with large flowers; white flowers Om, 20 wide - R. with five ribs, white flowers. - R. with rhomboidal stem. - R. with long stems. - R. compressed. - R. crispée, etc. Multip, cuttings; warm or temperate greenhouse for all these species. MANGLES RHODANTHE (Compositae). - Silvery-white flowers with dark pink ray and yellow disk; open all summer. Sow in April in warm soil; repot in May. RHODOCHITON VOLUBILE (Scrophularinea). - Mexico. Purple-black flowers, temperate greenhouse, winter. RHODODENDRON IN TREE (Ericaceae). - Native to Nepal. Pyramid-shaped tree with long leaves from Om, 14 to Om, 16, with scarlet flowers, blooming in April-May. Multiplied from seed and by grafting onto R. Pontique. - R. ferruginous des Alpes with brilliant pink flowers, found at 2,000 meters in its native mountains. - R. Pontique. 2.50 to 3 or more meters high; large, purplish-purple flowers in May; remarkable white-flowered varieties, with white and yellow variegated leaves obtained from seed and perpetuated only by grafting. - R. with pink flowers, etc., etc. - R. de Catawba with white, pink, lilac or purple flowers with macules of various shades. In general, R. requires slightly sandy, moist soil; north or east-facing exposure. Propagate by grafting and marcotting; from seed in dull beds in spring, or in heather soil terrines always surrounded by water; transplant the seedling in the second year, and again two years later. Can be grown in pots. COMMON RICE, Palma christi (Euphorbiaceae). - Annual. Height: 1.50 to 2 meters; leaves with 7 digitations; clusters of male flowers at base, leaves at top, July-August. Light soil; southern exposure. Multiply from seed in spring, in situ; woody species can be stored in an orangery. ROBINIA PSEUDO-ACACIA, Robinier-Acacia blanc (Papilionaceae). - Native to Virginia, North America. Height: 16 to 24 meters; clusters of hanging white flowers, late May and June. Multiply from offshoots or shallowly sown seeds in March-April; light, cool soil. Its roots are tracing; protect nearby trees from their approach. OFFICINAL ROSEMARY (Labiatae). - Indigenous. Height: 1.50 m and over; pale blue flowers in February-May. Warm, sheltered exposure; light soil. Propagates by cuttings, marcots and splinters. White variegated varieties. Water and mow. COMMON RONCE, Rubus fruticosus. - Indigenous. Non-spiny varieties with white fruit, variegated leaves and double white flowers are cultivated. Terre franche; mid-sun; pruned in spring. TREMENDOUS ROSE. V. Althœa rosea. ROSE TREE (Rosaceae). - Poets have celebrated the Rose; the centuries have only confirmed its title of Queen of Flowers, which it deserves for its incomparable grace and marvelous beauty, its sweet fragrance and elegant habit. Rosebushes need good, clean, dry, sandy, slightly deep soil, fertilized with cow manure; plenty of air; it's best to move the plants every two years if the above conditions are not met. Choice of rosehips: Prefer vigorous two- to three-year-old rosehips, from which you will remove a large part of the stump, keeping only a good heel and the rootlets if there are any; smooth the surface of the wound with the serpette; make sure there is nothing left of the bruising caused by the action of the saw. Rosehip, long. R. canina quickly produces large heads. Plant in autumn, if the soil is not too damp; or in spring, in a nursery. Mode of reproduction: 1° by sowing; 2° by rooted ~& S offshoots; 3° by layering; 4° by cuttings; 5° by grafting. 1° Sowing is the only way to obtain beautiful double-flowered varieties. Take your seeds from the most double-flowered varieties, the most graceful forFig. 22. - Roses. 3 varieties, the most graceful in form and habit, and the richest in shade; sow immediately in pots or flowerbeds close to a wall and shelter in winter; if you choose spring, first soak your seeds in water for twenty-four hours. When the plants are about Om, 25 in height, in the second year, you transplant them into light, substantial soil Om, 15 deep, keeping a distance of about Om, 30 in all directions between each plant; it's hardly until the fourth year that they show their flowers. Seeds of Bengal, Tea, Hazelnut and Ile-Bourbon roses sown in spring sometimes produce flowers in the first year. Hybrid Roses (produced by mixing the seminal dust of different species purposely brought together in cultivation) take an average time to flower between the late and early species from which they come. 2° By offshoots: after separating the shoots produced by the roots from their mother, use them only to multiply free-standing individuals. 3° By "marcottes": you enclose one or more stems in a hollow furrow, where you hold them with a small branch forming a fork; the marcotte must have one or two eyes above ground; in spring, small beads with nourishing roots form around the buried eyes; only then wean the marcotte and plant it separately. This procedure is used for low-stemmed, bushy Roses; for headed Roses, use a pot filled with good soil, supported by a stand, with an opening about 2 or 3 centimetres wide at the side, through which you can insert the branch. In both cases, water and cover with straw. For certain lazy species, you can activate layering by making an incision, ligature or twist above the point where the roots are to emerge, three ways of blocking the passage of the descending sap and retaining it for the benefit of the layering. 4° By cuttings (see Cutting, Part I). Cuttings are rightly preferred for all softwood varieties: hazelnut, tea, Bengal, Bourbon and Portland roses, which are free-standing. When replanting, it's best to bury the graft a few centimeters below the surface, so that a bead forms at its base from which roots can grow; the grafted branch will then be free. 5° Grafting. Roses are grafted either in escutcheon or in cleft (V. Grafting. Part I). The escutcheon graft, preferable to the other, is used in May when the wood of the subject is strong, rich in sap and allows only its bark to come off. Growing-eye grafting is used when the eyes develop rapidly, producing flowering buds that can be used in autumn for dormant-eye grafting. Dormant-eye grafting is carried out from July to mid-September, then quickly resumes, but does not grow until the following spring; it therefore sleeps for six months; hence its name. Forced grafting takes place in January-February; ordinary split grafting in March-April; cover wounds with grafting wax. Do not empty the bud's eye, which is the shoot's germ; leave some call eyes above the bud, to attract the sap; however, if these eyes become too greedy, pinch them promptly and repeatedly without destroying them until the grafting is complete. Pruning Roses. - For delicate species, prune after flowering; for others, in the first few days of March, removing all diseased or old branches; prune back any weak branches to three or four eyes; some varieties want to be pruned much longer; experience alone is a guide here. Rejuvenating Roses. - If free-standing Roses rejuvenate naturally thanks to their annual shoots and the removal of branches that no longer produce flowers, it is worth explaining, in a few lines, the means indicated by the 19th century Maison rustique for prolonging the vigor and life of grafted Roses. "In England, the most skilful horticulturists have found a way of prolonging the life of Rosebushes grafted on Rosehips, by removing them every three years in mid-February, before vegetation resumes..... Damaged roots are removed with the greatest care, all healthy roots are shortened, and almost all hair is removed, since at this time of the Rose's existence, it is either non-existent or almost dead. The head is then subjected to severe pruning, which provokes very active growth; the soil around the trunks is renewed or fertilized with a well-consumed manure, and the Rose is immediately put back into place. The operation must be carried out quickly enough to ensure that the roots are not exposed to the air for longer than is strictly necessary. Forced cultivation of Roses. - (All potted Roses can be forced into a temperate or hot greenhouse, but usually only remontant Roses are forced to flower early and artificially, in the open ground under trays heated by manure heaters or a thermosiphon. Care must be taken to give the plants a good day, plenty of air and watering. Smoke and direct sunlight are harmful (see also Insectes nuisibles, Part I). Among the 3,000 varieties of Roses, we will indicate the most interesting of each tribe. 1st Tribe. - Banks Roses. There are two varieties, white and yellow; the latter is preferable and much used in fences, against walls where it produces a graceful effect, in spring with its flowers, all summer with its green foliage. It does not remont. Sheltered exposure. 2nd Tribe. - Cinnamon Roses. So named for the color of their bark. Generally thornless, they are preferred for beds in landscape gardens. They require little pruning. The main cultivated species include: Alpine Rose, with its many varieties. - R. cannelle, strictly speaking, and R. soufré, with yellow flowers, very double and difficult to open. None of these species are remontant. 3rd Tribe. - Pimprenelle roses. Their type is R. pimpinellifolia, which grows on high mountains and offers many varieties. R. pimprenelle want to be placed north, grown free-standing and in clumps, and if you 23. -- If you ask for a lot of flowers, don't prune them too much. The most beautiful burnet roses are : Persian Yellow, l'Ancienne jaune, and Perpétuelle Stanwell. 4° Tribu. - Hundred-leaf Roses. Their type is the R. Cent-feuilles, originally from northern Persia, but widespread everywhere for many centuries. The R. Cent-feuilles (Cabasse Rose) is rightly called the most beautiful rose in the world; it does not rebloom; hybrid varieties are obtained by crossing, which are as beautiful as the Cent-feuilles Rose, their mother, and which, being more generous than it, give flowers several times a year. 1st Sub-tribe. - Remontant hybrids. Pius IX. Mother of Saint Louis. Councillor Jourdeuil. Angelina Granger. Madame Récamier. Prince Albert. Clémence Seringe. Baroness Préyost. The Queen. Qucen Victeria. Auguste Mie. Count de Montalivet. Giant of battles. Madame Lafay. Comte de Paris. Jcanne d'Arc. Conite de Bourmont. Colonel de Rougemont. Marengo standard. Madame Duchère. Doctor Arnal. Duchess of Montpensier. Madame Trudeaux. Pompon de sainte Radegonde. Madame Aimé. Aubernon. Duchess of Sutherland. Blanche de Portemer, Louise Péronny. Jacques Lafitte. Laure Ramand. Madame Phélip. Inermis. Baroness Hallez-Claparède. Béranger. Caroline de Sansal. Ludovic Léthaud. La dy Stuart. Prince Léon Kotchoubay. Alexandriue Bachmeteff. Baron Heckeren de Wasscnaër. Paul Dupuy. Alfred Colomb. Léonie Verger. Ernestine de Barante. 2nd Sub-tribe. - Perpetual Portlands. Rose du Roi. Madame Teillier. Bernar, Sydonie. Count of Derby. Delphine Gay. Amandine. Flowers often solitary; very fragrant. APEU AS -.- -. Single white. Centifolia cristata. Tears, ordinary foamy. 4th sub-tribe. - One hundred leaves, remontant sparkling. General Drouot. Perpetual pompon. Hermann Kégel. 5th Tribe. - Roses from Provins. Type: Rosa Gallica. The most beautiful varieties are : Camaïeux, Perle des Panachées, Madame Hardy, Rubanée. 6th Tribe. - Bengal Roses. Bengal Roses are more or less red, more rarely white, with very little fragrance. 1st sub-tribe: Cramoisie supérieure, Archiduc Charles, Madame Bréon, Madame Bureau, le Pactole, Gloire des Rosamones. 2nd sub-tribe: Bengales de l'île Bourbon: Paul et Virginie, Reine des iles Bourbon, Souvenir de la Malmaison, Madame Neyrard, Duchesse de Thuringe, Hermosa, Acidulée, Paul Joseph, Charles Souchet, Mistress Bosanquet, Louise Odier, etc. 7th Tribe. - Tea Roses. Roses of this tribe have many similarities with those of the preceding one, but are generally less vigorous; the flowers of varied color are pale, more commonly whitish or yellowish, more rarely red, with a slight tea scent: Devoniensis. Eugénie Desgaches. Triumph of Luxembourg. Auguste Vacher. Thé Sombreuil. Thé Bougère. Julie Mlausais. Gloire de Dijon. Thé Hyménée. Homère. Tea Clara Sylvain. Souvenir d'un ami. Vicomtesse Decazes. Louise de Savoie. Safrano. 8° Tribu. - Rosiers Noisette. Roses of this tribe are generally vigorous: Aimée Vibert. Céline Forestier. Caroline Marniesse. Chromatella. Ophyrie. Julie de Luynes. Lais. Solfatare. 3 " M 4" 407 7 .72 Vicomtesse d'Avesnes. Labiche. Lamarque. SAI Beauté des prairies. De la Grifferaie. Laure Davoust. Belle de Baltimore. 9th Tribe. - Multiflora Roses. These Roses are all climbers and much sought-after to decorate cradles and walls; they throw their elegant flowering garlands around beds; among the most beautiful varieties, let us quote: Beauté des prairies. La Grifferaie. Laure Davoust. Belle de Baltimore. RUDBECKIA ELEGANTE (Compositae). - North American perennial. Height: Om,70; saffron-yellow radiate flowers with purple-black disk, in August. Multiply by cuttings and seed in light soil; orangery in winter; flowerbeds. RUSCUS ACULEATUS, Fragon piquant, Petit Houx (Asparagines). - Native, high from Om, 68; small white flowers in May-June; coral-red fruits, autumn-winter; multiply from seed and by plant division, in light soil. M SABOT DE VÉNUS. V. Cypripedium. SACCHARUM OFFICINARUM, Sugar cane (Grasses). -

Native to India. Warm greenhouse; humidity and warmth; rich soil; multip, by cutting the stem into sections and splintering the stem. SAFRAN. V. Crocus, SAGITTARIUM, Arrowhead (Alismaceae). - Native, aquatic. White or purple-tinted flowers in terminal spikes in June-July. Ponds. SPANISH STRAWBERRY, Hedisarum coronarium (Papilionaceae). - Biennial; 1.50 m high; red flowers in July. *= "va "" IV F---) 3 Sow in spring; cover in winter. COMMON LOOSESTRIFE. V. Lythrum. SALIX ALBA, Common Willow (Salicinia). - Height: 13 to 15 meters. Place in damp soil; branches placed in holes quickly take root. The Weeping Willow, 10 to 15 meters high, is very well suited to ponds, etc.; only the female is cultivated. S. can be propagated by marcottes and cuttings. SALPIGLOSSIS WITH SINUED LEAVES (Scrophularinea). - Height: Om, 70 to 1 metre; long, funnel-shaped flowers, streaked and shaded with yellow, purple and violet, July-August. Sow outdoors April-May in warm, airy conditions, SALVIA. V. Sage. SAMBUCUS, Common Elder (Caprifoliaceae). - Native; 4 to 5 meters high; umbels of white flowers in June. Very easy and quick to propagate from cuttings. SANTOLINA COMMUNE, small Cypress (Compositae). - Native to southern France; height: Om, 50; strong-smelling, beautiful yellow flower heads, July-August. Warm exposure; light soil; cover during hard frosts. Multip, splinters and cuttings. Edges; slopes in landscape gardens. SAPIN. V. Abies sapin. SAPONAIRE OFFICINALE (Caryophylae). - Hardy perennial; height Om, 60-70; fragrant, violet-pink flowers in July. Only double-flowered varieties are grown. Multiply by dividing the clump; any soil, any exposure. PURPLE SARRACENIA (Sarracenia). - From Canada; large, five-petaled flowers, purple-red on the outside, green on the inside. Peaty soil mixed with leaf compost or rotted moss. Multiply from seed; frame in orangeries in winter. PENNATIFIC SARRET (Compositae). - Perennial; height: Om, 60; rose-purple flower heads in July. 2 E Fig. 23 - Dyer's capwort. Fig. 24 - African sagePleine terre. Multiplied by foot divisions. - Dyer's cap. SARRIETTE, Satureia (Labiatae). - Indigenous. Clump-forming stem; whorls of white flowers. Multipl. by seed or from broken plants. SAUGE OFFICINALE, Big Sage (Labiatae). - Blue or white flowers in July. Light soil; warm exposure. Multiply from cuttings or splinters for varieties: - S. with tricolored leaves, variegated with red and yellow or curly. - S. Hormin. Annual. Om high, 60-70; terminal spike of tender pink flowers with colored bracts. Variety with red bracts, purple bracts. South exposure. Sow in place and transplant to light soil. Among the many other remarkable S. species, let's mention the bright S. from Brazil, with its long spikes of very bright pony-red flowers. Warm greenhouse, orangery. Multip. from cuttings; - S. cardinale from Mexico, with hairy, dazzling purple-red corolla, Om, 06 wide. Same cultivation; - S. dorée du Cap. with yellow flowers; - S. à fleurs violettes, etc.; - S. d'Afrique, etc.; - S. d'Orangerie. WHITE WILLOW. V, Salix alba. THICK LEAF SAXIFRAGE (Saxifragées). - From Siberia. Perennial; clumps of large, oval leaves; stem of Om, 20-80; terminal clusters of beautiful pink flowers in spring. Multiply by suckers. Mid-sun exposure; light, cool soil. - S. cotyledon or pyramidal, 0m, 60 high; pretty little white flowers in May-June. Multiply by seed or lateral buds. In the garden; in partial sun; in pots, in orangeries. - S. ombreuse or Mignonette; Om high, 20-32; panicles of small white flowers dotted with red in April-May; borders. Multiplied by dividing the clump. SCABIEUSE, Widow's flower (Dipsaceae). - Biennial; height Om, 65; purple, pink, variegated, more or less dark, more or less velvety flower heads, with ant or musk fragrance. Loose soil; southern exposure. Sow indoors in spring or autumn, and transplant outdoors or in nurseries in spring. - S. du Caucase; very wide, simple perennial stems; tender blue flower heads in June-October. Multip, from seed or splinters; outdoors. SCHIZANTHE AILÉ (Scrophularinées). - From Chile. Annual; Om high, 40-60; terminal panicle of flowers, lilac-light with yellow palate and purple and violet spots. Sow outdoors in September or spring. ITALIAN SCILLS, Hyacinth Lilies (Liliaceae). - Height: Om, 16. Conical clusters of pretty, fragrant blue flowers in April-May. Light soil. S. from Peru, blue-flowered with white-flowered, flax-gray-flowered varieties. Same culture. - S. pleasant. Height: Om 25, blue flowers in April. Seeds or cloves. - S. campanulate. Height: Om, 35. bluish-purple spotted clusters in June. BIG-FLOWERED SCUTELLAIRE (Labiatae). - From Siberia. Perennial. Height: Om, 15-25; large blue flowers in spikes. Shards, seeds and cuttings. Light soil. SEDUM ORPIN, Carpenter's herb (Crassulaceae). - Indigenous. Hardy. Height: Om, 35-70. Purplish-red flowers, in the cultivated variety; July-August. Multip, by splinters; sandy soil, mid-sun. - S. rhodiola. Hardy Alpine perennial; fragrant pink flowers. Dry, sandy soil; mid-sun exposure. - S. de Siébold; flax-gray flowers; same cultivation. - S. with Poplar foliage. Height: Om, 35; small, fragrant, pink-washed flowers; cultivation of succulents, in pots. All Sedums grow well on dry slopes and rock gardens. AFRICAN SENECON (Compositae). - From the Cape; large heads with light crimson, lilac or white rays, pink, golden-yellow discs, June-August. Varieties: dark crimson, single and double lilac, double crimson, double pinkish white, double pure white, etc. You can propagate these varieties by taking cuttings and storing them over winter in a greenhouse; they can also be propagated from seed like the single varieties. Sow in March-April, in potting soil with good exposure, in a nursery; prick out in beds and set out to flower in October. CALIFORNIA SHORTIE (Compositae). - Annual; height Om,15; bright yellow flowers in June-July. Sow outdoors in April; beds and borders. PINK-FLOWERED SILENNA (Caryophyllaceae). - Barbary. Annual. Height; 25 centimeters; deep-pink or white cing-petal flowers, June-July. Sow in spring in light, warm soil. For borders. - S. armeria, bright pink, pinkish or white flowers in June-August. Multiply from seed sown on site in April. - S. bouquet. Native to the Caucasus; biennial; very beautiful, dark-pink, fasciculated flowers. Ordinary soil mixed with platras; warm exposure; moderate watering. Sow in June-July in nurseries; transplant in spring or autumn. - S. flycatcher. Plant. so called because it stops these insects by means of a viscous coating on the top of its stems. Seedling. - S. with bright pink hanging flowers. Seed multiplication. Baskets, beds, etc. LACINATED LEAF SILPHIUM (Compositae). - Height: 2.50 to 3 meters. Very graceful leaves; yellow, clustered flower heads, Om, 11 wide, borne on a strong stem. Multiplied by splinters in deep, light soil. - S. with ternate leaves; yellow flower heads similar to those of our Grand Soleil or Helianthus. Light, deep soil; warm exposure. SILYBUM MARIANUM, Milk thistle (Compositae). - Indigenous. Biennial. Height 1m,30-60; large, open leaves with white mottling; large purple flower heads. Multiply from seed on site in April; cool, deep soil; due south. SOLANUM LACINIATUM, Morelle laciniée (Solanées). - Biennial. Height: Om, 35.70; large, light-blue flowers in April-June. Multip, from seed sown on bed. - Egg plant. - White eggplant. Open ground. - Eggplant with scarlet fruit; sow in March-April; transplant into light soil; water frequently. - S. blue flower. Temperate greenhouse during winter; multiply from cuttings. - Margined M., with clusters of white flowers. Same culture. - M. with large fruits. Same culture. - M. à feuilles de Vélar. Annual; large white flowers quite similar to those of potatoes. Sow in April; plant in May. - M. faux Piment; white flowers; yellow or red fruits similar in shape to cherries. Frequent watering in summer; orangery in winter. Multiply from seed sown on warm soil. - M. du Texas with greenish-white flowers. - Gigantic. Warm exposure. Sow in March-April on bed, prick out on bed; set out at the end of May. - M. Gillo. - Judean vine. - M. ferruginous. - M. hairy. - Robust. - M. with large anthers, etc. SOLDANELLE DES ALPES (Primulacées). - Perennial; campanulate purple-purple flowers in April. Multiply by seed or root in October. Cover in winter. SUN. V. Helianthus. SOLIDAGO, Goldenrod (Compositae). - Height: 1 m to 1,m60; many yellow flower heads. Replant clumps every three or four years; any soil. - Large-flowered S. - S. Canada. - S. nutans. - S. glabra. - S. semperflorens. - S. multiflora, etc. BIRD SORB (Rosaceae). - Indigenous. Height: 8 meters; corymbs of white flowers in spring; open, cool soil; in mid-sun. - S. domestic. - S. hybrid. - S. American. - S. Elder-leaved. SOUCI. V. Calendula. SOUCI D'EAU. V. Caltha palustris. MARYLAND SPIGELI (Spigeliaceae). - Perennial; height: Om30-35; flowers red outside, yellow inside, in June. Multiply by splinters or cuttings, in slightly damp heather soil. SPIRÉE (Rosaceae). - A very numerous genus of plants, very rich in ornamental species, with white, pinkish, etc. flowers, among which we will mention only: the native Meadowsweet, or S. ulmaire, about 1 meter high, with single or double white flowers, arranged in panicles; variegated-leaf varieties; - the native Filipendula, with white flowers, of which a double variety is grown; - the lobed-leaf S., with pink flowers; - the Plum-leaf S., woody and bushy, with pure white flowers. - S. Reine des prés, from Canada. Height: 1 meter. Pink flowers. - S. with digitate leaves. Height: 1 meter. Umbel of pink flowers blooming in June-July. - S. goat's beard. Europe, Height: 1 m, 30. White flowers with long stamens. Partly sunny; cool soil. - S. elm-leaved. 1m, 60. White flowers in clusters. - S. with Obier leaves. Height: 2 to 3 meters Corymbs of white flowers in May-June. - S. des Alpes. White flowers in June. - S. flexuous; height: 1 meter. White flowers. - St. John's wort. - S. with Shamedrys leaves. Spirea with pink or red flowers include: S. en corymbes; flowers bloom in July-August. - S. de Fortune; pink flowers bloom for most of the year. - S. cotonneuse. Shady, damp heather soil. - Douglas fir. Height: 1.50 m. Multiply by cuttings and splinters. - S. de Billard; flowers in June-September. Same culture, etc. In general, Spireas require cool, light soil and part-shade exposure. SPRÉKÉLIE FORMOSISSIMA, Croix de Saint-Jacques, Cross-flowered Amaryllis (Amaryllidae). - Height: Om, 32. Dark purple-red flowers. Orangery or temperate greenhouse; no winter watering. A. saltimbanque, flowers a graceful blend of crimson-red and bright green. Amaryllids in general. INCARNATE SPRENGELIA (Epacridae). - Australia. Height: 1, r30. Pale red star-shaped flowers bloom all summer; heather cultivars. STACHYS ÉCARLATE (Labiatae). - Bright red flowers from June to September. Open ground in summer; orangery in winter. Seedlings, cuttings or splinters. - S. woolly. Height: Om, 30-40; small purplish flowers. Multiply by dividing plants. Edges, rock gardens. STACHYTARPHETA CHANGEANT (Verbenaceae). - South America. Spikes of first red, then pink flowers in July. Sow in spring on warm seedbed and under frame; transplant into pots. Warm greenhouse. TIGER FLOWER STANHOPIA (Orchids). - Large, yellowish-white flowers with brown spots. Orchid culture; in baskets or on old deadwood trunks. - S. aurantiaca. - S. eburnea. - S. à grandes fleurs. - S. Devoniensis. - S. two-horned. - S. guttulata. - S. Wardii. - S. insignis. STAPELIA VELUE (Asclepiadae). - Barbary, Height: om, 50; large flowers of Om, 14, wine-red color, stinking odor. Fertile soil; frequent watering in summer; none in winter; temperate greenhouse. Multip, cuttings on bed and under frame. - Large-flowered S.; purple-black flowers, blooming in August; same cultivation. - Toadflower, brown flowers with darker brown spots. Same culture. STAPHYLEA A FEUILLLES AILÉES, Nez-coupé, false Pistachier or Patenôtrier (Staphyléacées). - Indigenous. Height: 5 meters; white hanging flowers, seeds or offshoots. - S. with ternate leaves. Any exposure; any soil. STATICE LIMONIUM (Plumbaginaceae) - Native. Height: Om, 70. Small blue flowers bloom in summer. Cool, open soil; warm exposure. - L. mucronate. Soft violet flowers. - S. frutescent. White flowers, blue-violet calyx. Rich, substantial soil. Multiply with cuttings; cold greenhouse in winter. - S. lyre-leaved; white flowers with blue calyx. Sow in bed in spring; orangery. - S. with imbricated segments. Same culture. - S. with large leaves, cuttings and roots. - S. de Dickson. Pink flowers. Orangery. - S. de Fortune, golden yellow flowers. Orangery in winter; light, sandy soil. Multiplies by bursts in spring. STATICE ARMÉRIE. V. Armeria. "MS.=.28 SYRINGA COMMUN or Common Lilac (Oleineae). Naturalized in Europe; sweet-smelling, thyrse-like flowers ~ S 417 38 Fig. 25 - Syringa or Persian Lilac. bloom in May. It offers varieties with white and yellow variegated leaves, pure white flowers and bluish purple. - L. de Trianon with dark purple thyrse that fades to bright purple. Multip, from grafts, cuttings or splinters. - L. de Marly, with larger, purple-purple flowers. - L. Varin, originally from Persia or China; well-filled, elongated thyrses, more strongly colored than ordinary lilac flowers. SYRINGA DES JAREINS (Philadelphées). - Indigenous, hardy. Height: 2 to 3 meters. White flowers with a pleasant but strong fragrance in June. Varieties with variegated leaves and semi-double flowers. Light soil; partial shade. Multiply by seed, grafting, cuttings or splinters. I TOBACCO. V, Nicotiana. ELEVATED TAGET, Indian Rose (Compositae). - Annual; beautiful yellow flowers in July-October. Varieties with more or less dark yellow double flower heads. Sow outdoors in May. - Spreading or marigold; smaller, orange-yellow flowers in July-October. Double-flowered varieties; same cultivation. TAMARIX DE NARBONNE (Tamariscinées). - Pretty shrub that never completely sheds its slender, graceful foliage; white flowers tinged with purple in May. Cool soil; waterside. Multiply by cuttings. TANAISIE COMMUNE (Composites). - Native; 1 to 1.30 m tall; attractive yellow flowers in August. South exposure; free soil. Sucker propagation. TAXUS. V. Common yew. TÉCOMA, Jasmin de Virginie, etc. (Bignoniaceae.) - Climbing shrub with claws; red-cinabre flowers in August-September. Cool, open soil. Propagate from seed in terrines, on bedding, from chips, marcottes, cuttings, root sections. Varieties with red and purple flowers. *2-4 - * * WESTERN THUIA (Conifers). - Up to 8 meters tall; flexible, hanging or right-angled branches. Seed multiplication. - Tree of life. - Gigantic. - Pyramidal. - Thread-like. THUNBERGIA AILÉ (Acanthaceae). - From Bengal: yellow flowers, black-purple disk. Sow indoors in spring; transplant to light soil. Varieties with white flowers, fresh butter yellow, etc. COMMON THYME (Labiatae). - Perennial, very fragrant white or purplish flowers. Several varieties: broad- or narrow-leaved; variegated, etc. Borders. Domestic uses. Foot splinters; sandy soil; southern exposure. ALPES THYME (Thymelea). - Hardy plant, forming a creeping bush; small, fragrant, bright-pink flowers. Light soil; southern exposure, but with some shade. Can be propagated from seed or by grafting. Varieties with white flowers; variegated leaves. TIGRIDA AGRANDES FLEURS, Queue de paon (Iridées). - Height: Om, 65; beautiful ephemeral flowers in shades of purple, yellow and bright red. Light soil; winter cover. Multiply by seed and cloves. COMMON LINDEN (Tiliaceae). - Large leaves with small yellowish flowers in clusters, accompanied by a foliaceous bract. Can be propagated from seed or by grafting in cool, sandy soil. - American lime. - Silver lime, etc., etc. TITHONIA WITH TAGET FLOWERS (Composites). - From Mexico. Height 1.50 to 2 meters. Annual; bright yellow-orange flowers in July-September. Warm exposure; sow in bed in April. TOURNEFORTIA, Faon-Héliotrope (Borraginées). - Perennial; blue flowers; outdoors in summer; orangery in winter. This plant resows itself, rises and flowers the same year 419 TOURNESOL (Euphorbiaceae). - Annual; more of an industrial plant than an ornamental. BLUE TRACHELIUM (Campanulaceae). - From Algiers. Height: Om, 35; small, violet-blue flowers in July-August. Light soil; southern exposure and outdoors in summer; orangery in winter. Multiply by seed and cuttings. SESSILE TREE (Liliaceae). - From Carolina, it takes its name from the ternary number existing in all its parts; flower with three petals, three stamens, three styles, calyx with three sepals, capsules with three chambers. Perennial. Height: Om, 16-22; reddish-brown flowers in April. Full soil; warm exposure; protect in winter with a little straw. Multiply by seed or root. TROENE. V. Ligustrum. EUROPEAN TROLLIUS (Ranunculaceae). - Height: Om, 50. Large, bright yellow flowers. Light, moist soil with some shade. Multiply by seed or splinters. TROPŒEOLUM MAJUS, Great Nasturtium (Tropéolées). - Annual; climber with beautiful orange-yellow flowers. Sow in ordinary soil after frost. - C. de Constantinople, with larger flowers; double-flowered individuals from seed. - Dwarf C. with yellow flowers. - C. éclatante. - C. tricolore - C. with white flowers. - C. with short red washed spur. - C. de Jaratte. - C. de Moritz, etc., etc. GARDEN TUBER (Liliaceae). - From Mexico. Height: 1 m to 1.25 m; beautiful spike of white flowers tinged with pink, with an intoxicating fragrance in July-August. Plant under cloche or frame in spring. Multiply with cloves and better with onions, in fresh, light soil. TULIPS (Liliaceae). - Tulips are propagated by cloves and seedlings, taking care to: 1° choose a good south-east or south-west exposure; clean, loose, substantial or slightly sandy soil, but not damp; 2° plant from November 10 to 25, digging as many MAS .3 bt. of pits as you wish to make beds; 3° lift every two years, as soon as the leaves have faded, to replant immediately in well-prepared soil; 4° weed well; 5° shelter from winter cold and rain. Caiuses always produce plants identical to those from which they originate; the seeds of a Tulip do not reproduce its variety. A beautiful Tulip should have a straight, well-proportioned stem; the flower should be 1/5 longer than it is wide, with a white base, harmoniously rounded divisions at the top, and at least three bright, strong colors. Tulip varieties number in the hundreds. Let's just mention: Gessner's or florists' tulip, bare stem, obtuse divisions with colored or uncolored bottoms, giving rise to two divisions: bizarre tulips and white-bottomed tulips or Flemish tulips; - Tole's tulip, reddish-yellow at the tips; -- Sun's eye tulip, red with a long black spot bordered with yellow on each division, etc., etc. SWEET COLTSFOOT. V. Nardosmie fragrans, O ULMUS, Field elm (Ulmaceae). - Native. First-growth tree. Offers several breeds: Purple elm; - Lime elm; - Broadleaf elm, etc., etc. Multip, from seeds sown as soon as they are mature, from marcottes, from grafts; transplant the following spring (see what we have said about nursery work in general, Part I). UVULARIA SINENSIS, Chinese Uvularia (Melanthaceae). - Red-brown flowers. Multip, from roots, in autumn; in the open ground with cold cover. 24 VACCINIUM MYRTILLE (Ericaceae). - Native. Height: Om, 40; bell-shaped, pinkish-white flowers in May; leaves and berries quite similar to those of Myrtle, hence the name bilberry. Heather soil. Shady, arid places. GARDEN VALERIAN (Valerianae). - Indigenous. Perennial. Height 1m, 30; panicles of fragrant white flowers all summer. Multiplying in spring and autumn. - V. rouge. - V. centranthus. - V. macrosiphon. Annual; hardy; full corymbs of beautiful red flowers. Sow outdoors from March to May. White-flowered variety. - V, corne d'abondance; twiggy and prolific; numerous red flowers, etc., etc. VALLISNERIE EN SPIRALE (Hydrocharidae). - Southern France. Monoecious flowers on a corkscrew stalk that unfurls at fruiting time. Greenhouse basin. AROMATIC VANILLA (Orchids). - From Brazil. Climbing, sow-like plant with greenish-white flowers that must be artificially fertilized to tie. - Place against a tree or wall. Warm greenhouse, substantial soil kept moist during vegetation. PETROWSKI VEGETABLE (Cruciferae). - Annual. Slightly fragrant, saffron-yellow flowers all summer. Multiply from seed sown in autumn or early spring; outdoors. SUGAR-FLOWERED VENIDIUM (Compositae). - Annual plant with large orange-red flowers with brown discs; July to November. Sow in bed in April; plant out in May. WHITE HELLABORUS (Melanthaceae). - In digene. Height: 1 meter. Whitish flowers in June-August. - V. black, brownish flowers in June-August. Bulb and seed propagation in cool, shady soil. VERBENA AUBLETIA, Bunch Verbena (Verbenaceae). - Height: Om, 35; violet-purple flowers. Multip, from seed sown in spring or autumn in any soil, at any exposure. - V. d'Erine, red-purple flowers; June-October. - V. gentille de Buenos-Ayres, light blue flowers; spring, summer, autumn. - V. petit Chêne or Chamædrys; perennial, bright red flowers; all year round. Multiply by bedding and cuttings every August. Bring them into a temperate greenhouse and put them in the ground at the end of May. veined, purple-purple flowers; all summer. Orangery in winter. - V. Faux-Teucrium, white or pink flowers, all summer; many varieties. - V. with incised leaves and purple-pink flowers, etc. V. cuttings should be stored under frame or in a temperate greenhouse; light soil. GOLDEN VERGE. V. Solidago. SEED VERONICA (Scrophularinae). - Indigenous. Height: Om, 50; tender blue flowers; in August. - V. maritime. Height: Om, 65; beautiful blue or white or carinated flowers in spikes; these two Veroniques multiply by bursting from the stems. - V. Germandrée with red-veined blue flowers. - V. Chamædrys or Little Oak with purplish-blue flowers; these two plants multiply by seed or splinters in any slightly cool soil. Edges. Willow-leaved V.; terminal spikes of light-blue flowers. - V. de Lindley; white-lilac flowers. Summer cultivation in the open ground; frequent watering; multip. of seeds or cuttings. These three species are highly resistant to our harsh winters. VERBENA. V. Verbena. VETIVER. V. Androgogon. VIBURNUM. V. Lantana. VICTORIA ROYALE (Nympheaceae). - The most beautiful and largest of the Water Lilies; flowers first white, then pink, then red; it needs a large basin where the water, often renewed, is kept at -21°. VINE VINE, Cissus quinquefolia (Ampelidaceae). - Climbing shrub; North American; beautiful green leaves at first, then red in autumn, with insignificant greenish flowers. Cool soil; semi-sunny. March. Cradles. VINCA MAJOR, Great Periwinkle (Apocynia). - Native hardy plant; perennial, climbing, with numerous stems from Om 70 to 1m, 30; white or soft blue flowers in May-September. Varieties with variegated leaves. Ordinary soil; shade. - Petite Pervenche, flowers and leaves smaller than the preceding one, double or single, purple, red, white, blue, purplish. Light soil; part shade. Multiply by seed or offspring. - Madagascar periwinkle; axillary flowers of a beautiful pink, darker in the center, all summer long. White-flowered varieties. Perennial and sub-woody. Good, substantial soil. Multiply from seed on bed and under frame. VIOLETTE ODORANTE (Violariées). - Perennial; fragrant violet flowers in March-April. Four-season varieties with single or double, pink or variegated flowers. - V. de Parme with pale purplish-blue flowers. - V. with large, yellow flowers. Heather soil, very moderate watering. - V. tricolore, Annual pansy. Indigenous. Its three lower petals are a pretty yellow mixed with white, the two upper petals a velvety dark violet; it produces beautiful sub-varieties. Multiply by sowing, splinters and cuttings, etc. VIORNE. V. Lantana. VISCARIA, Sky Rose (Caryophylae). - Annual; pink flowers in July. Sow outdoors March-April. Store in a greenhouse over winter. Varieties with white or bright pink flowers. 2 W 425 WAHLENBERGIA WITH PERPENCH FLOWERS (Campanulaceae). - From Australia. Very bright blue flowers above, pale blue below. Sow in spring in cool, sifted soil. Although perennial, it is treated as an annual in France. For borders. WITLAVIA WITH BIG FLOWERS (Hydrophyllaceae). - From California. Annual. Dark purple campanulate flowers, paler at the bottom of the corolla. Sow outdoors in April or in pots for transplanting. Blooms early and lasts until frost. X XIMENESIA ENCELIA (Compositae). - From Mexico. 1 meter high. Annual. Dark yellow flowers on lighter disc in June-November. Light soil; south exposure. Sow indoors or outdoors. X YEUSE (Cupuliferous). - Several varieties: Quercus suber. - Q. kermès. Yeuse requires dry, sandy soil. YUCCA FILAMENTEUX (Liliaceae). - From Virginia, leaves with white, hanging filaments; stem from 1 m to 1m.50; greenish-white flowers about 200 in number. Varieties with white flowers; variegated leaves. - Y. superb. Height: Om, 70 to 1 meter, 150 or 200 white flowers hanging like small Tulips. Yuccas need to be protected from humidity and 24. snow. Full soil; any exposure, multiply by seed and by rooted eyelets. 2 CALIFORNIA ZAUSCHNERIA (OEnotnérées). - Perennial or sub-woody; stem Om, 30; scarlet flowers. Multipl. by seed and more usually by cuttings in spring. Sow in May and flower in September. ZEPHIRINE ROSE (Amaryllidae). - From Havana. Height: Om, 15-30. Pretty flower with three pure-white inner divisions and three pink-washed outer ones. Multiply by cloves; outdoors; cover in winter. RED ZINNIA (Compositae). - From Louisiana. Height: Om,50; yellow disk flowers with bright red ray. - Elegant Z. from Mexico. Height: Om,70 to 1 meter; beautiful pink-purple ray-disc flowers. Scarlet-flowered variety; white, purplish flowers, July-November, etc., etc. Grown in the garden. ZYGOPETALE HÉRISSÉ (Orchids). - Brazil. Beautiful green flowers mottled brown with red veins. Warm greenhouse, peaty soil and moss. V. Orchis, ZYGOPHYLLUM, Fabagella commune. V. Fabagella. Vocabulary of key gardening and botanical terms (1). A ACCLIMATER. To accustom a plant to the temperature and influences of a new climate. ACEROUS (leaves). Said of leaves that are long and pointed like a needle: pine leaves. ACICULAR. Narrow, linear, roughly cylindrical leaves: Acacia. ACOTYLÉDONES. Refers to plants without lobes or cotyledons: Algae, Mushrooms, Lichens, Mosses, Ferns, etc. ACUMINATED. Finished in a long, thin point. ADHERENT. Said of any part of a plant that is more or less intimately connected with the surrounding parts. ADNÉ, Refers to any organ attached laterally along its entire length to another part: anther of the Ranunculus. ADOS. An elevation of the ground in the shape of the back of a chest, wider at the bottom than at the top; ados are used to protect (1) We will only give here the notions that are absolutely necessary for the understanding of the book. a crop from the bad weather of the off-season, to provide early crops with good exposure to the south. ADVENTIFS, accidental. Said of buds and roots born on points other than those where they are usually seen. AFFRANCHIR. A grafted tree is said to be freeing itself when, from the grafted spot, it sprouts roots that sink into the earth. AGREE. Flowers united on a common receptacle, with distinct anthers: Leaded, Valerian, etc., etc. AIGRETTE. A collection of hairs of various shapes that crown certain seeds and fruits. It is only a particular form of the calyx blade, according to Richard: Valerian, Dandelion, etc. AIGRIN, from sour. Name given to wild apple and pear trees. AIGUILLONS. Hard, sharp projections, entirely composed of cellular tissue, which appear in greater or lesser numbers on plants and adhere only to the surface of the plant, as distinct from spines, which are integral with the parts in which they appear. WING. Part of the papilionaceous corolla: Legumes. WING. Winged stem, that on which the leaf blade usually extends: Comfrey, etc.; winged fruits those whose pericarp enlarges into a membrane: Elm, Maple. AISSELLE. Inward angle below the attachment of a leaf to a branch or a branch to a stem. The leaf axils usually contain the buds and very often the flowers, which are then said to be axillary. ALBUMEN. Name given to the part of the kernel that accompanies the embryo: coffee, cereals, poppies, etc., etc. ALPINES (Plants), Name given not only to plants native to the Alps, but also to those growing on other high mountains. ALTERNATE. Said of the superposition with mutual succession of the same organs of a plant on a common axis. In this sense, leaves are alternate as opposed to opposite or whorled. Petals are Alternate to sepals in the greatest number of cases; stamens are Alternate to petals when they are in the same number as the latter. Oak, Cherry, etc. have alternate leaves. AMANDE. Fruit seeds, their essential part. AMENTACEOUS. V. Kitten. AMPLEXICAULE. Said of any part whose base surrounds the stem; leaf or petiole. ANDROCEE. Stamens or male organs. ANNUAL (Plant). That which, in the course of a year, germinates, flowers, bears its seed and dies. ANTHERE. Upper end of the stamen, containing the pollen. AOUTÉE (Young branch). The wood of which has hardened before winter. APETALE. Flower without petals, hence without corolla: Daphne. APHYLLE. Devoid of leaves: Dodder. TREE. Plant whose woody trunk exceeds 6 meters in height. SHRUB. Woody plant rising from 1 to 6 meters. SHRUB. Woody plant rising only from Om, 35 to 1 meter: Rosemary, etc. ARÈ́TE. Beard or extension of balls or feathers in Grasses. ARTICULATED. Having or simulating several knots. AUBIER. The outermost layers of wood in dicotyledonous trees and the subfibers encrusted with resinous material; a new sapwood is formed every year. B 429 BACCIFEROUS. Bearing berries. BACCIFORME. Before the shape of a berry. BAIE. Fleshy, indehiscent fruit whose seeds are scattered in a succulent pulp when ripe. BALIVEAU. Young, unpruned tree, growing straight up with all its branches. BALLS or Glumes, floral envelope of grasses. BASE. Lower part by which the petal is held to the receptacle, the leaf to the stem, etc. BASIFIX. Attached at the base. BASILAIRE (Style). Starting from the base of the ovary. BASSINER. To water lightly in the form of fine rain. BIFIDE. Split deeply in two. BIFURQUÉE (Branch or stem). Splitting in two. BILABIA. Calyx or corolla whose limb has two main divisions or lips, one above the other. BILOBE. Divided into two lobes up to the middle. BILOCULAR. Presenting two compartments. BINAGE. Action of hoeing. BINER. To give a second way to soil, with a spade or hoe, to prevent it from hardening, or to destroy weeds; depth from em, 06 to Om, 08. BIPENNÉ. V. Penned. BISANNUEL. A plant that takes two years to set seed and wither: Digitale. BITERNEOUS. Leaves borne on a petiole which divides into 2 petioles, which in turn subdivide into two others. BORGNE. Deprived of terminal bud. BORNER. To prick out a young plant; to surround the roots by bringing the soil closer together with the planter. BOURGEON. A kind of small tuber that encloses leaves and stems before they develop. BOUTON. Said particularly of flowers before they bloom. BOUTURE. A branch detached from a tree and planted so that it can take root. BRACTÉES, or floral leaves. Small, sessile leaves, often colored, close to the flowers and sometimes intermingling with them: Sage. BRINDLE. Last offshoot of a branch; fruiting branch, slender and short. BULB. Underground, rounded stem: onion, lily, etc. BUI.BIFER. Giving bulbils at stem joints or axils, instead of flowers. BULBILLE. Small bulb born in the leaf axils of certain plants, or in place of flowers. 4 3 1 CADUC. Falling very quickly, as soon as its functions are fulfilled. CAIEU, Small bud forming on the side of an old onion or bulb: Hyacinth. CALCARIFORM. Spur-shaped: corolla of Linears, calyx of Nasturtiums, etc. CALCE. V. Basic botanical notions. - Find in this vocabulary the qualifiers given to this part of the flower. CALICINAL. Taking after the calyx, or resembling it. CAMBIUM. The tissues in the process of formation, still gelatinous and soft. CAMPANIFORM, CAMPANULATED. Refers to bell-shaped corollas and calyxes. CAPILLAIRE: Fine as a hair. CAPITATED. Finished at the top. CAPOT. Diminutive of layer: Hot manure covered with Om, 15 to Om, 25 earth for planting melons, cucumbers, etc. CAPSULE. Dry fruit with one or more cavities, CARENE or NACELLE. Lower petals fused into a carina in the flowers of Peas, etc., etc. CAULINAIRE. Attached to or dependent on the stem. CHATON. Long, flexible spike, somewhat similar to a tail; incomplete flowers: Coudrier, Willow, etc. CHAUME. Grass stem. CHEVELU. Small hair-like roots. CILIÉ. Bordered by hairs, arranged much like eye lashes. CIRRHIFEROUS. Before tendrils, CLAVIFORME. Club-shaped. COADNÉES. V. Cone-shaped. COLLERETTE or INVOLUCRE. First envelope of certain flowers: Umbelliferae, Ranunculaceae, etc. COLLET. Ideal point marking the separation of the stem from the root. COMPOUND. Leaves whose parts separate without tearing at the end of their life: Acacia. -7 i . 44 E 27 1 432 VOCÁBULARY. CONJUGUED. Bound together. CONNECTED. Leaves placed opposite each other on the stem and welded at the base. CONNECTIVE. Fleshy part following the fillet and separating the two anther chambers. HULL. Capsule, with several chambers, separating from each other: Euphorbias. CORDIFORME. Heart-shaped: Lilac leaf. COROLLE. See the chapter on the flower and, in the Vocabulary, the qualifiers added to this word. CORYMBE. Species of umbel whose peduncles or rays start at different points, although the flowers all arrive at about the same height and form a kind of parasol: Cherry. COTYLEDONS. V. Notions of elementary botany. LYING. Lying down. V. Marcotte. COURSONS. Branches cut short. CRAN, To make a notch, is to remove transversely a small piece of bark and wood, above an eye or bud. CRENELLED. A leaf with broad, rounded teeth. CUNEIFORM. Wedge-shaped. CUPULE. Envelope of the acorn. DECURRENT. Leaf whose blade extends onto the petiole or stem: certain thistles. DEDOSS. To separate a large clump of perennial roots into several small clumps. DEHISCENCE. Action by which distinct vulvas, joined by a weld, separate regularly without tearing along this weld. HALF-FLOWER. Very small flower with a leaf blade extended into a tongue on the outer side. DICHOTOMES. Stems or branches bifurcated or subdivided from two to two. DIGITAL. Leaves with leaflets imitating an open hand: Potentilles. D DRAGEON. Young underground stem. DRAIN, to drain off excess water, by means of furrows, gullies, stones, etc., etc., etc. DRUPE. Fleshy fruit with a single seed enclosed in a bony pit: peach, etc. E 433 SPLIT. To separate the roots or shoots of a plant. ENSIFORME. Having the shape of a sword. EPIPHYLLE. Inflorescence of certain plants where the flowers are mistakenly thought to be born on the leaves: PetitHoux. EPIPHYTE. Plant that vegetates on other plants: Orchids, etc. ÉTENDARD. Name of the upper petal in the flowers of Peas, Lupines, etc. LEAVES. See the various adjectives applied to leaves. FIBEROUS. Root whose bundle starting from the collar consists of thin, elongated threads: Wheat. FLOSCULAR. Flower head composed of florets: Thistle. FOVILLA. Essential element of pollen. FRONDES. Leaf-like organs of ferns. FUSIFORM. Spindle-shaped root. G GIBBOUS. Calyxes or corollas with bulges or bumps: snapdragon, etc. GLABER. Hairless. GLADIED. V. Ensiform. GLANDES. Small vesicular bodies found on various parts of plants: Myrtle, Orange, etc., and usually contain an essential oil. 25 GLAUOUE. Bluish green. GYNECEA. The female organs of a plant. H HASTÉ, Said of spade-shaped leaves: field bindweed, sorrel, etc. HETEROPHYLL. Plant with differently shaped leaves: Water Crowfoot, etc. HYBRID. Plants produced by two species of the same genus or even by two species of different genera; hybrids rarely produce fertile seeds. HYPOCERIFORM. Corolla whose straight, elongated tube ends abruptly in a spreading blade: Periwinkle. IMBRIOUÉ. Arranged like the tiles of a roof: Sedum, Joubarbe. INDEHICENT. Not opening. INERMAL, Without thorns. INFLORESCENCE. Arrangement of flowers on a plant. Inflorescence in spike, cluster, capitulum, fascicle, umbel. See these words. INFUNDIBULIFORM. Funnel-shaped: Bindweed. INVOLUCRE. V. Collar. L LABELLE. Internal division of the Orchid flower. LABIÉ. Lip-shaped. LACINIÉ. Having fine, uneven indentations: grape leaf. LAGENIFORME, Bottle-shaped. LEGUMINOUS. A large, natural family, details of which can be found in the cultivation of genera. 435 MACROPHYLLOUS. With long leaves. MARCESCENT. Calyx and corolla that dry out without falling off. MARCOTTE. Branch held to the tree and laid down in the ground to make it produce roots. FURNITURE. Soft earth, dividing well. MICROPHYLLE. Small leaves. NECTAIRES. Small bodies distilling a sweet liquor. NUCELLE. Pulpy nipple through which the ovule begins to manifest itself in the ovary. EYELETONS. Projections from certain roots: Artichoke. OMBELLE. Arrangement of flowers in a parasol; when the peduncles or pedicels start from the same point and arrive at the same level, the partial umbel is called an umbellule. ONGLET. Lower part of the petal. ORBICULAR. circle-shaped. PALEA. Leaf with 5 or 7 divisions that somewhat resemble fingers and meet at a common center representing the palm of the hand. PANICULE. A kind of compound cluster whose lower branches, longer than the upper ones, give the whole inflorescence a pyramidal shape: Yucca. PAPILIONACEES. Flowers so called because of their supposed resemblance to butterflies. V. Leguminosae. PARITETAL. Placenta barely extending into the ovary cavity: poppy, PARPENNEE. Compound leaf not ending in an odd leaflet. PECTINATE. Leaves having their indentations placed in two parallel rows like the teeth of a comb. PEDATE or PEDALATED. Leaves whose petiole divides at the tip into two divergent parts. PELTED. Shield-shaped. PENICELLED. Brush-shaped. PENNATIFIDES. Leaves with indentations not split up to three-quarters: Chamomile, Romaine. PHYLLODE. Expanded petiole whose blade does not develop. PLACENTA. Organ on which ovules are inserted. PLUMEOUS. Lined with hairs arranged like the barbs of a feather. PLURILOCULAR, Fruit with several lodges. PROLIFEROUS. Any flower from the center of which another flower emerges: some roses and carnations. PROVINE. To multiply by provins or marcottes. PUBESCENT. Covered with a light down. PULP. Flesh of soft, succulent fruits: Grape, currant, etc. PYRIRORME. Pear-shaped. PYXIDE. Opening like a soap box: Chickweed, Henbane, etc. R RACHIS. Part of the petiole to which the leaflets of compound leaves are attached. RACINE. See the various qualifiers added to this word. RADICANT. Said of a plant whose branches sprout roots. RADIANT. Arranged in rays from a common center: daisy, etc. REGIME. Name given to the cluster of flowers or fruits of certain plants: Palm trees, Banana trees, etc. RENIFORM. Kidney-shaped. NETWORKED. Intertwined like the meshes of a net. RHIZOME. Root-like stem extending horizontally: Iris, etc. ROCAMBOLE. V. Bulblet. RONCINATE. Pennatifid leaf whose strips run from top to bottom: Dandelion. ROTACÉE, wheel-shaped flower. SAGITTÉE. Shaped like an arrowhead: Sagittarius. SAUVAGEON. Tree that has not been grafted. SCABRE. Stems or leaves dotted with spots that are rough to the touch. SETACEOUS. Leaf as loose as silk. SETIGEROUS. Bearing one or more silks. SINUATE. Leaf with rounded, very open indentations: Oak. SPADICE. Spike of incomplete flowers, first enveloped in a sort of cone called a Spathe, the males at the top, the females at the base: Calf's foot. SPATHE. V. Spadice. Membranous envelope peculiar to Narcissus, etc. SPATULATED. Elongated like a spatula, a kind of flat spoon used by pharmacists, etc. STIPULES. Small leaves at the base of the leaf. SUBULAR. Leaf linear at its base and ending like an awl. SURGEON. Offshoots of a shrub. TABLIER. V. Labellum. TERNEA. Three leaves forming a sort of collar around the stem or twig. THYRSE. Panicle whose middle stalks are longer than the ends. TOMENTOUS. Loaded with tightly packed hairs: Poppy. TRICUSPIDATE. Fillet or other organ with three points. TRIFID. Split into three fairly deeply. TRIFOLIOLATE. With three leaflets borne on a common petiole: Clover. TUBEROUS. Root very swollen towards the middle: Dahlia. TUBULAR. Cylindrical flower ending in a more or less open, often divided blade: Jasmine, Lilac, etc. TURBINED. Top-shaped. TLRION. The bud arising immediately on the rhizomes: Asparagus. U UNIFLORE. Having only one flower. URCÉOLÉ. Bell-shaped. VESICULAR. Bladder-like calyx inflated with air. VITTÉES. Refers to the oil-filled strips found on the petals of some St. John's wort plants and on the fruits of some Umbelliferae. VIVACE. Herbaceous plant that lasts several years. VOLUBILE. Stem that curls to one side in all individuals of the same species. BOTANY is the study of plants, which it teaches us to know, distinguish and classify. Plant Physics or Organic Botany is the part of the science that considers plants as organized beings, with a kind of life, indicated by the inner structure and action of each of their organs. Examine a plant with the naked eye, or with the aid of a magnifying glass, and you'll see that it's made up of cells of variable shape and cylindrical vessels or ducts, sometimes alone, sometimes joined together; hence two main forms in the elementary parts of the plant: cellular tissue and vascular tissue. Cellular tissue is made up of contiguous cells that can be compared to the light foam of shaken soap water; depending on the obstacles they encounter, these cells change shape and communicate with each other through very small pores. To get a more or less accurate idea of vascular tissue, we need to imagine cells that are more or less (1) We will only give here the notions that are absolutely necessary for the understanding of the book. aligned and whose partitions have partly disappeared, thus establishing a direct, more or less continuous communication. If they are constricted from distance to distance, and cut by diaphragms (or partitions) pierced with holes, they are called rosary vessels; if they are cut by transverse slits, they are called false tracheae; the name tracheae is reserved for vessels formed by a membranous cylinder, in the interior of which is wound a spiral wire quite similar to the copper wire which forms the elastic of certain suspenders. Finally, the vessels themselves are short, non-porous tubes containing a juice particular to each plant. Some plants germinate in a day: watercress; others take years: Hazel, Dogwood, etc. Three external agents contribute to germination: water, heat and air. If there is perisperm, it softens and is absorbed by the embryo, which breaks its bonds and develops; if there is no perisperm, germination takes place much more quickly: Beans, Peas, etc. The radicular part elongates from top to bottom, towards the center of the earth; the young stem rises from bottom to top, towards the sky. The point where the root and stem meet is called the collar or vital node. The root serves to fix the plant in the earth and provide it with a large part of its nourishment; it never turns green from the action of air and light. Sometimes they float in water: Water Lentils; they attach themselves to the trunk or root of other trees: Ivy, Orchids, Orobanches; adventitious roots are the types of roots that detach themselves from the various points of the stem of some trees and shrubs, etc.: Mangrove, Maize, Magnolia. These supernumerary roots only develop in diameter when their tips reach the ground. The ability of the stems and even the leaves of certain plants to emit roots is widely used for cuttings and layering (see the articles on these two operations). If you cut a branch of willow or poplar and plunge it into the ground, you will see, after waiting a few days, its lower end produce rootlets. Considered as a whole, the root offers: 1° the body or middle part, varying in shape and consistency, more or less swollen: Carrot; 2° the collar or vital node, the demarcation point between stem and root, from which the annual stem bud emerges in perennial roots; 3° the rootlets or hair, more or less loose fibers, highly suitable for absorbing ambient fluids (V. for the different root species, the word root in the Vocabulary). The stem is that part of the plant which, growing in the opposite direction to the root, rises towards the sky to enjoy the sun and air, and to support leaves, flowers and fruit when the plant has them; it should not be confused either with the stump or rhizome, a kind of underground stem of certain perennial plants which runs in the soil and grows leaves and flowers from its front end as the rear end withers: Lily of the Valley, Iris Flambe. - nor with bulbs or onions, of rounded or conical shape, wrapped in scales or tunics, from which emerges a flowering branch, a true peduncle improperly called a stem: Porreau, Lis blanc; - nor finally with the tuber, short, swollen, usually rather irregular, without scales or tunics, a kind of outgrowth that arises from the roots of certain plants, offering on its surface buds called eyes: Pomme de terre. We'll only go into a little detail here on the trone and the stipe, two species of stem that we need to know well in order to understand one of the very distinctive characteristics between Dicotyledons and Monocotyledons. The trunk is conical and elongated, i.e. thicker at the base than at the top: 25. Oak, Ash, Fir, etc.; it is naked at the bottom, ending at the top with branches, twigs and thousands; it grows in length and thickness, increasing the layers of its circumference; it belongs to the dicotyledonous trees. The stipe is a kind of cylindrical column, as thick at the top as at the base, often even thicker in the middle than at either end, rarely branching and crowned with a bouquet of leaves and flowers: Palm trees, Dracœna, Yucca, etc. Its bark, when it has one, is quite indistinguishable from the stem; it increases in thickness by multiplying the threads of its circumference; its increase in height is achieved by the development of the bud that terminates it at the top. Cut crosswise, the trunk of dicotyledonous trees offers you, as has been so aptly described (1), a series of interlocking cases increasing in size from the center to the circumference: 1° At the center, a canal or medullary casing containing the pith; 2° Layers of tightly entwined fibers and vessels, all the harder and darker the closer they are to the center; these layers are called swan layers, and their softer part is called sapwood; the harder part is the wood itself; 3° The bark itself, made up of two layers, the inner or liber, a collection of thin sheets; the other outer, consisting of the epidermis, a thin, almost diaphanous layer pierced by a multitude of openings and covering all parts of the plant; the herbaceous envelope, a layer of cellular tissue, usually green, situated beneath the epidermis, and cor(1) Richard, Nouveaux éléments de botanique. the liber to which they are applied. Medullary rays extend from the pith to the circumference of the trunk, becoming wider and more active the closer they are to the bark; towards the center, they contain less starch and liquid juices. If you cut across the stipe of a Palm tree, all the parts examined above, very distinct in dicots, now seem to merge; the woody bundles blend into the pith; the bark is barely visible. Plants grow in two directions: as their diameter increases, so does their height. In dicotyledonous trees, diameter increases through the annual transformation of bast into sapwood, sapwood into wood, and successive renewal of bast. Growth in height is achieved by the young shoots of each year; the trunk is formed, as it were, of very long cones superimposed on one another; this kind of development is particularly noticeable in Pines and Firs. The stipe of monocotyledons grows very little in thickness, since instead of concentric layers, it forms superimposed rings; a Palm tree 40 meters high is often only a foot in diameter. Buds are organs that contain within them the rudiments of stems, branches, leaves and fruiting bodies; they always develop in the leaf axils or at the tips of twigs; scales covered with a viscous, resinous coating and a very fine down protect them from the rigors of the atmosphere. The flowering or fruiting bud contains one or more flowers without leaves; the leafing bud contains only leaves; the mixed bud contains both flowers and leaves. You'll recognize the first by its conical, swollen shape: apple trees, pear trees, cherry trees; the second, by its tapering, pointed, elongated shape: Bois-gentil; the third shares the shape of the others. Leaves have rightly been compared to the lungs of animals; they draw from the air the fluids necessary for plant growth; they combine air with sap and produce liquors analogous to our blood. Before their full development, they are enclosed in the buds. You'll find them variously arranged in relation to each other, but always in the same way in all plants of the same species, often of the same genus, sometimes even of an entire natural family. This arrangement, known as prefoliation, is a very good way of coordinating genera. - They can be folded lengthwise, half over half, i.e. their left lateral part is applied to the right so that their edges correspond perfectly on each side: Syringa; - they can be folded up and down several times over themselves: Aconit; - they can be folded over their length, so as to imitate the folds of a fan: Vine, Blackcurrant; - they can be rolled over themselves in the form of a spiral, as in certain Fig trees, Apricot, etc.; - their edges can be rolled up and down several times over themselves: Aconit; - they can be folded over their length, so as to imitate the folds of a fan: Vine, Blackcurrant; - they can be rolled over themselves in the form of a spiral, as in certain Fig trees, Apricot, etc.; - they can be folded over their length, so as to imitate the folds of a fan: Vine, Blackcurrant.their edges may be rolled inwards or outwards: Poplar, Pear; - finally, the leaves may be rolled in a crozier shape: Ferns. The leaf has two faces, one upper, the other lower; a base or point of attachment, an apex opposite the base; a contour or edge. Sometimes the leaf has no tail, in which case it's called a sessile leaf: poppy; sometimes it has one, known in botany as the petiole, hence the name petiolate leaf: lime, horse chestnut, etc. If the blade is aborted, the leaf is called phyllode: Acacia simple leaf of New Holland. On the underside of the leaf, the petiole is divided into projecting extensions called veins, almost always simple in monocotyledons, highly branched in dicotyledons. See Vocabulary for more details. Compound or articulated leaves, i.e. those whose leaflets are attached by articulation to the common petiole, show remarkable movement and irritability. Leguminosae, and Acacia in particular, rise as the sun rises over the horizon and fall as it disappears; the Sensitive is impressed by the slightest tremor, by the shadow of a cloud, by a gas, by a perfume, by a slight noise. Hedysarum gvrans has stipules that bend and twist on themselves, independently of each other. Dionea muscipula has two lobes at the tip of its leaves, lined with long, stiff yellowish cilia and trimmed with red glands: when an insect lands on them, the two lobes suddenly straighten up, move closer together and only reopen once they have smothered their enemy. Flower. - Fruit. Having briefly reviewed the parts that fix the plant to the ground, and those that supply it with the aqueous or aeriform fluids necessary for its nourishment and development, let's move on to the organs that renew and perpetuate the species. Plants remain in the place where they were born, where they must die, but they most often bear on the same individual the double apparatus of fertilization; hermaphroditism is as common among them as it is rare among animals. The flower is the culmination of vegetation on the stem or branch. It consists essentially of four whorls: calyx, corolla, stamens and carpels (ovary topped by style and stigma). Reduced to its last degree of simplicity, it can be formed by a single male or female sexual organ, i.e. a stamen or a pistil (willows); hence the name male flower or female flower, or hermaphrodite, the flower that combines the two sexual organs, male and female. If we take a complete flower, here's what we'll see when we examine it from center to circumference: the pistil or female sexual organ is always in the central part of the flower. It consists of the ovary, style and stigma. Further out are the male sexual organs, or stamens, usually more numerous than the pistils, each composed of a thread and anther. Outside the stamens are the two floral envelopes: the inner one, the corolla, called monopetal if it's made up of a single piece, or polypetal if it's made up of several pieces; - the outer one, the calyx, called monosetal or polysetal depending on whether it's made up of one or several pieces. The floral leaves and bracts do not belong to the flower itself. Sometimes the flower attaches itself immediately to the branches or twigs by its base: sessile flower; sometimes it uses an accessory part, a simple tail, in botany, peduncle: Carnation, pedunculate flower; a branched tail, pedicel, Vine, Lilac, pedicellate flower. Let's look at each part of the flower. Usually, there is only one pistil in a flower, as in the Lily, the Poppy, etc.; sometimes there are several, as in Ranunculus, the Rose, etc. The pistil or pistils are often attached to a particular extension of the receptacle called a gynophore, as in Strawberry and Raspberry. The ovary always occupies the lower part of the pistil; it may be simple or compound; when cut longitudinally or crosswise, it has one or more cavities called lodges, containing the rudiments of the seeds or ovules. It is in the interior of the ovary that the ovules are fertilized, develop and become seeds; this organ is therefore rightly compared to the uterus of animals. Most often, the ovary is free at the bottom of the flower, i.e. it does not adhere to the calyx (lime, lily); sometimes it is more or less fused to the base of the calyx, and only the top is free; in the first case, the ovary is said to be free or superior, in the second, adherent or inferior; two positions that provide valuable characters for grouping genera into natural families. V. Vocabulary. Whenever the ovary is inferior, the calyx is monosepal. The style is the more or less filiform extension of the apex of the ovary which supports the stigma; sometimes it is missing entirely (poppy, tulip), in which case the stigma is sessile. V. Vocabulary. The stigma is the apex of the style or of the ovary when the style is missing; it receives the pollen or fertilizing substance in its elongated utricles, united by a mucilaginous material; there are always as many stigmas as there are distinct styles or obvious divisions in the style. In the stamens, or male sexual organ, we note the upper part or anther, an essential part, a kind of small membranous sac; the pollen, a substance usually formed of small vesicular grains necessary for fertilization; the net, a thread-like appendage often absent from the stamens. The number of stamens varies greatly in different plants, and this is where Linnaeus got the idea for his classification system. He called flowers with a single stamen monandrous (Red Valerian); diandrous, flowers with two stamens (Lilac), etc., etc... Let's just note that the stamens can be all equal (lily, tulip); they can be unequal, i.e. some larger, others smaller in the same flower. Geraniums, for example, have ten stamens, five large and five smaller, arranged alternately. When a flower contains four stamens, two of which are always shorter, these stamens are called didynames (Linen, Calf's Club). When a flower contains six stamens, four of which are always larger than the other two, they are called tetradynamous (Radish). The stamens usually alternate with the corolla divisions when their number is equal to the corolla divisions (Borage); at other times, they are opposite the petals (Grapevine). The stamens of a flower are called definite when there are at most a dozen of them; indefinite when there are more. They are free or distinct (in Lilies); fused by the anthers (in Compositae); fused by the threads and then joined together in one, two, three or more distinct groups, each of which is called an adelphia; monadelphia, if there is only one group (Mallow), diadelphia, if there are two (Bean). In squash, the stamens are joined by both anthers and threads. The corolla is the inner, usually coloured, part of the perianth or double floral envelope; it immediately surrounds the organs of generation; it often contains a highly volatile oil which imparts a characteristic odour to the plant. Although the corolla is a real eye-catcher, thanks to the dazzling beauty with which it is often clothed and the grace of its cut-outs, in botanical terms it is of far less value than the simple pistil and stamen, which are sometimes barely visible. The corolla inserted around the ovary is called perigynous (Campanula); epigynous, when it is at the top of the ovary (Queen Margaret); hypogynous, if it is inserted under the ovary (Carnation). When these different parts are joined together, the FLOWER is said to be FRUIT. corolla is monopetal or gamopetal (Bindweed); polypetal, if these parts are separated (Rose). The first falls in one piece; the second lets its petals fall separately. In any petal, you will consider: 1° the tab or narrowed, more or less elongated lower part, by which it is attached; 2° the blade or enlarged part which surmounts the tab. A regular corolla is one in which all the incisions and divisions are equal, or whose parts appear to be arranged regularly around a common axis (yellow wallflower). An irregular corolla, on the other hand, is one whose incisions are unequal or whose parts do not appear to be arranged symmetrically around a fictitious common axis (Nasturtium, Snapdragon). For corolla modifications, see Vocabulary, under Corolla qualifiers. The single-petaled corolla has three distinct parts: 1° the tube, the lower part, usually cylindrical and tubuliform, more or less elongated; 2° the limbus, the upper part of the tube, more or less flared, sometimes spread out and even reflected; 3° the throat, the separation between the tube and the limbus. The calyx is the outermost envelope of the double perianth, or of the perianth itself when it is simple. The calyx usually has the consistency and herbaceous color of the bark it continues; sometimes it is colored (Fuchsia). See Vocabulary for the word calyx. Nectaries are the clusters of glands inside the flower that secrete the honey-like liquid so sought-after by bees. Inflorescence is the general arrangement of flowers on the stem and other supporting organs. If the flowers arise singly from different points on the stem, at varying distances from one another, they are said to be solitary (Tulip, Hundred-Leaf Rose). Located at the top of the stem (Tulip), they are called terminal; lateral, if they develop on the sides of the stem or branches; axillary, when they are born in the leaf axils (Periwinkle); geminate, if they are found two by two emerging from the same point on the stem (Viola biflore); ternate, when they emerge three by three from the same point on the stem (Teucrium flavum); fasciculate or bundled, if they emerge more than three by three together from the same point (Common cherry). Once fertilization has taken place, the floral envelopes wither and are destroyed, the stamens fall, and the stigma and style abandon the ovary, which concentrates all the flower's vital force within itself; then fructification takes place; the fruit is simply the fertilized and enlarged ovary. It then takes on the name of pericarp (envelope of the fruit); the ovule becomes the seed. You'll always notice three parts in the pericarp: 1° the epicarp, the thin outer membrane that covers the pericarp and determines its shape; 2° the endocarp, the inner membrane that lines the seminiferous cavity; 3° the sarcocarp, the fleshy part situated between the two preceding membranes, If the fruit comes from a single pistil, it's called single (Peach, Cherry); multiple, if it comes from several distinct pistils enclosed in the same flower (Strawberry, Clematis); compound, if it results from a more or less considerable number of pistils joined and often fused together, but belonging to distinct flowers (Blackberry, Pineapple, Pine cone). The thin, low-sugar pericarp produces dry fruit; the thick, succulent pericarp produces fleshy fruit (Apricots, Peaches, Melons). If fruits open with valves, they are said to be dehiscent; if they remain closed, they are called indehiscent. Depending on the number of seeds they contain, fruits are divided into oligosperms, or fruits containing few seeds, and polysperms, or fruits containing many seeds. The seed is to the plant what the egg is to the oviparous animal; it contains an organized body which, given the right conditions, will develop into a being perfectly similar to the one from which it originated. The seed has two parts to consider: 1° the episperm or integument itself; 2° the kernel contained within the episperm. The point at which the seed attaches to the pericarp is called the umbilicus or hilum, and you'll recognize it by a scar of varying size left by the seed on the surface of the seed coat. The center of the hilum always represents the base of the seed, whose apex is indicated by the point diametrically opposite the hilum. It is very important to consider the position and especially the direction of the seeds relative to the axis of the pericarp, when these seeds are in a given number; for, from this, we derive excellent characters for the coordination of families. When a seed is compressed, that of its two faces which faces the axis of the pericarp is called the face proper, the other, turned towards the walls of the pericarp, is called the back; the junction of the face and the back represents the edge of the seed. - When the hilum is on one of the points of the seed's edge, the seed is said to be compressed; on the contrary, it is said to be depressed if the hilum is on its front or back. The kernel is the whole part of a ripe, perfect seed contained in the episperm cavity; its essential character is that it contains an embryo, i.e. a body capable of reproducing a new plant of the same species. Sometimes the embryo forms the entire kernel (bean, lentil); sometimes an accessory body, the endosperm, is attached to the embryo (wheat, castor-oil). The two organs are so different in structure that a glance is enough to distinguish them. The endosperm, a more or less hard, soft or fleshy mass of cellular tissue, withers and diminishes in volume rather than acquiring it; it serves as food for the young embryo. Its presence or absence is a very good generic character, especially in Monocotyledones. The embryo is essentially made up of four parts: 1° the root body; 2° the cotyledonary body; 3° the gemmule; 4° the tigella. It is the root body or radicle which, through germination, gives rise to the root. Having already discussed monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants, we won't return to this subject. The gemmule, a small simple or compound body, is born between the cotyledons, or in the cavity of the cotyledon itself, if there is only one; it always forms the first bud, gemma, hence the name gemmule, sometimes wrongly replaced by plumule. The primordial leaves emerge from this bud. The tigella is not always clearly visible, because it often merges with the cotyledonary body and the radicle; sometimes, during germination, it lifts the cotyledons out of the ground, which in this position are called epigeous. SECTION TWO Methods. Three main systems have been used to study and classify plants, either in a systematic order, or according to a natural method. Tournefort's method (see table no. 1). - Tournefort established the 22 classes shown in the table below, and divided them into sections based on: 1° the shape, consistency and structure of the fruit, and even its economic uses; 2° the union or separation of the male or female organs; 3° the shape of the corollas; 4° the arrangement of the leaves. I" Trees...... TOURNEFORT METHOD (Single-petal corollas..... Poly-petal corollas. Campaniform. Regular.... 2 Infundibuliformes. 5 Cruciferae, 6 Rosaceae. (Regular....7. Umbelliferae. petals..... Compounds............ Irregular...) 3. Persooned. 4. Labiate. 8. Caryophyllaceae. 9. Liliaceae. 10. Papilionaceae. Irregular -. 111. Anomales. (12. Floscose. ....(13. Semi-floscose. 14. Radial. 15. Apetalous with stamens. (Flowers without petals or apetalous.............................16. (Flowers without petals.......................................... Petalled flowers... - without stamens. 17. No flowers or fruit. 18. Apetal trees. 19. Monopetal corollas..................... 20. ( Regular.... 21. - polypetals ....... ¡Irregular... 22. - amentaceous. - with single flowers. - rosaceous. - papilionaceous. Q Linné's system. - This botanist divided plants into 24 classes (see table no. 2), and based his classification on the presence or absence of sexual organs. The first 10 classes are made up of plants whose flowers have from one to ten stamens; the 11th class includes flowers with twelve stamens; - the 12th class includes plants whose stamens, numbering twenty, are inserted on the calyx; - the 13th class includes plants whose flowers have more than twenty stamens attached to the receptacle. For these first thirteen classes, he bases orders on the number of pistils, and calls them monogyny (flower with a single pistil); digyny (flower with two pistils); polygyny (flower with more than two pistils). In the 14th class, he establishes two orders: gymnospermia, characterized by four naked seeds at the bottom of the calyx; angiospermia, characterized by a polysperm capsule. Tetradynamia, or the 15th class, is divided into siliqueuse, when the fruit is significantly longer than it is wide, and siliculeuse, when its length barely exceeds its width. He subdivides the 16th, 17th and 18th classes according to the number of stamens. Syngenesis or the 19th class contains six divisions: 1° equal polygamy: all florets and half-florets fertile and hermaphroditic; 2° superfluous polygamy: all florets and half-florets fertile, but not all hermaphroditic; 3° frustrated polygamy: center florets hermaphroditic and fertile, half-florets sterile; 4° necessary polygamy: sterile florets in the center, fertile florets around the circumference; 5° separate polygamy: each floret has its own calyx; 6° monogamy: this last order, like the previous five, no longer includes compound flowers, but only those which, without being part of the composites proper, nevertheless have stamens fused together by their anthers. 1 I Cats456 ~~~ METHODS. * The 20th, 21st and 22nd classes form their orders according to the number of stamens and pistils. Polygamy, or the 23rd class, has the following subdivisions: monoecy, when hermaphroditic and unisexual flowers are found on the same plant; dioecy, when hermaphroditic and unisexual flowers are found on different plants; trioecy, when male, female and hermaphroditic flowers are found on separate individuals. Finally, the 24th class, or cryptogamy, includes plants that have no embryos or cotyledons, and whose sexual organs cannot be seen because of their small size, location or shape: mosses, liverworts, ferns, mushrooms and algaes. F. r -- bres...... LINE SYSTEM Stamens of equal length...... Classes. 1 Etamine........................ Monandrie.... EBSOONOMEe - - ............................ Diandrie...... ............................ Triandrie..... ............................ Tétrandrie.... ........................... Pentandrie.... ........................... Hexandrie..... ................ .......... Heptandrie.... ............................ Octandric..... ......................... Enneandria... MCONPOOFCQ 9 ............. Decandria..... 10 ............................ Dodecandria.. 11 - inserted on the chalice........ Icosandrie..... 12 More than 20 stamens inserted on receptacles............................... Polyandry.... 2 stamens shorter- 4 stamens, 2 of which shorter........ Didynamie.... 14 than the others. Stamens sou-/ Stamens welded endées entre elles on avec 2 tre elles.......... ........ Tetradynamics. 15 Stamens sou- En un seul faisceau.... Monadelphia. 16 In two bundles..... Diadelphia.... 17 nets........ In several bundles. Polyadelphic.. 18 Stamens fused by their anthers..... Syngenesis.... 19 the pistil.... Stamens fused with pistil............................... Gynandria.... :0 Flowers all uni-/ Flowers all unisexual or mixed flowers herMale flowers and female flowers on the same individual............................. Monoecie..... 21 sexual.....)Separate male and female flowers on different individuals........... Dioecie....... 2. maphrodites....... Unisexual flowers mixed with hermaphrodite flowers........ Polygamy..... 23 Stamens and pistils invisible to the naked eye................................................... Cryptogamy. 21 onla 17 - C- 3 E 3 2 4 4 458 METHODS. 5 Jussieu's method (V. tabl, n° 3). - In his method, indisputably the best, divisions are not based on the consideration of a single organ, but on the characters offered by all plant parts: shape of the embryo, position of the stamens relative to the pistil, absence or presence and shape of the corolla. - JUSSIEU METHOD .................................. 1. Acotyledonia. Hypogynous stamens............ 2. Monohypogyny. Monocotyledons................. perigynes............. 3. Monoperigyny. Dícotyledones.. - epigynia. 4. Monoepigynia. (Epigynous stamens.............. 5. Epistaminia. (Apetales.) - perygines.............. 6. Peristaminia. (Monoclines..) - hypogynes............ 7. Hypostaminia. Corolla mo2 (hypogynous... 8. Hypocorollie. (Corolla nopetal.. (perigyny.... 9. Pericorollia. (Epigynous corolla..... 10. Epicorollic synantheria. 11. - chorysantheria. Epigynous stamens. 12. Epipetalia. Corolla poIypetal... - hypogynous. 13. hypopetalic. - perigynous. 17. peripetalous. Diclines............................................. 15. Diclinia. Cotyledons. Sadond! 50 a. -2 CHAPTER VIII Plants recommended for use in the ornamental garden. Abies (Fir). Acer (Maple). ORNAMENTAL TREES, 1° Unobtrusive flowers. Alnus cordata (Alder, etc.). Betula (Birch). Broussonnetia. Catalpa. Cedrus (Cedar). Celtis. Cupressus (Cypress). Fagus (Beech). Fraxinus (Ash), Juglans (Walnut). Cerasus f. pleno (Cherry). Cornus (Dogwood). llex (Holly). Magnolia. Larix (Larch). Ornus (Orne). Pinus (Pine). Platanus (Plane tree). Populus (Poplar). Quercus (Oak). Salix (Willow). Taxodium. Taxus (Yew). Ulmus (Elm). 2° Flowers visible in spring and summer. Æsculus (Horse chestnut). Cytisus laburnum. Elœagus. Thuia. Malus (Apple tree). Paulownia imperialis. Robinia (False Acacia). Sorbus (Mountain ash). Tilia (Linden), Sambucus nigra (Black Elder). TREES AND SHRUBS WITH WHITISH OR SATINY LEAVES. Baccharis. Hippophæ rhamnoides. Willow-leaved pear tree, Salix alba (White willow). 2182 ORNAMENTAL FRUIT TREES AND SHRUBS. Amelanchier vulgaire, black fruit. Mahonia repens, Cornus sanguinea, Hedera Helix, Ligustrum vulgare, Rubus fruticosus, Cornus alba, Ilex aquifolium, Clematis sp., - - Prunus épineux, Viburnum Tinus, Diospyros lotus, Hedera chrysocarpa, white fruit. Mespilus azarolus, Evonymus broadleaf, - Platane oriental, - Arbutus unedo, Rosier, Sureau rameux, Cornus sericea, Taxus baccata, blue fruit. Viburnum opulus, blue fruit. yellow fruit. red fruit. Solanum bittersweet, Chamæcerasus vulgaire, purple fruit. Sorbus aucuparia, Cornus à feuilles alternes, - Leycesteria, Vaccinium, - Capparis. Cistus. Cotoneaster. Cytisus. Fagopyrum. TREES AND SHRUBS FOR ROCK GARDENS. Jasmine. Potentilla. Roses. Rubus (Bramble). TREES AND SHRUBS FOR FENCES. Lycium barbarum. Rhamnus alaternus. Ribes aureum. Rosa sempervirens Taxus for berries. Thuia. Syringa vulgaris. EVERGREEN TREES AND SHRUBS. Buckthorn. Buxus sempervirens. Carpinus Betulus. Spruce. Fagus sylvatica. Jasminum. Ligustrum. Araucaria. Aucuba japonica. Boxwood. Heather. Larix. Laurel. Pine. Quercus ilex. Cedar. Evergreen cypress. Ilex. Jasmine. Rosmarinus. Santolina. Viburnum Tinus. Yucca. TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES FOR WATERSIDE PLANTING. Alnus cordata. Hydrangea and its varieties. White poplar. White willow. 26. 8 " 6. - = 462 . ORNAMENTAL PLANTS. - "SHRUBS FOR BEDS OF BRUYR̀RE SOIL. Andromeda racemosa. Azalea pontica. Chimonanthus fragrans. Alder-leaved clethra. Cornus florida. Daphne (its varieties). Purple magnolia, etc. Rhododendron ponticum, etc. Vaccinium amœnum. SHRUBS AND BUSHES FOR GROVES. Artemisia abrotanum. Cerasus nana. Erica ciliaris, etc. 1° Shrubs from Om, 30 to I meters high. Amygdalus nana. Betula nana. Clématis erecta. Daphne Mezereum. Erica Mediterranea. Hy drangea nivea (Hydrangea). Mahonia sp., var. Spirea lævigata. Teucrium fruticans. 2° Medium height. Amorpha fruticosa. Amygdalus persica, etc. Aralia japonica. Arbutus unedo. Clematis sp. Cytisus nigricans. Lonicera sp. Mespilus. Robinia hispida. Elderberry. Styrax officinalis. FRAGRANT FLOWERING PLANTS. Asperula odorata. Cheiranthus cheiri. Convallaria maialis. Datura arborea. Heliotropium peruvianum. Helleborus odorus. Hesperis tristis. Iris germanica. Lathyrus odoratum. White lily, L. martagnon, etc., etc. Mirabilis Jalapa. Narcissus odorus, etc. Œnothera speciosa, etc. Pæonia edulis. Reseda odorata. Verbena teucrioides. Violet odorante. FULL-BODIED FERNS (DAMP PLACES, ROCK GARDENS). Adianthum, Hair of Venus. Aspidium tenue. Asplenium septentriouale. Crstopteris fragilis, etc. Nephrodium Filix-mas, etc. Onoclea sensibilis. Osmunda regalis. Polypodium vulgare, etc. Pteris aquilina. Scolopendr um officinarum. Struthiopteris germanica. Orobus vernus, Phlox verna. Pæonia officinalis. Primula elatior, etc Pulmonaria mollis. Saxifraga hypnoïdes. Scutellaria macrantha. Sedum populifolium, etc. CLIMBING PLANTS WITH WOODY STEMS. Ampelopsis bipinnata, etc. Aristolochia sipho. Bignonia capreolata. Celastrus scandens. Cissus orientalis. Clematis balearica, etc. Hedera (Ivy, its varieties). Jasminum officinale. Lonicera (Honeysuckle), its var. Passiflora caerulea. Rosa Banksiana. Smilax mauritanica. Solanum dulcamara. Sphærostemma. Vitis (Vine and its varieties. Wistaria de Chine. ANNUAL CLIMBING PLANTS (OR PLANTS CULTIVATED AS SUCH). Petunia violacea. Phaseolus coccineus. 463 *5 1 - -ustpad 22 m 1 - " gTmane PLANTS TO ADORN WATER ROOMS AND BASINS. Arundo plragmites. Carex acuta. Cyperus longus. Epilobium hirsutum. Iris fœtidissima, etc. Acorus calamus. Alisma plantago. Cyperus papyrus. Equisetum fluviale. Iris pseudo-acorus. 1e° Emerged. Water mint, Myosotis palustris. Rumex aquaticus. Scirpus sylvaticus. 2° Submerged. Nelumbium speciosum. White water lily, etc. Nymphea alba, etc. Ranonculus fluitans. Villarsia nymphoides. PLANTS TO DECORATE SHADY PLACES. Actæa spicata. Japanese anemone, etc. Aquilegia vulgaris. Arum maculatum. Asperula odorata. Dianthus delthoïdes, Ficaria ranunculoides. Gentian acaulis. Impatiens fulva. Cobæa scandens. Cucumis colocynthis. ORNAMENTAL PLANTS. Ipomæa purpurea, etc. Lathyrus odorant. Quamoclit coccinea. Thunbergia alata. Tropœolum majus, etc. CRIMPING PERENNIALS (WITH ANXIOUS STEMS). Asparagus Broussonnetii. Bryonia dioica. Latyrus latifolius. Phaseolus Caracalla. Polygonum scandens. Vicia and some of its varieties. PERENNIALS WITH ROOTS OR TUBEROUS RHLZOMES. Aconit napel, Anemone coronaria. Asclepias tuberosa. Asphodelus ramosus, Canna indica. Cyclamen Europæum. Dahlia variabilis. Helianthus tuberosus. Hyoscyamus orientalis (Henbane). Iris xyphium. Mirabilis Jalapa. Oxalis Deppei. Phlomis tuberosa. Pœonja officinalis, etc. Ranunculus orientalis. Veratrum nigrum (Varaire). FRAGRANT-LEAVED PERENNIALS FOR BORDERS. Anthemis nobilis. Brunella grandiflora. Hyssopus officinalis. Lavandula spica. Ocymum basilicum. Origanum vulgare. Salvia officinalis. Santolina tomentosa. Satureia (varieties). Thymus serpyllum, etc. ANNUAL PLANTS FOR BORDERS. Agrostemma cœli-rosa, Clarkia pulchella, etc. Delphinium Ajacis. Erysimum Perofskianum. Gypsophila elegans. Iberis amara, etc. Hesperis maritima. Linaria bipartita. Nigelle damascœna, Silene armeria. Viscaria oculata. SUB-SHRUBS AND PERENNIALS FOR BORDERS IN HEATHLAND BEDS. Linaria alpina. Mimulus moschatus, Phlox setacea. Polygala chamœbuxus. Primula formosa. Spiræa triloba. Violet and its varieties. Calluna erica fl. pleno. Cornus canadensis. Erica herbacea. Epimedinm macranthum. Dodecatheon meadia. Gentiana acaulis. Hepatica triloba, etc. 465 Acorus gramineus. Alyssum saxatile. Anthemis nobilis flore pleno. Asperula odorata. Aster Reversii. Brunella à grandes fleurs. Campanula cespitosa, etc, Dianthus deltoïdes, Fragaría vesca. Hyssopus officinalis. Iris and its varieties. Lavandula spica. Myosotis palustris. Oxalis Deppei. Phlox verna. Primula offic. etc. Santollna tomentosa. Satureia montana. Seutellaria macrantha. Sedum hybridum. Silene alpestris. Teucrium chamædrys. Thymus serpyllum. Veronica prostrata. Viola odorata. TEMPERATE GREENHOUSE OR ORANGERY PLANTS AND SHRUBS, WHICH CAN BE USED IN POTS OR IN THE GROUND TO DECORATE GARDENS IN SUMMER. Arctotis grandiflora, etc. Calandrina grandiflora. Cineraria var. Fuchsia corymbosa, etc. Peruvian Heliotropium, etc. Hypericum de Chine. L.antana camara. Large-flowered Linium. Lobella. Nierembergia filicaulis. Pelargonium var. Petunia violacca, etc. Polygala speciosa. Primula de Chine. Salvia patens, etc. Selago fasciculata. Sutherlandia frutescens. Verbena chamædrifolia. ANNUAL PLANTS TO BE SOWN IN AUTUMN (NORTH OF FRANCE), Adonis flammea; Calliopsis tinctoria. Centaurea cyanus. Clarkia pulchella, etc. Delphinum Ajacis. Dianthus de Chine (Carnation). Erysimum Perofskianum. Large-flowered Eucharidium. Gilia. Godetia amœna, etc. Iberis amara, etc. Silene armeria. BULBOUS PLANTS FOR BORDERS. Amaryllis lutea. Colchicum autumnale. Grocus vernus. Hyacinthus var. Narcissus bicolor, etc. Ornithogalum montanum, etc. Scilla bifolia. Tulipa gesneriana, etc. ORNAMENTAL PLANTS. Biitum virgatum. ORNAMENTAL FRUIT PLANTS. Cucumis colocynthis. Lycopersicum esculentum. Momordica balsamina. Pæonia. Phytolacca decandra. Solanum porte-œuf. PLANTS REMARKABLE FOR THEIR FOLIAGE. Acanthus mollis, spinosus. Amaranthus sanguineus, etc. Italian arum. Arundo donax. Beta vulgaris rubra. Brassica oler, prolifera, etc. Canna speciosa. - Chenopodium purpur. Eryngium amethystinum. Impatiens fulva, etc. Malva crispa. Mesembrianthemum crystallinum. Nicotiana acuminata. Phormium tenax. Rheum ondulatum, etc. Castor oil. Heart-leaved dock, etc. Silver sage. Senecio cineraria. Solanum atrosanguineum. Yucca gloriosa, etc. 1 . F. PERENNIALS FOR ROCK GARDENS. Aceranthus diphyllus. Alchemilla hybrida. Alyssum saxatile. Japanese anemone, Antirrhinum majus. Asperula odorata. Astragulus monspessulanus. Brunella large-flowered. Campanula (varieties). Centranthus ruber and varieties. Cerastium tomentosum. Cheiranthus cheiri. Convallaria maialis. Coronilla montana. Box-leaf Cotoneaster. Erica (Heather) herbaceous, etc. Genista pilosa, etc. Geranium (varieties). Gypsophila arenaria, etc. Helianthemum vulgare. Iris germanica. Large-flowered Lathyrus. Linaria (varieties). Small-leaved flax, etc. Lotus suaveolens. Lychnis dioica. Œnothera macròcarpa. Papaver (poppy) cambricum. Heart-leaved penstemon. Plombago. Dianthus (Carnation) superbe et va- Polygonatum vulgare. riétés. Ranonculus repens. Rubus caesius. Ruscus aculeatus. Heart-leaved Saxifraga, etc. Sedum acre and varieties. Potentilla (its varieties), Smilacina stellata, etc. Trifolium (Red clover). Vinca (large and small periwinkle). Vinca odorata. California Zauschneria. PLANTSE FOR LARGE BEDS. Achillea filipendulina. Aconitum napellus, etc., etc. German Iris, etc. Lupin changeant. Alcea rosea (Hollyhock), etc. Broad-leaved Lathyrus. Tailed Amaranthus, etc. Arundo donax. Asclepias. Aster (numerous varieties). Astragalus (varieties). Indian canna. African Centaurea, etc. Dahlia (varieties). Delphinium (varieties). Digitale pourpre, etc. Epilobium spicatum, etc. Euphorbia (varieties). Ferula glauca, etc. Helianthus annuel, etc. Impa:iens. Malva crispa (Mallow). Nicotiana tabacum (Tobacco). Papaver (Poppy), varieties. Phlox decussata, etc., etc. Polygonum orientale, etc., etc. Castor oil. Solanum glaucophyllum. Solidago of Canada. Sorghum. Sylphium lacinatum, etc. Symphitum asperrimum, etc. Verbascum. Speedwell, etc. Yucca gloriosa. Cazoús E FIN. OF PART ONE IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER (- means same word or same page. V. means to see. A Bees................... Apricot tree................. - (pruning and cultivation of)........... peacock tail fan........... Early apricot or Apricotin. - alberge.............. - Alexandria........... - angoumois hâtif...... commun... - de Jacques, etc., etc.. Abris........... . . . . . . . . . . .. Absinthe.................. Teens...................... AIl........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Alpiste.................... Althæa. V. Marshmallow...... Flea beetle..................... Almond tree.................. Amendments.............. Pineapple.................... - (species or varieties of). Animal pests.......... Angelica archangelica.... Anise...................... Aromatic stimulants (plantsj............. .... .... Antiscorbutics........... Antispasmodics.......... August (work of the month)... Aquarium................. 61 159 162 - 160 - -- - 2- 24 132 24 93 212 130 59 162 15 121 123 55 133 131 132 131 8 301 Peanut.................. 133 Trees for espaliers. V. - chap. XIII. 147 chap. XIV. Fruit trees............ - chap. XIII.... - chap. XIV.... (pruning). V. to the particular nem of each tree and V. Pruning...... Arcure. V. Arqûre.......... Beef stopper.............. Artichoke.................. Asparagus................... Astringent plants ...... Eggplant................. Elecampane............ Movable awnings............ Avelinier. V. Noiset:er...... Tall oats.............. - potato, etc., etc..... April (work for the month of)... E Tarpaulins.................... Capuchin beard. V. Chicory........ . . . . . ...... Burdock.................. Spades.................... Belladonna.................. Berberis. V. Barberry. Beet.................. 169 147 149 169 142 146 123 72 74 132 128 132 24 203 206 212 é 28 113 132 17 131 131 86 - champêtre......... 210 27 Beurré. V. Pear tree.......... 170Carthame.................. Bigaradier. V. Orange tree.... 187 Bigarreautier. V. Cherry... 166 (varieties of)... Rinette.................... - 18 Bistorte.................. 139 Blanc de meunier........ . Blatte............ . . . . .... 51 63 Wheat. V. Froment........... 212 - black. V. Buckwheat...... Buds................. Burgundy................ Borage................. - officinal......... Boursette. F. Lamb's lettuce........ Button,................... Cuttings........ .... .... Bradyporus dasypus........ 215 143 208 109 131 115 143 39 62 Branches................. 143 Brassica. V. Cabbage... ...... Twigs................. Broccoli.................... 95 145 99 Bucail. V. Buckwheat......... 215 Bulblets.................. Byssus.......... .......... Cages................... Caieux................... Calendar for market gardeners and nursery gardeners.... Calville. V. Pommier.... . Stinking chamomile.......... - Roman......... Campanula. V. Raiponse.... Cantaloupe................ Cantharides.... ........... Nasturtium.................. Carabe sycophant......... Carafes................... Cardon............ .... .. .. Exciting carminatives... ... Carrot.................. - 37 55 25 37 3 179 131 132 116 124 57 109 67 33 103 133 82 white, etc....... 211 Carpomanie................ 49 Cassage................... Blackcurrant. V. Currants....... Citrontier. V. Orange tree...... Celery...................... Celery root................. Centaurea (small).......... 134 146 195 187 101 102 132 Cereals. V. chap. XVII..... 212 Chervil.................. Kite................. German cherries, cte.... - English late..... - de Montmorency.... - commune........... - Belle-griotte, etc.... - Sixteen to the pound, etc. - à Trochet........... - (conservation of)... Cherry tree................... - proper..... Cherry trees ....... Mushrooms (conches)... - (cultivation of)... antophytes.... oecidia....... Hemp............... ... Weevils............. . . Fuller's thistle........... Chasselas........... . .... Chassis.................... 106 57 - - - - - - 167 164 165 166 27 129 54 54 134 58 134 194 25 Chestnut................ 201 Chenille.................. Chicory.......... . ... . .. 67 113 Quackgrass...... ... . .. .... 130 Chlorosis................... 52 Cabbage................... 95-209 Head cabbage............... - Cabbage..... . . . . . . . . . . . . - Milan_........... - Brussels sprouts.......... - green.......... . . . . .... - ravo........ ........ - flower................. - cavalier ou Chou à va96 96 97 - - 98 - clies............... 209 - colza................ 210 - rutabaga............ - Chives or Civet... .... 93 94 Hemlock (large and small)..... 107 Shears................... Scissors. V. Scissors........ Citronelle.................. Lemon tree, V. Orange tree...... Pumpkin. V. Squash....... Cleaie...................... Cleavage,............ ....... Glass bells........... Cloportes.......... ... ..... Cochineal................. Cochlearia................. Cochonnet................. Coignassier................ Rapeseed. V. Colza cabbage........ Composts.................. Cucumber............. ... .wild........ Conifers.................. Counter-sun............... Gherkins... ............ Diapers................... Coudrier. V. Hazelnut...... Squash................... Courtillière................ Watercress............ - de fontaine........ Crescent................. Cueilloir or Cueille-fruit.... D Dards..................... December (work for the month of)..................... Husking.............. Déplantoir................. Depuratives (plants)....... Diuretics............... Doucette. V. Lamb's lettuce........ Doyenné. V. Poirier........ E Eaux de manier............ 22 22 131 187 126 23 25 25 71 63 132 145 169 210 15 125 132 147 25 126 26 203 126 60 104 104 22 23 114 10 52 21 132 130 115 170 Eborgnage................. Ebourgeonnage............. Ebourgeonnoirs........... Ebranchoirs............... Echalote................... Echenilloir................ Ellébore.................. Emollientes (plants)....... Blunts................ Fertilizer.................... Notching................. Spelt................. Spinach.................. Spinach.............. Ergot.................... . Erysimum. F. Watercress..................... Snails. V. Slugs...... Snails. V. Barley....... Espalier (to fish in). V. Espalier fishing.......... Esparcette................. Fstragon................... Eucampe.................. Eumolpe de la vigne....... Aromatic stimulants....... Expectorants...... E Fasciation................. Double sash windows... Fennel,................... Broad bean and its varieties........ Faba bean,.................. February (work for the month of). Fig tree.................... Timothy.................... Sweet fluke............ Forficules.................. Forks.................. Ant.................... Forages (grasses)...... Forages (legumes)... 471 145 = 19 22 94 22 132 130 19 14 145 214 100 131 54 104 56 215 153 208 108 60 131 132 49 34 109 81 207 4 197 206 - 60 70 64 205 207 Forages (roots), etc..... 209 15 ! Strawberry........ ........... 117 - (... - * -- " F. 472 TABLE OF CONTENTS. remontant strawberry.......... 119 - non remontant...... 120 - capron.... ......... - American........... - high wood........... 121 - Virginia scarlet............... - from Chile............ - superb Wilmot.. - Goliath............. - British queen...... - bifer.............. - - of the four seasons... 119 - of the Alps........... - from the woods............ - de Gaillon.......... - - 126 Framboisier................ 196 Frisole.................... 50 Froment ordinaire, etc., etc. 212 - épeautre sans bar- bes................. 214 - Amidonnier........ Fromental................. 206 Knife fruit. V. Pears - - Knife fruit........... Stone fruit. V. Peach... stone. V. ch. XIV. - berries. V. ch. Xv.. - in catkins. V. ch. XV. Fumagine................. Fumier, P. Fertilizer........ G Galles..................... 170 150 169 189 54 14 64 Garance................... 135 Garousse. V. Gesse......... Gaude..................... 81 135 English grass. V. Ivraie. 206, 207 Gelivure................... Juniper.................. Gentian.................. 52 133 132 Gesse.................. 81, 207 Gotte or Gau. V. Lettuce.... Gourmands................ 110 Grasses. P. chap. XVI.... 205 V. chap. XVII... 212 Gratiole................... Grafting..................... - by approach........ - herbaceous............ - slotted............. - crown..........

- as a flute or whistle. - in escutcheon.......... - à l'anglaise.......... - à la Pontoise........ - Fauna............... Greffoirs................... Grenadier................. Currants................ Common wasp........... Mistletoe....................... Guignier. V. Cherry tree... ... Gnimauve................. 132 40 41 42 43 = - 45 45 21 188 195 61 54 166 130 Guizotia oléifère........... 135 H Hanneton.................. Bean.................... - Dutch early dwarf............. - Spanish dwarf.......... Helianthus. V. Jerusalem artichoke. Helleborus. V. Ellébore.... Helminthes................ 56 79 80 - 88 132 54 Herd-Grass. V. Agrostis.... 205 Hordeum. V. Barley......... 215 Hops.............. 132. 136. Hoe...................... Holly (small)............... Hybridization.......... .... Hyoscyamus. V. Henbane. 18 133 47 130 Hyssope................... 133 1 Incision annulaire.......... 49 1 Insectes nuisibles.......... 116 56 Inula. V. Aunée............ 132 (Lo-ma. V. Corchorustextilis.. 135 Irrigation.................. 16 Ivraie vivace............... 206 - d'Italie.............. 207 Loir (piège à).............. 55 Lolium. V. Ivraie........... 206 Magnifiers.................... Lupin blanc................ 51 207 Luzerne................... 208 Janvier (travaux du mois de). Jarat. V. Gesse............ 211 Planters................ Jarosse. V. Gesse.......... Juglans. V. Noyer.......... July (work for the month of)... June (work for the month of)... Lettuce.................... - Spring..... - Summer.............. - winter............ - romaines.......... (cult. of). Lambourde................ Lavender.................... Perennial vegetables and vegetables proper.......... Root vegetables........... Edible bulb vegetables..................... Edible leaf and flower vegetables.............. Pulses (forage32 207 205 - 110 - 111 - - 113 145 131 72 82 90 95 nised by). V. chap. XVI. 205 Lentils.................... 81 Lepidium. V. Cress....... 104 Lérot (trap).............. Dragonflies.................. Ground ivy............ Slugs................... Limetier. V. Orange tree...... Lemon tree. V. Orange tree...... 55 (6 133 56 187 - Flax........................ 136 Perennial flax................. 137 Litter..................... Delivered..................... 4 M Lamb's lettuce..................... Madia from Chile............. May (work of the month)... Corn...................... Plant diseases...... Malus. V. Apple tree........ Malva. V. Mallow............ Mange-tout. V. Bean..... Mans...................... Marcottage................. Marcottes................. Marjoram................. Maroute. V. Stinking chamomile...................... Chestnuts. V. Chestnut tree.... March (work for the month of)... Mallow..................... Medicago. V. Alfalfa...... Lemon balm.................... Melon..................... - de cloche............ - Cantaloupe........... - Carmes black...... - Prescott, etc......... - d'eau................ Melongene................. Peppermint............ Merangene................. Cherry tree................... Maspilus. V. Néflier........ Messire-Jean. V. Poirier.... Métissage.................. Meunier (blanc de)......... Honeydew.................... Molluscs. V. Slugs..... 115 137 G 215 49 179 130 79 56 37 131 131 201 5 130 208 131 123 124 2 - 125 - 123 131 128 166 184 169 46 51 54 56 67 [Morus. V. Mulberry tree.......... 200 97. I. White glanders............. 50 Mustard.................. 132 Plant propagation... - bulbils............. - stalks............... - splinters. V. Bulblets... - seeds.............. - graft.............. - eyelets............. - Onions. V. Bulblets. - roots.............. - offshoots. V. Cuttings. 35 37 - - 36 411 37 39 - stems, etc., etc. 37, 38, 39 - tubers, etc....... Stone walls........... 37 24 Mulberry tree.................... 200 Narcotics................ Turnips..................... - S6cs. . . . . . .......... - tender, etc......... Necrosis................... Nerflier..................... Buckthorn................... Animalized black. V. Fertilizer. Hazelnut tree.................. November (work of the month)...................... Core (fruit)............ Walnut tree..................... October (work for the month of). Olive beetle.......... Eye................ ...... Carnations.................. Oidium tuckeri............ Onion.................... Olea. V. Olivier............ Oliette œillette. V. Poppy... 131 84 53 184 132 14 203 10 150 202 70 143 37 51 90 167 138 Olivier.................... 167 Oiives..................... - Ononis, V. Arrète-Bœul... 133 Orange tree................... Orangerie.................. Square barley, etc............ Origanum. V. Marjoram.... Stinging nettle........... Sorrel.................... Gardening tools......... P Mulch..................... Trellising.................. Grapefruit. V. Orange tree. Panachure.................. Parsnip..................... 187 28 215 131 137 101 17 24 146 187 52 85 Papaver. V. Poppy........... 138 Papilionaceae (fodder provided by). V. chap. XVI. 205 Butterflies of caterpillar pests)................... Parmentière. V. Potatoes..................... Passerage. V. Watercress..................... Watermelon. V. Watermelon... Pastinaca. V. Parsnip....... Patience.................. Poppy..................... 69 87 104 125 85 132 133 Peach..................... 150 Downy peaches with flesh not adhering to pit...... 150 Admirable peach........... - apricot............ - White peach. - - - beautiful Beauce......... 151 - cardinal............ - Chevreuse hâtive..... - tardive.... - Déesse hâtive........ - galante.............. - Magdeleine blanche... - alberge jaune........ - belle de Paris........ - de Vénus............ Downy peaches with adherent fruit................ -o - - - - - - - - N Pêche Pavie jaunc......... 151Plantes fourragères, grami- - tardive........ - Pomponne..... - Persée.............. Peaches with smooth, non-adherent fruit..................... Courson violet peach... - with smooth fruit and adherent............... - Brugnon............. Peach tree exhibition..... - (cultivation of)........... - (pruning)........... - (square spacing of).... - en V ouvert.... - à la Montreuil. - single palmette.......... - double palmette.......... - horizontal cords...... - in oblique cords......... - (disease of)......... Emollient pectorals....... Pentatomes for vegetable gardens... Nursery.................. Pepins (fruit). V. ch. XIV. Earwig............... Earwig. V. Fennel.... Purple loosestrife........... Parsley...................... Pe-tsai..................... Phaseolus. V. Beans....... - - - - - 152 153 155 - - 156 158 - 159 130 65 147 169 60 109 138 104 100 79 Phleum. V. Timothy.......... 206 Phormium. V. Flax.......... Phyllomanes (trees)....... Cabbage worm........... Pepper.................... Pinching. V. Pinching...... Pinching................. Pickaxe.................... 136 49 67 128 145 17 Pistachio................. 203 Pisum. V. Pea............. Pivoine officinale........... 76 131 Pissenlit................... 132 Plaies des arbres........... 53 nées.................... Leguminous plants....... - cereals............. - root vegetables...... - economic......... - used in the arts............... - medicinal........ - emollient.......... - pectoral emollients................ - diuretics.......... - narcotic.......... - refreshing...... - antispasmodics.... - stomachic........ - antiscorbutic...... - depurative.......... - astringent......... - expectorants........ - purgatives, etc... ... Planter................... Rain...................... Shovels..................... Earth pear. V. Jerusalem artichoke.................... Leek.............. ..... Pear tree.............. .... .. - (cultivation of).......... - Pyramid pruning... - cattail... - single palmette 475 205 212 212 82 133 - 130 - - 133 131 - 132 - - 133 132 - 2" 11 21 83 92 169 112 178 116 -- - double... 177 - - peacock-tailed. - spindle-shaped...... - in candle. - - siuueux cordous....... Pears guenette............ - d'Angleterre........ - de Madame..... ... - de Doyenné........ - Epargne............. - Mouille-bouche. ... - Romaine..... ..... - sans pepins...... .. - longue-verte......... - - 178 170 - - - - - -- - - Poires de Montigny......... 1701 Prune de Briançon......... 102 - S1x.................. - Grésilier............ - de Beurré........... - duchesse d'Angou lême, etc., etc...... - - rose................ 111 - Goulu-Morceau....... - Silvange............. - Gros-Rousselet....... = Lougard, etc......... - Crassane, etc........ - - - Bon-Chrétien, etc..... Amirale............. d'Amour............. Grosse queue, etc..... Beet.......... . - Sanguine d'Allemagne, etc........... - - - - - - - - Catillac, etc.......... 172 - Martin-Sire, etc...... - Chat-Brûlé, etc....... Peas....................... - shelling, dwarf...... - for shelling, with oars... - Mange-tout.......... - Chiche.............. Love apple. V. Tomato. Potato............ Apple tree.................. - (cultivation and pruning). - cordon pruning...... - 76 77 - 78 79 127 87 179 - - bush pruning..... 180 - - vase pruning........ - - goblet..... - Normandy.......... Porreau. V. Leek........ Portfolios (trees)....... Portulaca. V. Purslane...... Pumpkin. V. Squash......... Purslane.................. Prione..................... Weather forecasts......... Plum tree ....... Apricot plum............ - Reine-Claude...... . - of Catalonia......... - Brignole............ - - 92 49 109 126 109 58 11 164 162 - - - - Goutte d'or..... ... - impériale............ - - - - - with yellow fruit. 103 - Washington......... - Sainte-Catherine..... - Damask musk....... - violet, etc. .. . - de Tours, etc. - empress....... - imperial violet..... - de Monfort..... .... - Perdrigon red, etc.. - royale hâtive......... - Jefferson........... . - Mirabelle............ - de Monsieur........ - Saint-Julien,........ - peach............... - Victoria............. - d'Agen.............. - Black Damask......... - Cerisette............ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Green-good.......... 164 Aphids.................. Punica. V. Grenadier....... 65 188 Purgatives (plants)........ 132 Pyrale.................... 70 Pyrus. V. Pear........... 169 R Radish..................... 85 Radish-oleifera.............. 140 Refreshing (plants)... 131 Horseradish.......... 86,132 Rapunzel.................. 116 Grapes-chasselas. V. Vine. 189 Rameau. V. Branches...... 143 Raphanus. V. Radish........ - V. Rave......... - V.Horseradish........ Rats (trap).............. Rake.................... Rake................. Rave...................... - V. Turnips........... 85 85 86 55 20 19 85 84 Ray-Grass. V. Ivraie........ 206, Scise...................... Rechauds.................. 27 Réglisse................ 131,140 Reine-Claude. V. Plum... Re,net. V. Apple tree...... Knotweed. V. Purple loosestrife...... - viviparous......... - amphibious........ Repiquage................. Reseda. V. Gaude.......... Rhamnus. V. Buckthorn...... Rheum. V. Rhubarb...... Rhubarb................. - officinale........ Ribès, V. Groseillier....... Richelle. V. Froment....... Ricin...................... Rocambole. V. Garlic.......... V. Onion....... Romaine, V. Lettuce........ Rosemary.................. Rose de Provins............ Rust-red.............. Roll... .. ....... .. . .. Rubia. V. Garance......... Rubus. V. Raspberry...... Rumex. V. Sorrel......... - V. Patience.... ... Ruscus. V. Holly........... 164 179 138 139 37 135 132 140 104 132 195 224 132 93 90 111 131 133 45 23 135 196 101 132 133 Rutabaga. V. Cabbage......... 210 Saffron..................... Bleeding.................... Sainfoin................... Salads.................... Salsify.................... Salvia. V. Sage............ Soapwort................. Buckwheat................... Buckwheat.......... ... .... . Sage........ ............ Grasshoppers................. 131 146 208 110 86 131 132 19 215 131 61 Scandix. V. Cerfcuil......... 106 Scarabée.................. 59 Scarole. V. Chicory....... 113 477 21 Scille..................... 132 Scolyme d'Espagne......... Scolytes................... Scorsonera................ Secateurs.................. 86 58 86 21 Rye..................... 216 Tree and shrub seeds. V. Nursery...... 147 Broadcast sowing........... 36 - in pots............. - in pots........... - in rays............. - in nurseries.......... - on bed.......... Seneve. V. Mustard....... September (work for the month of) ..... ... . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. Serfouette................. Serpes..................... Serpettes................. Greenhouses............. ...... Sinapis alba. V. Mustard. Sisymbrium. V. Watercress.... Sweet sorghum.............. Spinacia. V. Spinach...... Sterility (causes)........ Stomach tonics (plan- 37 132 8 19 21 28 132 104 216 100 50 tes)...................... 132 Stramoine. Datura.......... Stratification............... Floral suspensions........ 131 36 32 Symphitum. Comfrey...... 130 T Pruning..................... 142 Apricot pruning....... - Peach tree........... - Square espalier.... - open V shape...... - single palmette............ - double palmette........... - Montreuil-style - in hori161 152 153 155 - 156 155 zontal cords....... 158 I S Peach tree pruning in oblique cords...... - Pear trees........... - Pyramid shape..... - Cattail shape.... - in palmettes..... - peacock tail, etc........... - Apple tree........ - in cords....... - in bushes, etc. Tansy................... Mole trap ........... Sawfly................. Termites.................. Potting soil. V. Fertilizers....... Tetragon................. Thlaspi sativum. V. Cress 159 172 173 176 175 177 7. 189 131 55 66 61 14 100 Alenois.................. 104 Land (choice of).......... Tomato................... Jerusalem artichoke.............. Tormentil................ Touzelle. V. Froment... .. Traçoir.................... Water clover............... Triticum. V. Quackgrass..... 13 127 88 133 - 20 132 130 Tropœclum. V. Nasturtium... 109 Trowel................... 23 Tubers.............. 37 Turions..... ......... ... Turnep.................... 210 Ulcers................... Gardening utensils..... 51 17 Valerian officinalis....... 131 Wind...................... White worms. V. Mans. . ... 11 56 Common vetch........... 209 Vicia. V. Vesce......... . Vigne................... 139 - (maladie de la)...... 51 - (taille de la).......... 189 à la Thomery.. 199 Vinetier. V. Épine-Vinette... 131 Violette.................. . 130 2 Zea. V. Corn.............. 215 END OF TABLE OF CONTENTS. Pages. DISCLAIMER................................................ Calendar for market gardeners and nursery gardeners.... .......... Weather forecasts............................... CHAPTER ONE - Choice of soil. - Fertilizers. - Composts. - Amendments. - Irrigation............................. CHAP. II. - Gardening tools and utensils. - Shelters for conserving plants: Frames, Layers, Greenhouses, Orangeries, Planters, Apartment greenhouses, etc....................... CHAP. HI. - Means of propagating plants. - Seedlings. - Budding and Marcottage. - Cutting. - Grafting. - Crossbreeding. - Hybridization.................................. CHAP, IV. - Plant diseases. - Animal pests....... First section. - Plant Diseases................. Second section. - Animal pests..................... CHAP. V. - Perennial vegetables and vegetables proper: I° Artichokes, Asparagus. - 2° Peas, Beans, Lentils...... First section. - Artichokes, Asparagus................... Second section. - Peas, Beans, Lentils.......... CHAP. VI. - Root vegetables: Carrots, Turnips, Parsnips, Radishes, Raves, Horseradish, Salsify, Scorzonera, Beets, Potatoes, Jerusalem artichokes........................................ CHAP. VII. - Vegetables with edible bulbs: Onions (species and varieties), Leeks (species and varieties), Garlic, Chives, Shallots............................................. CHAP. VIII. - Edible leaf and flower vegetables: Cabbage (varieties), Kohlrabi, Turnip cabbage (varieties), Spinach, Tetragon, Sorrel, Celery, Celeriac, Cardoons, Watercress, Watercress, Rhubarb, Parsley, Chervil, Tarragon, Purslane, Fennel, Nasturtium, Borage...................... CHAP. IX. - Lettuces: Spring, summer and winter lettuces, Roman lettuces, Chicory, Scarole, Wild chicory, Chicory, Lamb's lettuce. Rapunzel.................... CHAP. X. - Edible fruit plants: Strawberries (species and varieties), Everbearing strawberries, Non-everbearing strawberries, Matt strawberries, Aubergines, Peppers................................. CHAP. XI. - Mushrooms. - Medicinal plants. - Economic plants................... .................. ...... CHAP. XII. - Tree pruning in general: Eyes, Buds, Buds Branches, False Branches, 11 13 17 35 49 55 72 76 82 90 95 110 biferous highbush; Pineapples; Melons, Cantaloupes, Embroidered melons," Smooth-skinned melons, Watermelons, Cucumbers, Gourds; TocoFY 117 129 Branches, Stings, Bourses, Lambourdes, Brindilles, Cochonnets, Notching, Debudding, Pinching, Palissage, Breaking, Ring incision, Bleeding, Bowing................ CHAP. XIII. - Nursery. - General observations on tree and shrub seeds. - Stone fruit trees: peach, apricot, almond, plum, cherry, sour cherry, cherry tree, olive tree................ CHAP. XIV. - Pome fruit trees: Coignassier, Poirier, Pommier, Néflier, Oranges and Grenadiers................... CHAP. XV. - Fruits with berries and kittens: grapevines, currants, raspberries, thorns, figs, blackberries, chestnuts, walnuts, hazelnuts and pistachios........................................ CHAP. XVI. - Forages: grasses; - legumes; - roots.......... ........................................... 142 149 169 189 205 CHAP. XVII. - Cereals..................................... 212 PART TWO Florist-gardener's calendar............................... CHAPTER ONE - Bedding. - Borders. - Lawns. - Assortment of flowers; laws of color. - Bedding, ornamental and collection plants. - Parterre accessories............ CHAP. It. - Landscape gardens. - Rivers, streams, lakes, water features. - Paths, driveways. - Cuttings, embankments, artificial valleys and hills. - Distribution of trees and shrubs, etc..... CHAP. III. - Ornamental plants and trees. - Character of the main natural families.............................. CHAP. IV. - Brief description and cultivation of ornamental plants..................................................... CHAP. V. - Vocabulary of key gardening and botanical terms................................................. CHAP. VI. - Basics of Botany.................. CHAP. VII. - First section: Flower. - Fruit............... Section two: Methedes................. ... CHAP. VIII. - Pleme terre plants for use in the garden 217 224 235 244 248 427 439 446 453 ornamental......................................... 460 END OF TABLE OF CHAPTERS. -... ." CORBEIL. - Typ. et stér. du CRETE FILS. * bound, English cloth........... 3 fr. 50 Le Cuisinier des cuisiniers, 1,000 recipes de cordon bleu, usuelles, faciles et économiques, par le Dr JOURDAN-LECOINTE, 21e édit. 1 large vol. in-12, with numerous woodcuts. Le Guide-Conseil en affaires. Dictionnaire de droit usuel et pratique, spécialement destiné aux propriétaires, locataires, rentiers, négociants, entrepreneurs, ouvriers, cultivateurs, fermiers, etc., by M. PILET DES JARDINS, 1 vol. in-12. Guide pratique du vétérinaire et du parfait bouvier, contenant tout ce qui a rapport : 1° aux espèces bovine, chevaline, ovine, porcine : croisements, castrations, maladies et remèdes: - 2° aux petits quadrupèdes domestiques : lapin, léporide, cochon d'Inde, furet, chien et chat; - 3° aux oiseaux de basse-cour; poules, coqs, dindes, oies, canards, pigeons, cygnes, etc.4° à la maréchalerie, by a society of veterinarians and breeders, under the direction of M. RIVIÈRE, veterinarian. 1 volume in-12. Guide pratique du style épistolaire, ou Traité complet de la correspondance, by M. DURAND, head of institution, and M. MESLINs, former head of corresp, from the Laffite-Caillard firm. 1 vol. in-12. Le Guide pratique du chasseur, contenant la chasse à courre; - la chasse à tir; - le dressage des chevaux et des chiens de chasse; traitement de leurs maladies; - maniement et entretien des armes; - engins de chasse: pièges, filets, etc.; - termes de vénerie, by M. GAETAN DE LA TOUR. Guide pratique du pêcheur. Traité complet de tout ce qui est relatif à la pêche à la ligne et au filet en eau douce et en mer; à la préparation des appâts naturels et artificiels; - à la manière de faire et de raccommoder les filets; - un calendrier perpétuel du pêcheur; les lois, ordonnances et règlements sur lapêche, etc., by MM. A. B. MoRIN, garde-pêche, and J. Maupurr, patron du bateau pêcheur l'Intrépide. Guide pratique pour conserver et recouvrer la santé, ou Traité complet de médecine et de pharmacie domestiques mises à la portée de tout le monde, et contenant les moyens de connaître les maladies par leurs symptômes, de les guérir par l'emploi des remèdes les plus sûrs et les plus efficaces; de conserver sa santé par l'hygiène, etc., by Dri VOLLET, ex-interne des hôpitaux de Paris. Guide pratique de la ménagère et de ra mère de famille à la ville et à la campagne. A complete treatise on everything to do with: - housing; - the cellar; - servants and accounting; - sewing; - food supplies, etc., etc.., easy and instantaneous means of recognizing the falsifications to which they are subjected, etc.; - world customs; - farming, etc., etc.; - domestic medicine, perfumery, etc., with several hundred various recipes, etc., by A. DE BEAUYILLE, 1 vol. in-12, br............................... 3 fr 2327-81. CORDEIL. - Typ. et stér. de CRRTE.