Guercy, M me de (née Prévost). Author of the text, L'école du jardin potager, contenant, mois par mois, l'indication des travaux, de la culture et des semences à faire... pour le potager, les fourrages, céréales.... / by Mme de Guercy née Prévost,.. 1859. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is a digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the BnF collections. Their reuse is governed by French law no. 78-753 of July 17, 1978: -Non-commercial reuse of this content, or reuse as part of an academic or scientific publication, is free of charge, provided that current legislation is complied with, and in particular that the source of the content is stated as follows: "Source gallica.bnf. fr / Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use is understood to mean the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates revenue: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a service or product for which a charge is made, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE ETALA LICENCE RATES 2/ Gallica content is the property of BnF, in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the French General Code of Public Property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are: reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. These documents may not be reused, except in the context of private copying, without the prior authorization of the copyright holder. -reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 71 To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation. commercialeobnf. fr. Source gallica.bnf.fr / Blbliothèque natlonal de Franc JARDIN POTAGER. JARDIN POTAGER CONTENANT, MOIS PAR MOIS, L'INDICATION DES TRAVAUX, DE LA CULTURE ET DES SEMENCES A PAIR A CHAQUE ÉPOQUE, POUR LE POTAGER, LES FOURRAGES, CÉRÉALES, GAZONS, ETC. Ouvrage destiné aux départements du Midi, PAR Mme de GUERCY née PRÉVOST, Commerce de graines, 1() riace des Carmez, 14. TOULOUSE, IMPRIMERIE DE A. CHAUVIN, RUE MIREPOKX, 3. 1859. D G, G D We have read with the greatest interest the manuscript you thought we should receive, and we have found a great deal of modesty in the title under which you propose to publish it. You are not, in fact, writing only for gardeners, or for the man who devotes his leisure time to horticulture; the true farmer, the one who seeks to increase the produce of his fields, can draw the most useful notions from it; you speak, above all, of forages as the most learned agronomists have spoken of them, and your School has the inestimable advantage of presenting only the principles established by the most unequivocal experience. Your work, full of exact definitions and interesting facts, can therefore be considered an excellent Manue for both large and small landowners, and we applaud the generous thought that prompted you to undertake it. May you find in its publication the reward for your zeal and the efforts you are constantly making to promote the progress of the most useful of all sciences! Please accept, Mapemoiselle, the assurances of our most distinguished consideration. The President of the Royal Agricultural Society, MALARET, signed. Le Segrétaire perpétuel de la Societé rayale d'Agriculture. CAVALIÉ, signed. potager pour la cinquième fois, je ne peux pas empêcher de témoigner ma reconnaissance à MM. les membres composant la Société d'Agriculture pour l'appui dont ils m'ont favoris. I trust they will be pleased to learn of the complete success of my trial. This little work has been appreciated by our large landowners; they have taken foreign and highly cultivated seeds from me. These gentlemen can be sure that my company will continue to merit the trust they have always placed in it.   G G G G G D G, G, D D In order to facilitate research, I must inform the reader of the division I have adopted. I have preferred alphabetical order, as the simplest, and have divided my opuscule into two main chapters: In the first, I indicate the seeds used in the vegetable garden proper; In the second, I deal with seeds used for fodder. These seeds are divided into four natural families, forming four classes: the first includes seeds of the grass family; the second, those of the legume family; the third, those belonging to various families; the fourth, forage roots. Finally, I'll go into a few details about cereals and lawns. By indicating the proper times for sowing, I will direct country gardeners to take the greatest care with their seedlings, and to renew them every few days. During winter, it's urgently necessary to establish built-up or earthen benches along a wall facing south; during spring and summer, the benches are placed in semi-shade. This is how the plants will succeed: thrown into garden tiles, the delicate seeds become the pasture of insects, which crawl out in the night, devouring everything before the vigilant eye of the gardener has seen their germs rise. When sowing has been unsuccessful in this way, people complain wrongly about the quality of the seeds: the precautions I have indicated would have prevented any inconvenience. As an example, let me cite the flat-leaf cabbage, cultivated with great success by the gardeners of Toulouse: their produce can be seen on display in our squares; and yet this same seed, for which I dare to vouch, cannot succeed when distributed in the countryside; the same applies to all other seeds: the procedure I propose will suffice on its own to achieve any success. I must recommend gardeners to have well-consumed potting soils, and to use them for all small and delicate seeds, which they must bury very little, especially in strong soils; it is then better to spread potting soils on top, or, if they are very fine, and the seedling not very spread out, to sift a little soil into dust, and cover it with light moss: when the seeds are too deeply buried, only a very small part of them sprouts; this little part is even slow to germinate, and the plant is usually weak. All spring and summer seedlings, especially in strong soils, should be covered with compost, or at least short manure (1); they can also be covered with a little moss, to protect them from sunburn and dryness; this prevents the soil from cracking, hardening and forming a crust. All seedlings in general need frequent wetting. When the soil in the benches is exhausted, after the seedlings have been removed and before any new ones are planted, a few inches of (1) By short manure we mean the coarse parts of the compost, or the very short straws removed from the edges and paths of the beds, or from the piles of consumed manure, which we pulverize to make them softer; in this way we avoid the coarse straws, which prevent the short manure from touching the soil. compost to facilitate the germination of the new seeds. The limits I have imposed on myself will not allow me to go into too many long, detailed instructions; I shall confine myself to pointing out what is absolutely necessary for successful sowing and the proper time for sowing. To instruct the gardener, to pique his self-esteem, to give him a taste for his profession, to inspire him to emulate his neighbor: this is the goal to which I aspire, and which I shall be satisfied to have achieved. I offer new species of vegetable plants that have been perfectly successful. In order to make them better known, I have given cabbages, celery and other items that I can say I have begun to propagate to various gardeners for trial. SOILS. The gardener's foresight should be focused on the provision of potting soils: they should be formed from soil taken from the edges of fields, along paths, around strawbeds, and from the ground. This soil, along with the turf that is usually mixed with it, should be piled up in layers, with manure: sheep manure is especially preferable. Let the whole thing dry out, even water the pile if the weather is too dry (manure is known to dry out in summer), and spade the soil from the top to the bottom of the pile: in this way, the soil and manure are mixed together; the pile must then be rebuilt, and the same process repeated several times; this well-consumed compost will be used for sowing. The gardener must not stick to a single heap, waiting to see it through to completion; he must have several prepared in advance, and at different times. With these precautions, which require no great effort or loss of time, he will be amply rewarded by the success of the seedlings; whereas by sowing on flat ground, on poorly prepared, unsmoked soil, the seeds cannot germinate and are devoured by insects. In a wet spring, even transplanted plants are not immune to being devoured, even though they are strong; all the more so when the seeds of young, delicate plants are exposed to being eaten by slugs. The carrot, for example, as I'll remind you in its article, is often devoured by the ground spider. Here's the only way to preserve them and all seedlings: take quicklime, throw it into a pot filled with water, let it boil, stir with a stick, and after it has dissolved, sprinkle this water with a watering can over the seedlings devoured by insects; they won't reappear on the same spot for a long time, as this procedure has always been used successfully. Snails usually gather on strong plants, such as currant bushes, boxwood borders and others. Take powdered lime, sprinkle it all over the plants, and you'll see the snails fall off and die. It's in this way that our gardeners save most of their seedlings, and supply our markets, and even the countryside, in abundance. SOWING TIMES, PLANTING, ETC. As the temperature is not uniform every year, it is easy to understand that the following indications cannot be rigorously exact, and that sowing will have to be brought forward or delayed, depending on whether the season is earlier or later. JANUARY. The sun rises in January, and with the year begins a new order of vegetation. All the sowing of the previous months, which was slowed down by the onset of winter, heralds the coming renewal of nature with the arrival of January, making it easier to sow early. Lescure onion sowing begins; Cutting lettuce, known as petite laitue, wild chicory and supplies, nasitort, arugula, chervil, parsley, purslane, small celery, early radishes and turnips, early white carrots, short red Liège, large celery for bedding out, early Aleth cabbage, michaux and dwarf peas, and other species designated in December, and all early cabbages, if previous sowings have failed. Also sow early peas with the recommended care, and replace any beans that have perished with those from Nice. FEBRUARY. If the ground is not frozen or covered with snow, continue to sow small lettuces and their supplies, radishes, mixed with carrots if desired; cabbage, kale, early Aleth cabbage, to bring them forward, and replant in place in March; michael peas, and others that may have been missed in previous months; asparagus, and artichokes for those that may be late; chicory-scarole for summer, curly-leaf lettuces, mousseronnes crêpes; parsley. You can also grow black-seeded romaine and Lombardy plants, eggplants; sow porreau, Lescure onion; early carrots, short Liège, very sweet white, very large with green collar; chili, ditto sweet; spinach, various species. Plant shallots, garlic and rocambola in light soil. Sow asparagus seed in the ground at the end of this month. Sow asparagus legs. Sow purple eggplants, tomatoes; sow autumn flowers. MARCH. This is the month when the earth opens up and calls for all the gardener's activity. Replant all the strawberry, sorrel and tarragon borders. We sow abundantly, and without fear, various kinds of snow peas, broad beans, several species of lettuce, romaine, escarole, Maux curly endive, wild chicory in borders or beds, chervil, parsley, onion, porreau, spring onion, carrots, beet, spinach, turnips and radishes, and all garden vegetables except beans, cardoons and eggplants. Asparagus can be planted, seedlings can be sown, and legs can be placed in the ground, if this was not possible the previous month. Aleth cabbage, if you missed it, early cabbage, York sprouts, salsify, scorzonera, ordinary tomatoes, large tomatoes, yellow tomatoes and plain tomatoes without Naples ribs. Repeat any missing seedlings. APRIL. We continue the previous month's work, sowing and planting all kinds of vegetables in abundance, weeding seedlings that have already been sown, thinning out those that are too thick, grommeting artichoke plants, and planting the most beautiful grommets to form a new plant if needed. Asparagus can still be planted at the beginning of the month. Watering should be done in the morning, during the day, and not in the evening, for fear of white frost. Sow various types of Savoy cabbage this month: milan des vertus, gros pointu, milan blanc doré de Russie, Bruxelles cabbage, rosette, or mille-têtes, known by all three names; haricot hâtif rond de Soissons, mange-tout; haricot-sabre à grandes rames. As vegetation becomes very active during this month, gardeners must not lose sight of plants that go quickly, such as turnips and radishes, spinach, chervil, romaine lettuce, peas, etc., so as to sow them often enough to avoid running out. Sow cucumbers and gherkins. If you haven't sown celery and cardoons by the end of March, hurry up and sow them at the beginning of the month. MAY. You can still sow spring onions, and any other vegetables (1) that have been forgotten. In May, you can still sow beets, carrots every fortnight, cucumbers, green gherkins, cauliflowers (1) I use the word légume in the general sense given to it in the French language, and which is used almost throughout the kingdom, but also of all kinds of vegetable plants. Holland hard and half-hard, recommending that they be sown, along with broccoli, eight days apart; cauliflower, from the end of May to the end of June; cardoons from Spain and Tours, lettuces for cooking, and romaine; a few small turnips and radishes, early turnips, beans, mange-tout of all kinds, early peas. April is infinitely more suitable for sowing. JUNE. Summer is harvest time: no more sowing or planting. However, spinach and supplies are still sown in mid-shade areas in June, but these weekly seeds have only one cutting. We sow large turnips, long radishes, small black radishes and large ones; we sow raiponce seed, as in August, watering it often; we sow lettuces for peeling, such as hollandaise, lazy, Batavia, Versailles cabbage lettuce, and chicory, beans, michael peas and carrots. From June through to winter, in addition to the seeds mentioned above that need to be sown in advance for the following year, other seeds are sown and paid for immediately. These are the weekly seeds, i.e. lettuce supplies, spinach, radishes, turnips, black radishes; lettuce and chicory plants are also raised, and even various leguminous seeds, such as prud'homme beans, early beans, especially michaux peas and Clamar peas. Although nothing sown after the summer solstice brings the seeds to maturity, since we're content here with these green seeds, we can harvest them. Finally, those who fear no expense in procuring rarities, sow cucumbers at the beginning of July, and harvest their fruits, by dint of manure, in December and January. JULY. Sowing of all vegetables whose produce can be obtained in less than three or four months continues as in the previous month, such as all kinds of salads and supplies, beans for eating green, peas, gherkins, eggplants, autumn cauliflowers, broccoli, kohlrabi, autumn carrots. Celery is ridged every two weeks, so that we always have some ready to eat. At the end of the month we sow cabbages, which we transplant in nurseries; we can also sow York cabbages, to enjoy them at the end of March: we sow chives and porreau to succeed those sown in spring; but it's good to remember that if the seeds we sow then to give their product the following spring were too new, the plants would be prone to go up : the safest time to sow these kinds of seeds is from August 10 to 15; this is the time to sow white onions for replanting in October, and scorzonera for overwintering. As can be seen from the list of cabbage, lettuce, etc. species not cultivated in our départements, with the exception of amateur gardens, and which are fixed at five or six varieties of each species, it necessarily follows that, for part of the year, we are deprived of vegetables. If we wanted early vegetables, it would be possible to obtain them, as well as late species, and enjoy the whole year the resources that nature provides. I'll mention peas and beans, which, because of their different species, can be eaten green, in the form of grain, or with their tender pods and without fillets: by experimenting, these various vegetables can be obtained almost all year round. Mashed potato peas are generally very neglected, yet this vegetable is a great resource at certain times, especially in years of unusual cold, such as the one we experienced at the end of 1829 and the beginning of 1830. The inhabitants of the north and of cold countries, more careful than we are, have their provisions ready, and are never without. There are well-educated gardeners who have wanted to sow foreign lettuces: when they take their produce to the market, they can't get rid of it, because the buyers don't know it. When, then, will the time come to cultivate with care the riches we owe to nature's inexhaustible resources? AUGUST. You won't see a single empty garden corner in this month, any more than in June and July. Cucumbers and gherkins need plenty of watering when it's not raining, and cauliflowers, cardoons and celery require copious watering even when it's raining a little. In addition to sowing and planting everything that will be eaten within the year, we must also take care of what can survive the winter and produce the following year; for example, we sow white onions, porreau, salsify, scorzonera, red passion lettuce, which we replant in the ground; spinach, chervil, turnips; carrots for spring. The gardener must carefully study his terrain and locality, in order to know the advantages and disadvantages: there are, in fact, terrains and sites where autumn sowing must be done a fortnight earlier or later than in others. In support of my argument, I'll cite our mountains, which lie within a radius of sixteen to twenty leagues from here: gardeners there sow early York sprouts a month earlier than in Toulouse, their plants remain covered in snow for three or four months, and the terrain is so favorable to them that York sprouts, which are very small among us, become much stronger in our mountains than our summer cabbages. Following our scorching summers, peas and green beans have often provided abundant supplies until the end of November. Bind chicory and escarole, and butter celery, often and sparingly at the same time. From the beginning of the month, sow early head cabbage, female beef cabbage, cabalan, Strasbourg cabbage, to have early crops; prud'homme beans: an excellent all-rounder, can supply until the frosts. SEPTEMBER. We continue to sow and plant everything that can be eaten or harvested. All sowings made during the previous month can be continued, as well as various lettuces, supplies, very early white turnips; chervil, spinach, yellow-pink radishes, yellow turnips, York sprouts, sugarloaf, cabbage (1), cabal, Strasbourg (all foreign cabbages sement in this month); parsley, broad-ribbed chard; spinach, to enjoy for a long time: small, pink, half-long radishes that last well through the winter; short, early Liège carrots; early white carrots; winter romaine lettuce. (1) Our gardeners sement flat summer cabbage every month of the year, to ohtenir primeurs; late sowings provide them with this species until the frosts. OCTOBER. Spinach and chervil can be sown during this month, and will bear fruit in March if the autumn is favorable; but crepe lettuce, gotte lettuce and romaine lettuce can be sown with advantage. At the end of the month, we sow a few snow peas at the foot of walls, in good exposure; we transplant young York cabbage, head cabbage sown in August, either in nursery, to be put in place only in February and March, or even immediately for a temperate climate. We sow the large Narbonne and Perpignan beans, and the early Nice ones. At the end of the month, asparagus stalks are cut, smoked and the soil ploughed; this is also the time to cut artichoke stalks, clean the stalks, shorten the outer leaves and plough to facilitate the ridging that will take place next month. Celery, cardoons, escarole and chicory continue to be blanched in the usual way. NOVEMBER. Radishes, lettuces, nasitort are sown: asparagus is sown in autumn with more success than in spring; large quarantine peas, Norman purée peas, long-shelled peas; large dwarf peas; Narbonne and Nice broad beans, if they could not be sown earlier. Cabbage seedlings sown in August or July are put in place; when placing them, care is taken to press them against the back of furrows made with a spade, so that they are sheltered from the north winds. DECEMBER. There is little to be done in the open ground during this month, unless there is some ripping to be done; however, if the vegetable garden is in strong soil, the earth in the empty squares can be ploughed roughly, so that the frosts penetrate it, and make it more crumbly; for it will heat up in the spring, and seedlings and plantations will thrive all the better for having been more divided. We sow lettuces, watercress, white mustard, lettuce supplies, garlic, radishes, Norman green peas, long-shelled and michaux peas, early peas, dwarf bouquet peas, dwarf green peas without parchment. These five species should be sown by anticipation, and little, in case of heavy frosts, observe that peas in the ground only fear frosts when the leaf has reached a certain elevation on the ground. VEGETABLE GARDEN. CHAPTER ONE. CATALOG OF VEGETABLE SEEDS. AlL. Alium sativum. Cloves are planted at the end of January, February and March, in beds four or five inches apart. Spanish garlic, or ROCAMBOLE. Scorodoprasum. Same cultivation: the bulblets of the stem and the cloves are used to multiply the plant, and are put to the same uses as garlic. Garlic is not cultivated. ARROCHE des Jardins, BONNE-DAME, BELLE-DAME. Atriplex hortensis. This annual plant is used to soften the acidity and overly green color of sorrel. It is sown in February, every two weeks, so as not to run out: any soil will do. ARTICHAUT. Cynara. There are several species: their cultivation is fairly well known. With large, long roots, they require deep, fresh, fertile, crumbly soil; they are usually propagated by eyelets around January, February and March. Here's the procedure to follow. When the old artichokes have leaves about 8 to 12 inches high, dig them up to the origin of their young stems with a spade, to expose them. There are usually from five to ten on each plant: we choose the two or four best to keep them, and we break off all the others as close as possible to the root, so as to remove them with the heel. These young stems are called "œilletons". We select the strongest ones and those with a good heel, from which new roots should emerge; we clean and smooth this heel with the serpette, if there are shreds, and we shorten the leaves to the height of 6 inches. This operation must be carried out immediately, and the leaves must not be allowed to wither. The Laon artichoke generally produces much higher yields than the southern varieties: its seed is sown in February and March. ASPERGE. Asparagus officinalis from southern France. Asparagus can be propagated in two ways, either by sowing in the field, or by raising plants in a nursery: the latter is the more common method. This operation is carried out in October or November. After preparing the soil to receive the legs, the squares are made as desired; from the length of the pits, three lines are drawn at equal distance, on which the places for the roots are marked, about fifteen to eighteen inches apart, by very small mounds of potting soil; the roots are laid out by hand on the mound, with their ends inclined, and the whole is immediately covered with two inches of soil. With these distances, it will be easy to hoe and water other plants that can be grown on the slope: low plants will suffice. Green Dutch asparagus seed and large Ulm violets are the best: sow the seed in March for sowing. BETTERAVE, Beta vulgaris. The red-black and yellow Castelnaudary beets are the most esteemed in our country; the yellow, white-fleshed beet, one of the best for extracting sugar, is grown like the other beets: it offers the grower a resource for speculation and income. It is widely cultivated in the north of France, and its sugar product is sold for consumption. It is to be hoped that this cultivation will spread to our southern departments, where the soil is highly suitable for the success of this plant. Once the soil has been well loosened by good ploughing, sowing is carried out in rays at the end of March and April: the plants must be thinned out so that they are at least a foot to eighteen inches apart: depending on the quality of the soil, fertilizer must be used; only consumed manure should be used. BASILIC. Ocymum Basilicum. Fine or broad-leaf, sow in March on a bed; outdoors in April. CARROT. Daucus Carota. There are a large number of cultivated carrots; I will mention the best species: the long red carrot from Toulouse, cultivated in large quantities, is a very good species; the long red from Holland, the short early (this species is very valuable for terre-fort, where the long carrot cannot rotate, as the soil is not soft); the short carrot can replace it with advantage: the short one can replace it with advantage; the red one, the white one, delicate to the taste, early (white carrot with green cockle out of the ground, very big: sow it clear, each seed at 5, 7 and 8 inches of distance, new species): the last two can be sown in September, October and February, to have them early, and replace those which, sown in June, begin to get woody. Carrots can be sown from February to the end of June, and can be taken up again in September; the first sowings, done a fortnight apart, provide for spring and summer; the last ones in June are used for winter until vegetation: this root requires deep, soft, sandy soil, well amended before autumn: they must be sown light, or thinned out so that those kept for winter are 5 to 6 inches apart (1). This thinning is done successively, and (1) Carrots are most often devoured at birth by the spider, not the one that crawls on trees, but the one that crawls on the ground, which is always on the move, and attacks several young seedlings, particularly carrots, whose tigelle it pricks to pump out the juices: the plant then withers and perishes. This spider is sometimes so numerous that it destroys seedlings of any size: there is only one way to keep it at bay; as it fears humidity, the plants are lightly watered every day, when the weather is limey and dry, with a decoction of lime water and soot. the torn carrots are used for cooking. Although I have just indicated, as far as I can, the qualities of the various carrots, it is nevertheless true to say that the nature of the soil influences this point, as much as and more than the quality of the seed, if the soil is not favorable to this plant: strong soil prevents the root from pivoting; the soil being too compact, it also loses its natural color, and becomes pale yellow. Cultivated celery. Apium graveolens. There are various species: dwarf, small to cut, whose leaves are used as salad supplies; Turkish or Persian celery; the large violet of Tours, remarkable for the thickness of its ribs, the size of its stalk and the entire volume of the plant, which is more considerable than in most others; and, finally, celeriac, whose large, turnip-shaped root is eaten cooked. To grow celery at different times of the year, sow from January to June in a light, well-amended bed of soil, staggered in rays about nine to ten inches apart; each plant is watered immediately to promote growth, and moistened every two or three days if it doesn't rain; when the plant is strong enough, it is blanched by tying it with three ties in dry weather, and covering it with dry straw, so that only the tips of the leaves are visible; or, after tying, the soil is heaped around the plant up to the first tie; after eight days, it is raised to the second tie, and finally to the third; eight days after this operation has been carried out, lettuces, chicory, etc. are planted to make use of the soil. In May and June, seedlings should be sown in the open air, and should be thinned out so that they can be left in place without being transplanted, in order not to retard growth. CAPUCIN, Tropœolum, The large and small varieties are grown to dress salads: the flower buds are barely formed and the seeds taken while still green are preserved in vinegar, replacing capers; the large, creeping variety is used to dress cabinets: it is sown in April and May. CARDON. Cynara cardunculus. From Barbary, we prefer Tours cardoon, which is very thorny, to Spanish cardoon, which is thornless, because the latter combines the disadvantage of being more prone to climbing with that of having thinner, less tender ribs: Both can be sown as early as February, in pots and under cover, if you want to have early cardoons, good for eating in June; but some always come up: to have them in winter, sow them only in May and June, in holes lined with consumed manure, spaced about three feet apart in all directions, where you place two or three seeds together, to leave only one plant. These plants should be grown in the same way as artichokes, but more watered and kept warmer, as they are more delicate; they should be blanched when they are strong enough: they should be mounded with earth, which should be piled up at the base; the leaves, which are often five feet long, should be brought together; they should be held together with wicker, or better still with straw; tightened in this way for three weeks, the cardoon will then have blanched, and its ribs will have softened: left any longer it would rot. CERFEUIL. Scandix cerefolium. Native and annual. It is sown at all times, from March to September, with the difference that it is sown in rays at the foot of a wall in March, in the north and in the shade during the summer, and at any exposure at other times. Curly chervil, very nice variety: same cultivation. CHENILLETTE. Scorpiurus. A small, indigenous annual plant whose bristly, scaly, furrowed fruits imitate either caterpillars, worms or snails; as a sort of mischief, they are sometimes added to salad supplies, to surprise people who are unfamiliar with them. They are sown in spring in ordinary soil. CHERVIS, CHERUI, CHIROUIS and GIROLLES. Sium sisarum. Fleshy, very sweet roots that can be eaten like scorsonera. Sow in spring or September, in soft, cool, deep soil, and water often. WILD CHICORY. Cichorium intybus. Native and perennial. Sow all year round, every two weeks; young leaves are used in salads. white or curly chrysanthemum. Cichorium endivia, summer or Italian chicory: the curly Meaux variety is sown in March; it is excellent for the early seasons, and even frequently used in autumn. There are several species. SCAROLE, the large, round one, which is quicker to produce, and has a very rounded, almost heady heart. Chicory seedlings are sown in the open ground in April, July, August and September: it is easy to grow and widely known. CHOU. Brassica oleracea. Biennial and indigenous. Several main breeds can be distinguished: cabbages with smooth, usually glaucous leaves; savoy cabbages with blistered, more or less dark green leaves; green or headless cabbages, which can last up to three years; those with fleshy roots or stems; and cauliflowers and broccoli. 1. cabbage or cabus. Its main sub-varieties, in order of earliness, are : YORK CABBAGE. Small, elongated, very early and highly prized. There are a few sub-varieties, such as cabbage-cabbage, or early super-fine, even smaller and a few days earlier; early dwarf cabbage, lower on the stem and with a slightly shorter head, as early as the previous one; large York cabbage, whose head acquires more volume and forms a little more quickly. SUGARLOAF CABBAGE. Slightly blond-green leaves, hooded, elongated head, sometimes in the shape of an inverted cone, tender and very good. BEEFHEART CABBAGE. Three sub-varieties: small, medium and large. The small forms its head almost as soon as the York cabbage; the large cabbage is quite similar to the large white cabbage. Both are good and widely grown. GROS CHOU CABUS BLANC, or summer cabbage. Highly cultivated in our regions, it is sown in September to produce early vegetables. Our gardeners sow it all year round. Sowing should begin at the end of January and continue until June, repeating often: this precaution is necessary for a good gardener; this one offers the greatest number of varieties; here are the best and most widely known: chou de Saint-Denis, or chou blanc de Bonneuil, very short stem, very glaucous leaves, large head, usually flattened, sometimes round; chou cabus d'Alsace, second season, slightly high stem, detached, rounded leaves, sometimes flat: one of the quickest to form a head among the large cabbages; large German, Alsatian or quintal cabbage, short stem, very large, broad, slightly scalloped leaves, lighter green than the preceding species, huge head in rich, cool soil; short-stalked, medium-sized, early Dutch cabbage, which is placed among the cabbages: it can occupy the same place given to lettuces; large Dutch cabbage, or cabbage, stubby Brunswick cabbage, with extremely short stem, medium-sized head, tight, flattened, with round, short, few leaves. ALETH CABBAGE, POINTED, VERY ATTRACTIVE. Sown in September and October, it is earlier than summer cabbage, and can also be sown at the end of January and February: at this time, it can replace summer cabbage plants that would have perished in a harsh winter. RED CABBAGE. There are two main breeds, large and small, known as Utrecht black cabbage: both are highly prized; many people eat them in salads; their apples, cut into small strips and pickled in vinegar, are excellent as pickles. Red cabbage is considered to be very heart-healthy, and is frequently used as such in medicine. All large cabbages are used to make saüer kraut, when their heads are full and tightly packed. Cabbages can be sown at several times: 1° from mid-August through September (York sprouts and other small hatives, June and July); the latter are planted out in October; the larger species can be planted out at the same time, or transplanted in nurseries, in proportion to their strength, to be planted permanently in February and March, at a distance of 15 inches for the small ones, 18 inches to 2 feet for the medium ones, 2.5 to 3 feet for the large ones. Sow York sprouts and cabbages in early soil as above; they come in apples from the beginning of April until May, and the others successively until August; 2° in February, at the foot of a wall facing south; 3° at the end of the same month and beginning of March, in well-soiled beds; 4° during March, in well-prepared soil: The plants from these seedlings are planted at the end of March and during April; their production follows that of the autumn seedlings, and continues until November and December. The larger species could be sown in April, and the smaller ones almost all year round; but it is still advantageous to grow kohlrabi, because they are preferable for late spring sowing. Cabbages in general, and large head cabbages in particular, require good, slightly consistent, well-smoked soil; when it is naturally fresh, they grow larger and more beautiful: for sowing, the soil should be light rather than strong, well loosened, with a little shade, which is especially essential for spring and summer sowing (1). If the weather is dry, you need to baste them regularly, and visit them to destroy any insects that might attack them, particularly the tiquet, or ground flea, which is sometimes very harmful to them. The best way to eliminate these insects is to sow ash on the young plant in the morning, when the dew falls. When replanting, visit the plant at the point where the roots start, and if you see a tumor, cut off half of it, and destroy the worm that causes it, which would stop the plant's development; water each plant at the time of planting, and then continue watering as long as the season requires. CABBAGE CABALAN GROS POMMÉ POINTU. A new species cultivated with great success. As it was not known two years ago, in September, I gave some seed to a few gardeners, and in June I received from one of them cabbages weighing eight pounds; I also received some from another gardener in Merville, which were very beautiful, since they weighed twenty-five pounds each: they have also been successful with various gardeners. Since that time, the seed has been much sought-after, and at the moment when I propose to deliver my opuscule for reprinting, I hear from all sides of its success. The quality is good, the head is sugarloaf-shaped and very firm; the leaves, pressed together, prevent caterpillars and slugs from lodging in them; the lateral leaves are of enormous extent, which means that it is advisable to plant this cabbage at twice the distance of cabbages. Only two cabbages should be planted on an ordinary-sized bed, given their large shape and the volume of their leaves. According to experience, kohlrabi should be sown in August and September, even in October; if the first sowings have failed, they can also be sown in January: it needs good soil, well amended and carefully smoked. Cabbage is all the more valuable for the countryside, as it grows almost without care. Only seedlings sown on benches require watering in July, August and September, to help the plant grow; once planted, at the end of October and November, it requires no further care; it can withstand the harshest winter: just weed and hoe in good time. Cabbages grown near Toulouse only received watering on transplanting, which is essential if the weather is dry. Today, cabbage is widely known and cultivated. It is easily distinguished from other cabbages by its yellow leaves, which are set aside and thrown into the manure. Their quality is so poor that they should not be grown, and I hasten to warn all those who will be growing them. This disadvantage is general to all plants; the only advantage this one has is that the bad plant is yellow, easy to recognize; whereas, for other cabbages, it is impossible for the most experienced gardener to choose the good from the bad plant. 2. MILAN CABBAGE, or curly cabbage. Its heads are less tightly packed, usually more tender, and less prone to muskiness: this often depends on the soil. The main varieties are the Ulm milan, with a slightly high stem, very quick to peel, not very large, excellent; the short milan, or dwarf, extremely stocky, very dark green, fairly quick to peel, tender and very good; the Touraine pancalier, low on the stalk, and very dark green, like the previous one, but with stronger ribs; the ordinary milan, or large milan cabbage, with a stronger head than all the preceding varieties; the long-headed milan, with a pointed head, not very large, but tender and excellent; the golden milan, whose color, a slightly blond green, becomes quite yellow in winter: Its apples are not very tight and very tender. MILAN-DES-VERTUS, or BIG GERMAN KOMPED CABBAGE. Its head is as large as that of large cabbages, which it resembles a little in the way it peels, and because it is less blistered and sometimes glaucous: it needs good soil. It is a valuable variety for large-scale cultivation; it is hardier, and keeps longer in winter, like the pancalier and the ordinary kite. CHOU DE BRUXELLES A JETS, CHOU ROSETTE, with a stem two to three feet high, producing small, tender, curly apples in the leaf axils, which are highly prized and picked as they grow, ending with the head. Kale could be sown, like cabbage, in August and September; but the most common practice is to sow it in spring, from the end of April to July, with the exception of green kale, which should not be sown later than May. The distance for small and medium-sized kites is eighteen inches to two feet, and two and a half to three feet for large ones. The first to be sown of the early varieties come in April and May, and the last to be sown at the beginning of winter, and keep until April: frost tenderizes them without destroying them, unless it is extraordinary. RUSSIAN CABBAGE. Russian cabbage has leaves cut right down to the rib in narrow, irregular strips, but which retain the stiffness peculiar to Savoy cabbage leaves, which contrasts with the elegance of the cuts. At the top of the stem, which is about a foot high, the leaves come together to form a rounded head of medium size, very tender, and of excellent quality. Sown in April, May and June, this cabbage is treated in the same way as the kites. CHOU-FLORI is sown in June and July; CHOU FEMELLE, in August and September: these species are very popular. Same cultivation as kites. 3. green cabbage, or non-apple. This name covers several varieties that do not form a head, some of which are green, others reddish, violet, variegated, etc. These cabbages are more resistant to cold than others. These cabbages are more resistant to cold than those of the other divisions, and most are only good to eat when frost has softened their leaves. Their new shoots are also eaten in spring, before the flowers have developed: they are not cut like the others when you want to use them, but the leaves are chopped as you need them. The main varieties are collards, large cow cabbages and tree cabbages, which grow up to six feet or more on a single stalk; their leaves are large and plain, very good to eat, and very useful for feeding cattle. CHOU MOELLIER, a sub-variety of the preceding one, whose stem increases in size from the middle to the top. CHOU CAULET DE FLANDRE, which differs from the cabbage cavalier only in its red color. CHOU VERT BRANCHU DU POITOU, less tall than the cavalier, but forming a considerable and very productive clump. CHOU VIVACE DE DAUBENTON, distinguished from the preceding variety by its lower branches, which lengthen and slope down to the ground, where they sometimes root naturally. GRAND FRISÉ VERT DUNORD, CHOU FRANGE. ou FRISÉ D'ECOSSE, and GRAND FRISÉ ROUGE. They are more resistant to cold than the others, and are also ornamental plants because of their habit and the elegant cut of their leaves; the same is true of the variegated variety. They can be sown throughout spring, summer and autumn, but are more commonly sown in April, May and June for winter and early spring produce, and in July and August for summer produce. Distance from two-and-a-half to three feet for the first five varieties, and two feet for the others. 4. ROOT cabbage, or CHARNUE ROOT. SIAMESE KOHLRABI. Distinguished by its swollen, ball-shaped stem, on the top and sides of which the leaves are planted. Half-sized kohlrabi is a good vegetable, when it has been watered a lot; it shares the taste of cabbage and turnip. It comes in three varieties: white, purple and early dwarf, the latter with its small, sparse leaves; its ball forms very quickly: it is dried in May and June, and the early dwarf until July. Kohlrabi can withstand fairly hard frosts. Kohlrabi, kohlrabi-turneps, Lapland kohlrabi, ordinary kohlrabi, early kohlrabi, quicker to form and more tender than the former, red-necked kohlrabi. They can withstand the coldest weather: same cultivation as kohlrabi. RUTABAGA. Yellowish Swedish turnip, preferred as a vegetable: sow from May to July. 5. FLOWER KALE. Brassica botrytis. There are three main varieties: tender, semi-hard and hard. These varieties have no clearly defined external characteristics that distinguish them from one another, but they do differ in quality. Cauliflower seed should be sown on benches to protect it from insects; it is sown from May 15 to the end of June. For the past two years, we have been deprived of cauliflower; the two summers that have just passed have been so rainy, and at the same time so cold, that cauliflower has not been able to peel; it has only risen: it needs the ordinary warmth of our summers, so that it can form its head. When the plant is a foot high, it is planted, taking care to plant it far enough into the ground, as they are often missed if this precaution is not taken, as they are likely to put a lot of leg into the soil: this is why only the leaves should be left to come out. Holes should be one foot square, with a bed of well-consumed horse manure at the bottom, and a layer of good soil on top: plant a cabbage in each hole, and top with a little short manure. In countries where cauliflowers come in very large quantities, take the precaution of leaving some soil around them, so that they can be resown; several sowings are necessary: if the first is not successful, as often happens, those that followed replace them. White broccoli should be treated in the same way. CABBAGE-WHITE BROCCOLI. Brassica botrytis cymosa. Resembles cauliflower, from which it differs only in its wavy leaves, its overall larger size and its color. The most widely grown varieties are white and purple, and are sown later than cauliflower, in late June and early July. CIBOULE. Allium fissile. It is sown in two seasons, in light, substantial soil: in February, to replant two plants together in April, and from the 15th to the end of September, to have them all year round. CHIVES, CIVETS; APPETITE. Allium schœnoprasum. Indigenous, multiplies by its cloves, which are separated in February to be planted in beds, and more usually in borders; it likes good soil and warm exposure: being delicate, it needs new soil. Russian gherkin, very small, almost round, comes in bunches; the earliest of all gherkins, since it is good at least three weeks before ordinary gherkins: its fruit must be picked as soon as it is born, otherwise it turns yellow. The English gherkin, stronger, elongated and of excellent quality, is abundant. All gherkins are sown in April and May. CUCUMBER. Cucumis sativus. A plant of warm climates: the long white cucumber, the small green candied cucumber, called green gherkin. All cucumbers like heat and water. SNAKE CUCUMBER. Cucumis fluxuosus. A very curious fruit: it owes its nickname to its elongated, flexuous shape. Used to make gherkins. Cucumbers are sown in manure-filled holes in April; green gherkins in April and May. CURRANGE. Cucurbita. Dark-fleshed melonne squash; long green melonne squash. LARGE TOMATOES. Several species of this genus are grown, and a large number of varieties: their cultivation is well known. GOURD. Powder pear, trumpet, etc. Several varieties: it produces fruits that are kept for their unusual shapes, and which are inappropriately called coloquintes. From April or May, they are sown like gherkins. ALENOIS CRESSON, and others. Can be sown at any time. Fountain cress can be sown at the edge of running water: plant a few roots. Para cress. ECHALOTE. Allium Ascalonicum. Bulbs are replanted in February and March, in beds or borders. SPINACH. Spinacia oleracea. There are two main species, with round or long leaves. For winter enjoyment, sow seeds from July to October in beds or borders. Spinach from England with long leaves, round from Flanders, with very wide leaves; from Holland, from New Zealand. The seed remains ungerminated for a long time. Transplant 25 inches apart, let the plant run on the ground, take the large leaves, cut them off by pulling towards the ground, so as not to shake the root, give it frequent watering. ESTRAGON. Artemisia dracunculus. Perennial, aromatic plant, propagated by bursting the stems in March and April. FÈVE DE NARBONNE, large, flat, called fève de Marais: sown at the end of October. FÈVE DE NICE, small, with long pods, early, good in green and for stewing; there is also a very large Windsor bean: the small dwarf bean is very good, very sweet and produces abundantly. In 1834, the harvest of this vegetable was nil: I have observed that the small dwarf bean alone has resisted drought and fog; its yield is fifty to one, and it is fed to horses with advantage: it deserves to be cultivated. I must point out, with regard to all types of broad bean, that they retain their fruiting germ for many years. What's more, two-, three- and four-year-old beans are more resistant to cold, more robust, load more, and don't provide branches or twigs that are useless for fruiting. I insist on this point, in order to fight as much as I can against a prejudice so strongly ingrained in me, that many people only want to sow this year's beans; and I am obliged to keep only new ones in my store, on pain of not selling them. I would also point out that broad beans and many other vegetables should be sown with a planter; then the ground is less raised, less loose, and ground rats and field mice have less opportunity in winter to devour the seeds and devastate the seedlings. FRAISIER. Fragaria. Multiplies by seed, by runners and by rooted splinters. There are six varieties: their cultivation is well known. HARICOTS A RAMES. From Soissons. White, flat, large seed. This dry bean is highly prized. Little cultivated in our departments, it is sought after elsewhere; it acquires a finesse of taste that makes it superior to other species. HARICOT-SABRE. White, flattened, medium-sized seed. This species is perhaps the best of all: it produces considerably; its pods are extraordinarily long and wide: when young, they make excellent green beans; when almost fully grown, they are still tender and fleshy, and can be eaten in this state, either fresh and broken into pieces, or in winter after having been cut into strips and candied in salt. It climbs very high, and requires large, strong oars. PREDOME, PRUDHOMME, PRODOMMET. White, round, small seed; it is an all-purpose eater par excellence; its pod is absolutely parchment-free, and still good when almost dry; the grain is dry and of esteemed quality: it is sown to be eaten green, in April, May, June, July, for the late season. The Lima bean, with its very high stalk, could become precious. Swiss bean. There are a large number of species. The cultivation of beans is generally too well known to enter into lengthy details: a soft, light and slightly cool soil is best suited to them. Beans without parchment are widely cultivated in this country; we have a species that is not of good quality; I urge amateurs to introduce the true prudhomme, which will be an excellent acquisition for the country. DOLIQUE. Dolichos. Following on from beans, I must mention a neighboring genus, the dolichos, which provides, especially in warm countries, several species and varieties cultivated for human consumption. Dolichos unguiculatus, known in Provence as Mongette and Bannette, is highly esteemed and produces a good yield, but has difficulty reaching maturity. The Egyptian or Lablab, which is grown in Egypt, is no less difficult: it is mainly used as an ornamental plant in our gardens. Finally, there is a third species known as the long-podded cowpea, asparagus bean, sesquipedalis, which, thanks to the extraordinary length of its narrow, fleshy pods, which are good in green, is accepted in amateur gardens. LETTUCE. Lactuca. Two species have given rise to two divisions: head and romaine lettuces, the former distinguished by its rounded shape, the latter by its more elongated form: the heart of the latter develops more easily, and it also has a much sweeter flavor. I'll list the most esteemed varieties, limiting myself to a much smaller number than exists, as few plants have varied as much as lettuce. SPRING HEAD LETTUCES. GOAT LETTUCE. Small, very blond, two sub-varieties with black seed, slow to bolt and, even in summer, bolts only very-difficulty. - Red-edged, or red cordon. - Dauphine. SUMMER HEAD LETTUCES. Versailles lettuce. Large, slightly high head, excellent for summer, fairly quick to bolt; difficult to bolt: white seed. - Blonde with black seed. - Berlin blonde. - Royal with black seed. - Batavia blonde, or Silesia, extremely large. - Turkish. - Genoa. - Big lazy brown. - Palatine. - Bloody or flagellated. All these summer lettuces should be sown from mid-June to the beginning of July: sowing several times, four to five days apart, will produce good results. WINTER LETTUCES. LAITUE PASSION, or DE LA PASSION, so named because it apples around Holy Week: white seed. - Morine: as large as an apple; lasts longer. - Small pancake. - Black head. CUTTING LETTUCE. Small species are usually preferred for this purpose, such as crêpes, gotte, lettuce-chicory, whose curled leaves imitate a small yellow chicory; lettuce-spinach, cut almost like an oak leaf. The latter grows back and can be cut several times. Spring lettuces can be sown in February, under cover, and replanted in April, or they can be sown in the field in February and March, among onions and carrots, etc. - Black-seeded Lombardy. Summer lettuces are sown at the same time as early lettuces, from March to July. Winter lettuces are sown from August to the end of September, and even in October: they can be transplanted along walls and shelters. Roman lettuces, or CHICONS. Early green. - Market green, gray. - Winter green. - Large gray. - Red apple. - Lombardy with white seeds. Head lettuces are ideally suited to Romans. We know that they need to be tied, so that their heads fill out better. MACHE, BOURSETTE, DOUCETTE, BLANCHETTE. Valeriana locusta. Annual plant. Sown every eight days, from late August to October. As lamb's lettuce is used whole, and only when young, picking the most advanced for consumption, the plant is sufficiently thinned out. Cultivated in our gardens, this species is more beautiful than the field variety. MELON. Cucumis melo. There are a great many varieties. They can be reduced to three main breeds: common or embroidered, cantaloupe and plain-skinned melons. Melon MaRAîcHeR. - Sucrin de Tours. - Small-seeded Sucrin. - Des Carmes: two varieties, one medium, the other small, very sweet. - White-fleshed Sucrin. - Green-fleshed pineapple. - De Honfleur: very large, elongated, ORANGE CANTALOUP. Small, round, ribbed. - Fine early. - Noir des Carmes. - Large black cantaloupe from Holland. - Large Portugal. All very good, but which the limits of this little book do not allow me to describe, since few of these species are grown, but the Saint-Nicolas-de-la-Grave melon, which is carried in very large quantities to our squares: they are rarely good. Roman melon. - From Cavaillon. These are two good varieties that do very well. I'm going to list a few more varieties, in the hope that the best will be selected and grown in the future. MELON DE MALTE, white-fleshed. - Maltese, red-fleshed. - From Peru. - From Morée. - From Candia. - From winter Malta. - From Persia, or Odessa. Green with yellow stripes, very long; green, melting flesh: winter like the previous one. Cultivation. For early crops, sow in March. The custom in our climate is to sow in April in holes in place: sometimes the plants don't succeed, either because of rain, or because they are eaten by insects: we sow again at the beginning of May on a bed in place; that is to say, and to explain myself more clearly, we make a hole of one foot, in which we put six inches of manure, which we cover with six inches of compost; then, we sow the melon seeds in it. When the fruit is set, prune the main branches, leaving them as long as possible according to their vigor, lengthening the strong ones more than the weak ones; four or five days after pruning, remove the harmful secondary branches: If there is more than one fruit on a branch, we cut them off, keeping the best fruit; if there is only one fruit, and it is rounded on one side but not on the other, we lightly pass the cutting edge of the pruning knife over the side that is not rounded. Some time later, we pinch off the ends of the fruit-bearing branches, and remove any unnecessary ones. If there are any good melons in Toulouse, we bring them from Bas-Languedoc. WATERMELON, PUMPKIN WATERMELON. Cucurbita citrullus. Red or white flesh, very melting: used for jams. MELONGENE, MERANGENE, EGGPLANT. Solanum Melongena. Sown in February on a bed and under a frame; failing that, sown in vases: a layer of manure is laid along a wall facing south, in a sheltered spot; after allowing the first fire to pass through the manure, the vases are immersed in it, covering them at night, and during the day when the weather is too cold. Violet and large brown. White eggplant, or egg-laying eggplant, is sown in the same way: water the vases (1). (1) Eggplant is particularly prone to destruction by the moth known as Courtilière, Courterole or Mole-Grillon. It wreaks havoc on seedlings, destroying tender plant roots, and we were mistaken when we thought it didn't eat them: it is very formidable, and we must make every effort to eliminate it from crops. The only way to destroy it is with water, on which a little oil is thrown. NAVET should be used. Brassica napus. The usual season for sowing turnips is from mid-June to September. There are several breeds of fine turnips: the soil has a great influence on their flavor. I'll just mention a few of them, and the best ones. The Freneuse turnip, small and half-long. - The Meaux turnip, very long and shaped like a tapering carrot. JAUNE de Hollande turnip, round shape, yellowish rind and flesh. - Scottish yellow is frost-resistant. - Maltese yellow. - Alsace black, long, usually very sweet and good, with enormous volume. These varieties, and all those belonging to the same section, succeed only in privileged, sandy, mild soils: they are turnips par excellence, especially for stewing; but in strong soils they become fibrous and worm-eaten, and are worth less than the common species. Foreign turnips are little cultivated, depending on the abundance of gardening in our regions; however, there are several turnip species that deserve to be known, having a delicious flavor, hunting it down, destroying it, and seeking it out to its furthest reaches. a thin, delicate rind: I recommend them to turnip lovers. Tender turnips include the white, half-round Sablons turnip, which is very good. - The pink turnip from the Palatinate, with a pink collar and very tender, sweet flesh. - Flat-white turnip, early. - The early red turnip, whose main merit is its earliness. - Maltot turnip - Limousin turnip, or rabioule, or turneps, which, although grown for livestock, is nevertheless very good in most non-sandy soils. OGNON. Allium cepa. This plant, one of the most important and useful of the root vegetables, is perennial by nature; its varieties are numerous, and change very easily with the influence of soil and climate. I'll mention the most esteemed. Pale red, the most widely grown. - Dark-red onion, broad and flat. - Yellow or blond. - Vertus. - Cambrai onion, excellent, large and good for keeping. - James onion, blond in color, slightly elongated, highly valued for its long shelf life. The Lescure onion is a good species, highly cultivated by our gardeners: consumption is very considerable for its quality. It is firm, slow to bolt, and keeps until Easter in ordinary years; but I must point out that 1834 was not a good year for it; we won't keep one, because of the heavy rains that fell during its development; we sow it at the end of January and throughout February: for early crops, if the plant is lacking at these two times, we must continue sowing in March. We grow the Saint-Michel red onion here, because it is sown at this time of year: it is used for tender early onions, which are needed for cooking at this time, as the others are past their prime. Straw onions are also advantageously sown in January and February, to be used for storage: the latter is more prone to cold than the former. Experience has shown that onions harvested from dry soil keep longer than those grown on oily soil. The latter rises more easily. The soil must be well prepared and fertilized, and the manure well consumed: it would be a good idea to have fertilized the soil for some time before sowing. When the onion is ripe, it is left for a few days in an alley, then brought in when the weather is dry. Another method is used in cold countries, where these seedlings are difficult to raise. In good, healthy soil, sow onion seeds in April and May, very thickly; water once or twice immediately after sowing: if the operation is successful, you'll obtain a multitude of pea-sized bubbles for harvest, which you can store in a dry place over winter, like other onions. After winter, lay out the ground in rays, six to eight inches apart, and plant the bubbles one by one, three or four inches apart: each one becomes a large, beautiful onion. Rumex acetosa. It is sown broadcast, in beds or borders, in spring, and better in autumn; it does well in all soils, although it prefers light, deep soil. Belleville sorrel, which has broader leaves than the common variety, is generally grown elsewhere. Virgin sorrel: less acidic. PANAIS. Pastinaca oleracea. Large biennial plant, long-rooted, simple, sweet and aromatic; adds flavor to soup. Same cultivation as for carrots: under the name of round parsnip, there is a spinach-shaped variety, earlier than the ordinary one, and better suited to soils with little bottom. PASTEQUE. See Watermelon. SWEET, EARLY POTATO. Convolvulus batatas. The long-rooted, yellow variety is preferred for its earlier maturity. The gardeners of Paris grow it successfully; my father raised it under simple frames, and then placed it in the ground at a good exposure. The gardener at the Jardin-des-Plantes grows it extensively, with great success. The southern départements could give themselves over to this crop, which would be perfectly successful in the open ground. PARSLEY. Apium petroselinum. Biennial plant: its seeds, which take three weeks to set, should be sown in the first days of March, then at the end of August and September, at the foot of a wall and at midday, to get them early. This plant goes to seed in the second year: there are several varieties, such as curly parsley, the very curly dwarf, a new variety remarkable for the beauty of its leaves and its slowness to rise; broad-leaved parsley, tuberosum, whose fleshy root is used in cooking; Naples parsley, with large ribs, or celery parsley, which produces a much larger plant than the others, and whose blanched ribs are eaten cooked like those of celery: the latter should be sown very lightly, or better still, replanted one foot in all directions. PICRIDIE CULTIVÉE, TERRE-CRÉPIE. Terra-Crepola. Cultivated in southern France and Italy, it is sown in March and successively cut young and green, and eaten as a salad. PEPPER. Capsicum. Several species of this genus are used as seasoning, the most common being the annual pepper, known as long pepper. - Coral. This plant is sown in February or March in potting soil and replanted in late April or early May in a bed facing south. - The ordinary chili pepper, the round one, the large one, the large Spanish round one, the sweet one, which we call tomato chili pepper, because of its shape, which is the same, but smaller in volume. TOMATO PEPPER. Yellow, rounded, tortuous fruit like the tomato, from which it takes its name: it is sweet and ripens more slowly than the ordinary pepper. PIMPRENELLE, garden, for salad. PORREAU, LEEK. Allium porrum. Requires light, substantial soil that has not been smoked for a long time. It is sown in February and March, and also in July: when it has reached the size of a feather pipe, take advantage of rainy, overcast weather to carefully remove it; and immediately replant it in a bed of the same well-disturbed soil, about six inches apart and three or five deep, after cutting off the tips of the leaves and roots. Water often during the summer. The German porreau is stronger and bigger than the one acclimatized in the country: same culture as for the previous one. POIRÉE or BETTe. Beta. The chard variety is generally adopted, because the ribs of its leaves, which are more tender and broader, can be cooked and eaten with white sauce; the most widely cultivated breed is the white chard; it is grown in two seasons: in March and April, for winter; in late July, August and September, for spring. Only in the second year does the plant go to seed. POIS. Pisum. Peas are not fussy about the quality of the soil: they are sown in clumps, or in rays, often in flowerbeds along south-facing walls: When you want to get an early crop, choose warm, sandy soil; the rays are planted about eight inches apart, and that's the distance of one foot between the holes made with the hoe, into which you throw five or six peas to form the clump; until harvest, all you have to do is hoe, weed and rake the larger species, and pinch the early ones when they have their third or fourth flower. In naturally good soils, peas should not be fertilized: fertilization makes them too vigorous, and they produce little fruit. In November and December, sow michaux and early peas along the flowerbeds; sow other early peas at the end of January, February and March, and successively the same species: prolong sowing in the open ground using the Clamar until the end of July. Pea varieties can be divided into two main sections: peas without parchment, or mange-tout; and gourmet peas, whose pods and seeds are eaten: dwarf and oar-shaped varieties can be distinguished from each other. 1. peas for shelling. DWARF PEAS. - Dwarf hátif pea. Earlier than the other dwarf varieties, from fifteen inches to two feet high, depending on the soil. Its season is that of the michaux; it flowers from the second or third node, which distinguishes it from all the others; its pod is rather small than large: it is of good quality without being striking. - Dutch dwarf. It can be used as a border plant in poor soils. - Large late sweet dwarf: large grain, very good quality, very productive; being strong, it requires more space than the other dwarfs. - Green Prussian dwarf. Both species are good and productive. 2. SHELLED PEAS. A RAMES. - Dutch michaux pea. Very early; sown at the end of February, it is sensitive to cold. - Michaux, petitpois de Paris. From Auvergne, new variety, very long, arched pod, very full of seeds (it contains up to eleven); very good quality. - Sans-pareil. - Fêve, very large and late. - Géant, even larger than the previous one. - Gros vert normand, late, with large oars, esteemed above all for its excellence for purée (1). This last species should be sown at the end of December. The Normandy pea has been perfectly successful sown at this time, as has the Auvergne pea, with a long pod. (1) These species of row peas are very productive; but they should be reserved and sheltered, because of the east wind: tossed around in the wind, when they have tender stems, it is very harmful. I won't go into more detail on a number of species that are neither known nor cultivated, but will simply mention the best ones. For some years now, pigeon peas have been almost the only cultivated species: their seed should be changed, as they are prone to bastardization, as are all plant species. 3. PARCHMENTLESS PEAS or Mance-TOUT. Early dwarf parchmentless peas. - Ordinary dwarf parchmentless. - Fan, the only one without dwarf and early parchment, quite dwarf, barely a foot high. - Without white parchment, with large pods, perhaps the best of all mange-touts: large, broad, fleshy, hooked pods; which is why it is still called ram's horns. It is long-stemmed, late, and very productive in good soils. Without parchment, it is also very productive. Turc, or crowned, name taken from the arrangement of the flowers, with large reams, very numerous pods, so tender and sweet that birds sometimes destroy a large part of them. It is said that, to protect peas from being attacked by an insect called the pea beetle, they should be sown in April for all those destined for purées: I encourage amateurs to make tests and observations on this subject. CHICK-POIS. Cicer arietinum. Annual plant, generally known. Sow in spring. POURPIER. Portulaca oleracea. Sow outdoors when cold weather is no longer a concern. Golden purslane, more esteemed than the green variety, but often degenerates as it regains its color. The seed, being very fine, is thrown clear, on well-consumed compost: it is not buried, but flattened with the hand on the ground: it is covered with moss. This method should be used for all fine seeds and delicate plants. RAIPONCE. Campanula rapunculus. Sow in March, on well-tilled and loosened soil, in a shady spot; cover very lightly with fine compost; water with a fine-hole watering can, given the fineness of the seed; cover with chopped moss, or sow radishes among, to provide shade. RAVE, Raphanus sativus oblongus, and RADIS, Raphanus sativus rotundus. These annual roots come in many varieties: long red rabe; early small rabe; rose-colored or bronce; white rabe; Le Mans tortee; early white radish; long summer gray radish; yellow radish; large Augsburg radish; horseradish or large winter black radish. Most of these varieties, especially the small long radishes, can be grown almost all year round. To obtain well-rounded radishes, the soil must be well trampled before sowing; in hot weather, plenty of water and a little shade are needed; sow little at a time, and repeat sowing often. ROQUETTE. Brassica eruca. Sow very lightly in spring, in August and September, for winter. SALSIFY, CERCIFIS. Tragopogon porrifolium. Sow broadcast, in March and April, in substantial, deeply tilled, well loosened soil that has not been newly smoked: just water often. Cultivate in the same way, and for the same purpose, as the previous plant. SPANISH SCORZONERA. Scorzonera hispanica. Its root is black; it differs from salsify in that it is commonly eaten only in its second year, except in very soft soils, where it can acquire sufficient size in its first year: in the latter case, it should be sown in February; it can also be sown in August. GARDEN SAVORY. Satureia hortensis. Annual. Small, aromatic plant, nine to ten inches tall, closely related to thyme. It multiplies on its own when introduced. EDIBLE NUTSEDGE, ALMOND-EARTH. Cyperus esculentus. From southern Europe, in Spain, and in some departments of France: the numerous tubers with which its roots are covered are used as human food, or to make a kind of very pleasant orgeat; and oil can be extracted from it. Three to four tubers are planted in March, to a depth of one inch, in preferably light, moist soil, well loosened, in clumps spaced about a foot apart, and usually swollen in water; the tubers are hoeed, weeded and watered; in October, they are removed and kept for use and for planting the following year. Spilanthus. Name of two annual plants whose pungent flavor is used in cooking as a seasoning; one is called CRESSON DE PARA, Oleracera, and the other CRESSON DU BRÉSIL: to obtain them, it is sufficient, when they are not sown by themselves, to do so in spring on a bed; then, when the plant is strong enough, it is transplanted to a southern exposure, and watered often. If you take a head of the flowers of these plants and rub it on your teeth and gums, you'll feel a little quivering in your mouth, with abundant salivation and a very pleasant freshness. TOMATO, LOVE APPLE. Solanum lycopersicon. Annual. Sown as soon as the soil warms up. A large, new species, with very high volume and excellent quality; can be grown like the previous one. JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE, EARTH PEAR. Helianthus tuberosus. It is grown like potatoes, but needs to be planted as early as February. It usually reproduces on its own, and a plot of land where Jerusalem artichokes have been grown can remain covered, so to speak, indefinitely. The taste of this tuber is similar to that of cooked artichokes. There is a variety with yellow tubers. TRIQUE -MADAME, WHITE ORPIN. Sedum album. Used as a salad ingredient. It can be propagated from seed or cuttings; it soon spreads, provided it has been placed in a warm spot. CHAPTER TWO. LARGE-SCALE CULTIVATION. THE MAIN FORAGE SPECIES. As fodder plants are now generally cultivated, I felt it necessary, in the interest of a large number of my readers, to explain the cultivation of those suited to our climate. In confining myself to the most essential notions, I shall try not to omit anything useful, and I shall avoid all scientific detail or mere curiosity. First, I'll give a few general indications on sowing artificial meadows: we must consider that success concerns not only the fodder product that we expect directly, but also the harvest of grain or other products that will follow the clearing, sometimes even several subsequent harvests. Plants that last several years, and whose roots run deep, such as alfalfa and sainfoin, require ploughing as deep and as complete as can be given; and for all forage species, with very few exceptions, the more perfect the preparation and cleaning of the land, the more successful it will be. This precaution is especially important for fine seeds and in the case of deep ploughing: when the ford is not sufficiently stale, it is advisable in certain cases to obtain this effect artificially by using a roller, or by repeated harrowing, with the harrow teeth tilted backwards. In the case of meadows to be mowed, the soil surface should be sanded, dethatched if necessary, and cleared of anything that might interfere with mowing, which is all the better the shorter it is. Applying manure to forage plants, rather than to the grains that usually follow them, is a very good method, whose advantages extend both to the current product and to the goodness and cleanness of the next harvest: I'm talking especially about annual and short-lived plants, such as vetch, clover and forage roots. New manures are generally suitable for vigorous plants with large seeds; some species, on the other hand, whose seeds are very fine, or which are delicate in their youth, such as alfalfa, carrots, etc., require consumed fertilizers, or prefer manure given a year in advance for the harvest that preceded them. Fine seeds should be sown after harrowing, rather than after the last ploughing, and should be only lightly covered; for this operation, a light harrow with short teeth is used; or the ordinary harrow, between the teeth of which thorn branches are interwoven; or only the roller: the use of this last instrument, even after harrowing, is always excellent for sowing in light soil. Forages are very often sown with oats or other cereals; or a meadow sowing is made up of large or light seeds, such as sainfoin or fromental; and others that are fine and runny, such as white or yellow clover and other grasses: in both cases, the large seeds are sown first, having been previously mixed together, if there are several kinds; this first sowing is harrowed; then the fine seeds, equally mixed, are spread over the whole field, if there are several kinds; then the seeds are again harrowed across, or rolled in the same way. I will indicate in each article the approximate quantity of seed to be used. One hectare compared to the Toulouse arpent gives 7 pugnères 4 perches; half a hectare, 3 pugnères 4 bushels 2 perches: 56 ares 90 centiares make the Toulouse arpent, or 1764 square canes, or 576 perches. There are circumstances in which it is necessary to sow more or less thickly; for example, a poor plot of land requires more seed than a good one; on a plot of land poorly prepared by unfavorable dry weather, in a situation exposed to late frosts, in all circumstances that are unfavorable to sowing, it is necessary to sow thicker than if the soil and the season favor it. I have thought it necessary to give some rough guidelines for owners who, wanting to make trials, sometimes have no data on the quantity of seed needed for the land they want to sow. FIRST CLASS. Forage plants of the grass family, AGROSTIS TRAÇANTE. Agrostis stolonifera. Trailing bentgrass can be usefully employed on peaty soils, or, as pasture, on damp badlands, where it often propagates naturally with abundance. As its seed is extremely fine, it should be barely covered, and sown at a rate of 20 pounds per acre in February or September. AGROSTIS of herd-grass and red-top-grass. An American plant that has succeeded perfectly in France on deep sandy soils, where its yield has been extraordinary, and on chalky soil that is a little cool, but not damp. Herd-grass tallies a lot, and once established becomes very vigorous and long-lasting, making it very suitable for use in permanent meadows. The extreme fineness of the seed and the slowness of the plant's first growth make it difficult to sow successfully: the young plant is choked by weeds; those who have grown it in France have preferred to sow it and transplant it. I would only recommend that, when sowing in place, the precautions necessary for the success of very fine seeds be strictly observed: its fodder is a little coarse, but very abundant. 25 pounds per acre. HIGH OAT, FROMENTAL. Avena elatior. Perennial grass, one of the largest and most productive found in France: grown extensively in the Nord department, it is very fortunately beginning to be cultivated in our departments. Fromental can be used to create natural meadows. It's not easy to create good natural meadows, because landowners don't want to sacrifice anything to obtain the seeds they need to create them: almost everywhere, we're content to collect seeds indiscriminately from the barns, which is nothing more than a mixture of all the bad seeds that exist in the old meadows: in this way, we can only create very bad meadows; such a serious disadvantage would not exist if we chose good seeds suited to our climate and our land: timothy, tall fescue, cocklebur, burnet, yellow clover, fromental; its hay, though of good quality, is a little coarse, and prone to drying out very quickly on the ground: for these reasons, fromental should be mown early, and sown thickly; it is particularly suited to high and medium meadows, and fears excess humidity. This gramen is superior to all others in forming high meadows for mowing. Fromental is often incorrectly referred to as French ryegrass. To keep avena elatior pure and free of weeds, mow young seedlings of this plant four or five times a year. The agronomist can keep the seed unmixed, and spread these seedlings sparingly. See Turf. From repeated experiments, it has been proven that we were mistaken when we fixed sufficient seed at 100 pounds per acre. Some agronomists claim that 200 pounds should be sown; as for me, I saw an acre of land on which 140 pounds of fromental had been sown: it was quite thick, and, consequently, I limit myself to recommending this quantity. Other grasses can be added, to garnish and increase the forage. Fromental, if sown thickly, has the advantage of keeping longer: we can't recommend its cultivation enough. It can be sown in September and February. I don't need to dwell on the advantages for landowners of mucking out their old meadows; they will have harvests every year for almost ten years, whether wheat, corn or oats. After reaping great benefits from these harvests, the meadows can be re-established with a mixture of 10 pounds of red clover, 10 pounds of yellow clover, and a few grasses; this combination will produce a very good meadow. I know of large landowners who use the communication paths between their various tenant farms, sowing yellow clover along the edges every five to six years, to serve as a depaissance: this process is only good for large estates. MEADOW BROME. Bromus pratensis. It can be classed as a passable species, but there are soils and circumstances where an otherwise mediocre plant can become very useful. For example, on calcareous soil, too poor even for sainfoin, and where the aim is to obtain some kind of forage, meadow brome gives more satisfactory results than any other species. It will establish itself vigorously, providing good pasture and even becoming more mowable than orchardgrass, even on very poor sands. This plant can therefore be ranked among those which, by virtue of their vigor and hardiness, are able to succeed on the poorest soils, and offer resources and means of improvement that would not be obtained from more valuable species. It lasts a long time. Meadow bromegrass, with its narrow leaves (it has some resemblance to ryegrass), has the added advantage of being suitable for forming long-lasting ornamental lawns on very chalky soils, where even ryegrass and low meadow grasses cannot survive. It requires 80 pounds of this seed per acre. MEADOW FESCUE. Festuca pratensis. Perennial plant of natural meadows, one of the best to be used for seeding low meadows, due to the abundance and quality of its product; it is a little late, and for this reason should not be combined with early-season species such as vulpine and meadow ryegrass: sown alone, it would require 120 pounds per acre. TALL FESCUE. Festuca elatior. Stronger and taller than the previous one, this plant's hay is coarse but of fairly good quality and abundant, making it one of the most useful species to cultivate in low meadows. EWE'S FESCUE. Festuca ovina. Small, with fine leaves, not very productive, but renowned for the quality of the pasture it provides for sheep, and having the advantage of growing in fine, sterile sands and on the driest slopes. Only in such soils can it be useful, and it should be sown either in September, or early in February and March; 80 pounds of this seed is enough per acre. TIMOTHY. Timothy from the English. The considerable yield of this well-known plant has led to its cultivation: it is sown separately to make mowing meadows; it is particularly suited to damp, clayey or sandy soils. As timothy is one of the latest grasses, if you use it to form the base of a natural meadow, you should avoid adding very early species to it: agrostis, meadow fescue, tall fescue, etc., are the ones that would go best with it in this respect. Timothy can also be used very advantageously for grazing, even on mediocre soils, provided they are fresh. Sow 50 pounds per acre. FRAGRANT FLUKE. Anthoxantum odoratum. A low-yielding grass, but recommended for its earliness and aromatic scent. This plant grows in a wide variety of situations and soils: it can be found in woods and on dry, high slopes, but is not uncommon in even damp meadows. On its own, it cannot make good mowing meadows: it can be sown with advantage on sandy, mediocre soils, to provide early grazing; another use for it is to be mixed in small quantities with the seeds intended for sowing a meadow: the good smell it imparts to hay makes it more appetizing for cattle. Sow 50 pounds per acre. WOOLLY COOT. Holcus lanatus. Few of the perennial grasses are better suited to the composition of a meadow base for cool ground. In the northern départements, it grows abundantly in both cool and dry soils: its flowering time, which strikes a balance between the early and late species, and its ability to remain standing for some time after maturity, without losing too much of its quality, mean that it can be combined with most other grasses; lastly, it is very good for grazing. It requires 40 pounds per acre. If mixing grasses with artificial prairie plants, and particularly with red clover seed, is a good practice, experience has shown that woolly coot would undoubtedly be one of the most suitable species for this purpose, and preferable in all respects to ryegrass and orchardgrass. FORMATION of a natural meadow per half-hectare, or per Toulouse acre, metric weight: 115 half-kilograms fromental, 4 half-kilograms yellow clover. OTHER FORMATION of natural grassland per half-hectare, or Toulouse arpent: 25 half-kilograms gramens in mixture. 70 half-kilograms fromental. 4 half-kilograms yellow clover. OTHER FORMATION of natural grassland per half-hectare, or per Toulouse arpent: 25 half-kilograms gramens by name. 70 half-kilograms fromental. 4 half-kilograms yellow clover. These various meadows have been perfectly successful. Agronomists who have formed new prairies with the gramens I describe, and by mixing in the proportion I indicate, have obtained an infinitely diverse product gramens cost something more in money than prairies remade with barnyard seed. To do this experiment economically, you need to sow half a hectare, squeeze the fodder into a separate barn, collect the seeds carefully, and sow again. IVRAIE VIVACE, RAY-GRASS from England. Lolium perenne. Of all the grasses, this is the one least used in meadows. In our départements, it could be used with advantage with red clover, in a mixture: it is a good practice, according to experience, in large-scale cultivation; the results already obtained vary infinitely, due to climate, soil and other local circumstances; it can be partially admitted in the mixture of gramens for meadows. Ryegrass is sown with a mixture of white clover. For lawns or borders, birdsfoot trefoil can be added. See also

Turf. Ryegrass should be sown thickly in February and March, September and October: sown alone, it requires 100 pounds per acre. ITALIAN VIVACE RYE, lolium perenne italicum, has only recently been introduced to trade and agriculture; if it can be acclimatized in France, there is no doubt that the great advantages of this forage, in terms of duration, high yield and usefulness, will encourage its cultivation. Preferable to alfalfa and clover, it has the advantage of being healthier than the latter, and is not harmful when fed green to all livestock: this is an invaluable advantage, because of the unfortunate events that have resulted from the short-sightedness of herdsmen in giving clover and alfalfa still soaked in dew, and which have suddenly lost oxen, cows and bulls, as these two forages are pernicious to horned animals. It will also prevent the accidents that often occur on properties covered with these two types of forage: when horned animals escape, entrusted to the care of children who are too young, they run there greedily, and die. I will agree, however, that these two forages have been a great help to agriculture, especially in our départements, where it is growing, and from where it is spreading to distant countries. Italian ryegrass can be mowed four times; it can also be grown on land that is unsuitable for other forages: This is all the more precious, as these localities cannot receive cereals, which usually perish there due to the abundance of rain, with the water staying longer; and the little harvest that escapes this first accident is washed away by the fog, which thickens with force over all the shallows; which everyone can verify as well as I can. When I say that Italian ryegrass needs moist soil, I don't mean to say or advise that it should be given soil that is continually soaked with water: that would be against common sense; but I say moist soil, shallows (1). It should be noted, however, that in our Midi climate, the most favorable season is to sow Italian ryegrass at the end of September and October; it is already foraging in December, with strong, active vegetation: It can also be sown in spring, at the end of February and throughout March; later, its vegetation is delayed by the south winds, which in April dry out the surface of the soil where the seed has been scattered, and it necessarily remains there, being very light, until a sufficiently heavy rain attaches it to the soil: for this reason, choose damp weather when sowing. Germination doesn't take long; in a few days it covers the ground. A fair assessment of the usefulness of ryegrass (1) The summers of 1833 and 1834 were very wet, which disrupted the experiments then being carried out on Italian ryegrass. It is grown at the Ecole d'Artillerie with the greatest success: it has been mowed five times and has produced a large quantity of green and dry fodder. Italian ryegrass is grown in various cuts, especially in August and September, when green fodder is in short supply. This plant can provide this resource right up to the time of sowing, if heavy frosts are delayed: its vegetation is active and continuous, which makes us fear for its duration, which is not yet well established in our climates. PANIS ÉLEVÉ, or GUINEA HERB. Panicum altissimum. There are three species of Guinea grass: the species cultivated without success are panicum altissimum and panicum virgatum. It is impossible to acclimatize panicum altissimum in our departments, because in September, when the plant has given its fodder, small tubers of about five or six lines in diameter appear on the root; unfortunately, these tubers always tend to establish themselves half in the earth, and the other half above its surface: It is from these tubers that the shoots that form the fodder should emerge in spring; but these tubers are frozen by a cold of four degrees, if they are not covered by snow: then the plant is lost; we have no resource other than the seeds, which ripen very well; but we have lost the fodder no less. We could try growing this plant in Spain and in our southern departments. Panicum virgatum withstands cold temperatures of twelve degrees; its fodder rises as much as panicum altissimum: its seed is very difficult to germinate. A distinguished agronomist, who sowed it with the greatest care, has been unable to get it to germinate: it is possible that in transporting it by sea it has spoiled and not retained its germination principle; it is to be hoped that this remarkable forage will eventually become completely acclimatized in France (1). PATURIN, or POA DES PRÉS. Poa pratensis, Paturines offer several interesting plants, from different points of view, but especially in terms of forage quality. The species known as meadow-grass is perhaps the most difficult to appreciate: few gramens are as common as this one, and present themselves under more different aspects: we see it small and dry on roadsides and banks (1) These observations were given by M. le chevalier de Morteaux, a zealous agronomist; but it is said that M. le comte de Mosbourg, near Cahors, has sown it in place, and it has been perfectly successful. of ditches, large and foddery in wet meadows; but everywhere extremely tractable and very early. These two characteristics often make it more harmful than useful in mixtures formed by chance, and mean that it should be used only with caution in the formation of meadows. Although its hay is considered to be of excellent quality, it is best sown on its own in wet soils, or with meadow-grass and common meadow-grass, which, although later, need to be cut at about the same time as it; in dry soils, with dactyls and meadow-grass, a little flouve and legumes, taking care, in the latter case, to mow it very early: it would require around 80 pounds per half-hectare. Common meadowgrass, Poa trivialis, is as common as the previous species, but like it grows in very different types of soil: it is abundant on dry plains, among artificial meadows, yet humidity is very unfavorable; it is often found in watery soils: it requires 80 pounds of seed per half-hectare. MEADOW VULPINE. Alopecurus pratensis. Vulpine is generally considered a valuable plant for its earliness and the abundance of its fodder: although it thrives early, its vegetation is sustained by a new production of stems; this means it can be mixed with heath and ryegrass. It can be sown early, in autumn or February, and requires 80 pounds per acre. SECOND CLASS. Forage plants of the legume family. GORSE, SEA RUSH, THORNY BROOM. Ulex europœus. Extremely thorny shrub, natural to uncultivated land, highly cultivated in the Ariège department. I'd like to mention the Mazères, Saverdun and Pamiers plains, whose very light, treeless soil is now planted with gorse, which provides a very good income for owners. In good soil, it reaches an elevation of ten feet: it provides heating for ovens; it is used to form fences, and is of great use to the poor. It would be desirable to cultivate it more widely, especially in woodless countries. All thorny trees give a brighter fire than oak and others: a hundred bundles of gorse of equal size will serve the same purpose as a hundred and fifty bundles of oak. Cut young, it can be used as fodder, especially in countries where artificial pastures are in short supply: it is fed to animals after crushing the prickles with a mallet or under a cider millstone. Gorse is considered to be a fertilizer: good harvests can be obtained from it; this is undoubtedly due to the practice of burning the stumps and roots on the ground when it is uprooted. Gorse should be cultivated in dry, arid regions, as it provides great timber resources and ashes for smoking the land: its advantages are well known; as I have already said, it is suitable for forming almost impenetrable fences: for this, after sowing it in February and March on the sides of ditches, its young shoots are defended from the teeth of cattle, which are very comfortable with it; it is also sown as a seedling in February, to be put in place in October. If you want to cover large areas permanently, broadcast it at the same times, after preparing the ground as much as possible with good ploughing: you need 10 pounds per half-hectare. The small species of gorse, Ulex nanus, common around Paris, is used by the poor to feed their livestock when it is new, and to heat their ovens in the late season. ERS ERVILLIER. Ervum ervilia. Annual forage. The ers plant is not high, but it is always good fodder, and produces a lot of seed, which is fed to pigeons, but sparingly, because it heats them up. The plant eaten green by pigs is almost fatal to them, as well as in dry grain, bran and flour. As a human foodstuff, this seed is also highly suspect, and should not be used mixed in bread. Ears in flour can be used with advantage to fatten cattle, but must be combined with potatoes. Here's how it's done: potatoes are cut into pieces with a knife (1); a pair of oxen is usually fed 130 to 150 pounds a day. (1) M. Bourcette, in Paris, has invented a potato slicer: all the roots are chopped into small slices, which do not inconvenience the cattle; a sharp S fixed to the end of a stick can also be used to cut potatoes easily: this 11- 71 After the first fortnight's feeding, we add three times a day seaweed flour, kneaded with a little water and salt; one hectoliter of this flour is enough for the entire fertilizing period. A pair of old oxen, valued at thirteen louis, which had spent 50 quintals of potatoes in thirty-five days, was sold for twenty louis. In years of abundance of this root, which is difficult to sell, it can be used to advantage in this way, which raises the price of potatoes to over 3 fr. per quintal. Ears ground into flour are excellent for cows; they produce a greater quantity of milk, and can be fed to herds mixed with bran. Sown in October, it is more successful than in February: its fodder should be given to horses in small rations and when you want to give them strength and support them for hard work: you need three quarters of a hectoliter for half a hectare. GALÉGA, or Rue de CHÈVRE. Galega officinalis. Galéga is a fodder plant with well-stocked clumps. The latter method is good for oxen, while the former is preferable for mounts. The plant is surprisingly vigorous, requiring 60 pounds of seed per hectare. BIRDSFOOT TREFOIL. Lotus corniculatus. Little known until now in cultivation, it nevertheless deserves to be: it is good for pasture, grows well on dry land, and maintains its vegetation there in summer; it is suitable for most of the uses to which little white clover is put, and would often be preferable to it, particularly for lining grass lawns, where its yellow flowers make a very pretty effect: its seed, very-difficult to harvest, is not very abundant, which keeps it at a high price. Agronomists will recognize by experience the climate that will be most favorable to it: it deserves to be cultivated for the goodness of its fodder, albeit not very high; the seed being very fine, the land must be well prepared, and tightened with the roller: 16 pounds of seed are needed per half-hectare. WHITE LUPIN. Lupinus albus. The importance of lupin as a fertilizer prompts me to give a few details on its cultivation. The roots of this plant are woody, the stems straight, and the leaves alternate: it thrives on light, sandy soils; but it fears clay, and will not grow on loamy soil: when properly sown, lupin covers the soil perfectly, and destroys all weeds: if it is to be used as fertilizer, the seed must be placed in very close rows; if the seed is to be collected, the rows must be spaced further apart, so that the intervals can be worked, much like those of lentils. White lupin, buried in flower, is recognized as a valuable soil fertilizer. Mr. Chambord, a landowner in Lunel, having sown lupin on smooth, bastard soil, obtained a product of fifteen seeds: sown on an exhausted vine, it was entirely restored, and produced many grapes; the shoots became strong, and received so much vigor, that they were 12 to 15 pans long. Lupin has been successfully sown by several agronomists; its cultivation will probably spread everywhere: I join Count Louis de Villeneuve in urging agronomists to cultivate it. Artificial meadows began the fortunes of our agriculture; add a good number of livestock to them, and you'll have manure: lupines will come to the rescue to increase them; they succeed perfectly in soft, fresh soils with depth. As a wild bean, I think it should be sown at the same time as our field beans. The seed has the advantage of staying on the ground, and you don't have to worry about it being eaten by animals, which means you don't have to pick it until it's very ripe. Lupin is sown at the first rains in September and October, so that it can produce strong vegetation, rising from 30 to 40 inches, even to 48. This plant is known for the excellent fertilizer it supplies to the soil, when buried during flowering: three quarters of a hectoliter per hectare are required. LUPULIN, KITTY. Medicago lupulina. It has the leaf and appearance of a clover, which is why it is sometimes called yellow clover or black clover, names derived from the color of its flower or its pod. For a long time, its cultivation was confined to certain cantons, but in recent years it has spread considerably throughout central France. It is biennial, and can occupy the same place in rye crops as clover in wheat crops: Its heavy weight is less abundant; it is fine, of good quality, and almost harmless to animals; moreover, grazing lupulin for sheep is perhaps even more advantageous than converting it to hay; and as it supports continuous grazing, it could be mixed with clover in a two-to-one ratio: it is sown in February and March, at a rate of 26 pounds per half-hectare. LUZERNE. Medicago sativa. The advantages of this plant are generally known, because it is widely cultivated in our department, and in many others, being the most productive of the plants used in artificial meadows. It may be useful for countries where it has not yet been introduced to give them the necessary instructions for its cultivation: it prefers good, deep, healthy soil, well cleaned of couch grass, and smoked the year before sowing; nevertheless, it succeeds in many different types of soil: in silty soils, formed from river deposits, except in those that are peaty or clayey on the surface, or extremely thin; if smoked at sowing time, it should be done with consumed fertilizers. This plant's considerable yields and long life are largely due to the ease with which its roots penetrate deep into the soil, which must be well dug out for this purpose: the most usual time to sow it is during the first rains of August and September. Sown at this time, when the ground is well prepared, it has the advantage of fortifying the plant before the first frosts, which are sometimes very early, and often late. Some growers sow it on oats, which have already been sown in February, and on top of which alfalfa seed is spread in March or April. This fodder has several cuts, and some of the most abundant. The North, much more advanced than us in agriculture, sows it in rays six inches apart; they use a rake armed with several small iron plowshares, each tracing a shallow furrow; women quickly sow the seed mixed with sand into each furrow, and gradually cover it with a light harrow, which is passed through the furrows; In this way, we have the double advantage of being able to weed alfalfa easily, and of increasing the yield by pulling up the grass, as alfalfa would be eternal with this precaution: it's not difficult to establish the truth of what I'm saying. In fields cultivated in this way, the yield will be greater than in those sown by broadcasting: this method requires a few extra expenses and meticulous care, but is amply rewarded by its long life. In February, we choose calm weather to plaster the alfalfa. You only need 6 to 7 quintals of plaster, well cooked and pulverized, to cover half a hectare. The first cut is made green, before the plant is in bloom: its height alone should indicate the moment to mow it; this cut must be consumed green, because of the difficulty at this time of drying the fodder: the second and subsequent cuts are intended for dry fodder. The second and subsequent cuts are destined for dry fodder. Choose good weather to mow it: leave it for two days without stirring it; the experience you gain should indicate the care you need to take. It is advisable to let the fodder dry out sufficiently before putting it in the barns, otherwise it ferments, heats up and becomes very pernicious for the livestock, a very serious inconvenience that is often experienced. We sow 32 pounds of alfalfa seed per acre: it is improperly called sainfoin, lauzerde. I must point out that fresh land along rivers contains a greater quantity of weeds, so it is necessary to sow more thickly: 40 to 45 pounds are needed in this case; without this precaution, seedlings will be missed, and will be choked by weeds as they become too light. Few people are unaware of the frequent accidents that result from grazing alfalfa and clover regrowth, when cattle are allowed to graze before the dew has dissipated, or after it has rained. As they are very avid of these plants, it is prudent to keep them in the crib, observing to let the fodder wither before giving it to them: without these precautions the animals bloat and perish. In this case, to prevent the animal's death, if you're within reach of a deep enough fishpond, you must take it there immediately, so that the water reaches its back: it empties immediately, and this is what brings about its recovery. SIBERIAN MELILOT. Melilotus alba. Siberian melilot is a biennial plant that grows to a considerable height. Its long life means that it can be used in crop rotation in the same way as clover; it is likely to do better on poor, gravelly soils. Regardless of how it is later judged as fodder, it has one advantage, which is now well recognized: it provides bees with abundant, successive flowers, which they eagerly seek out: 25 to 30 pounds of seed are needed per half-hectare. SAINFOIN, BURGUNDY, SPARCETTE. Hedysarum onobrichis. Sainfoin, or Esparcette, so improperly called alfalfa, is one of the best artificial forages: whether consumed green or dried, it is not harmful to livestock; and although less abundant than alfalfa and clover, it makes an excellent soil improver, both because of its duration, and because of the debris of its leaves and the hair of its roots (1). Sainfoin thrives in warm, dry, calcareous soils facing south, and even in soils sitting on a layer of marl or tufa, known as caussonels. We can insist on the usefulness of this plant and 1) In my book, I will only refer to this plant by the French name of Sainfoin-Esparcette, which is specific to it. I urge people who might ask for it to explain themselves, and not to confuse it with alfalfa. sainfoin is used to convert land into wheat land where, despite previous attempts, only rye had ever been grown; the demonstration has been so successful, and the example so influential, that, one by one, a large proportion of the land on the Lauraguais hillsides has undergone a similar transformation using the same method. When a sainfoin meadow is intended to be mown, and you want to keep it going as long as possible, you must avoid grazing the regain, especially in the first few years; but there are cases, particularly on poor soils, where it is sown expressly for the grazing of woollen animals: then it doesn't last long; but, nevertheless, it is still a great resource. It is sown in October, as soon as the weather allows rye or wheat to be sown; on fields intended for sainfoin, it is sown immediately after the grains have been covered by the plough. If the cold weather has caused some young plants to perish, don't hesitate to throw another hectoliter of seed on the same plot in March. Experience has shown that, in spring, on fields where sainfoin was sown the previous autumn, a mixture of 5 to 6 pounds of Dutch clover and the same amount of yellow clover can be spread. The following year, the sainfoin was thicker, although mixed with a certain amount of clover, but by the third year, the sainfoin had completely occupied the soil, leaving only yellow clover, which grew very well with the predominant plant. Sainfoin can also be sown on land planted with corn: shortly before harvesting, the seed is broadcast, and when the corn is harvested, it is cut on the ground. Sainfoin can be used as a fertilizer for vines. Two-cut sainfoin, or hot sainfoin, is advertised: it is more resistant to cold than that already cultivated; the plant is more vigorous, stronger and more productive than ordinary sainfoin; finally, it gives an abundant second cut where this one only produces a weak regrowth. It is to be hoped that our agronomists will introduce its use in our regions. It requires 2.5 hectolitres per half-hectare; others estimate that 3 hectolitres are needed: sowing is generally too light. HOLLAND RED CLOVER. Trifolium pratense. Of all artificial meadows, clover is the most widely cultivated in France, no doubt due to the ease with which it fits into the three-year crop rotation, which is almost always followed without disturbing the order. In this respect, this plant has been and will continue to be of great service, contributing more than any other to the elimination of the fallow year, and demonstrating that it can be replaced with advantage by a productive year. It is to be hoped, however, that this way of using clover will be replaced by another, less defective one; for land where it would be brought back several times in a row, with only one year's interval, would certainly soon tire of it. Clover prefers soils known in our départements as boulbennes (strong, soft or cold soils), terres bâtardes (bastard soils), terres lisses (smooth soils), in short, all soils composed of a high proportion of clay, sand and little limestone. Clover is sown in autumn on wheat, or on wheat in spring, or with oats or barley in February and March; it can also be sown on the second type of corn. Sown on wheat in the first days of October, clover finds loose soil, sprouts immediately, grows deep roots before winter, and can then withstand the cold: these are the advantages. The disadvantages are that, if the winter is harsh, the clover, still young, cannot withstand it; and if the spring is rainy, this plant, acquiring great vegetative strength, flowers in part, and is extremely detrimental to the wheat harvest. By sowing on wheat in spring, we don't have to fear any of the inconveniences I've just mentioned; but it's also rare that this seed succeeds perfectly: if the months of March and April are deprived of rain, the seed cannot be born; then, thrown on land that the winter rains have tightly packed, the clover seed has difficulty breaking through the crust : if, after sowing, there are heavy showers, the seed is sometimes washed into the furrows; and if the heat comes on early, the young plants perish easily: it's often said that the seed was no good. But this seed, which is hard, and alfalfa seed, though old and black, are still born: age only deteriorates them after several years. Sown with barley or oats, in March, success is almost certain; but this method has the disadvantage of not fitting in with our soils, of delaying for a year the return of wheat, such an essential crop, which is only slightly offset by that of oats, which are so successful when sown in spring. Sown on corn in the second way, the clover is in danger of perishing in the heat of July and August; moreover, we would have to give up buttering the corn plants, an operation that is nevertheless necessary, because of our strong easterly winds: only selected spots in cool valleys, sheltered from the winds, would be suitable for this crop. Having thus exposed the good and the bad of each method, I must add that, according to experience, it is preferable, as a last result, to sow clover on wheat in the first fifteen days of October: the only precaution to take is that, if the cold reaches seven degrees below zero, 8 to 10 pounds of seed per half-hectare should be sown at the end of February; in this way we are certain that the fodder will be thick enough : As for the disadvantage that clover sown in autumn has of harming the prosperity of wheat, I know of no way of remedying it: it's a chance you have to take, fortunately very rare; you can, however, obtain a sort of compensation, by having the wheat cut very high, and mowing immediately: you thus obtain a mixture of clover and straw that makes excellent fodder. If you need to sow a fairly large quantity of land with clover, it's wise to divide it partly in autumn, and partly in spring. Clover seed should be sown a little thickly, especially when sown with wheat in autumn, or on wheat in spring: from experiments, we are convinced that 15 to 16 pounds of clover are needed per half-hectare. To put an end to our old habits, which are to use the old table weight, I observe that I have put the quantity to be sown on the arpent, which corresponds roughly to half a hectare, and that I have fixed the weight at half a kilogram: it is to be hoped that sellers of this seed will adopt the new weight, and give up the old one, which is a difficulty for trade. Land intended to be sown with clover and wheat should be formed into plots. The sower begins by mixing the clover seed with five times as much dry sand; once this mixture has been made, the sower spreads it over each bed in the same way as the wheat, coming and going, and immediately after the wheat has been covered with the plough; the light harrow is then passed over, covering the clover and making the small stripes formed by the plough disappear: if the field needs to be crumbled, this operation is carried out, taking care not to step on the beds. If you lock up this forage before it is perfectly dry, you have to mix it in the barn with straw, layer by layer. Grazing dew-laden or damp clover is very dangerous, as is using it in green under the same circumstances; it should therefore only be fed to livestock properly: the same disadvantage results as for alfalfa; livestock that are inconvenienced by it should be treated as described in its article, noting that clover is even quicker to inconvenience livestock than alfalfa. Of all the fertilizers we can use to improve artificial fodder, such as alfalfa, clover, sainfoin and farrouch, gypsum is unquestionably the most valuable, both because of the property it has of doubling, so to speak, the production of fodder, and because of its great economy. It is to the discovery of this fertilizer that we owe the success of our artificial fodder, and consequently one of the greatest improvements in our agriculture. The most favorable times to spread plaster on clover and the four fodder crops indicated are November and February: the latter is preferred, in that it fixes for tenant farmers the time when they should no longer lead their herds onto artificial meadows. Start by removing the stones; then choose a very calm day, and the hour after or before sunrise, as being the time when the atmosphere is most tranquil: the people throwing the plaster must walk abreast, bent over as they spread it with their hands, in the same way as when sowing wheat, throwing the plaster as they go and return, and walking at a good pace. Sow 6 to 7 quintals of gypsum per half-hectare: stop work as soon as you realize that the wind is removing the loosest part of the gypsum; for this, the lightest wind is enough: without this precaution, a lot of gypsum will be consumed uselessly; a calm fog, a windless drizzle, are still precious moments for this operation. The clover seeds harvested in 1834 were of poor quality; this is easy to understand: weeds, and in particular dodder, were dominant because of the heavy rains. Everyone knows that dodder poisons fields, and even more so when sown mixed with clover seed, as happened this year. The dodder is in our fields; it does not appear in dry years, and when the land has been ploughed in dry weather; but it appears with force when the land has been worked too soft and too wet. When the owner plans to let his clover crop go to seed, he should visit his field when it is flowering; he will see the part dominated by dodder: he should mow this part, to give it green or wither it; by this means he has his clover pure of this mixture, and sells the seed with advantage. I carefully searched for pretty dodder-free clover seed, and I paid more for it; but you know that you run at the cheap end of the market. Unfortunately, fraud has crept into this trade, by mixing grained sand, prepared and colored with resin, which is mixed with clover seed to the extent of one third, thus increasing its weight. GRAND TRÉFLE NORMAND. This species is much taller than the common one, later, and usually yields only one cutting, but which often equals the two cuttings of ordinary clover: its fodder is fatter, the plant is more durable: it should be preferred to the ordinary species, and should encourage agronomists to experiment. I thought I should mention it as an interesting subject for trials and observations. WHITE CLOVER, LITTLE CLOVER. Trifolium repens. This species, also known as Fin-Houssy, is perennial and particularly suitable for grazing sheep; it stands up well in dry, light soils, and can be very useful: it is also used to line the bottoms of meadows and lawns sown with grasses. TRFLE INCARNAT, FARROUCH, TRFLE DU ROUSSILLON. Trifolium incarnatum. Annual forage, cultivation of which has spread to several départements. Although incarnate clover gives only one cutting, and its dry fodder is inferior in quality to that of ordinary clover, there are few species that can render such great services to agriculture, since almost without cost, without care, without disturbing the order of cultivation, one can obtain abundant harvests of fodder; it has, moreover, the merit of being very early, and of offering resources for cattle feed in spring almost before any other plant. This clover is sown in August or early September, usually on stubble, after turning it over with a very light plough: This method, or at least the loosening of the soil surface by repeated harrowing, is necessary for hulled seed, which needs to be covered with a harrow; but for podded seed, it's enough to spread it on the stubble without any prior preparation and then roll it: it almost always succeeds. It's easy to see how forage-deprived countries could improve their agricultural situation. Once the farmer has harvested this forage, either green or dry, he is still in time to raise the forages on this part of his land, and to give it all the fallow possibilities: in this way, without any disturbance, he will have obtained a large supply of forage from the land, between the harvest and the time when he would naturally have put the plough on it. Crimson clover offers a valuable resource for replenishing missed clover, simply by throwing podded or purified seed onto clearings. Almost all wheat or rye soils can be planted with red clover: we use 20 to 25 pounds of hulled seed per half-hectare, and 200 pounds of podded seed (1). I must point out that farrouch was lacking last year; this year its success is not wonderful: I will indicate the cause. I believe, as I indicated, that farrouch sown in August and at the beginning of September is sufficient; sown in July it is too early: all the seedlings sown at this time have suffered greatly. The rains of then and of August helped the seed to develop, and raised hopes of a good harvest: the drought that began at the end of August, and continued until the end of October, brought the greatest preju(1) An early and precocious incarnate clover is announced; the farrouch. of the mountain has its seed better nourished and clearer than that harvested in the plains of Lauraguais; so it has been given preference: it is the only quality sold in our stores. About thirty-five years ago, my late father stimulated our farmers, made it known and spread it with advantage. To encourage cultivation, he was obliged to advance the seed, which was only to be paid for at harvest: it was he who had it purified for shipment overseas. At that time, it was cultivated in Bayonne, following relations with a number of agricultural societies, and with M. de Villelle-Campolhac, a zealous farmer. dice to this plant: whether the seeds were made with the purified seed, or with its envelope, mixed with grass seeds that are naturally in the mixture, they all suffered greatly: the round seed is incarnate clover, its leaf is wider than that of ordinary clover. This young plant is devoured, in dry weather, by an insect called the white aphid, which hovers all night over the plant, devouring it whole: we can convince ourselves of what I'm saying, by checking the field at night; lit by fallots or tightly bound bundles of straw, the agronomist will see a swarm of these aphids rise up by the effect of the light. Loaches also devour cabbage leaves, just as the black aphid destroys cauliflower seedlings. COMMON VETCH, BLACK. Vicia sativa. Boulbennes destined to be sown with black vetches for fodder should be ploughed as soon as possible after harvest; they are loosened by several ploughings and the use of a spiked roller: if the soil is of good quality, smoking can be dispensed with; but if the soil is mediocre, half-smoking is necessary. Vetches should be sown in the first two weeks of October, at a rate of nine-tenths of a hectoliter of wheat seed: sowing a little thickly before winter is the only way to make up for the loss caused by ice. To support vetches, mix a tenth of oats on a hectoliter of vetches. On boulbennes soils, it is essential to sow this forage in large, rounded plots; to do this, cover the vetches with the ear plow, and use the harrow to level the ground. Standing water is very harmful to this forage. In strong soils, vetches can be sown before the corn is harvested: a light hoe is used to pull up the weeds and flatten the ground; the soil is lightly covered with rakes, and then the corn is harvested in dry weather, with the stalks cut off at ground level: this method is only good when the corn harvest is delayed; it's infinitely better not to sow vetches until the corn has been harvested: if the weather permits, a good ploughing is given to uproot the corn plants; they are then removed from the fields. Vetch is very good for green feeding in cowsheds, or for grazing; but with the necessary precautions for very succulent and nourishing fodder, because given too fresh, or too abundantly, it inconveniences animals no less dangerously than wet clover. The choice of black vetch is very important: the big black one is the one you get from the Montagne-Noire; it's a good idea to change the seed every four or five years. The field that is to receive the wheat harvest, which is to follow the vetch, must be well fertilized. VESCE. Vicia, Vica. A perennial vetch is found naturally in our fields and woods, and is recommended elsewhere as useful forage. It is currently eagerly sought after. The usefulness of this plant has been recognized in northern France, due to its hardiness, and the government has even encouraged its cultivation as very advantageous. It's in our woods. Why not have women collect it in August? This way, we could obtain this fodder very cheaply. We haven't yet decided how much we need per half-hectare; as its stalk is less elevated and less furrowed than common vetch, it's certain that a third more seed would be needed (1). Heligoland vetch, field vetch, horse vetch, from England, where it is highly prized. (1) Sown on its own, it is a fodder resource. Our climate is very favorable to its cultivation, and in general it could be grown with advantage. I have refrained from mentioning it in my little pamphlet: all agronomists know how useful it is, both for grain and for fertilizing the soil; I am only indicating that faba beans are useful because of their hardiness, and that they can be adopted with certainty: you need one hectoliter of faba beans per hectare. LENTILLON. Ervum Lens minor. An annual plant whose fodder is highly prized. Lentillon likes dry soils: it is sown broadcast in September, usually with a little oats to row it. One variety is sown with rye instead of oats. One hectoliter of seed. THIRD CLASS. Fodder plants from various families. WILD CHICORY. Cichorium intybus. Very productive, early, drought-resistant forage, very useful for grazing, or to be given green in the cowshed: excellent for cows. Sown with half red clover, it succeeds in strong or light soils, provided they have a little bottom. Like other forages, it is abundant when it receives a few rains to refresh its root, which provides a well-stuffed tuft of infinitely large leaves extending from the heart of the plant. When the tuft is two or three feet above ground, and the first leaves that fall to the ground turn yellow, mow immediately; they are fed green to all the animals, oxen, cows and horses, who eat this plant with avidity; let it wither like all succulent fodder, visiting the field often, so as not to let it rise. If you forget to mow it in time, a kind of reed emerges from the heart of the stem, removing the vegetation from the leaves, which naturally line up along the stem, shrinking and taking away the fodder. This plant can be mowed several times; an agronomist who has experimented with it assured me that it was impossible for him to determine the quantity he had harvested, or to calculate the product. Its cultivation has been recommended by several newspapers. Wild chicory is usually sown in February, either alone or in a mixture, at a rate of 12 pounds per acre; it can also be sown in September. Turnip chicory has long, fleshy roots like white carrots: you could feed it to pigs, who eat the roots well. It can be grown in rows, weeded and hoeed; the roots will be more beautiful. HORSE CABBAGE, COW CABBAGE. Brassica oleracea vaccina, seu procerior. Cavalier cabbage seems to be the best, at least for fertile soils, because of its considerable elevation and the use of its leaves. All cabbages like good soil, rather stronger than lighter, and well smoked. Sow the kale, and all the larger species, in a nursery in a corner of the garden, in August or September, or in March and April; replant them in place, the former in October or November, the latter in March and April, in rows spaced about three feet apart, and two or three feet apart along the line: during their vegetation, keep the soil clean and loose by ploughing or hoeing. These cabbages produce leaves until the spring of their second year, when they go to seed. Flanders caulet is similar to collards in growth habit, height and yield. It is less tall than collards, but perhaps just as productive; it is covered from the base with numerous, strong shoots, making it a very thick bushy plant. These varieties, like all kale, can be grown in the same way, and are not very sensitive to cold. For reasons of economy, they can be planted permanently on the back of the plough. KOHLRABI, TURNEPS CABBAGE, LAPLAND CABBAGE. Brassica napo-brassica. Its main product is its root, fleshy like a large turnip; one of its qualities is to withstand very great cold without deterioration. It can be sown in the field or broadcast; in all cases, thin out so that plants are 10 to 15 inches apart. It is very good for fattening livestock: a soft, sandy and slightly cool soil is suitable. It requires 4 pounds of seed per acre. RUTABAGA CABBAGE, SWEDISH TURNIP. Brassica rutabaga. This plant was introduced to France from England, where it is widely cultivated and produces an extraordinary product; it is little known here (1). Rutabaga should be sown in the field; each plant should be at the same distance as ordinary turnips: it withstands considerable cold, and can be left in the fields over winter to be pulled up only when needed. Same soil as above. CHOU-COLZA. Brassica oleracea campestris. Rapeseed is grown extensively in Flanders (2), mainly for the oil extracted from its seeds, but it is also used for fodder. After the grain harvest, the stubble is ploughed well; rapeseed is sown on this ford at a rate of 6 to 7 pounds per half-hectare: the plant spends the winter without (1) My father experimented with it: its root, good to the taste, was kept until mid-April, long after our turnips, which wood up early. Its cultivation has been neglected. (2) One of our earliest farmers, M. Hacher de Cahuzac, cultivated them extensively on his estates in the Aude department; he had a mill specially built to extract the oil, which was very good. This distinguished agronomist was one of the first to cultivate red clover. An untimely death has taken the life of this good man, who would have boosted the progress of agriculture. The clover plant is not damaged, and at the end of the season, it provides either pasture or green fodder for the cowshed, both of which are invaluable at the time they are grown. All hardy cabbages, and even better rutabaga and chounavet, can be used in this way. The above method is only suitable if you want to make green fodder from rapeseed in spring: growing it for seed requires more care. It is essential to harvest this seed as soon as most of the pods are almost fully ripe, as much could be lost by delaying harvesting. WHITE MUSTARD. Sinapis alba. This plant is used to provide green feed for livestock in autumn. It is generally sown on stubble immediately after harvest by light ploughing. The use of the seed for gastritis and similar ailments is becoming increasingly common in medicine. Approximately 10 to 12 kilos of seed are used per hectare. BLACK MUSTARD. Sinapis nigra. Like mustard, it can be used to feed livestock, but its main use consists in harvesting the seeds to make flour. PIMPRENELLE. Poterium sanguisorba. The great merit of this plant is that it provides excellent pasture on the poorest, driest soils, whether sandy or chalky: it withstands the extremes of drought and cold; above all, it offers a very valuable resource in winter for feeding flocks. A few thousand hectares abandoned and uncultivated, due to the poor quality of the soil, could, through the cultivation of burnet, bring about a significant improvement in their agricultural situation. At least 100 pounds per half-hectare are needed; it would even be prudent to increase the seed to 120 pounds. SPERGULA. Spergula arvensis. Annual forage, particularly suited to fresh sand, which provides excellent food for cows. The butter from cows fed on it is considered to be of superior quality. It is sown in summer on the stubble, after the harvest, at the beginning of September; it is consumed on the spot, or given green to the cowshed, a resource that lasts until the frosts: its dry hay loses considerably to desiccation, due to the watery nature of the plant. This very fine seed needs little covering. We sow 24 pounds per acre. Some people claim that its seed is good for poultry feed. FOURTH CLASS. Forages-Racins. BEET, SHORTAGE. Beta vulgaris campestris. All beets are good for feeding livestock, but beet is particularly cultivated for this purpose, because of its more considerable yield: its cultivation is too neglected, yet it provides a very valuable resource for working livestock, and especially for pigs, both through its leaves and its roots, which grow to a considerable size. Beet requires substantial, soft, good-quality, fresh and deep soil. At the beginning of winter, the soil should be broken up as deeply as possible, and at the end of the season, it should be ploughed again to loosen it up perfectly: the soil is smoked and harrowed to smooth it out and make it loose. At the beginning of April, we take advantage of fine weather to sow beet seeds: to do this properly, follow the steps I'm about to outline. Once the ground is well prepared, take a string, marked in color from 15 to 15 inches, and stretch it along one edge of the field, 15 inches from the ditch; you have a small wooden planter, and opposite each mark on the string you make a hole two inches deep, where you place one or two seeds, which you immediately cover; two workers are enough for this work: we replace the cord again at 15 inches, taking care to arrange the marks in a checkerboard or staggered pattern, and not sideways, along those on the previous furrow, and we sow, continuing, the plot right to the end; in this way each plant will have a greater expanse of land for its nourishment. Two intelligent children can do this sowing. After the plant has grown a little, follow all the rows exactly, leaving only one foot in each place. I should point out, for the benefit of those unfamiliar with this type of cultivation, that each seed not only produces one root, but up to five. This is why it is essential to follow all the rows and leave only one plant in place, the one with the best appearance, the strongest, the most vigorous; without this precaution, the roots will devour each other, and the hope of production will be frustrated. To carry out this operation, it is essential to choose dark weather; the soil must be fresh and less soft: it seems pointless to replace the young plants that have failed in the empty spots; this would require prompt watering, without which they would not recover. As soon as the plants have been thinned out, the roots left in place grow rapidly, and all that's needed is to keep the ground clear of weeds. Pick the leaves when the lower ones begin to wilt, detaching the rib near the collar (the root emerges from the ground in the shape of a sugar loaf), without breaking it in the middle. When collecting the leaves, cut them by pulling towards the ground, and not from above, so as not to shake the root, which would be shaken and detached from the ground: you must not leave a snag, but rather five or six leaves that rise vertically and form the eye of the plant. This first harvest is started towards the end of June, and repeated from month to month until the end of September. Removing the leaves does not harm the growth of the roots, which grow until the end of October. The roots should be harvested before frosts, which would be very harmful to them: choose a time when the soil will be a little damp, so that they can be pulled up easily; lock them up so that they are protected from frost, either in cellars, or in large pits covered with earth. Country beet roots are excellent for all kinds of livestock: horned and woollen animals, pigs, even poultry, are perfectly suited to them; they are also useful for pigs: the roots, cut into pieces and fed to oxen, do them a world of good, refreshing them while they are fed dry fodder, and protecting them from disease: they make excellent milk for cows. This root has a pink tint: cooked, it is very good in salads; its tender leaves replace spinach in cooking: the leaves, having reached an extreme size and being very large, replace chard; its root often reaches a weight of 25 to 30 pounds, if the soil is suitable. Good agronomists, even those who have been growing it for some years, do not recommend harvesting it in the country, because the east wind dries it out, deteriorates it, makes it very tough and deprives it of some of its germination. This is, moreover, the opinion of Count de Villeneuve (special observation in his Manuel d'agriculture): you need 6 to 7 pounds of this seed per half-hectare. WHITE SUGAR BEET. Its volume is much smaller than that of field beet, but the sweet and nutritious parts are much more abundant, which makes it preferred by some growers. However, its use is much less widespread than that of beet. Its root develops completely in the ground, making it much more expensive to uproot. YELLOW GLOBE BEET. This species, originally from England, has been adopted and cultivated for some years by a large number of landowners; it grows almost on the surface of the soil, which makes it particularly suited to shallow soils. CARROT. Daucus Carota. This root is an excellent feeder for all animals; it should be cultivated across the board: one of its advantages is that it doesn't need to be smoked; it prefers soft, deep, loosened soil, amended the year before sowing. Sow from March to June, depending on climate and soil, at a rate of 8 pounds per acre, broadcast or in rows; cover the seed with a light harrowing and roller: thin and hoe it, and leave it 5 to 6 inches apart, as mentioned in the vegetable garden article. The various species are red, pale red with a large head, yellow and white: there are some differences between these varieties, regardless of color; but all can be usefully employed. The yellow from Achicourt is the best of all; the large white from Breteuil is also very good and vigorous. TURNIP TURNEPS, RABIOULE, RAVE PLATE. Brassica Rapa. Turnips are a well-known source of animal feed in winter. Their roots are used in many parts of France to fertilize oxen, and to help feed cows, sheep and pigs. Turnips like soil that is light and dry, or at least healthy, rather than strong and moist, well-prepared, cleaned and, at best, smoked. The ordinary sowing season is from the end of June to the beginning of August; in some cases, it can be extended to the beginning of September, and in others, brought forward by several weeks. The usual method is to sow turnips broadcast: sowing them in rows would be preferable, as it makes weeding and hoeing easier: it is as profitable for the turnips as for the harvest that will follow, if they are thinned out, weeded and shaped. Good harvests can also be obtained from this root, by sowing them with a single light ploughing of the stubble: these sowings are successful if the season favours them. All turnip species are suitable for field cultivation. The large Limousin and Auvergne turnip, known as rabioule, which has been given the misnomer of turneps, includes several varieties: yellow turnip, yellow Scottish turnip, Alsau turnip, called long country turnip, and known as large Berlin turnip: 6 pounds of seed are used per half-hectare. All turnips and carrots prepare the soil, breaking it up, dividing it and loosening it, even for cereals, which are perfectly successful even when sown immediately after harvesting. POTATO or PARMENTIER. Solanum tuberosum. This plant needs no recommendation; its merit is appreciated and its cultivation generally known. There are various species: white, red, cultivated in large quantities in our mountains; early yellow gherkins; early large yellow gherkins; Swiss yellow gherkins, etc., etc., etc. The experiments that are being carried out will be able to determine the choice of owners. TOPINAMBOUR. Helianthus tuberosus. These tubers taste like artichokes. Jerusalem artichokes should be grown like potatoes: these tubers never freeze. This plant thrives on ordinary, mediocre soils, and resists drought well. For some time now, Jerusalem artichokes have been widely cultivated. The leaves and tubers are ideal for cattle feed, and the stalks provide good fuel. Planting is done early in the spring. 137 On the subject of ASSOLEMENTS, I will borrow the following article, based on his experiences, from the Supplément d'agriculture by M. le comte Louis de VILLENEUVE, printed in 1834: "I have seen the time when a good crop rotation was all agriculture; it seems impossible to me to give general rules: the variety of our climate, the so varied qualities of our soils, seem to me to require a crop rotation for each commune, each estate, and even for each field. The prudent agronomist must not adopt any exclusive system: the opinion of a skilled agronomist will no doubt serve to give importance to this advice. My esteemed colleague, Mr. DECAMpS-CAYRAS, in a very interesting memoir on crop rotation, expresses himself as follows: "These systems are undoubtedly followed in part of France. Does it follow from this that we can adopt them?" "Do we have such frequent rainfall?" "Are the disastrous droughts we have not unknown to them?" "Do we have," especially as in the North, "wealthy, intelligent farmers who cultivate with perseverance and accuracy?" "Do we have, finally," large combined estates? I've been involved in agriculture for thirty years," adds M. Decamps, "and it's only by dint of perseverance, patience and iron will, and by leading a very hard life, that I've managed to achieve some success. An invariable crop rotation seems to me very difficult to establish: an extraordinary winter, a drought like that of 1832, which largely destroyed artificial fodder, must necessarily upset all calculations. A crop rotation can only be a variable base on which to prepare the means of obtaining as much wheat as possible; because in our territorial position, it's wheat that we need to speculate on: it alone offers us almost certain chances of income. This principle undoubtedly has its exceptions: some localities may present a combination of soft soils, alluvial soils, easy to work in all weathers; if you combine these advantages with the talents and perseverance of my esteemed colleagues, success will be certain; but it is not to such positions that I am addressing, it is to this large number of agronomists who want to force science to give them certain results, without taking into account the climate and the countless accidents that we are likely to experience." First of all, I must point out that, in these crop rotations, the duration of sainfoin as forage is reduced to three years, instead of four: this is undoubtedly a reduction in the amendment produced by this forage; but these three years fit in better with the return of wheat and corn. In the crop rotation that I follow on my estate at Auterive, there are two consecutive years of wheat, after the clearing of sainfoin-esparcette; I was led to this change, always for the same reason, that in the Midi, wheat must be considered the first of our resources: no doubt, after clearing sainfoin, we're sure to get a good crop of corn, but as the vigor of the plant delays its maturity, it almost always happens that we can't clear the field of weeds, that sowing is delayed; and if the frosts come early, the harvest is often mediocre. This method of sowing wheat on wheat will undoubtedly be criticized as contrary to principle; here's what Mr. DOMBASLE has to say on the subject: "I think that, in modern crop rotation, the succession of two cereal crops has been put off too abruptly; there are, however, many cases where we can allow ourselves this kind of deviation in a seven, eight or nine-year crop rotation. If Mr. Dombasle allows this deviation in the North, where we have so many resources for successful spring harvests, he would make it our duty to do so in the South, where wheat and corn are almost our only resources. Perhaps we should sow more wheat and reduce corn cultivation. It will no doubt be objected that the drought of our summers makes it difficult to clear sainfoin and wheat stubble. This is undoubtedly an obstacle that can arise, as in 1832: but in ordinary years, it is very rare that a storm does not facilitate the necessary work. In this case, we use the spider plough with the pointed share, which opens up the soil slightly, and if there is another rainfall, we can give a good ploughing with the moldboard plough. Moreover, to obtain a good harvest from a forage or meadow clearing, it is not necessary to plough deeply, in order to avoid gamat disease; it is for the second wheat that it is necessary to plough deeply, in order to bring to the surface the layer of soil amended by sainfoin. Experience has shown that when clearing land of any kind, the soil should be left to rest after the first heavy rains in September, when a crust forms that gives the roots of the wheat strength. The same does not apply to boulbennes, which can be ploughed up to the time of sowing (1). The difference between these two types of soil must necessarily have led to changes in the way they are cultivated. Thus, for strong soils, ploughing with the highest heat is excellent for destroying quackgrass, but for boulbennes it has the disadvantage of diminishing the soil's vigour. It's for the same reason that, if you've smoked a field by ploughing the second way with a moldboard plow, you should only plow the rest with a spading plow, so as not to bring the fertilizer to the surface. It also follows from these different types of soil that, for boulbennes, sowing should not be delayed, so as to sow dry soil, and for terre-fort, you should wait (1) This procedure is used for all light soils until the soil is well soaked. There are, however, years when only a few light rains fall, and you have to decide to sow; but, in this case, and even if this operation is carried out in well-moistened soil, in the spring, you have to pass the heavy roller over the wheat sown on the terre-fort, and it is even useful to pass the herd quickly and tightly after the roller. In this way, once the soil has been well compacted, the disease known to farmers as gamat or grauzel can be prevented. This disease has a very simple cause: if heavy frosts have lifted the soil, and you neglect to firm it up with the roller; if an auta (south-easterly) wind, very common at this time of year, comes up in spring, just as the wheat is about to come up in tubers, the scorching air penetrates to the roots, the soil having been lifted by the frost, and you soon see the stems turn yellow and dry out. If the soil has been sown very soft, as it were kneaded, the frost cannot lift it, and the roots are sheltered. This disease is especially to be feared when clearing forage and old meadows: rye and oats do not run the same risk. SOME SPECIES AND VARIETIES OF CEREAL PLANTS. CANARY GRASS, CANARY BIRDSEED, LONG MILLET. Phalaris canariensis. Annual plant, similar to millet in cultivation and use. Its straw is good fodder for horses and horned cattle. Sow lightly, broadcast, in April and May, on good, loose, fertilized soil. Its grain is used to feed serins. AVOINE. Avena sativa. This cereal has a large number of varieties, whose respective merits are difficult to determine, given that soil and climate often have a major influence on their success and quality. To make my book as useful as possible, I'm going to list the main cereal varieties here, pointing out that it's only by testing them in your own field that you'll be able to judge which ones to give preference to. I note that we have received requests for various qualities of oats, as well as foreign wheats. I am going to indicate several species, so that agronomists who may wish to experiment with these cereals will first have a clear idea of both their qualities and their products. I will have a price list for each year, which can be consulted; and, on requests made to me, I will send to my store the articles I have on order, provided that the commissions are given in good time. The agronomists would have liked to have foreign wheat. It is very difficult to obtain the free and new qualities, I have experienced this; but I find it even more difficult to place the little I could get, given the high prices for the port of cereals, and the low price of ours. AVOINE PATATE, or AVOINE POMME DE TERRE. Avena sativa turgida. White grain, short, heavy, with fine rind, abundant in flour. This variety has become very popular in England in recent years. GEORGIAN OATS. Georgiana. Yellow-white grain, very large and heavy, with hard bark, very large panicle, broad leaf, large, high straw, soft however, and of good quality for livestock; very early maturity: it provides more chaff for threshing than any other species. JOAN OATS. Recently multiplied in the Orléans area, because of its earliness; prone to shattering, and therefore requiring cutting before perfect maturity; black grain, fairly good quality. THREE-GRAIN OATS. Trisperma. So named because its spikelets are largely composed of three grains that remain attached at their base: highly productive, and not very difficult in the field: fairly large grain, but bearded, with hard bark. BLACK BRIE OATS. One of the best and most productive varieties in good soils: short, swollen grain of very good quality. Some of the kernels do not separate when threshed, and remain attached at the base. WINTER OATS. Hyemalis. Highly cultivated and esteemed in Brittany and part of western France, but of uncertain success in cold countries: it can be adopted in our climate, which is milder and more temperate than in the North. It is very productive in terms of straw and grain, which is heavy and of excellent quality; it ripens early and is sown in September or early October: it can be very usefully employed for the first sowings in February, or even at the end of January, which, with this species, are much more assured than with March oats. Hungarian oat, RUSSIAN oat, UNILATERAL. Orientalis. Two varieties: white and black, very distinct from other oats, in that their panicle is narrow, and all the grains are attached short and hanging on one side only; this also gives them the name "cluster oats". Black oats are extremely productive in good soils; their grain is a little thin and light in weight; their high grain and straw yields give them preference in many places. White Hungarian oats are especially remarkable for the strength and height of their straw; their grain is even inferior to that of black oats. Hungarian yellow oats, mixed with black, have been very successful; this green plant is furred, its leaf wider and higher than ours; it offers an advantage when grown green; its grain yield is immense; its stalk rises to five feet; in a short time it will be widespread in the country. Beardless winter wheat. BLANC DE FLANDRE, also known as BLANC ZÉE, OR BLAZÉE. One of the most beautiful and productive wheat varieties harvested in France. WHITE WHEAT FROM HUNGARY. Remarkable for the very rounded shape of its grain. TALAVERA WHEAT. Strongly propagated for some years in England: high straw content, long ear, beautiful white grain, elongated shape. HEDGE WHEAT. With large, thick ears, whose chaff is covered with a cottony down; this wheat, cullivated in England, is a very good breed. LAMMAS WHEAT. Red, precocious, productive; wants to be sown early, and fears damp soils; prone to shattering, and for this reason needs to be cut before full maturity. Bearded winter wheat. CaUcASE WHEAT. Very long ear, hard, heavy grain; chunky straw, yet prone to spilling. This wheat is remarkable for its earliness, and can be sown in February and March, as well as in autumn: it has a sub-variety with a red ear and no beard, which differs from the bearded only in these two characteristics. All the wheats just described belong to the common wheat species, triticum sativum. POULARD BLANC, CARRÉ, OR POULARD DE BARBARIE, triticum turgidum. This wheat belongs to the race of large bearded wheats, known as poulards, whose grain is generally of a common and little-appreciated quality; but in this respect it significantly outweighs its analogues, while, like them, it has the merit of being very productive in terms of straw and seed. It is hardier than fine wheats. MIRACLE or SMYRNE WHEAT. Triticum compositum. Remarkable for its stalked ears, i.e. composed of several ears joined into a single large, enlarged head: white, very large, rounded grain. Although this wheat has been advocated at various times, and has the merit of being highly productive, its cultivation has so far been very limited, because it is rather difficult on the land, and gives a hard, coarse flour; its straw is full and very hard. MARCH WHEAT. Triticum sativum vernum. This breed of grain is not cultivated as much as it should be. If excessive rainfall, flooding, insects or the cold have destroyed or severely damaged pieces of land sown with autumn wheat, or if landowners, thwarted by a season that is too harsh, have not been able to complete their sowing, the result is a deficit, sometimes considerable, in the wheat harvest, a deficit that could be made up by March wheat, if its cultivation were more general and more extensive than it is: for this, a few acres of it would have to be sown annually on each farm. This resource could be extended all the more easily, as March wheat would succeed in many soils too light for autumn wheat. Among the varieties of this grain, I'd like to mention the following: March wheat with white ears without beards, the most widely cultivated, although it is more often mixed with the following variety; - with white ears without beards, a little earlier than the preceding variety; - red without beards, a species cultivated in the North, which appears to be very good; Sicilian square, a short, sturdy, red ear without beards; - Fellemberg wheat, with straw as high and ears as long as autumn wheat; Pictet wheat, a sub-variety of the previous one, whose grain fits better in the bale, and which seems to be equal to it and perhaps superior in other respects; - Odessa and Tangarok wheats, which, in numerous trials carried out in France, have generally succeeded well; - Cape wheat, a pretty yellow grain, hard and heavy. These wheat varieties can be sown from mid-February to mid-March. CORN, TURKISH WHEAT, INDIAN WHEAT. Zea Mais. The usefulness of this grain for humans and animals is well known. The varieties of this cereal are very numerous: there are grains of all colors; the most cultivated are either yellow or white: these two species are generally adopted in our departments. In the Landes department, we grow a beautiful white variety, with a shorter, more conical ear than the previous one, a little earlier, and of very good quality. A few years ago, we also recommended a corn from Pensylvania, which is significantly earlier than ours, and which, in this respect, is of interest. SIOUX CORN FROM THE UNITED STATES. This breed is similar to the previous one, but with much larger ears and kernels; - pearl corn, white, very small and very pretty, which ripens with difficulty in the North, and which seems especially suitable for fodder, due to the large number of stalks and leaves it produces. Among the very early varieties, I would like to mention the following two as having particular merit. QUARANTAIN CORN. Less elevated and less productive than the ordinary variety, but much earlier, to the extent that in Piedmont it ripens, sown in June and July, on the stubble of grain that has just been harvested. This quality means that it can be grown to replace corn that has been ravaged by June hail: it's still a resource. ALGERIAN CORN. Pointed cone, very tight grain, more productive than ours: its flour is equally good for human consumption and for fattening animals; but its grain, sharp and pungent, repels the animals that are usually fed it. CHICKEN CORN. This pretty breed was brought from America: it differs from the previous one in that it is smaller in all its parts, and even earlier. The smallness of its kernels was indicated by its name, as well as by the use to which it can be put. In terms of yield, this variety cannot be compared even with the quarantine variety, but it possesses to a greater degree all the advantages attached to a high earliness; and in this respect, it is truly interesting: these two corn varieties should be sown closer together than the large one. BUCKWHEAT, BUCKWHEAT, BUCKWHEAT, BUCAIL. Polygonum fagopyrum. In general, buckwheat is the resource of poor countries and sandy, cold, mediocre soils; it also offers advantages that may make it useful on more widely distributed farms. Its very abundant grain, which, as we know, is used for human consumption, is also very suitable for poultry and pigeons; it is excellent fertilizer for pigs and good for horses; its flowers provide abundant grazing for bees: Cut green, the plant makes fairly good fodder; buried in flower, it is recognized as one of the best plant fertilizers known: moreover, buckwheat's vegetation being very rapid, and enabling it to be sown late in the season, it offers a great resource as an auxiliary or intercrop. It is almost always broadcast, and when the soil is damp, it is raised in ridges beforehand, because it fears dampness. We use half a hectoliter of seed per hectare for harvesting from seed, and twice that amount for burial. The ashes from its stems contain a lot of potash. As this plant flowers for a long time, its first seeds fall before the last ones are ripe; we are therefore obliged to take a middle term between one and the other to harvest it; when it is done, we pull them into bunches, which we place upright to let them dry. In mentioning the names of a few cereals, I can't help but mention a new rye as well. MARCH RYE. Secale cereale vernum. This rye, unknown in France, has just been introduced into the Ain department. Its grain is long, clear and clean, and makes very good bread; it is yet another cereal that can be very advantageous to agriculture. Its grain should be sown light, given its high yield. TURF. Lawns being of great importance in pleasure gardens, I must speak here of how to cultivate them, and how to preserve them. No plant forms such a pleasant carpet of greenery as ryegrass, lolium perenne or perennial ryegrass. Whenever you want to form a lawn close to the view, near the front of an apartment, or on which you want to walk or sit, you need to form it with ryegrass; you can mix in strawberry or white clover, and even a little birdsfoot trefoil, but the soil must be good and substantial: If it's light or sandy, the ryegrass will perish; if it's too wet, rushes and other large, unpleasant plants will grow. Before sowing a lawn, the soil must be perfectly prepared to receive the seeds, i.e. after a good ploughing, all stones and roots must be removed, the surface must be perfectly levelled and, if necessary, amended with potting soil, which must not be buried. Sowing is done in overcast or rainy weather, by broadcasting at a rate of 120 pounds per half-hectare; the seeds are covered with a rake and harrow, and then rolled: this last operation is repeated every spring, immediately after the frosts, to firm up the soil, and after each mowing, to tidy up the plants, in order to obtain thick, uniform greenery: all care is then limited to keeping it free of all foreign plants, watering it during severe droughts, and mowing the grass at least four times a year, if not more: this should always be done before fruiting time. A well-tended lawn, carefully purged of weeds and especially fine mosses, and amended every two or three years with consumed manure, or potting soil, and better still, if moss gets in the way, with lime, plaster or ashes, can keep in all its beauty for several years. Small masses of colchicum and crocus can be placed on a carpet of greenery, creating a charming effect and flowering, the former in autumn, the latter in spring. This practice deserves to be imitated in all lawns within view, either from the windows of the dwelling or on the promenades. MAHON GRASS. Mahon grass blooms on carpets; the flowers are pink, violet and lilac: it is very pleasant in flowerbeds, as it blooms during three seasons of the year; it is mown and pruned often, because it reproduces itself by the fall of its seeds. It is sown in March, in borders, in soft, light soil, with a mixture of fine sand, because of the fineness of its seed. CALAMBOKI. MIL imported from Athens. This plant is an excellent substitute for oats; it is suitable for feeding all kinds of animals: horned beasts, horses, mules, pigs and all fowl, which eat it greedily. Its grain is full and round; its cultivation is the same as that of millet; it is sowed in the same way as broad beans, and the soil is worked at the same times. Shoots that are too numerous should be pruned, leaving only two or three per plant; any soil is suitable for its cultivation; one of the properties of this seed. One of the properties of this seed is that it provides at least twenty carts of stalks per acre, suitable for heating the oven; its stalk rises to over two meters, the size of a reed; the leaves are very wide and of a pretty green color; from the top of the stalk there forms a large tuft, eight inches long, swollen, wide, filled with such a large quantity of seeds, that there must be at least two thousand of them. This overview should demonstrate the usefulness of this plant, whose yield is incalculable; it is also reported that two bushels are enough to sow an acre or half-hectare, which should produce 40 to 50 hectoliters at least. SWEET SORGHUM. Holcus saccharatus. I won't reprint this little work without devoting a few lines to sweet sorghum, which has been much talked about in France over the last few years. I won't mention its use in the extraction of alcohol, which numerous experiments have confirmed; but the plant, which the excessive cost of alcohols in recent years has led us to recommend so highly, would soon be forgotten, if the abundance of the wine harvest continued to show itself in subsequent years as in the one that has just passed. I mention this plant here only for its use in agriculture as green fodder; the excellent results and enormous yields it has produced, the abundance and good quality of the milk it gives cows, place it in the first rank of green fodder. It can be sown at the same time as Hungarian millet and moha, and even later, as heat does nothing to damage its vegetation. When sown for fodder, 15 to 20 kilos of seeds per hectare are used. TABLE OF THE MOST INTERESTING FLOWERS ARRANGED IN ORDER OF THEIR USE IN GARDENS. BEDDING PLANTS. BULBOUS PLANTS (GARLIC). Amaryllis. Anemone. Anemone hepatica. Asphodel. Balisier. Bulbocode. Colchicum. Cyclamen. Cypripedium. Erytherin. Fritillary. Fumitory. Gallant. Gladiolus. Glycine. Hemerocallis. Iris. Hyacinth. Lily. Morea. Muscari. Narcissus. Neottie. Nivéole. Orchis. Ornithogale. Oxalis. Pancratier. Phalanx. Ranunculus. Saffron. Scilla. Trolle. Tulip. VERY HIGH FIBROUS (SPRING FLOWERS). Various asters. Foxglove. Valerian. FLOWERS IN SUMMER. Alcea, rose-tremière. Asclepias of Syria. Pyramidal bellflower. Napaea. Levantine loosestrife. Phlomis. Phytolaca. Sunflower. Algerian sun. Dwarf sun. FLOWERS. Dalhia. Helenie. Ketmie. Sylphium. Idem HAUTES (SPRING FLOWERS). Acanthus. Aconite. Milkweed. Astragale. Astrante. Bugrane. Heart-leaved buphthalmum. Butome. Coriope. Digitale. Echinope. Enothere. Galega. Gaura. Yellow gentian. Ketmie. Thuringian lavatera. Lobelia. Lychnid of Chalcedon. Lysimachia. Matricaria. Melissa. Molena. Molucella. Momordique. Panicaut. Poppy. Rudbeckia. Spanish Sainfoin. Spirea. Stramoine. Tagetes. Tansy. Varaine. AUTUMN FLOWERS. Anserine ambroisée. Anthemis with large flowers, chrysanthemum. Bottonia. Cacalie. Casse. Fireweed. Eupatorium. Galane. Immortelles with bracts. Lotier-Saint-Jacques. Savory. Valerian. Goldenrod. Ximenesis. Idem MEDIUM (SPRING FLOWERS). Safflower. Celsia. Cynoglossus. Dendria. Doronia. Elymium. AUTUMN FLOWERS. Columbine. Dolphinella. Iris. Lamier, orvale. Lunaria. Garden snapdragon. Poppy. Phlox. SUMMER FLOWERS. Yarrow. Amaranth. Arum. Aster, queen daisy. Astragale. Balsamine. Night beauty. Betony. Bupthalme. Campanula. Centaury, cornflower. Chrysanthemum. Cinerea. Cynoglossus. Dalea. Dolphinella. Digitale obscure. Dracocephalus. Enothère. Fabagella. Ficoïde glaciale. Fraxinella. Galane. Wallflower. Hyssop. Iberian. Immortelles. Lavender. Bindweed. Lotier rouge. Martyma. Mimule. Monarde. Nigella. Nolana. Carnation. Saponaria. Scabious. Groundsel. Septas. Marigold. Stevia. AUTUMN FLOWERS. Wormwood. Anthemis of Arabia. Aster. Boucage. Celosia. Scented knapweed. Chrysocome. Poppy. Casiope. Crepid. Cupid. Eupatorium purple. Geranium. Wallflower. Gnaphale de Virginie. Gomphrin. Ephemerina. Epimedium. Gentian. Geranier. Giroflées. Gnaphale oriental. Gomphrene. Helonias. Iberian. Julienne. Perennial lupine. Lychnid. Melilot. Menyanthès. Spotted mimule. Orobe. Meadow-rue. Peony. Podophyllum. Blue fleabane. Lungwort. Sage. Saxifrage. Solomon's seal. Velar. Verbena. FLOWERS IN SUMMER. Lobelia. Lopézie. Verbena. Zinnia. Idem BASSES (FLOWERS IN SPRING). Arabette. Arenaire. Cynoglose spring. Gentianelle. Globularia. Gvroselle. Black hellebore. Helleborine. Dwarf iris. Perennial daisy. Lily of the valley. Primrose. Primrose. Reseda. Violet. SUMMER FLOWERS. Adonide. Amethyst. Androsace. Alpine aster. Atanasia. Amaryllis, yellow. Anemone hepatica. Anthemis odorante. Dwarf boxwood Basil. Bermudagrass. Hawkweed. Speedwell. AUTUMN FLOWERS. Ficoid, annual. Sweet coltsfoot. Idem RAMPANTES. Alysse saxatile. Arabette. Bindweed. Momordique elastic. Periwinkle. Idem GRIMPANTES. Nasturtium. Dolique. Perennial fragrant chickweed, Tangier tuberose. Large-flowered runner bean. Hops. Ipomea. Bindweed. Periwinkle. Perennial sweet pea. PLANTS FOR BORDERS. Small wormwood. Alysse saxatile. Auricula. Strawberry. Hyssop. Silene. Iberian evergreen. Hyacinth iris. Lavender. Perennial daisy. Marjoram. Melissa. Carnation, mignardise de mai, de poete. FLOWERS. Primrose. Rosemary. Sage. Saffron. Samboline. Sauce. Saxifrage. Statici. Thyme. Violet. Deltoid carnation. FLOWERS. Brunella. Ditto ANNUALS. Aster, queen daisy, dwarf. Ditto, larkspur. Pink crepis. Flax-leaved hound's-tongue. Dracocephalus of Austria. Mahon's julienne. Orchid-flowered linear. PLANTS FOR WATER DECORATION. Acorus. Butome. Cress. Flochière. Marsh iris. Rush. Lysimache. Water lily. Water lily. Parnassia. Poplar. White reed. Variegated reed. Scorpion. PLANTS FOR HEATHER BEDS. Amaryllis. Ansonia. Milkweed. Virginia Bugloss. Calceolar. Dandrie. Canary crabgrass. Erithrochise. Purple, yellow and slimy gentian. Pachysandra. Trillium. ROCK GARDEN PLANTS. Androsace. Arearia. Prickly pear. Drave des Pvrénées. Erine des Alpes. Ficoïde. Joubarbe. Alpine Lychnid. St. John's wort. FLOWERS. Primrose. Saxifrage. Sedum. Symbalaria. Letters are requested to be franked, FIN. Preliminary observations. 7 8 Terreaux.... ... 12 Calendar of sowing and planting times, etc. January 15 ... ... ... ... ibid. February ... ... ... ... 16 March ... ... ... ... . 17 April ... ... ... ... 18 May . June. July . August. September . October. . . . . ." . . . . . . 4 2R85 November. . . . . . ibid. December. . . . . . . CHAPTER ONE. CATALOG OF VEGETABLE SEEDS. 27 Garlic... ... ... ... . 29 1 Gherkins... ... .  Asparagus ... ... ... . 30 31 Beetroot .................................................... 32 Carrot... ... ... ... ibid. Celery, cultivated... ... . Nasturtium....... 34 35 Cardoon... ... ... ibid Chervil... ... ... . Chervil. 36 37 Chervis... ... ... ibid Chicory... ... ... ibid Cabbage... ... ... . 38 Cucumbers ....... ibid Squash......... ibid Watercress........ 52 Shallots ... ... ... ibid. Spinach... ... ... ibid. Tarragon... ... . 53 Broad beans . . . . . . . ibid. Strawberry. - . . . 54 Beans. . . . . . . ibid. dolichen. . . . . . . Lettuce... ... ... ... Lamb's lettuce . Melons . . . . . . . . . . . . CULTIVATION. . . . . .  Turnips. ... ... ... " E 8 50 2 58 2 5e 62 --- FS 62 Ciboule. . . . . . . 50 Onions. ... . 6 Sorrel... ... ... . 65 Purslane... ... . 72 Parsnips......... ibid Watermelon....... . 66 Potato ... ... ... ibid Parsley. . . . . . . ibid. picridis... . . . . 67 Pimento... ... ... ibid. Pimprenelle... ... ... ibid Porreau... ... ... ibid. Poirée... ... ... ibid. 68 Pea... ... ... ... ibid Raiponce... ... ... ibid Raves and radishes... ... ... ibid Roquette... ... ... . 73 Salsify... ... . . ibid Spanish scorzonera . . ibid Savory... . . . . 74 Yellow nutsedge... ... ... ibid. Spilanthe... ... ... ibid. Tomato... . . . . . . 15 Jerusalem artichoke... ... ... ibid. Chickpeas... ... ibid. . . . 721 Trique-madame. . . . ibid. CHAPTER TWO. MAJOR CROPS. The main forage species... ... ... . 76 1st CLASS. Fodder plants of the grass family. Creeping bentgrass. . . 80 Herd-grass and rep-top-grass bentgrass. tall oat, fromental. Meadow brome . 81 83 Meadow fescue . . 84 Tall fescue. ... . 85 Sheep's fescue. . . ibid. Timothy. ibid. Sweet vernal grass.... . . 86 Woolly heath. . . . ibid. Formation of natural grassland per half-hectare or Toulouse arpent, metric weight. . . . . . . . . . . Italian perennial ryegrass, English ryegrass ... . Italian perennial ryegrass . . 87 88 89 Meadow-grass or meadow poa. 93 Meadow vetch... . 94 2° CLASS. Fodder plants of the legume family. Gorse, sea rush, thorny broom... ... . 95 Ers ervillier... ... . 97 Galéga, or goat's rue ... ... ... . 98 Bird's-foot trefoil . . . 99 White lupin ... ... ... ibid Lupulin, kitty... ... . 101 Alfalfa. ... ... . 102 Siberian sweet clover ... . 105 Sainfoin, burgundy, esparto. ... ... . 106 Dutch red clover ... ... ... . 109 Norman clover . 116 White clover, small clover. ibid. Incarnate clover, farrouch, Roussillon clover. . ibid. Common, black vetch. 119 Vetch... . 121 Guinea... ... . 92 l Heligoland faba bean. Lentillon... ... ... . 122 ! Pimprenelle....... . 128 3rd CLASS. Fodder plants of various families. Wild chicory... . 122 Horse cabbage, cow cabbage. ... ... . . . 124 Turnip cabbage, Turneps cabbage, Lapland cabbage. 125 Rutabaga cabbage, Swedish turnip ... ... . 126 Rape cabbage... ... ... ibid. white mustard, mouSpergule. ... ... ibid. . ibid. 4th CLASS. Root fodder. Beet, disette... ... ... . White beet, beet129 globe... ... . 133 Carrot... ... ... ... ibid. turnip turneps, rabioule, rave plale... ... . 134 Potato. 136 Jerusalem artichoke. ............................................... ibid. 127l AssoLEMENTS... ... . 137 SOME PLANT SPECIES AND VARIETY Canary grass, Canary bird seed, millet CEREALS. long. ... ... ... . 143 Oats ... ... ... ... ibid. Potato oats or potato oats ... . 141 Georgia oats... ... ibid. joan oats... ... . 145 Three-grain oats. . . ibid. Brie black oats. . . ibid. Winter oats. . . ibid. Hungarian, Russian yellow, unilateral oats. 146 Winter wheat, beardless . . ibid. Hungary white wheat . 147 Talavera wheat ... ... ibid. hedge wheat ... ... ibid. ..................................................................... Ibid. 148 March wheat... ... ibid. Corn, Turkish wheat, Indian wheat... ... ... . 150 Sioux corn, United States corn... ... ... ... ibid. Quarantine corn... ... ibid. Algiers corn... ... ... 151 Chicken corn... ... ... ibid. Buckwheat, buckwheat... ... ibid. March rye... ... ... ibid. Sod. ... ... . Mahon grass... ... . Calamboki, millet imported 154 156 from Athens... ... ... ibid. Sweet sorghum... ... ... Table of the most where poulard de Barbarie, ibid. 153 interesting flowers, arranged in the order of their 157 use in gardens. 159 (END OF TABLE OF CONTENTS.    AIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE DE FRANC 04 11