Ysabeau, Alexandre (1793-1873). Author of the text, le jardinjer de tout le monde : traité complet de toutes les branches de l'horticulture, ouvrage nécessaire aux jardiniers et aux amateurs de jardinage, contenant tous les détails relatifs au jardin potager, fruitier et fleuriste.../ A. Ysabeau. 1872. 1 Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is a digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the Bnf collections. Their reuse is governed by the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: Non-commercial reuse of this content, or reuse as part of an academic or scientific publication, is free of charge, provided that current legislation is complied with, and in particular that the source of the content is mentioned as follows: "Source gallica.bnf. fr / Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf.fr / BnF". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates revenue: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article t.2112-1 of the French General Code of Public Property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules: reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. These documents may not be reused, except in the context of private copying, without the prior authorization of the rights holder. reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr/ Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which the Bnf is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ The present conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 71 To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation, commercialeobnf.fr. Source gallica.bnf.fr! Bibllothèque natlonale de France - - 1 FERRET CWNOMIE 1986 2 8 LE p4 JARDINIER DE TOUT LE MONDE 4 -80 0 TRAITÉ COMPLET DE TOUTES LES BRANCHES DE L'HORTICULTURE PAR A. YSABEAU 148 " Ouvrage orné d'un grand nombre de Figures PARIS LIBRAIRIE DE GARNIER FRÈRES 6, RUZ DES SAINIS-PÈRES ET PILAIS-ROTIL, 215 S e 9088 8 DE TOUT LE MONDE Paris. - Imp. Viéville et Capiomont, rue des Poitevins, 6. ARDINIER DE UT LE MONDE COMPLETE TRAIT DE TOUTES BRANCHES DE L'HORTICULTURE NÉCESSAIRE AUX JARDINIERS ET AUX AMATEURS DE JARDINACE, CONTENANT ALL LES DÉTAILS RELATIFS AU JARDIN POTAGER, FRUITIER ET FLEURISTE orné de plus de 100 figures - Intercalées dans le texte. 7. PARIS GARNIER FRÈRES, LIBRAIRES-ÉDITEURS 6, RUE DES SAINTS-PÈRES ET PALAIS-ROYAL, 215 The taste for gardening has never been as widespread as it is today; this taste, like all things in this world, has taken on an entirely new form in a century rich in transformations. From the amateur whose only source of satisfaction is the window garden, to the man who has a vast landscape garden with its obligatory accompaniment of cold, hot and temperate greenhouses, there is hardly anyone who is willing to take up gardening without wanting to know at least a little about it. It's not so very long ago that the most enlightened classes of society owned beautiful gardens, but made a pity of not knowing anything about gardening. Today, it's almost shameful to own a garden of any kind and not know how fruit and vegetables, ornamental plants and shrubs grow; in a word, it's no longer acceptable to have a garden and not be a bit of a gardener. As an expression of this new need, the last thirty years have seen the birth, growth and multiplication of horticultural societies, and the spread among the various classes of amateurs of general or special treatises on horticulture as a whole, or on its main branches. These works, many of which have rendered eminent services to gardening in France, have for the most part aged, despite the sometimes successful efforts made to rejuvenate them. This is because, in gardening as in any other division of knowledge applied to the things of life, progress does not stop; it cannot stop. If tomorrow, by means of a new process, we manage to print on the daguerreotype the complete body of human knowledge, just at the precise point at which it stands at the moment; before the book is printed and put on sale, it will be out of date. In France, and in Europe as a whole, the railroad network, which eliminates distances, has made gardening possible and profitable in places where it was previously out of the question. The rapidity and extreme ease of maritime communications put all the world's plants, whether for utility or for pleasure, within the reach of amateurs in every country. The perfection of manufacturing and the low cost of iron and glass have made it possible to multiply greenhouses everywhere, and to extend all types of garden cultivation to all climates. These are just some of the most striking features of the transformation of contemporary horticulture. At a time when, so to speak, everyone is a gardener or aspires to become one, the time seems right to publish Le JARDINIER DE TOUT LE MONDE. This book, inspired by the benevolent advice of the most skilful horticulturists, written almost under the dictation of the most enlightened members of Parisian horticulture, is not aimed exclusively at professional gardeners; The facts and concepts are presented in such a way as to remind those who know, and teach those who don't, all that is important to know, all that can enlighten practice, and enable them to fully enjoy the sum total of elegant and harmless pleasures that the passion for gardening, so sweet and fortunately so widespread in France, can provide. Let us recall, with a touch of national and professional pride, that if one of our ancient provinces, Touraine, has borne the fine title of Jardin de la France, the whole of France is entitled to claim that of Jardin de l'Europe. Exempted by the happy variety of soils and climates of its departments, from the devouring heat of the Midi, the ice of the North, the fogs and icy mists of the far West, France is the country in the world where fruit, vegetables, flowers and all the useful or pleasant products of gardening can be obtained with the greatest perfection. Le Jarbinier de Tout le MOnde embraces horticulture from the most general and advanced point of view; it is naturally divided into five distinct parts, comprising: 1st part, Notions générales; 2nd, Culture maraichère; 3rd, Culture des arbres fruitiers; 4th, Culture des végétaux d'ornement; 5th, Orangeries et serres. If, to do a job of this nature properly, you need to have spent many years in the company of the most skilful practitioners in France and abroad, to have studied in their own languages the writings of the most famous horticulturists in England and Germany, and above all to be yourself animated to the highest degree by the most passionate taste for gardening, the author of JARDInIeR De TOUT LE MONDE, believes he is in the best position to offer friends of horticulture a guide at the height of current knowledge. As for the form, he has endeavored to make it simple enough, precise enough to be effortlessly intelligible to all, correct enough to be accepted by the enlightened and literate part of the horticultural public, with the hope of being not only consulted, but read with profit; and why wouldn't he add, with pleasure. A. YSABEAU. PART ONE GENERAL NOTIONS CHAPTER ONE Gardening Intimate relationships between gardens and those who cultivate them. - The gardens of Semiramis. - Gardens of the New Zealand savages. - Functional relationships between agriculture and horticulture. - Various types of gardens. - Vegetable gardens. - Marshes. - Market gardening. - Fruit garden. -Fruit and landscape garden. - Parterre. - Suitable location - Landscaped garden. - English garden. - Parkland. - Grove. - Symmetrical gardens. - Used for public walks. - Preserved as souvenirs. - Sully's garden. - Choice of garden location. - Expositica. - Fencing. - Fence walls. - Chaperons. - Their usefulness. - Living hedges. - Shrubs they can be formed from. - Hedges at the bottom of a ditch. - Interior distribution. - Dividing walls. - Apple hedge grafted by natural grafting - Interior fence between the kitchen garden and the rest of the garden. If we were to write the history of gardens from century to century, in every country in the known world, from those of Semiramis, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, to those of the savages of New Zealand, who hide a kitchen garden in the heart of the most impenetrable forests, accessible by paths known only to the owner, the result would be a picture no less instructive than curious. Everywhere and at every time, gardens have shown the most striking links with the customs, ideas and habits of those who cultivate them. Without going beyond France in our time, the dominant character of the inhabitants of each of our agricultural regions is reflected in the gardens; the more or less advanced state of gardening gives a fairly accurate measure of the state of local agriculture. We know by what intimate links agriculture and gardening hold and help each other. The word horticulture, which has come into common usage for all divisions of gardening these days, seems to bring the two branches of the art of using cultivable soil even closer together, placing them on the same level. We will conform to current usage by using the words gardening and horticulture interchangeably throughout this book. From a general point of view, horticulture offers an outlet for human activity that is as beneficial to individuals as it is to society. As a profession, horticulture leads with certainty to that degree of relative ease which gives more real satisfaction than opulence; as a leisure activity, there is no other which is more favorable to the maintenance of health, or which provides a greater sum of elegant and varied pleasures, which each person can enjoy according to the humble or elevated situation in which it has pleased God to place him. Various types of gardens. - The size, shape and distribution of a garden can vary infinitely, but all gardens fall into four divisions: 1° THE POTAGARDEN; 2° THE FRUIT GARDEN; 3° THE PARTERRE; 4° THE LANDSCAPE GARDEN. 1. Vegetable garden. - The vegetable garden is often surrounded by flowerbeds devoted to the cultivation of ornamental plants in the open ground. In this case, it combines the functions of the parterre with those of the vegetable garden proper. When the kitchen garden is cultivated by a professional gardener who uses the produce to supply vegetables to city markets, it is called a marsh, and the person who cultivates it is called a market gardener; market gardening is rightly considered to be the cultivation of vegetable plants brought to their highest perfection. 2. Fruit garden. - This type of garden is distinct from the others only in very large gardens, such as those in châteaux surrounded by spacious parkland; everywhere else, fruit trees are planted either in espaliers along the enclosing walls, or in the beds bordering the vegetable garden compartments. In recent years, a completely new type of fruit garden has been introduced in the vicinity of Paris and the larger departmental towns. The ground is laid out and distributed as for a bosquet; beautiful lawns, with flowerbeds standing out from them, take up most of the space; views are skilfully created; but all ornamental trees are replaced by fruit trees and shrubs of all kinds: this is what we call a landscape fruit garden. 3. Parterre. - Most often, the parterre, also known as the flower garden, is one of the outbuildings of another type of garden, either because, in the vegetable garden, the best-placed beds are decorated with the most beautiful flowers of each season, or because, in a large landscape garden, the compartments closest to the house are devoted to the same crop. In any case, it's the most pleasant division of the garden. 4. Landscape garden. - This type of garden has long been known as the English garden, because it is in fact English in origin; in large dimensions, it is a park, in smaller proportions, a grove. We mention here only for the record the symmetrical gardens, with wide, straight paths and regular, geometrically-shaped compartments, a style now abandoned except for gardens used for public walks; in France, the Tuileries, Luxembourg and Versailles are the finest examples. In some départements, however, gardens in this style are still preserved as reminders of another era. Such is the case, for example, of the Château de Sully, whose hedges, wide paths and terrace have been restored to exactly the same condition as they were when this garden was used as a promenade by Henri IV's friend. Choice of location - It rarely depends on the gardener to choose the location of the garden, even when it's a new creation on land previously given over to other crops. When he has the choice, he should place the kitchen garden, fruit garden and parterre as far as possible on a slope, with southern, western, south-western and south-eastern exposure. North, east and northeast exposures are the least favorable. The vegetable garden should be isolated and placed far enough away from the house so as not to be seen from the apartments; the flowerbed, on the other hand, should be close enough to the house so that the appearance of the flowerbeds continues to make it pleasant. Fences. - The best fence for a garden, large or small, is a good wall, made of stone or brick, 2.5 to 3 meters high, whose most exposed surfaces can be used to grow espalier trees. But the cost of a fence made entirely of walls is sometimes too high relative to the resources available to the owner. In this case, he simply encloses the north or northeast and west or northwest sides with walls, so that the inner surfaces of these walls are in the best condition for growing espalier and counter-spalier fruit trees. The walls are topped with a double, roof-like ledge, projecting 20 or 25 centimetres beyond the plumb line of their surface: Fig. 1. The chaperon. This is called a chapreon (fig. 1). The main advantage of the coping on a garden wall is that it protects espaliered fruit trees from the excessive cold that results from radiation on winter nights when the sky is not covered with clouds; it's on the edges of the coping that we hang the mats or canvases designed to protect flowering trees from the late frosts of spring, and from the hail that too often accompanies the March sleet, which in the Paris climate lasts until the middle of April. The two sides of the garden that you consider more advantageous and economical not to enclose with walls, can be enclosed with hedges. The strongest and tightest are those of hawthorn, because of the ease with which this shrub can be pruned and sheared with scissors, giving it the shape of a thick wall, impossible to cross. After hawthorn, European liciet, dogwood and privet are the most suitable shrubs for garden hedges. In the south of France, well-mown hedges with even surfaces, like those of a hawthorn hedge, are quite frequently formed entirely with Bengal roses. When there is no reason to spare the land, and you wish to preserve the appearance of the exterior landscape inside the garden, you dig a sloping ditch with a narrow base, in the middle of which are planted the shrubs of which the hedge is to be composed. When these shrubs have reached the height of the upper edge of the ditch, the hedge forms a fence that is as complete and more difficult to cross than if it were established according to ordinary practice, without a ditch on the outer boundary of the garden (fig. 2). Fig. 2. hedge in ditch. Interior distribution. - When the kitchen garden is sufficiently extensive, and not accompanied by another garden more specifically devoted to growing fruit trees, walls are built at intervals parallel to the one of the enclosing walls that faces the most favorable exposure, in order to provide the largest possible surface area for growing espaliered fruit trees. This is what gardeners call the dividing wall; it is pierced by false doors to allow free communication between the various compartments of the kitchen garden; its construction is the same as that of the enclosing walls. The kitchen garden is often isolated from the parterre and landscape garden by an inner fence of hedges. These hedges can be made up of apple trees, the branches of which are directed in such a way as to form a trellis with diamond-shaped compartments. At all points of contact, the branches are welded together by natural approach grafting; the hedge thus ends up being in one piece, giving it great solidity, without the trees of which it is composed being any less productive. CHAPTER II Lands and waters suitable for gardening. Lands and waters suitable for gardening. - How gardening is possible everywhere. - Origin of cultivable land. - Their elements - Strong soils. - Clay soils. - Brick soil. - Dose of clay in strong soils. - The need to drain heavy soils - Drainage in gardens. - Principle of drainage. - Light earth - Siliceous sand without cohesion. - Its sterility. - Dose of sand in a good light soil. - Calcareous or chalky soils. - Dose of lime in a good chalky soil. - Clay-limestone soil. - Clay-siliceous earth. - Wood soil. - Heather earth. - Composts. - Orange tree soil - Camellia soil. - Carnation soil - Tulip soil - Water suitable for gardening. - Matter dissolved in them. -Well water. - Spring. - Spring water - Running water - Stagnant water. - The useful effect of water in gardening. The old Flemish proverb applies especially to gardening: "There is no such thing as bad soil; there are only bad farmers. Wherever land and water are available, it's possible to create and maintain a good garden. This is not to say that melons can be grown successfully in the open air in Greenland, or pineapples in Siberia; but by adapting crops to the nature of the soil at hand, success is not impossible anywhere. Before reviewing the horticultural properties of the various types of arable land, let's take a look at the general composition of these soils and how we understand how they came to be. In the part of the earth's surface not covered by water, man's real domain, i.e. that which it is possible for him to convert into cultivated fields and gardens, is not very extensive; once the ice deserts of the north, the sandy deserts of the south, the barren rocks and steep slopes of the high mountains have been removed, he is left with the plains crossed by the valleys of the rivers and their tributaries. The layer of earth that covers these plains and valleys was formed by the mixture of the debris of various rocks, broken, divided, decomposed and violently transported by the waters following the cataclysms that upset the surface of our planet, as geology shows. Without this mixing and shifting, there would be no cultivable soil, and farming and gardening would be impossible. Soil suitable for cultivation is based on clay, lime, sand and some organic matter derived from the decomposition of plants and animals; these substances, taken separately, make up what we call humus or loam. These various elements of cultivable soil can be combined in any proportion; if clay dominates, the soil is strong; if sand dominates, it is light; if lime is present in excess, it is chalky or calcareous; depending on the proportions of its main elements, it can be clayey-limestone or clayey-siliceous. All these types of soil, whose nomenclature can be expanded by a host of names that lack precision, must contain a fairly high proportion of loam in order to be suitable for various garden crops. Heavy soil. This type of soil is also known as fat soil or clay soil. When it contains too much clay, it is unfit for cultivation; as it doesn't allow rainwater to filter through, it forms a pasty mud in winter; in summer, it becomes as hard as brick; its surface then cracks, splits in all directions, heats up to the point of drying out and burning plant roots; all vegetation becomes impossible. Soils in this condition are not common; they contain 85% clay, and are commonly known as brick soils, because they are used to make bricks, tiles and pottery. When, instead of containing 85% clay, a strong soil contains only 45 to 50%, and lime, sand and loam are present in the right proportions, it is of good quality and can become a good garden soil. The modifications it may need for this purpose would not be practicable in large-scale cultivation; on the contrary, they are very practicable in a garden, where only relatively small areas are ever worked. Any soil that is clayey enough to merit the name "terre forte" (strong soil) retains rainwater to a greater or lesser extent, and presents, albeit to a lesser degree, the disadvantages of brick clay. The first thing to do, before converting it into a garden, is to sanitize it with a good drainage system. Drainage in gardens. Since English agriculture has demonstrated the benefits of draining heavy soils, through a series of highly successful applications, this operation has become the greatest and most fruitful agricultural improvement of modern times. It is beyond the scope of this book to give even a brief idea of drainage and the means of applying it; drainage must be studied in special treatises. If the soil is to be ploughed, either with a plow in the field or with a spade in the garden, it must be neither too dry nor too wet. Ploughed too dry, it rises in large blocks that are very-difficult to divide; ploughed too wet, it kneads, clumps and is in worse condition after ploughing than if it had not been touched; it must therefore, in both gardens and fields, be taken at its point. The degree of dryness to which the soil must have reached in order to be properly ploughed in the spring, following heavy rains and snowmelt, is more or less delayed, depending on how difficult it is for the cultivable layer to filter out and evaporate the excess moisture with which it is permeated; this can result in delays that are highly detrimental to the success of gardening operations; for, in horticulture, it is of the utmost importance that everything is not only done well, but also done in its time. When, through the application of a good drainage system, the superfluous water in the subsoil finds a quick and easy way out, the soil, in spring, is at the right point for the re-growth of all crops; the heat it receives from the rise in outside temperature is no longer absorbed by the evaporation of its excess moisture; the vegetation of perennial plants is early and vigorous; seedlings of annual plants are sown in good time; the roots of fruit and ornamental trees are preserved from canker and rot; the strong soil, made healthier by drainage, seems to have suddenly changed its nature and lends itself with perfect docility to all types of garden cultivation. In the presence of such advantages, if you have to create a garden in strong clay soil, don't hesitate to drain. The distance between parallel lines of pipes, the diameter of the pipes and the depth at which they should be buried will vary according to the constitution of the soil and the atmospheric circumstances of the local climate; nothing can be specified in this respect. The homeowner, determined to achieve this fruitful improvement, if he does not have the required knowledge himself, should turn to a competent man, and act under his guidance. It should be noted that drainage in gardens generally needs to be deeper than in open fields, so that the roots of trees and shrubs cannot reach the pipes, enter through the joints and partially obstruct them. Once drained, strong soils need to be modified by various amendments if they are to be in the best possible condition for gardening. (See Amendments, chap. III.) Light loam - When light loam is completely lacking in cohesion and contains up to 70% silica, it is no longer a loam in the strict sense of the term; it is an absolutely sterile siliceous sand, unsuitable for gardening or any other crop. However, when it contains no more than 50 to 55% silica, light soil can easily be made into a very good garden soil. Its main drawback is that it heats up excessively, and doesn't retain water from rainfall and watering for long enough for cultivated plants to take full advantage of it. Among light soils, the best are those that are both light and deep; the thickness of the cultivable layer then compensates to some extent for the disadvantages resulting from its lack of cohesion. Any light soil to be used for gardening needs to be amended with lime and clay (see Amendments, chap. III).-The presence of lime in the soil, even in very high doses, in no way makes it unsuitable for gardening; but when the soil contains 70 to 80 percent lime, it is very difficult to grow garden crops; it is then called chalky earth or white earth, a less-than-fertile soil that covers fairly large areas in France, particularly in the Aube department. (Champagne pouilleuse.) Chalky soil, which contains no more than 40-50% lime, is excellent for all types of gardening; it is easy to plow in all seasons and dries out more slowly than siliceous soil. Clay-limestone soil. In most garden soils, clay and lime are in higher proportion than siliceous sand; these soils are therefore clay-limestone. Where this soil does not exist naturally, the gardener, through the judicious use of various soil improvers, should endeavor to bring the garden soil back to the conditions of a good clay-limestone soil of medium consistency. Sandy-clay soil-This type of soil, in which clay and sand are combined with a small proportion of lime, can be quite good for gardening when it contains enough humus; it is often a little too compact, slow to warm up, and needs to be amended with lime in high doses. Various types of soil adapted to special crops are used in gardening, such as carnation soil, orange tree soil, camellia soil and many others; these soils are mixtures for which horticulture has adopted the English expression "composts". Wood soil and heather soil, which are used in the same way as composts for various specific crops, are nevertheless natural soils that are used without modifying their composition. Both are based on plant debris combined with the light siliceous earth on which woodland and heather generally grow. The compost of decomposed leaves is the useful part of wood soil; the compost of heather, broom and ferns is the active principle of heather soil. Many valuable shrubs and ornamental plants, including Azaleas, Rhododendrums and Fuchsias, grow only in pure heather soil. Composts. Modern gardening has done away with the complicated mixtures once used with a kind of superstitious confidence, and prepared at great expense for a variety of special purposes. Such was the case with the old orange earth, whose recipe, including a host of ingredients, was carefully preserved in the Versailles orangery: it was a kind of theriac. Orange trees only received this compost after it had been stored for three years and stirred several times during this long interval. Today, we know that any kind of fertilizer reduces to compost after a certain length of time. Today, when their soil needs renewing, the orange trees at Versailles receive only the orange-tree compost used elsewhere, and they are no worse off for it. This compost is made up of: two parts free-range garden soil, one part potting soil, one part natural heather soil, all mixed exactly with a spade; it can be used as soon as it has been prepared. The most commonly used Camellia soil is made up of: one part free-range garden soil, one part leaf compost, one part heather soil. To increase fertility, we add to these exactly mixed ingredients undisinfected human fertilizer, diluted in enough water to give it the consistency of a clear brouct. The dose is two to three liters of this brouet per cubic meter of camellia soil; it is incorporated one month before giving the soil to the camellias, which it helps to vegetate with great vigor. Carnation soil is no more than good garden soil mixed with a third of its volume of good potting soil. The soil in which tulip and hyacinth onions are planted is a compost of garden soil and potting compost, in equal parts. Ranunculus soil is made up of garden soil and dried pond sludge, in equal parts. Water for gardening. It takes a lot of water to keep a garden going. The only exception to this rule in France is in the north and in the western maritime departments, where it rains almost every day. Rarely can the gardener choose the water needed to water his plants; he has to make do with what he finds within his reach; more often than not, he has only well water, which is very full of calcareous principles, and therefore of poor quality, and whose defects he can only try to attenuate by leaving it as long as possible in the tanks, in contact with the air, before using it. When he has the means to obtain it in sufficient quantity, rainwater is the best that the gardener can distribute to his plants; then come, in order of relative value, spring water, running water, i.e. water from streams and rivers, and finally, stagnant water, drawn from ponds and puddles of limited extent. From the point of view of its fertilizing action, this last water is undoubtedly the best; but as the organic matter it contains, and which decomposes incessantly in it, gives it a repulsive odor, on the one hand its use is unhealthy for the gardener, and on the other it spoils the flavor of certain garden produce, that of strawberries, for example, which must be watered while the strawberry plant bears flowers, half-formed fruit and ripe fruit at the same time. Water not only quenches the thirst of plants and protects them from the effects of drought; even the purest water, such as that which flows over a bed of pure silica sand or granite, always contains dissolved air, carbonic acid gas, ammonia and various salts in varying proportions, all of which have a significant influence on the vegetation of garden plants. The foregoing shows how important it is for the gardener, before creating a garden, to ascertain the nature of the water he will be able to obtain; for without abundant water of at least fair quality, gardening is impossible. (See Watering, chap. VII.) CHAPTER III Fertilizers and soil improvers. Fertilizers and soil improvers. - Manures. - Sheep manure - Rarely used for gardening. - Horse manure. - Advantages in horticulture. - Suitable soils. - Manure from horned animals. - Its properties. - Pig manure. - Common prejudices. - Potting soil. - Columbine. - Barnyard bird droppings. - Powdered fertilizers. - Guano. - Poudrette. - Refinery black. - Goëmon. - Sea sludge. - Pond slime. - Wool rags. - Crushed bones - Leather shavings. - Bone shavings. - Horn shavings. - Lime. - Sand. - Clay. - Preparation of soil improvers. - Sieved ash. - Soil additives. Garden cultivation, whether for the personal enjoyment of those involved, or because the gardener intends to sell the produce, requires very large quantities of all kinds of fertilizers. Whereas the ploughman does his best to fertilize his land every three or four years, and necessarily takes several harvests from one manuring, the gardener must renew the manuring several times a year. If he tries to avoid this necessity, it is for him the most ruinous of savings; he obtains, in this case, only miserable products which do not even pay for the little fertilizer distributed too sparingly to the garden soil. Manure. Livestock manure, which has reached a more or less advanced stage of decomposition, is the most common type of fertilizer used in gardens. For this part of his duties, as for many others, the gardener does not always have a free choice; he must adapt his crops to the type of manure he can obtain. More often than not, professional gardeners can only obtain manure from the large numbers of luxury or service horses employed in cities. Far from major population centers, it's the manure from horned cattle that's easiest for them to buy. As for sheep manure, although excellent for all kinds of garden cultivation, it is almost never used; farmers who keep flocks of sheep never sell manure from their sheep. Pig manure is considered harmful to many of gardening's most delicate products; it's better than its reputation. Of all manures, its chemical composition brings it closest to human fertilizer, whose fertilizing power it almost equals. It can therefore be used without fear in gardens, either alone or mixed with other fertilizers. Horse manure is invaluable for gardening because of the property it possesses of suspending fermentation when dry, and resuming it as soon as wet; for this reason, it is the only manure that can be used to build warm and hot beds for forced cultivation. Horned cattle manure, which is more watery and colder, cannot provide the same kind of service to the gardener. When garden soil is more or less cold, compact and heavy, only horse manure should be used; this manure, in a relatively early state of decomposition, acts mechanically by lifting and dividing the soil, which it prevents from closing up, and to which it promptly yields its fertilizing principles, due to the activity of its fermentation. If the garden soil is warm and light, it should preferably be given either horned-animal manure or half-decomposed horse manure. Potting soil. Any kind of manure, when left to its own devices, eventually runs out of fermentable matter, leaving a black, crumbly mass that's soft to the touch and much smaller in volume than recent manure. Potting soil is the same and has the same properties, whatever the type of manure it comes from. In gardens, potting soil, which is constantly needed for all crops, comes from layers that are dismantled when they no longer give heat: potting soil from broken layers still possesses some of the properties of the manure from which the layers were built; when it is to be used as potting soil for the cultivation of certain plants that cannot stand contact with manure, it is kept in a heap before use, until it has reached the most complete degree of decomposition. Columbine. - Strictly speaking, colombine is pigeon droppings from the cleaning of dovecotes or pigeon lofts, from which it derives its name. It is one of the most active fertilizers, and is stored dry for use as a powder. It has a very energetic influence on vegetation, even in small doses, especially on melons, cucumbers, gherkins, pumpkins, gourds, coloquintes and all plants in the same family. In the absence of real colombina, the gardener can always obtain a fairly large quantity of barnyard bird droppings by frequent cleaning of the henhouse; this fertilizer has the same properties as colombina and is suitable for the same crops. Powdered fertilizers. - The trade supplies agriculture with a number of powdered fertilizers, some natural, others artificial, some of which can be used to great advantage in horticulture; these are, in particular, Guano from Peru, whose properties are more or less the same as those of colombina; Poudrette, or disinfected human fertilizer, endowed with properties of the same kind, but much weakened; and Animalized Black, or refinery black, less energetic than guano, but less expensive, which can be used in higher doses and applied, especially in light siliceous soils, to a large number of crops. In addition to these fertilizers, which are available almost everywhere in France, the gardener, depending on local circumstances and the nature of the land he cultivates, can also use Goëmon, Tangue or sea sludge, pond mud after it has dried out in the open air, woollen rags, crushed bones, leather shavings, and bone and horn shavings from button factories to stimulate the vegetation of the plants under his care. Amendments. The action of soil improvers differs essentially from that of fertilizers. Fertilizers activate vegetation for a more or less short time, after which there is nothing left in the soil: the crops grown on the manure have absorbed it all, and it must be renewed; the nature of the soil, once the useful effect of the manure has been exhausted, is not appreciably changed. They modify the composition of the cultivable layer and change the proportions of its constituent elements. When a garden is created and the soil needs to be amended, it is amended in much greater proportions than cultivated fields to which the same amendments are given, so that there is no need to come back to it. Let's take a garden established on schistose, clayey soil, which can only become suitable for gardening by receiving a high proportion of lime; in a field only 4 hectares in size, with a 25-centimeter thick topsoil, to add a tenth of lime to this layer, you need a thousand cubic meters, a very considerable quantity, of such a high value when the cost of transport is added to the purchase price, that the operation is impossible to carry out; in a one-hectare garden, the soil can be limed with 250 cubic meters of lime; it's an expense once made, and the certain benefits it should produce will be in proportion1 to the sum spent: there's no need to hesitate. The same applies to silica sand, used to amend clay soils that are too compact, and to clay added as an amendment to garden soil when it has the defect of being too light and lacking in consistency. Lime, sand and clay are, as we've just seen, the most common soil improvers used to improve garden soil. Ashes are no less useful when the soil lacks the fertilizing principles they contain. PREPARING SOIL IMPROVERS. Once it has been recognized that a garden's soil needs such an amendment, lime should not be given to it without preparation; it would be difficult to incorporate it exactly into the cultivable layer; it would be too unevenly distributed. To get the most out of it, it should be layered, at the right rate, in alternating beds with thin turf or dried pond sludge. Piles are formed in autumn, reworked once or twice with a spade during the winter, and dismantled in spring. The lime, intimately mixed with decomposed sod or pond sludge, is in the best possible condition to be distributed on the soil surface and ploughed in by very careful deep ploughing. The advantages of this process for liming soils are so obvious that enlightened growers use no other, whether for field or garden cultivation. SAND, added as an amendment to compact clay soil, which it serves to render less heavy and more easily divisible, needs no prior preparation; all that's required is to spread it on the soil, in the appropriate dose, and mix it well with the soil by autumn or spring ploughing. CLAY incorporated into garden soil that is too light to increase cohesion should be exposed to the open air and thoroughly dried before use. In this state, it is easy to reduce it to a coarse powder, which is spread by hand in the furrow or dip opened by the spade during ploughing. In this way, it mixes very evenly with the ploughed soil, without forming blocks that are difficult to divide, and produces its full useful effect. ASH, especially coal ash, is widely used in the North as a soil improver, due to the high proportion of lime and potash it contains. When mixed with manure, it is more effective than when used on its own, as a soil improver. After having been roughly sifted to separate the slag, the manure pile is first dismantled and built up layer by layer. The manure mixed with ashes is then spread over the garden squares at spring or autumn ploughing time, and buried with a spade, like ordinary manure. The careful gardener takes every opportunity to improve his garden soil, either with the aforementioned amendments, or by adding good soil when available. If, for example, a building in his neighborhood is to be erected on sufficiently fertile ground, he will not fail to take advantage of the opportunity to add, at little cost, a large dose of good soil to that of his garden, which could not receive a more effective amendment es of a more lasting useful effect. CHAPTER IV Gardening tools. Gardening instruments. - Their classification. - Ploughing implements - Common spade. - Curved blade. - Flemish spade. - Pickaxe. -- Pick. - Their use in ripping. - Square-bladed hoe. - Triangular blade. - With two flat teeth. - Hoe or serfouette. - Sharp-toothed rake. - With obtuse tines. - Fork with straight tines. - With curved tines. - Irrigation tools. - Flat-sided watering can. - Long-necked. - Portable pump. - Transport tools. - Common wheelbarrow. - Lined with sheet metal. - Clerestory. - Stretchers. - Arboricultural tools. - Serpette. - Secateurs. - Saw. - Grafting machine. - Pliers. - Crescent. - Cleaver. - Miscellaneous instruments. - Roller. - Rakes. - Shoe planter. - Advantages. - Cleat. - Trowel. - Its use in the greenhouse. It is very important for the gardener to be equipped with an assortment of the best tools for the various tasks involved in his profession; with the wrong tools, he can only do a poor job. Tools and instruments for horticultural use are classified into four main divisions, comprising ploughing, irrigation, transport and arboriculture implements; a fifth division includes implements for various purposes that do not fit into any of the preceding divisions. Ploughing implements. - The main ploughing implements used by gardeners are the spade, pickaxe, hoe, hoe, rake and pitchfork. SPADE. - Perfect ploughing with a spade is one of the most essential conditions for successful gardening. The spade, in terms of weight, diameter and length of handle, must be perfectly suited to the size and strength of the person using it; a good spade is to the gardener what a good rifle is to the soldier. In a garden of a certain size, the soil is never homogeneous; there are veins of hard, strong soil alongside other veins of soft, light soil: hence the need for several different spades, because soil that differs essentially from one another cannot all be ploughed well with the same spade. COMMON SPADE (fig. 3). - For ploughing good ordinary garden soil, neither too strong nor too light, there is no better instrument than the common spade, with its flat iron, slightly narrower at its cutting edge than at its upper edge. When the spade is to be used in slightly hard soil, the two portions of the upper edge, to the right and left of the socket through which the handle passes, must be wide enough for the worker to rest his heavy clogged foot on them. CURVED EDGE SPREADER (fig. 4). - When the subsoil is stony and difficult to cut, the common spade is replaced by another spade which differs from it in only one respect: instead of a straight edge, the cutting edge describes a curve and forms two points at the two corners, making the work easier without increasing the worker's fatigue. Fig. 3: Common spade. Fig. 4. curved-edge spade. Fig. 5. Flemish spade. FLEMISH SPADE (fig. 5). -Gardeners often have to plough soil that is otherwise very good, but so light that when it is a little dry, if you want to work it with one of the two preceding spades, the portion taken up each time by the instrument crumbles, slips on the blade, and falls back without having been properly turned, which makes ploughing more or less imperfect. Soils of this kind are very common in Flanders, so farmers there have adopted a spade with a long, narrow blade which, instead of being flat like the common spade, forms a slight curve towards the middle of its length, which holds the clod of earth in place and gives the worker plenty of time to turn it over as he sees fit. The Flemish spade, widely used throughout northern France, is excellent for all garden soils that are lighter than heavy. PIOCHE (fig. 6). - The pickaxe itself is only useful to the Fig. 6. gardener in breaking operations, where the soil must be turned over and excavated to a depth of om, 60 and sometimes om, 80. (See Gardening operations, chap. V.) When carrying out work of this kind, we frequently come across either large roots or stones which must not be left in the subsoil. These are removed with the common pickaxe; Fig. 7. Pickaxe. When this instrument is insufficient, a special kind of pickaxe called a pick (fig. 7) is used, similar to the instrument of the same name used by pavers; it differs from the pickaxe only in the strength and length of its thick, narrow blade, and in its point, which can, in the hands of a sturdy and skilful worker, penetrate the hardest subsoil, where the ordinary pickaxe would break. HOUE. - The hoe is one of the gardener's most useful implements, used to give the most expeditious superficial treatment to all types of soil. It is the best instrument for ridging potatoes and a host of other common tasks. The most commonly used hoe has a square blade (fig. 8), curved slightly inwards. Fig. 9. triangular-bladed hoe. Fig. 10. Two-tooth hoe. is fitted to a short handle, so that the worker who uses it can only work bent over, moving straight ahead, whereas when plowing with a spade, he can only work backwards. The hoe blade is triangular in shape (fig. 9), while the length and layout of the handle remain the same as for the square-bladed hoe. For digging up potatoes and other root vegetables, which you often risk cutting when digging with a spade, we recommend a two-tine flat hoe (fig. 10), which does the job very quickly and very well. The length and strength of the tines can be varied according to the resistance of the soil and the depth at which the instrument is to penetrate it. BINETTE. - The hoe or serfouette (fig. 11) is the tool par excellence for careful weeding and hoeing between rows of cultivated plants, without risking damaging them; the gardener should have several of different strength and size, but all composed of a blade on one side and two tines on the other, with a short socket through which the handle is passed, long enough for the worker to work without bending. Rare. - This instrument is to the gardener what the harrow is to the ploughman. There should be at least two of them, one with strong, pointed teeth long enough to give ploughed land the equivalent of a harrow, and the other with round teeth, obtuse at the end, used for clearing paths, trimming the surface of flowerbeds and lightly burying fine vegetable seeds. FORK. - The three-pronged fork, either straight or slightly curved inwards, is often used to even out the soil after a vegetable harvest, and to quickly give it a very superficial appearance. This means that the fork can be classed as a ploughing tool, although its most common use is to work with manure, especially to build up the beds, and also to remove weeds from garden weeding. Irrigation tools - Watering cans and portable pumps are the main tools used for watering gardens. WATERING CAN. - The shape of the old watering can, with its very rounded sides, has been more or less abandoned these days; the flat-sided watering can (fig. 12) is rightly preferred, as the worker can carry it without being forced to hold his arms outstretched and tense; this alone very-sensibly reduces the fatigue of watering. 2. The sheaf at the end of the watering can's neck can be removed Fig. 12. at will; the gardener must have several spare sheaves, Fig. 13. pierced with more or less fine holes; delicate plant seedlings cannot withstand watering with a sheaf pierced with large holes, which is the equivalent of a heavy rainstorm. For greenhouse service, we use watering cans with very long necks, which can be used to water pots in the upper rows of shelves, without having to move them or use the footboard. PORTATIVE PUMP (fig. 13). - Horticulture has several good models of portable pump, which can replace the use of watering cans for a large number of crops; they are especially useful for watering the surface of fruit trees in summer, when the foliage needs to be refreshed during long droughts. Transport tools. - Transport in the garden is carried out using two different instruments: the wheelbarrow and the stretcher. BROUETTE. - The common wheelbarrow is too well known to need describing. The gardener needs one lined with sheet metal and fitted with a hinged lid, for transporting liquid fertilizers, which are very useful in the vegetable garden. He also needs a wheelbarrow with long stretchers, no edges and a slatted bottom, for easy transport of doormats and bulky objects, which are more cumbersome than heavy. CIVIERE. - The most common type, with a double stretcher and requiring the help of two workers, has a slatted, rimless bottom and is very practical for transporting manure and removing produce from the vegetable garden, wherever a wheelbarrow cannot easily be used. The gardener also needs a hopper-shaped stretcher for transporting certain objects which, like potting soil, do not fit on the stretcher. Arboricultural tools. - The pruning, management and maintenance of fruit and ornamental trees require the use of a fairly large number of instruments, the main ones being: the pruning shears, secateurs, saws, grafting shears, pliers, crescents and weeders. SERPETTE (fig. 14). - Although the increasing use of pruning shears has considerably reduced the use of the pruning knife, this instrument is nonetheless indispensable to the gardener; many operations can only be carried out properly with the pruning knife; in particular, no other instrument can adequately repair the wounds resulting from the removal of large branches cut with the saw. There should be several different-sized pruning shears; the handles of the strongest ones, designed for pruning branches of a fairly large rig.14. diameter, should be fitted with a projecting edge that holds the instrument firmly in the workman's hand. It is important that the steel used for the crimper is of the highest quality; Rouen's crimper has a well-deserved reputation in this respect. SEWER (fig. 15). - The use of this instrument is so expeditious and convenient that, despite a few drawbacks noted at the outset, it has become universally used in Fig. 15. Secateurs. Fig. 16. Saw. Fig. 17. Grafting machine. gardens. Several sizes are required, the smallest of which are used for pruning roses and delicate shrubs. Some gardeners use secateurs armed with two long handles to prune high tree branches; it is better to use ordinary secateurs, and not to shy away from the need to use a double ladder; if you prune from too far away, you can't see what you're doing, and irreparable mistakes can result. SAWS (fig. 16). - Saws used by gardeners are fitted in such a way that they can always be used between the branches of overgrown trees, when they need 33 to be pruned or cut back on their main branches. Wherever the saw has passed, the pruning knife must pass in turn, so that the surface of the cut is left clean and smooth, as if the pruning had not been done with the saw. GRAFTING. - The various types of grafting require the use of a fairly large number of grafting tools, the most common of which is Fig. 18. Pliers. 2 Fig. 19. Pince. a knife with a rounded blade at the end, and a small ivory spatula on the lower part of the handle for lifting the bark of trees for scape grafting (fig. 17). (See Gardening operations, chap. V.) PINCE. - In recent years, gardeners have made frequent use of a variety of pliers, some suitable for pinching and disbudding fruit trees (fig. 18), others for making annular incisions (fig. 19) in the branches of trees too slow to set fruit. GROWING (fig. 20). - This instrument is used only in groves and large landscape gardens, for pruning large ornamental trees; the very long handle to which it is adapted makes it very convenient for this special purpose. Fig. 20. Crescent. Fig. 21. ladder pruner. Fig. 22. Ratissoire. SHEAR (fig. 21). - This instrument is used with advantage in spring, before the leaves develop, to remove the webs in which caterpillars have encased themselves for the winter. Its long handle gives access to the highest branches, without the need for a ladder. Various instruments. - The most useful tools for gardening, and which do not fit into any of the previous divisions, are the roller, rake, planter, rake and trowel. RATTISOIRE (fig. 22) - The two most common forms of the ratissoire, in constant use for keeping paths clean, allow you to use it either by bringing it to you, or by pushing it forward; it cuts the roots of weeds between two plots of land, preventing them from growing back in the paths. ROLLER (fig. 23). - To firm up the soil in the paths of Fig. 23. The cast-iron roller is a hollow cylinder with a handle that the worker pushes in front of him. It can be made heavier at will by loading the inside of the cylinder with stones. PLANTOIR. - The most practical planter is made of wood, with a crook-shaped handle. It is made more durable by wrapping an iron band around its tip, which is polished by use, so that the planter enters the hole with little effort and exits in the same way, without causing the edges to fall into the hole. The iron planter does not get stuck in wet soil like the non-iron planter, which is therefore much less convenient to use. CLaIE (fig. 24). - Gardeners often need to sift the soil, compost and potting compost they need to grow their crops. For this purpose, he uses a sieve fixed to a wooden frame and made up of rods set more or less close together. The rack is held in an inclined position by a support; the substances to be screened are thrown over it with a shovel; the most divided parts fall on one side, the largest on the other. Racks are more durable and provide better service when wooden rods are replaced by iron rods. Fig. 24. Rack. Fig. 25. Trowel. TRUELLE (fig. 25). - This instrument is used exclusively in the greenhouse to lay out the soil in the pots in which the plants are to live, and to open the holes in the tannage into which the pots are to be sunk (see Greenhouses, chap. VII). CHAPTER V Shelters and layers. Shelters proper. - Stone walls. - Brick. - Plank s. Palisades or windbreaks of Jerusalem artichokes. - Yew. - Thuja. - Italian poplar. - Doormats. - How to make them. - Cloths. - Their use as shelter. - Bells. - Verrines. - Cages. - Counter floors. - Frames. - Panels. - Boxes. - Sheet metal frames and chests. - Wooden floor under hot-water heated chests. - Economical frames. - Hot layers. - Stoves. - How to assemble layers. - Warm layers. - Elements of which they are composed. - Deaf layers. - Their distinctive features. - Pits for establishing them. - Duration of their heat. - Usefulness of muted layers. Most of the produce in our gardens is of foreign origin; we have borrowed it, some in modern times, others since the most remote antiquity, from climates further south than our own; there are some, and the best, which, in the average climate of France, can only vegetate in the open air from the time frosts cease in spring, until they begin again in autumn. As a result, for most of their vegetative life, these plants cannot do without shelter. In horticulture, the term "shelter" is used to refer to anything used to protect plants from the cold; in this sense, greenhouses of all kinds, to which the following chapter is devoted, are all shelters too. Shelters in the strict sense of the term are not only useful against the cold; they also protect certain delicate plants against the heat of the sun's rays and the destructive action of strong winds. The most commonly used are walls, palisades or windbreaks, doormats, canvas, ados or cótières, cloches, verrines, counterfloors, glazed châssts and layers. 3 Walls. - As we saw in the previous chapter, the height and method of construction of enclosing and dividing walls are the best of all shelters for fruit trees that are more or less sensitive to the cold. In countries where stone is in short supply and brick is expensive, board walls are erected for ospaliers, with the same useful effect as masonry walls. Peach trees and vines are trained on plank walls, and their produce reaches perfect ripeness in the islands of Zeeland, where the climate is much more unfavorable than in northern France. These walls, running from north-east to south-west, are, like most garden enclosure walls, 2.50 m high; their tree-lined surface is plain; the other surface is supported from distance to distance by structural buttresses. Although they are built of white wood, the layers of tar that are carefully applied every year make them quite durable. Palisades or windbreaks. - Cold and temperate greenhouse plants that spend the summer in the open air would frequently be knocked over and damaged by the winds, if they were not secured in some way. On the other hand, seedlings planted during the summer would be destroyed by drought without the protection they receive from palisades or windbreaks, a type of shelter that is absolutely essential in a large garden. The simplest of these consist of one or two rows of Jerusalem artichokes. The very rapid growth of this plant and the extent of its abundant foliage make it very suitable for use as a windbreak, while still allowing a weakened ray of sunlight to pass through from distance. Hedges of yew, cedar and Italian poplar are planted permanently for the same purpose; these should not be kept beyond 6 to 7 years. Doormats. - In gardens, excellent diminutive forms of espalier are improvised by planting lines of stakes about a metre high above the ground in an east-west direction, from which doormats facing south are suspended. These temporary shelters, which are removed when no longer needed, hasten the growth of plants sown in trays and transplanted in the open air when outside temperatures permit. Gardeners need straw mats all the time, not only for this purpose, but also to protect seedlings covered with branches from the cold. The straw mats should be placed on these seedlings during the night, when a bit of cold is likely to occur. Greenhouse frames, tarpaulins and windows are also covered with doormats to keep out the cold. This multiplicity of uses for doormats means that the gardener must always have a fairly large quantity at his disposal. It would be difficult for him to buy them for money, which would be very expensive, so he usually makes them himself using the following process. The top of a large table, or a door taken off its hinges, is placed by means of a support under one of its ends, in a slightly inclined position. Three hooked nails, in a line, at equal distances from each other, are fixed to each end of this surface; thick strings are stretched tightly over these nails. Once this has been done, a layer of rye straw is spread as evenly as possible over the table. Care must be taken to alternately take a handful on one side of the cob and one on the opposite side, otherwise the mat will be too thin on one edge and too thick on the other. A shuttle is then loaded with strong but fairly thin twine, and passed along the three lines of stretched twine, each time taking a small quantity of straw of equal thickness, which is secured with a slipknot. The straw mat, made to the length of the board being worked on, is rolled back from the board and continued indefinitely by the same process, until it reaches the desired length. This very light work is easily performed by women and children during the forced leisure of the worst days of the bad season, when outside work is interrupted. Canvas. - In the north of France, when espaliered trees are in bloom, canvases are hung from the coping of the wall. These canvases can be very clear, provided they are strong enough; large canvas is usually used for this purpose, not only to protect peach and apricot blossoms from the cold, but also to prevent these blossoms, the hope of the harvest, from being destroyed by hail, which is quite common in April. Ados. - Ados or "cótières" are simply flowerbeds laid out on slopes facing south. Many very low plants, especially winter lettuces, kale and seedlings of plants to be transplanted in spring, are sufficiently sheltered here from the east and north winds, so that they overwinter very well on ados, without any other protection. Bells (fig. 26). - Glass cloches are one of the most common forms of shelter used in vegetable Fig. 26. cultivation; they are laid flat on the ground when the plants they shelter can do without air. When the temperature is milder, the edge of the bell is raised towards the south to let in a little air. On cold nights, long litter or straw mats are thrown over the cloches to provide extra protection for delicate plants. Glass jars (fig. 27). - The use of glass jars has been virtually abandoned in the garden, due to their high price; they are cloches made of glass compartments joined by lead strips. Their greatest advantage over one-piece glass cloches is their solidity, and consequently their durability. Verrines usually have two compartFig. 27.ments on opposite sides of the top. Verrines. hinged to give air to the plants housed in the verrine. Cages (fig. 28). - Under the name of cages, gardeners use cylinders made of wickerwork, fitted with pointed legs that are driven into the ground Fig. 28. Cages. Fig. 29. Counterfloors. so that the cage cannot be blown over by the wind. This kind of shelter is very useful for many delicate plants during the first period of their growth; as soon as these plants, accustomed to contact with the air, have become sufficiently robust, the cages are removed. Counterfloors (fig. 29). - We mention counter-soils here, even though they are rarely used in most gardens, despite their undeniable usefulness. These are large flower pots cut in half lengthways. They are placed behind certain plants, either on the south side to protect them from the sun, or in the direction of the wind, the violence of which can be harmful to delicate, very watery plants, when the bedded plant is transplanted into the ground. These include cucumbers, gherkins, squash, pumpkins and all cultivated plants of the Cucurbitaceae family; no other type of shelter ensures the recovery of these plants better than counter-soils. Counter-soils are available at very low cost from all horticultural pottery factories. Frames (fig. 30). - Frames are widely used in horticulture Fig. 30. Chassis. in horticulture, consist of two distinct parts: the box and the chassis itself. The trunk, designed to support the frame, is usually made of wood; its length varies at will; nevertheless, it rarely exceeds four meters, a length sufficient for three frames or panels, according to the expression received among Parisian gardeners. The width is only one meter when the box is to contain a warm layer for forced cultivation of early vegetables; it is one meter thirty centimeters for warm or dull layers. The rear part of the frame is always a little higher than the front, so that the frame is not laid horizontally, but has a certain slope to the front. The difference in height varies from eight to ten centimetres, depending on the height of the plants to be grown under this type of shelter. Chests are usually made of oak wood, well tarred on the inside and painted with several coats of oil on the outside, to make them more durable. They are also made of sheet iron, of the dimensions indicated above, for the same purposes. When artificial heat is to be produced inside the chest by a layer of fermenting manure, it rests on the ground, into which even its lower edges enter by one or two centimeters; when this heat is to be produced by the pipes of a thermosiphon, the chest rests on a wooden floor under which the heat pipes pass. (See Thermosiphon, chap. VI.) The frames that are placed over the chests to concentrate heat internally for the benefit of plants raised in forced cultivation, are most often covered with panes of glass laid one on top of the other. It's important that the glass is both transparent and thick enough to withstand the various chances of breakage, which can make maintenance very costly. A rack-and-pinion support allows the frames to be lifted to varying degrees, either to clean the glass panes or to allow free access to the outside air. In addition, each frame is fitted with two iron handles for moving and replacing it as required. Gardening enthusiasts whose means do not allow them to use glazed frames supported by oak or sheet-iron casings, can substitute inexpensive chássis, consisting of white wooden casings surmounted by simple rough wooden frames on which is stretched a canvas coated with linseed oil, or even oiled paper. Forced cultivation of the most delicate plants is undoubtedly not as successful here as under good glass frames, but almost all the most common types of forced cultivation are practicable with advantage and at very little cost, especially since, with a little skill and activity, anyone in the countryside can make economical frames for his garden, whereas ordinary frames can only be made by professional carpenters or sheet-metal workers. The frames, whatever they may be, are made very durable by the twofold precaution of giving them a heavy coat of paint every year in spring, and storing them in the shelter of a shed for as long as they are not needed. Layers. - Layers are made up of fermenting manure, either on its own or combined with dead leaves and moss to produce artificial heat of varying intensity and duration. As the manure and other fermentable elements used to build the layers are not directly used to feed the plants grown in layers, they are covered with a more or less thick bed of potting soil, or a mixture of potting soil and garden soil in various proportions. It is on this bed, more or less heated by the fermentation of the layer, that the forced plants vegetate. Depending on the degree of heat they are intended to provide, layers are warm, lukewarm or muted. Hot layers. - This type of bed can only be built with horse manure at the height of its fermentation. If you have stockpiled horse manure with a view to using it when the layers are to be erected, you must take care to keep it in loosely packed heaps, through which long poles are passed from distance to distance, lifting the mass so that the air can penetrate and the heaps dry out inside. Horse manure possesses, above all others, the precious property of interrupting fermentation when dry, and resuming it when wet. So, when you want to build up the layers, you break up the heaps and wet the manure you're using without delay; fermentation sets in immediately: it's very active, but doesn't last long. For this reason, we take care to make the hot layers higher than they are wide. When their heat begins to wane, reheaters are used to revive it. This is the name given to the belt of recent manure that surrounds a warm layer that has cooled halfway, warming it up for a while. In market gardening, where a large number of layers are used, they are placed close together, so that the new manure stoves occupy the service paths, thus producing all their useful effect without causing any inconvenience. To build up a hot layer properly, you must first mix all the parts of the manure with a fork; if this mixing is not done carefully enough, the fermentation of the different parts of the layer will be very uneven. Many gardeners use almost dry manure to build up the beds, which they wet and trample when the bed is fully erected. But it is much better to water the manure before using it; this ensures that it is more completely and evenly moistened, which contributes to the even fermentation of the bed. With these arrangements in place, the bed is marked out by four stakes, over which cords are stretched to ensure that the edges of the bed are perfectly straight. The layer is then built up, starting at one end, and the gardener works backwards to the opposite end; he takes care to strike the manure with the back of the fork as his work progresses, so that the mass is very evenly packed. Warm layers. - These are usually built up with half manure, half recently fallen leaves, fresh moss or other vegetable substances capable of providing gentle, long-lasting heat. These are mixed well and moistened to form a layer, as described for warm layers. Deaf layers. - To build up a deaf layer, a trench the length and width of the layer is opened in the ground, to a depth of 30 centimeters. Either the manure alone, or a mixture of manure, leaves and moss, is piled into this pit to produce the warmth of the layer. This heat must last a long time; but once exhausted, it cannot be 3. renewed by means of the stoves that this kind of bed does not allow; so we only start to build up deaf beds as spring approaches, to be able to transplant plants that have started to grow on other hot or deaf beds, during the bad season. Instead of potting soil, the surface of the deaf layer is covered with a thick bed of good soil taken from the pit opened to house it. Like the others, it is then covered with a glass frame supported by a box, to concentrate the gentle heat that is maintained in this type of layer for a very long time. CHAPTER VI Orangeries and greenhouses. The origins of greenhouses in Europe. - Orangeries. - What distinguishes it from the cold greenhouse. - Why they are no longer built. - Interior layout. - Shelves. - Stoves. - Cold greenhouse. - Flemish greenhouse. - Dutch greenhouse. - Camellia greenhouse, - Pelargonium greenhouse, - Calceolar greenhouse. - Winter garden. - Cold frame. - Temperate greenhouse. - Heating system. - Thermosiphon. - Its advantages. - Ventilation. - Reservoir. - Living room greenhouse. - Warm greenhouse. - Interior divisions. - Vestibule. - Aquarium. - Forcing greenhouse. - Multiplication greenhouse. - Greenhouse shading. - Mobile greenhouse. - Placed in front of espaliered trees. - Heated portable greenhouse. - Unheated. - Apartment aquarium. The need to give a large number of plants, originating in the hottest regions of the globe, an artificial climate as similar as possible to the natural climate of their native land gave rise to greenhouses, the first of which were built, it is said, in the 15th century, for the botanical garden of the University of Padua. Since then, this type of construction has continued to proliferate, and today there is no country house of any comfort that is not accompanied by the obligatory accessory of a greenhouse. Greenhouses, according to their purpose, are classified in the following order: Orangeries. - Cold greenhouses. - Temperate greenhouses. - Warm greenhouses. - Aquarium. - Forcing greenhouses. - Multiplication greenhouses. To this list should be added miniature greenhouses and aquariums, which can easily be placed on a pedestal table and serve as the most pleasant part of home horticulture. Orangery (fig. 31). - The orangery differs from the greenhouse in one essential respect: the greenhouse, whatever its purpose, is covered by a glass roof; the only materials used in its construction are wood or iron on the one hand, and glass on the other; the back wall against which it is usuallyHoSueao1831 leaned is the only masonry; the plants grown there therefore receive light from all directions. The orangery, on the other hand, is a masonry structure with large windows on the south side, covered with a roof of tiles, slate, zinc or lead, just like a residential building. The plants receive light from one side only. This alone makes the orangery much less useful than the cold greenhouse; so orangeries are hardly ever built any more, even though we still make use of those built in large numbers last century; for the same expense, we prefer a cold greenhouse, where we can grow a greater variety of ornamental plants. When the orangery is intended, as its name indicates, to house mainly orange trees and other trees of the same temperament, such as pomegranates, myrtles and oleanders used to decorate large gardens in summer, it must be fairly large. The back wall, as well as the front, faces south; the door, very high to facilitate the entry and exit of large shrubs grown in boxes, is open on the sunset side. A ceiling, usually as high as the top of the door, covers the entire interior of the orangery, which is thus surmounted by a vast attic. In winter, this ceiling prevents the cold resulting from snow on the roof from penetrating into the interior of the orangery. The health of the plants, trees and shrubs that overwinter in the orangery is not compromised as long as the inside temperature doesn't drop below zero; consequently, there's no need to install a permanent heating appliance, just a stove that's lit only when it's very cold; it makes just enough fire to prevent the orangery from freezing; it's dismantled in summer. The front facade of the orangery should be pierced by high, wide windows; the best orangeries are those where all the windows touch. The interior dimensions of the orangery can be varied at will; as it receives light only through the windows on its front facade, it must not be too deep, otherwise the last row of plants placed along the back wall, being too far from the windows, would suffer from lack of daylight and air, which would cause the plants to lose much of their foliage, and could even compromise their existence. The thicker the walls of the orangery, the harsher the local climate; when only large shrubs are to be wintered in crates, the stove and pipes are all that's needed. If the orangery is also to house a variety of small plants, grown in pots, shelves are placed in front of the windows, on which the pots are arranged so as to be as close as possible to the light. These shelves should never be so high as to intercept too completely the air and light that the large shrubs placed behind them, between the shelves and the back wall, demand their fair share of. Cold greenhouse (fig. 32). - English horticulturists call this type of greenhouse conservatory; this term expresses very well the purpose of the cold greenhouse, where the gardener houses a very wide variety of ornamental plants, with the sole aim of preserving them. Among these plants, some naturally suspend their vegetation in winter, without losing their leaves; others experience a complete vegetal sleep; others, finally, are naturally disposed to vegetate without stopping, winter being unknown in their native climate. This last series of plants is the most difficult to preserve in the cold greenhouse; it can only be achieved by slowing down the movement of their vegetation. In the cold greenhouse, as in the orangery, it's always warm enough when it's not freezing; the stove should only be turned on when absolutely necessary. The cold greenhouse is built with one or two slopes, with a flat or curved surface. Buildings known as Flemish greenhouses (fig. 33), Dutch greenhouses, camellia greenhouses, pelargonium greenhouses and calceolaria greenhouses are nothing more than cold greenhouses, with no distinguishing features. In order to keep the fire as late and as short as possible, when the cold greenhouse is double-sided, the north side is covered with a thick layer of long litter or leaves, held in place by a blanket of thin white wooden boards; the south side, during light frosts, is covered only with straw mats that are Fig. 32. Cold greenhouse. Fig. 33. Flemish greenhouse. a som d'enlever dès que la température adoucit; car les plantes de serre froide souffrent plus en hiver du manque de lumière que des atteintes d'un froid modéré. THE WINTER GARDEN (fig. 34) is yet another variety of the greenhouse Fig. 34. Cold winter garden, very popular today. It's a two-sided greenhouse, spacious enough for pathways and rustic seating. Orangery and cold greenhouse plants, trees 1 and shrubs, especially camellias, thrive here all year round in the open ground; a basin fed by a trickle of running water should be considered an indispensable accessory to the winter garden. THE COLD CHASSIS is the cold greenhouse reduced to its simplest form; it has the shape of an ordinary frame; only, the plank box supporting the glazing is two meters high at the back and one meter sixty centimeters high at the front. A sturdy rack supports the upright panels when the gardener has to work inside the cold frame. Most of the time, as its dimensions remain the same, it is sunk forty to fifty centimetres into the ground. When the cold is severe, leaves, litter and straw mats piled up around the cold frame, and temporarily spread over its windows, prevent frost from penetrating. All orangery and cold greenhouse plants can overwinter under the cold frame. Temperate greenhouse. - The temperate greenhouse is the most useful of all in horticulture. Its construction differs in no way from that of the cold greenhouse, but it allows the cultivation of a far greater variety of plants borrowed from the flora of tropical regions. These plants spend only a short period of the summer in the open air; for the rest of the year, they need artificial heat. The various heating methods previously used in temperate greenhouses have all given way to the thermosiphon, whose superiority cannot be disputed. The apparatus known as the thermosiphon consists of a hermetically sealed boiler, under which fire is lit at will; the boiler and its hearth are usually placed outside the temperate greenhouse, either in an insulated compartment, or in a cellar built underneath for this purpose. Cast-iron or copper pipes (the latter being the best) run from the boiler around the greenhouse one or more times before re-entering the boiler at a point on its lateral surface lower than their starting point; like the boiler, these pipes are filled with water and hermetically sealed. When the fire is lit under the boiler, the portion of water in contact with the heated wall immediately heats up, making it lighter than the rest of the liquid mass; currents of hot water rise and cold water fall, until all the water contained either in the pipes or in the boiler has reached the same temperature. (Thermosiphon, fig. 35). The advantages of heating greenhouses with hot water, using Fig. 35. Thermosiphon. are obvious. If, for example, a temperate greenhouse is heated by ordinary heat pipes, from a fireplace fed by wood or coal combustion, the gardener must, during frosts, stay up day and night to maintain the fire, and he succeeds only with difficulty in maintaining that equality of temperature which is the first condition of success for the cultivation of tropical plants. Whether he falls asleep or lacks vigilance, his plants can be burnt out by too much heat, or destroyed by frost; for, with this heating system, an hour after the fire is extinguished, it freezes in the greenhouse to the same degree as outside. If there's a crack in one of the heat pipes, smoke is introduced into the greenhouse; then, to repair the accident, the mason has to be called in; and smoke and the mason are no less to be feared than frost for greenhouse-grown plants. With the thermosiphon, there are no heatstrokes to worry about; the temperature equals itself; there's never any smoke or masons in the greenhouse: the gardener can go to bed and get a good night's sleep; several hours will pass after the fire is extinguished under the thermosiphon boiler, without the temperature inside the greenhouse dropping in a way that's dangerous for the plants. Air renewal in the temperate greenhouse is achieved by means of hinged windows that can be opened and closed at will, at the top of the roof; these openings are used to let warm air out; outside air is introduced through pipes communicating with the outside; When the air enters the tempered greenhouse, it is sufficiently warmed by contact between the air pipes and the pipes filled with hot water; in this way, the best possible ventilation is obtained, without sudden cooling. Water for temperate greenhouse plants must be brought to greenhouse temperature before use. A stone reservoir, fed by a trickle of water, is built into the temperate greenhouse for this purpose; goldfish are kept there to feed on the microscopic animalcules in the water, preventing it from becoming corrupted. The temperate greenhouse is often built on the same level as the living room on the first floor of a country house, in which case it is called a greenhouse-lounge (fig. 36). Plants are arranged on shelves, which are placed to the right and left on days when the greenhouse is to be used as a living room. A carpet is laid out on the space left free in the middle of the greenhouse; candle-laden chandeliers hang from its top; the plants do not suffer appreciably, provided that the days of reception do not recur at too close intervals; for the influx of visitors, the stale air and the burning of the candles always do them more or less harm. hot greenhouse. - The construction of the hot greenhouse, its heating system, reservoir and ventilation are the same as for the temperate greenhouse. As the temperature is constantly very high, it would be dangerous for the gardener to go from this temperature to the outside temperature without any transition. The gardener hangs up his jacket before entering, and takes it off again before leaving. Not all greenhouse plants require the same degree of dry or humid heat; in order to be able to give each series of these plants the temperature that suits it best, the greenhouse is divided into several compartments by glass partitions; the gardener modifies the interior temperature of each compartment as required. Aquariun (fig. 37).- In recent years, the number of very fine tropical aquatic plants introduced into Europe has increased to such an extent that greenhouses have been purpose-built for this particular type of cultivation. Inside these greenhouses is a basin full of water constantly maintained at the desired temperature; all around this type of greenhouse, for which the new term of aquarium has been coined, is a bed in which the most beautiful ornamental plants for hot greenhouses are cultivated, chosen from among those that need an atmosphere that is both very hot and very humid. Forced greenhouses. - The forcing greenhouse is a temperate or warm greenhouse, dedicated entirely 3 Fig. 37. Aquarium. to force either ornamental plants to flower before their natural blooming time, or fruit trees to bear fruit at a time when the same trees grown in the open air have only flowers. The construction and interior layout of the forcing greenhouse do not differ from those of other warm or temperate greenhouses. Multiplication greenhouse. - This is an ordinary cold greenhouse, usually built on northern or sunset exposures, so that greenhouse plants propagated by grafting or cuttings are never exposed to direct contact with the sun's rays, which would be essentially harmful to them. How to shade greenhouses. - All the greenhouses described above, with the exception of the propagation greenhouse where the sun never shines, need to be protected by various means from the scorching heat that could cause irreparable damage in summer. In England, glass with an uneven surface is widely used to break the sun's rays, thus weakening their action. In France, when the aim is to reduce the intensity of the sun's rays without excluding them altogether, a slightly thicker whitewash is smeared on the inside surface of glazing facing south. To shade the inside of greenhouses more completely, cloth or straw mats are laid over them. The latter are not only awkward to handle, but also cast too thick a shadow. In Belgium, greenhouses are frequently shaded with thin slats held together with wire, which can be rolled and unrolled as required, like doormats. These slats leave small gaps between them through which enough light can pass, although sunburn is perfectly prevented. Mobile greenhouses (fig. 38). - These are glazed frames attached to the coping of walls planted with espaliered trees, especially peach trees and vines. These frames are tilted forward so as to leave a free space of 1 meter and 30 centimeters at ground level between them and the wall. The bottom of the frames rests on a plank placed on the field, sunk a few centimetres into the ground, and held downFig. 38. Mobile greenhouse. dement by two rows of stakes, one inside, the other outside. At both

At the ends of the wall temporarily sheltered beneath the mobile greenhouse's frames, two triangular plank partitions intercept all communication with the outside world. A stove with a long pipe, or better still, a thermosiphon, is set up at one end of the mobile greenhouse, heating the interior; this is a safe and inexpensive way of forcing espaliered fruit trees. The mobile greenhouse is set up in February in the Paris climate; it is dismantled once the forced fruit has been harvested. Portable greenhouse (fig. 39). - Horticultural enthusiasts who are kept at home by sedentary occupations in the cities can find great pleasure in multiplying cold and temperate greenhouse ornamental plants by sowing, cutting or grafting in a portable greenhouse. If we limit ourselves to the cultivation of those plants for which the ordinary temperature of an inhabited apartment is sufficient, there is no need to adapt a heating appliance; for those requiring a little more heat, we use a portable greenhouse equipped with a reservoir full of water (fig. 40), under which we place a lighted lamp; the flame of the lamp gently heats the water in the reservoir, which communicates its temperature to the interior of the portable greenhouse. THE GARDENER Fig. 39. Unheated portable greenhouse. O 6 0 Fig. 40. Heated portable greenhouse. Apartment aquarium (fig. 41). - The predilection for ornamental aquatic plants on the part of a large number of enthusiasts has led to the invention of the home aquarium. This charming device can only be set up on the Romonedde p anpenbv 'iy 81" first floor, on a table with four columns, through one of which passes a lead pipe designed to carry the water into the aquarium, itself supported by four copper columns, one of which contains the upper end of the same pipe, while another is pierced by a hole through which the same quantity of water escapes, the aquarium being fed by a continuous stream of running water. In addition to small ornamental aquatic plants, the home aquarium can be used to propagate sticklebacks, small fish with highly unusual habits, and various freshwater shellfish whose development phases are extremely interesting to study. The home aquarium can contain a fairly varied assortment of aquatic plants, without the need for any special heating equipment. The growing popularity of the home aquarium has led many wealthy hobbyists to replace freshwater with seawater, either natural or artificial. This water, because of its salt content, does not corrode, and does not need to be constantly renewed, as is the case with freshwater aquariums. The seawater aquarium takes the form of a square box, with sides made of two-way glass joined by a solid putty. The bottom is lined with pebbles, flat, rounded stones collected from the seashore, to which we add a few rocks and a little sea sand. In this aquarium, in addition to seaweed, kelp, eelgrass and a host of very interesting marine vegetation, you can breed seahorses, various shellfish and a fairly large number of marine animals and small species of sea fish, whose movements make for interesting observations. To facilitate these observations, the aquarium can be placed near a false window, whose frame is replaced by a permanently fixed one-way glass. As the light from outside passes through the aquarium, all parts of the water are constantly illuminated, and nothing that happens there can escape the observer's notice. CHAPTER VII Gardening operations. Gardening operations. - Plowing; - Spading. - Method of execution. - Gauging. - Burying manure. - Ploughing with the square hoe, - With the triangular hoe, - With the two-tooth hoe, - Under trees in the grove. - Ripping. - How they differ from plowing. - Hoeing and weeding. - Watering. - Irrigation. - How it differs from watering. - Watering in the greenhouse. - Age at which plants most need watering. - Mulch. - Its useful effect - Buried barrels. - Roman cement basin. - Plant propagation. - Sowing and planting. - Sowing in the field - Nurseries. - Stratified seeds - Tuber planting. - Transplanting herbaceous plants - Trees and shrubs in the nursery. It is of the utmost importance to the gardener that all operations within the scope of his profession are well executed; acquiring the greatest practical skill in each of them is the study of a lifetime. The most important of these operations are: ploughing, ripping, hoeing and weeding, watering and the various procedures for multiplying plants by sowing, planting, cutting, layering and grafting. Ploughing. - Most garden ploughing is done with a spade, which should be to the gardener what the plough is to the ploughman. Ploughing with a spade always begins with the opening of a pit at one end of the bed to be ploughed; the depth of this pit is usually equal to the length of a spade head; it is adjusted, moreover, according to the greater or lesser thickness of the layer of topsoil. The soil extracted from the pit is carried to the end of the plank, where it remains in reserve to fill the pit when the worker, working backwards, has finished his task. Gardeners give this pit the name of "gauge"; they say, in praise of a worker who spades carefully, without sparing any effort: "We'd bury him in his gauge". The gauge must be the same width and depth throughout the ploughing operation. If the purpose of the operation is to bury manure, the gardener takes care that the manure is distributed very evenly everywhere, and that it is placed between two plots of land, only 5 or 6 centimetres from the surface; if it were buried too deeply, the roots of the cultivated plants would not benefit from it. When the soil is strong rather than light, care should be taken to cut and divide it with the edge of the spade as you move it, so that it is in the most perfect state of loosening possible. There is, however, one exception to this rule: if, at the onset of winter, you plough those parts of the garden that are not occupied by perennial or biennial vegetables, you lift the soil in large blocks and place them upright on the ground, without dividing them, so that, during the winter, the alternating frosts and thaws ripen and crumble them, giving the soil a very good preparation for spring crops. Garden soil is not always ploughed with a spade; in the vegetable garden, the gardener makes frequent use of the square- or triangular-bladed hoe, with which he quickly makes superficial cultivations that are sufficient to prepare the soil when one crop is to follow another; in the tree and shrub beds of the landscape garden, the spade would not work properly because of the roots its cutting edge would encounter in the ground; this part of the garden can only be shaped with the two-toothed hoe, which works between the roots of trees and shrubs without damaging them. Ripping. - Ripping is ploughing to twice the depth of ordinary ploughing. Gardeners only break up the ground when they want to create a garden on a piece of land previously occupied by other crops, or when they need to plant fruit or ornamental trees. The work is carried out in the same way as ploughing, by opening a pit at one end of the plot measuring between om.80 and 1 metre, from which the soil is carried to the other end of the room. When the subsoil is of a poor nature, care is taken not to mix it with the surface layer, which is laid out in strips, so that it can be distributed evenly throughout the area when the trenching is complete. During the operation, stones and roots of perennial weeds are removed, as well as any pieces of dead wood the subsoil may contain; this last point is extremely important, as the underground fungi that grow on rotten wood can spread to the roots of trees and shrubs and cause them to rot. Hoeing and weeding. - These methods, the most superficial of all, are carried out using the hoe or hoeing tool, carefully loosening the soil between cultivated plants. The less water you can give the different divisions of the garden, the more necessary it is to give them frequent hoeing, which prevents the soil from closing up and leaves it in the best conditions for the plants to take full advantage of the night dew. When the garden has been well tended for a long time, weeds only appear if their seeds are accidentally carried by the wind or birds, or if they are mixed with manure without losing their germinative properties. Deep ploughing in autumn and spring, shallow ploughing in summer, and repeated hoeing are enough to keep the garden perfectly clean. If the soil is infested with the roots of bad perennials, they should be pulled out by hand as they grow, and the roots cut off between two plots of land with a fairly long knife; this frequently repeated weeding and the contact of fresh manure will eventually remove all the bad perennials that garden cultivation soon gets rid of. Watering. - Watering is one of the most important gardening 4. operations, except in cantons near the coast and river mouths, where it rains almost every day. In the south of France, evaporation caused by the heat of the climate is so rapid that gardening is impossible wherever irrigation is not possible. Irrigation differs from watering in that it involves running water through gutters onto garden beds levelled for the purpose, and saturating them with water by soaking. This is done on a large scale in the gardens of Cavaillon, Pézénas and around Perpignan. In the climate of Paris and central France, watering is done using a watering can. All garden plants need plenty of water from spring to autumn. Cabbages, cauliflowers and other plants whose foliage doesn't need wetting are watered with the nozzle of the watering can, without the sheaf; all others receive water in the form of rain. In principle, you should water very sparingly, or not at all. When plants, tired by drought and the heat of the day, receive only a small quantity of water, which is quickly dissipated by evaporation, watering does them more harm than good; you should, as the gardeners around Paris say, wet thoroughly, or refrain from watering; but, in this case, you run a great risk of harvesting nothing. In the greenhouse, watering can only be done with a watering can without a spout, with a very long spout; not all plants need the same quantity of water; each one needs to be watered separately, according to its temperament and the more or less advanced state of its vegetation, which would become impossible if we watered all the potted plants arranged on the shelves of a greenhouse in the form of rain. When a plant's foliage needs refreshing, we take the pot outside and hold it in an inclined position, while the spray from the watering can gives the plant a fine shower of rain, without saturating the soil in the pot with excess moisture which is harmful to the plant's roots. In the open ground, it's during the first period of their growth that plants need the most water; some, however, including strawberries and pumpkins, want to be saturated with water while they're bearing flowers and fruit. For most vegetable plants, it's a good idea to cover the beds with a good mulch of long litter, both to slow down the drying-out process by evaporation, and to prevent watering from beating too hard on the surface of the soil, hardening it, or, as the saying goes, plummeting the earth. In gardens that are not blessed with a pond intake, or the proximity of a stream, it is necessary to establish a system of underground pipes, usually made of terracotta, through which water from a well or pump is brought into barrels buried flush with the ground, so that it is available at every point in the garden, within easy reach of the watering can. In recent years, many gardens have replaced barrels with circular basins, deeper than they are wide, made of bricks laid on the ground and impregnated with Roman cement; these basins are frost-resistant, more durable than barrels and more useful in every way. Plant propagation. - This operation, the main aim of all horticulture, involves four distinct processes; cultivated plants can be multiplied by sowing and planting, by cutting, by marcotting and by grafting. Sowing and planting. - Sowing requires special study and care on the part of the gardener; no two plants need to be sown in exactly the same way. Large, hard-barked seeds need to be sown deeply, otherwise drought would reach them and they would not germinate; others need to be covered only with a thin layer of soil or pulverized compost; all very fine seeds are in this case; the smallest ones are only spread on the ground, where they germinate without being buried. If we were to follow nature's way of doing things, we would never cover the seeds, because natural seedlings are never covered; but nature lavishes seeds, most of which are destined to perish without being used to propagate plants: the gardener, on the other hand, only sows in the hope that each seed will produce a plant. Plants that are difficult to transplant, or which can produce the desired results without being transplanted, are sown in situ. In-place sowing can be done in rows or broadcast; sowing in rows, in gullies traced in advance to a depth proportionate to the volume of seeds, makes weeding and hoeing easier, and allows plants to be spaced evenly from one another, which never happens with broadcast sowing. Plants that only produce after one or more transplants are sown in nurseries. Sowing is very important in fruit and ornamental tree nurseries. All large seeds, such as kernels, walnuts, chestnuts, acorns and dwarfs, need to be stratified in order to survive the winter. Stratification consists of placing the seeds in alternate beds, in fresh earth or sand, either in the cellar or at the foot of a south-facing wall, at a depth of 30 to 40 centimetres, so that frost cannot reach them. As soon as the first fine days of late winter arrive, with a few moderate waterings, the seeds germinate; they are then picked up one by one, carefully so as not to damage the radicle, and planted in rows in suitably spaced gutters. Larch seeds, covered with a very hard envelope, need to be kept for a day or two in heaps which are moistened so that they warm up by a fermentation movement which, if pushed too far, would cause the germs to perish, but which, if stopped in time, favors their development; they are then sown either in rows or broadcast. Transplanting is the name given to any transplant that is not definitive. In the vegetable garden, for example, cauliflower seedlings obtained from sowing are transplanted once or twice; the purpose of transplanting is to make the seedling more robust and to hasten the formation of its head; it is only definitively planted when, through transplanting, it has developed sufficiently. Plants which, like the dahlia in the parterre, and the potato in the vegetable garden, do not usually multiply by sowing their seeds, are propagated by dividing their tubers; they are planted, not sown. The depth at which they should be buried varies according to their volume. When transplanting nursery-raised seedlings, care must be taken to ensure that the roots are not folded back on themselves in the hole opened by the planter, which can happen when the worker is not sufficiently attentive to his task. The transplanting of seedling trees and shrubs, while waiting for the moment when they can be grafted, requires great care; the future of young trees depends on it. (See chap. XXIX, 3rd part.) CHAPTER VIII Cuttings and marcottes. Cuttings. - Rapid propagation. - Open air cuttings. - Cutting by planting. - Trees that propagate by planting. - Simple cuttings. - Crossette cuttings. - Bead cuttings. - Incision or ligation to create the bead. - Cutting under a bell or under a frame. - Applicable to coniferous and resinous trees. - Bengal and Chinese roses. - Greenhouse cuttings. - Suitable soils. - Pure sand. - Cutting pots and terrines. - Oleander cuttings in water. - Cuttings from leaves and leaf portions. - Favorable times for cuttings in the greenhouse. - Time required for cuttings to root. - Single cuttings. - By cepée. - By incision. - By amputation. - In hanging pots or cups. Propagating plants by cuttings and marcotte are the two operations that offer the gardener the most resources for propagating useful or ornamental plants, trees and shrubs; they are also those that, as a form of recreation, are the source of the most varied pleasures for the amateur gardener. Cuttings. - To cut a plant is to place a portion of it - a branch, a section of stem or root, a whole leaf or just a fragment of leaf - in such conditions that roots develop and a new plant results. It is one of the most striking advances of modern horticulture to have succeeded in multiplying by cuttings almost all the plants grown in gardens and greenhouses. With the exception of a small number of plants that have hitherto refused to take cuttings, all the others, when placed in the right conditions, can take root, or, as the saying goes, take cuttings again. Recent advances in the art of taking cuttings are, to put it mildly, the most effective way of making foreign plants readily available at low cost soon after their introduction. The greater or lesser ease with which the gardener multiplies a new plant by taking cuttings determines its value; if it can be cut easily, it soon ceases to be rare; its price, very high in principle, falls to the most moderate rate. The many and varied methods of taking cuttings naturally fall into three divisions: cuttings taken in the open air, cuttings taken under a bell or under a frame, and cuttings taken in a greenhouse. CUTTINGS TAKEN IN THE OPEN AIR. - This procedure is mainly used for trees and shrubs that are easy to regrow, and which for this reason are only multiplied by sowing their seeds when new sub-varieties are expected. The hardiest trees, such as poplars and various willow species, can be cuttings in place, preferably in cool, light rather than strong soil, and at the water's edge. For cuttings, we prepare twigs that can be from 1 metre 50 centimetres to 2 metres long; we give this type of cutting the special name of plancon. The lower end of the plank, cut to a point, is placed in the ground in a hole drilled with an iron bar; the lateral shoots at the bottom of the plank are pruned, leaving those at the top; a sturdy stake, to which the plank is attached by one or two ties of wicker or twisted straw, prevents it from being blown over by the wind. The activity of the sap in trees usually propagated by cuttings soon leads to the formation, at the bottom, of a bead from which young roots grow, and the cutting becomes a fully-formed tree. SiMple BoUrureS. - Various softwood shrubs, especially redcurrants, both those cultivated for their fruit and ornamental varieties, can be taken from cuttings without any preparation; a portion of two-year-old twig or from the previous year is stuck into the ground, a few centimetres deep, leaving two or three good eyes above ground; these cuttings can all be taken at the gardener's discretion; they are the simplest of all cuttings. CROSSETTE cuttings. - For other trees and shrubs, see Fig. 42. Crossette cuttings. vine, among others, root with greater certainty when the one-year-old shoot, used as a cutting, is accompanied at the bottom by a portion of two-year-old wood, forming a sort of hook; this is what gardeners and winegrowers call a crossette (fig. 42). Crossette cuttings are not planted straight, or at a slight angle, like ev plançon cuttings and simple cuttings; they are placed horizontally, a few centimetres below ground level, with the top end, which has one or two good eyes, straightened out to the outside. In this case, the shoot born from the top eye of the cutting becomes a stock in the very place where it is to grow and bear fruit. cuttings to be boURRed. - The above procedures for taking cuttings apply exclusively to those plants which, because of the way they vegetate, lend themselves most readily to taking cuttings. Many others are not; they need to be prepared a year in advance to obtain roots. The most common method is to make an annular incision in the bark around midsummer, or to bind the twig slightly tightly with wire, so that it can be used as a cutting in the spring of the following year. At the end of autumn, the branch is detached with a portion of wood below the ligature; it is then buried, either in the open air or in a cold frame, deep enough to cover the ligatured part. A bead is formed immediately above the ligature or incision, from which the roots should emerge; the beaded cutting's winter sojourn in the ground prepares it for rooting when it is put in place in spring, after all the reserved portion below the bead has been cut away. CUTTINGS UNDER A BELL OR UNDER A FRAME. - For a cutting to live and become a young plant, whatever the process used, it must be able to sustain its vegetative life at the expense of its own resources, from the moment it is detached from the plant until it has produced enough roots to continue vegetating at the expense of the soil. In plants that are very slow to root, the incessant evaporation produced by transpiration of the leaves would lead to complete desiccation and death of the cutting long before the roots were formed, if the gardener did not take care to render it null or very weak, by placing cuttings of this kind either under a bell or under a frame. This type of cutting is especially useful for evergreen resinous trees of the conifer family, for which it is difficult to obtain fertile seed to multiply by sowing. This method of propagation is always successful, if the cloche or frame is lifted when needed to provide a little air, and the temperature and humidity levels required by each type of plant are carefully regulated. Many conifers cut under a bell give better results when cut from root sections than when cut from branch sections. Similarly, cuttings from remontant roses in Bengal and China should be taken under a bell or under a frame, as simple cuttings would not be successful in the open air. CUTTINGS IN THE GREENHOUSE. - Delicate plants, which are difficult to root, cannot be cut under a bell or under a frame; the suppression or reduction of evaporation is not enough to induce them to put down roots; moreover, their cuttings must be stimulated by the mild or high temperature they find in a temperate or hot greenhouse. After a time, most of these plants only form excessively delicate fibrous roots, which rot in the slightest excess of humidity. For this reason, cuttings of this kind can only be made in heather soil, either pure or mixed with a small amount of potting soil, or even in 5 silica sand with no soil mix, kept at a suitable level of humidity until the roots have formed, after which the cutting, now a young plant, is transplanted into soil or compost appropriate to its nature. Greenhouse cuttings are taken in small pots; the smaller the pot, the better. Several cuttings can also be successfully placed around a terrine or pot with a wide opening; the closer they are to the inner wall of the pot, the faster they root, which is attributed to the favourable action of the air filtering through the thickness of the pot or terrine. Pelargoniums, Indian chrysanthemums and several fuchsias are all suitable for this purpose. All you need to do is cover them with a low bell, which concentrates evaporation and prevents them from drying out. Oleander and its sub-varieties root easily in water. When the weather begins to warm up in spring, cut a young oleander shoot from the previous year and soak it in a bottle near the window, where it will receive the sun's influence. When white, filamentous roots form at the bottom of the cutting, we remove it from the water and plant it in a pot filled with orange-tree soil, where it continues to vegetate as if it had put down its first roots. In the hot greenhouse, cuttings of leaves or parts of leaves are taken under the influence of a high temperature in small cloches adapted for this purpose; an inverted glass does the job perfectly if necessary. When the leaf has a petiole, it is at the bottom of this that the bead from which the roots grow is formed. In the Begonia genus, for example, ample, fairly thick leaves used as cuttings wither and are gradually destroyed; the petiole alone lives long enough to root. When the beading is well pronounced, the petiole can be split lengthwise into three or four pieces, each of which takes root and becomes a good cutting. Plants of the Gloxinaceae and Gesneriaceae families have an even more pronounced tendency to root by means of cuttings from leaf fragments, under cloche in the warm greenhouse; a single achimene leaf, for example, cut along its main veins, provides a large number of cuttings, not one of which fails to root. In the opinion of gardeners, June and July are the months in which cuttings under glass, in the greenhouse, are most successful; cuttings in the greenhouse can be taken at any time of year, provided that the plant being cut is still active; Others, without completely slumbering, experience a pause in their vegetation; it's when they start growing again with renewed vigour that they should be cut. The gardener must be patient and not despair of success as long as the plant life in the cutting is sustained, even though it remains stationary, neither moving forward nor backward. One fine day, he will see young leaves, then young shoots announcing the resumption of the cutting, which cannot begin to grow until it has put down young roots. Marcottes. - Marcottes are true cuttings which are given a better chance of success by leaving the mother plant to feed them until they are sufficiently rooted to feed themselves; only then are the marcottes weaned, i.e. detached from the mother plant. Layering therefore always consists of placing a portion of a plant in the ground, one end of which is left protruding outwards, while the other adheres to the plant you wish to propagate by this means. Provignage, so widely used in vine-growing countries, is a form of layering. Layering is simple when the operation is limited to covering the layered shoot with soil kept sufficiently moist. Some plants, such as carnations, which multiply mainly by layering, would not take root if the nodes of the buried part were not incised crosswise, to about half their thickness. This incision creates the bead that gives rise to the roots. In nurseries, linden trees and several species of avenue trees are marcotted by "cépée", which is the accepted term. The mother tree is cut back close to the ground, giving rise to a multitude of offshoots. Each of these shoots, once it has reached the right length, is covered with soil and treated like a simple marcotte, which is weeded when it has taken root, and transplanted to the place where it should continue to grow. Quince trees can be rooted in the same way. Some plants can only be rooted by layering when, instead of making a simple incision in the buried nodes, a part of them is cut off; this is called layering by amputation, and is frequently used in the greenhouse for plants that are difficult to root. Annual shoots suitable for marcotting are not always placed low enough on the plants to make it possible to marcott them in the very soil in which the plants live. In this case, the plant is attached to a stake strong enough to support a Fig. 43. Pot with Fig. 44. Cornet small pot split on the side (fig. 43), marcotter. to marcotter. or better a "cup formed from a sheet of lead or zinc rolled into a horn (fig. 44). The shoot to be marcotted is placed in it and surrounded by soil, which is watered often enough to prevent it from drying out; this method of marcotting is practised by simple marcotting, by incision or by amputation, according to the more or less pronounced disposition of each type of plant to emit roots. Grafting 77 Grafting. - Influence of subject on grafting. - Evidence of this influence. - Advantages of grafting for horticulture. - Approach grafting - Saint Fiacre's ointment. - Grafting wax. - Danger of applying it too hot. - Weaning from approach grafting. - Scion grafting. - Slot grafting. - Single scion. - Multiple scions. - Crown grafting. - English grafting. - Means of increasing strength. - Pontoise grafting. - Its applications. - Herbaceous grafting. - Escutcheon grafts. - Common escutcheon. - Oval escutcheon. - T-shaped incision. - Placement of escutcheon. - Ligature. - Flute graft. - Faun graft. - Growing eye budding. - Dormant eye. Grafting is a forced marriage, often a mismatched pairing that does not always produce happy results. It is a plant that is forced to live at the expense of another of a neighboring species, just as it would live by its own roots at the expense of the soil. Physiologists do not agree on the intimate relationship between the graft and the subject: some admit the influence of the subject on the graft, others absolutely deny it. In practice, the gardener is daily confronted with facts of indisputable value, which prove the existence of this influence in a large number of cases. For example, if he grafts an apple tree onto Paradis, the result is a dwarf tree; onto doucin, he obtains a medium-sized tree; onto egrain, i.e. onto a subject born from an apple seed, he has a first-rate tree. Were it only for this fact, and it is certainly not the only one of its kind, the gardener would certainly be justified in maintaining that the subject sometimes influences the graft, and in believing that this influence is very often exerted, albeit to different degrees, according to the greater or lesser analogy that may exist between the one and the other. The benefits to the gardener of grafting applications are many and far-reaching. It is through grafting that he can fix and perpetuate flower and fruit sub-varieties that any other method of propagation would not maintain; it is through grafting that he rejuvenates old, exhausted fruit trees, and that he makes beautiful ornamental trees live on hardy subjects that are not very difficult in terms of soil quality, in soils where they would refuse to vegetate on their own. It's far from certain, moreover, that grafting, although known and practised from the earliest times, has said its last word. Several types of grafting, such as herbaceous grafting, which was widely used three centuries ago but then fell into oblivion, have regained favor today and are producing results of the highest interest. Grass grafting, successfully used on rice in Italy, opens up a whole new series that time can make fruitful. There is an immense amount of experimental work to be done on grafting, which, if it ever comes to fruition, cannot be the work of just one man; we need to ascertain which plants can be grafted onto each other, which types of grafting are best suited to them, and what advantages can be gained in practice; such interesting points are known, at present, only for a fairly limited number of plants. All grafts used in horticulture fall into three natural divisions: approach grafting, scion grafting and escutcheon grafting. APPROACH GRAFTING. - This graft, the most ancient of all, consists in welding a branch of one plant onto another; when this welding is complete, the lower part of the plant to be grafted and the upper part of the subject are removed, resulting in a new tree; it is therefore a sort of marcotte of one tree onto another; a notch made on the two surfaces to be joined makes the union more intimate and the recovery easier. The graft and the subject are firmly attached to each other by ties which, in the case of fully-formed trees, can be coarse provided they are strong; in this case, they consist of wicker or twisted straw, which can be lined with Saint Fiacre's ointment or grafting wax to prevent rain from penetrating. Saint Fiacre's ointment is made from clay and cow dung, mixed together to form a paste of good consistency, in equal parts. The best and easiest to use grafting wax is composed of the following ingredients: Black pitch 500 grams; resin 100 grams; yellow wax 100 grams; axonge 100 grams, plus a small amount of pulverized brick. When a lot of grafting has to be done at the same time, a small portable furnace is carried into the field to soften the grafting wax. Great care must be taken not to apply the grafting wax too hot, as this could kill the subject or the graft. In modern horticulture, approach grafting is now used almost exclusively in the greenhouse, for plants that do not lend themselves easily to other types of grafting. Ligatures are made with woollen thread, avoiding over-tightening, which would cause strangulation. When the state of vegetation indicates that a graft is approaching, it is weaned like a marcotte, not all at once, but little by little, by making a notch which is deepened every day until complete separation; weaning, depending on the diameter of the subject, can last from ten to fifteen days. There is no fixed time for approach grafting; you have to choose the moment when the sap is at its most active, which, for exotic plants more or less displaced in European greenhouses, only occurs at times that vary from one genus to another. Scion grafting. - This grafting method is one of the most widely used, under the various names of split grafting, crown grafting, English grafting, pontoise grafting and herbaceous grafting. It always consists of inserting a scion as a graft onto a neighbouring species. SPLIT GRAFTING. - Although many ornamental trees and shrubs can be successfully split-grafted, split-grafting is mainly applicable to trees with seeded fruit. Slot grafting can only be carried out using a piece of wood from the previous year. The success of the operation depends largely on the condition of the scion used for grafting at the time it is brought into contact with the subject. For split grafting of fruit trees, the most vigorous shoots of the year are reserved for winter pruning; they are placed in bundles, taking care not to confuse the species; the lower part is pricked out in fresh soil, in the open air, in a shady situation. The bundles of scions for grafting are covered, if necessary, with litter or dry leaves during very cold weather, to protect them from frost damage. For a cleft graft to be successful, the movement of sap must be very pronounced in the subject and ready to begin in the graft. The surface of the cut is then slit transversely with the grafting blade; at one end of the slit is inserted a scion with two good eyes, cut at the bottom so as to present the exact thickness of its bark in contact with the bark of the subject (fig. 45). A wool thread ligature Fig. 45. Split graft. Fig. 46. Grafting with 4 scions. holds everything in place until the next cutting; the wound is covered with grafting wax. When the diameter of the cut is large enough, two similar grafts are placed, one at each end of the slit. The same graft with one or two scions can be used not only on the trunk of a tree cut horizontally, but with equal success on the branches of a tree whose species is to be changed to a better one. On very large branches, not two, but four or six grafts can be placed using exactly the same procedure, by making two or three slits in the cut, each of which accepts two scions, one at each end (fig. 46). Slot grafting, although usually carried out in spring, can also be successful in September. In this case, the graft and the subject enter their hiyernal sleep at the same time, and the movement of their vegetation starts again at the same time for both of them, in the spring of the following year: this is what gardeners call "dormant-eye" split grafting. When split grafting is carried out at this time of year, it is usually to advance the work and avoid having too many trees to graft at the same time in the spring, with a growing eye. CROWN GRAFTING. - This differs from the previous method in that the cut of the tree is not slit to admit the scions, which are cut in the shape of a flute mouthpiece, so as to fit between the tree and its bark, which is lifted for this purpose (fig. 47). A branch with a large diameter can receive eight to ten scions, or even more, by crown grafting; this type of grafting is especially used to rejuvenate old Fig. 47. Crown graft. Fig. 48. English grafting. exhausted trees. It is not to be confused with the gresle en 5. fente of large branches or trunks of trees broken by accident, and on which six grafts have been placed at the ends of three slits; the specific character of the crown graft is to exclude any slit on the surface of the cut and to leave this cut perfectly intact. ANGLAISE Graft (fig 48). - This type of graft can only be applied to subjects of exactly the same diameter as the scion. The top of the tree and the bottom of the scion are cut obliquely at the same angle, so that all their parts overlap and the edges of the two barks coincide at all points. Ligature for English-style grafting, also known as copulation grafting, must be very strong, but not too tight; this graft is one of the easiest to detach when it is not well attached to the tree by a good ligature. If the English grafted tree is to be planted in an open position, exposed to violent gales, the solidity of the graft is increased by cutting two notches into the cut of the subject and the graft, which fit into each other. PONTOISE GRAFT. - This is a split graft particularly suited to ornamental trees and shrubs which do not lose their leaves in winter, and which need to be sheltered during the bad season in the orangery or cold greenhouse. When the shrub emerges from its winter sleep and its sap Fig. 49. The bottom of the graft is cut into a wedge shape, so as to fit exactly into the incision; it is held in place by a ligature which is loosened when recovery is assured. As the scion used for Pontoise grafting is loaded with diggings and often even flowers or flower buds, evaporation would destroy it before it could be grafted onto the subject, if we did not take the precaution of placing the shrubs thus grafted under a frame for two weeks, in return for which success is assured. (fig. 49). HERBACEOUS GRAFTING. - This is another split grafting technique usedFig. 50. Herbaceous grafting. on plant parts that have not yet become woody. This graft is mainly applied to the terminal shoot of coniferous resinous trees, during the height of their vegetation. This shoot is cut off by a triangular cut into which the wedge-shaped scion fits. This type of graft should only be tied with great care; their lack of consistency makes them more prone than others to strangulation when too tightly tied (fig. 50). Escutcheon grafts - Escutcheon grafts are characterized by the fact that no part of the wood used for grafting is introduced onto the subject; a single eye (or several eyes), attached to a piece of bark, performs the grafting function, and is applied to a part of the subject from which the bark has been removed over an area the same size as the escutcheon. The most delicate aspect of good budding is to select the eyes with discernment on the middle part of a shoot from the previous year, and to remove it with the bark. Fig. 51. Oval escutcheon and surrounding cortex without emptying the eye, common escutcheon. i.e. without tearing out the inner germ it contains, which is to become a plant or a tree, and to keep for it a piece of the leaf stalk in whose axil any annual eye has formed. The incision to detach the escutcheon is made with the tip of a sharp penknife; the piece of bark surrounding the eye is usually oval or escutcheon-shaped, hence the name of this grafting method (fig. 51). To attach an escutcheon, two straight incisions are made in the bark, in the shape of a straight T or an upside-down y. With the tip of the grafting knife, the escutcheon is removed from the bark. With the tip of the grafting tool, both sides of the T are lifted to the right and left, and the escutcheon is immediately applied to the subject; the two edges of the split bark are then brought over the escutcheon, leaving only the eye exposed; the whole is held in place by a ligature several turns above and below the eye: this is the most ordinary way of setting escutcheons. You can also lay the escutcheon flat on the subject's bark, and use it as a template to cut a piece of bark precisely the same size as the escutcheon. After removing this piece of bark, the subject is placed in its place and secured with a ligature. FLUTE OR RING Grafting (fig. 52). - This graft is based on the same principle as the escutcheon graft; it is Fig. 52. Flute graft. Fig. 53. faun graft. a strip of bark with several eyes, removed at the time of sap movement and applied to the tree stripped of its bark. If the subject's diameter is greater than that of the branch from which the ring has been detached, the ring is trimmed to the appropriate length so that it fits exactly on the subject. FAUNA GREEF (fig. 53). - This is a variety of the flute graft, particularly used for grafting walnut and chestnut from seed. Instead of removing the bark at the point where the bark ring is to be applied, the bark is slit lengthwise by several incisions, dividing it into strips which are then folded over from top to bottom without being detached; the ring used as a graft is then placed in its place as for flute grafting. The bark strips are folded up over the ring, leaving only the eyes exposed, and tied up like a shield graft. The various methods of scape grafting are practised either from May to July, with a growing eye, i.e. the scape eye should immediately come into vegetation, or in August and September, with a dormant eye, which means that the branch we hope to obtain from the scape eye will only develop in the spring of the following year. The foregoing is sufficient to give a good understanding of the principle of grafting and its most important applications; specific details will be found in the chapters devoted to the various crops for which each type of graft is specially used. CHAPTER X Plant diseases Plant diseases. - Diseases caused by excessive vigor. - Etiolation. - Principal diseases. - Potato disease. - Mr. Tombelle-Lomba's method. - Sowing potato seeds. - Results. - Frisole. - First potato disease in Belgium; -Vine disease. - Tuckeri powdery mildew. - Blowing out diseased vines. Glanders, or softening of flowering onions. - White or mulberry. - Plants specially affected. - Ulcers. - How to treat them - Ulcers on tree roots. - Magnifying glasses. - Wounds. - Contusions. - Wounds. - Peeling. - Tears. - Remedies. - Fractures. - Lesions due to various causes. - By heat - By cold - Under what circumstances do plants freeze? - Treatment of greenhouse and orangery plants affected by frost. - Injuries caused by thunder. - By hail. - Stale air. Ever since the Italian physiologist Philippo Ré published an extensive work on the diseases that can affect plants, all those who have tackled the same subject have included in their classification a host of phenomena or particular plant conditions, which in no way constitute disease affections. We therefore refrain from mentioning here, except as a reminder, plants that are ill due to excessive health, producing an abnormal quantity of leaves, flowers or fruit; it is often useful for the gardener to provoke this state of vegetation; it is then the aim of his cultivation care; it is not in any way an ailment to be remedied. The same can be said of the transition of leaves from green to yellow at the time when they are due to fall, a natural transition which we have tried to turn into a plant disease, and of the wilting of leaves on cabbages and head lettuces, a state which must be provoked but never combated. Thus reduced to its proper limits, the framework of real plant diseases now comprises only a fairly limited number of diverse, well-characterized affections, arranged in two divisions, the first of which contains diseases properly so called, and the second injuries to plants, trees and shrubs in the field of horticulture. The main diseases are: potato disease, grapevine disease, glanders or softening of onions, powdery mildew of pansies, plums and some fruit trees, ulcers and burls. These last two diseases are specific to woody plants (trees or shrubs) and do not exist on herbaceous plants. Plant injuries, or at least those which the gardener is most often called upon to combat, are contusions, wounds, decortications, tears, fractures and more or less serious lesions caused by excessive heat or cold, thunder, hail and prolonged contact with air contaminated by unhealthy vapors. Diseases. - Diseases of gardening plants can be cured or prevented if the first symptoms are carefully observed and remedied in good time. potato disease. - Of the countless varieties of potato, only the garden varieties such as marjolin, chaville, schaw and seven-week-old, all in the early series, should be considered for horticultural use, as they are less prone than the others to the disease, which only rages in full force once these varieties have produced their produce. Nevertheless, even the earliest potatoes can be diseased in the garden as well as in the field. What is potato disease? So little is known about it that physiologists haven't even named it. When it first broke out in Europe in 1765, Belgian farmers, whose crops were devastated by it, gave it the name frisole, because it causes the leaves to curl up and turn from green to dark brown. Without going into the theory, which concludes that nothing is certain, let's confine ourselves to indicating the curative procedure of Mr. Tombelle-Lomba, of Namur, the only one which, to our knowledge, has given positively advantageous results. As soon as the first brown spots on the leaves and stems indicate the invasion of the disease, all the outer parts of the plant are cut off at ground level; the soil is then strongly compressed by trampling. At the usual time of uprooting, the potatoes are only slightly below the normal volume for their species, but they are not diseased. This simple, easy-to-apply procedure works just as well in the field as it does in the garden, especially for early varieties. In gardens, these same species, planted in late autumn deep enough to prevent frost from reaching them, produce vigorous plants in spring the following year that are very rarely affected by disease. The gardener who lives in a country where potatoes are often diseased, and where this tuber nevertheless holds a place in the crop rotation, can profit greatly from multiplying good species by sowing their seeds. In the first year, he obtains only small plants which produce tubers of very little volume; in the second year, these same tubers planted in the usual way, in good quality, well-smoked soil, produce masses of tubers such that it seems that at the foot of each plant the earth has literally turned into potatoes. However, seed potatoes are much less prone to disease than other varieties, and it was through seed potatoes that Belgian growers in 1765 successfully combated and eradicated curly disease, which has now returned not only to Belgium, but to the whole of Europe. When the gardener can offer the farmer good-quality tubers from seed, which are unlikely to be affected by 9 - disease, he is sure of getting good prices for them at the time of planting. When he grows early potatoes in large enough fields, using second-year seed tubers for his plantadons is a very effective way of preserving his crops from being invaded by the disease. Vione disease. - The losses caused by the scourge of grapevine disease in all the vine-growing countries of Europe have been almost as severe as those caused by potato disease. The disease first appeared in England, in greenhouses used for forcing vines, and from the outset showed the same characteristics as those we recognize today. It is the rapid multiplication of mycalium and the spores of a microscopic fungus, Oidium Tuckeri, on leaves, shoots, bunches and grapes, which appear to be covered with a whitish dust. When the disease has reached its peak, vegetation stops, leaves crisp up and fall off, grapes crack and dry out; vines are so badly affected that it takes several years to restore them to good health. In greenhouses, as in the open air, the only effective remedy is sulphur flower spread over the entire surface of the diseased vine, moistened by a good basinage in the greenhouse to be forced, dampened by the morning dew when it grows outside. In greenhouses and gardens, sick vines can be sulphured very quickly and very well using a specially designed bellows. With one or two sulphurings, the disease disappears; the value of the crop preserved is always far greater than that of the sulphur and labor spent on this beneficial operation. GLANDERS OR SOFTENING OF FLOWERING ONIONS. - Onions grown on bulbous ornamental plants often suffer from a disease which consists in the decomposition of the tissues of their tunics; this is what gardeners call onion glanders. This disease always leads to the death of the onion affected, but no serious harm is done to the far-sighted gardener, who must have stocked up on carefully cultivated young onions to replace those that die each year from exhaustion or softening. By frequently visiting them during the interval between the removal of the onions after they have flowered, and their installation, either in spring or autumn, the gardener cannot fail to recognize the first signs of the disease which starts with a small round spot and ends up invading the whole onion. If it belongs to a rare species, removing the damaged part will not preserve the onion, but enable it to produce cloves that will replace it later. BLANc or MEunier. - The disease known to gardeners as blanc or meûnier is due to the development of a microscopic fungus, called erysiphe by botanists, which is not very different from the one which, under the name of oidium, causes vine disease. In gardens, this disease particularly attacks plums among fruit trees; roses among ornamental shrubs; and pansies among ornamental annuals. There is no known cure for powdery mildew, but it is known to develop very quickly on plants, trees and shrubs with vigorous vegetation; With the judicious use of solid, powdered or liquid fertilizers, and well-directed cultivation care, cultivated plants can be placed in such conditions that powdery mildew cannot invade them. In fact, powdery mildew is one of those plant diseases that cannot be cured, but can always be easily prevented. ULCERES. - The trunks and main branches of certain trees are quite often attacked by ulcers, from which, depending on their nature, gum or various juices derived from the decomposition of their sap flow. These ulcers gradually eat away at the wood, penetrating right to the heart of the tree and eventually leading to its death. The only remedy is to cut away the damaged part, then cover it with St. Fiacre's ointment, or grafting wax, until 2 3 5 2 I 91 the bark, advancing on both sides, finally masks the scar. Sometimes, the ulceration occurs on one or more roots; this can be seen when the branches corresponding to these roots die back; we must then hasten to uncover them carefully, remove all diseased parts and put the soil back in place; the tree will soon regrow by putting out new roots. WOLVES. - Various trees, notably elms and their ornamental varieties, are often deformed by very voluminous, rounded growths that are veritable plant magnifiers. They are rarely so numerous as to interfere with the tree's growth; they are left to survive for use as marquetry wood, due to the various shades of veins and knots with which their interiors are marbled. Injuries. - Most of the time, it depends on the gardener to prevent most of the wounds that the plants under his care may accidentally receive; when they do receive wounds in spite of his supervision, he must hasten to dress them, just as he does ulcers. CONTUSIONS. - Trees and shrubs whose wood is hard enough can receive heavy bruising without suffering noticeably; their vital energy repairs the damage by itself, without it showing on the outside. In recent times, it has even been suggested that a stick be used to strike the bark of the trunk of fruit trees when they are too slow to set fruit - a savage method that can always be replaced by a more rational one designed to achieve the same goal. When, by violent bruising, the bark and the portion of wood it immediately covers are crushed, the result is a swelling which degenerates into a wound and eventually takes on the characteristics of an ulcer. This can be prevented by removing the wounded part and dressing it like an ulcer, using Saint Fiacre's ointment or grafting wax. WOUNDS. - Plant wounds can be accompanied by decortication, tearing or fracture, produced by external causes. When decortication does not embrace the entire circumference of the trunk, the tree suffers to a greater or lesser extent; but it rarely dies, and the wound eventually heals as the beads on its two edges gradually come together. This process can only take place extremely slowly, without compromising the tree's vigor or slowing its growth. The traces of the decortication they underwent in 1814, by the teeth of Cossack horses bivouacked on the boulevard Bourdon in Paris, can still be seen very clearly on the lime trees; after forty-four years, not all the wounds are completely healed. This result can be achieved more rapidly by applying a sufficiently thick layer of grafting wax to the wounds; in this case, St. Fiacre's ointment would not be sufficiently durable. DECHIRURES. - When, for whatever reason, a branch of a tree, without being broken, has burst at its insertion on the trunk or on a larger branch, and is still attached by a portion of wood, it should not be considered as lost; Without wasting any time, it must be put back in place, secured with a strong wire ligature, to which we add, if necessary, some kind of splint consisting of pieces of wood hollowed out in a gutter, and hold the whole solidly in place by ties attached either to the trunk or to the surrounding branches. The main obstacle to the healing of wounds of this kind is the moisture that can enter through the edges of the tear; but, as long as circulation is not completely interrupted by a complete separation of the torn branch, recovery is certain. Ligatures and splints should only be removed when the branch has returned to its original state of vitality, which sometimes takes several years. Instead of grafting wax, molten black pitch is used to coat the edges of the tear, taking great care not to apply it too hot, otherwise the remedy would be worse than the disease. When the tear has completely detached the branch, or when there is so little adherence left that it cannot be expected to recover, the wound is treated as if it had been made with a saw; it is carefully dressed with a strong serpette with a sharp blade, then covered with grafting wax. FRACTURES. - Any fracture in the branches of a tree should be treated as an amputation; the broken part is sawn low enough below the fracture that no trace of splitting or tearing remains on the amputated surface; then the wound is trimmed and dressed with grafting wax. When an overload of snow, or the violence of the wind during a hurricane, has fractured the trunk of a fruit tree that is still young and full of vigor, instead of sacrificing it and planting another, it is much preferable, after having sawn the fracture and trimmed the wounds, to provide the tree with the means to quickly regrow by crown grafting (See Grafting, chap. IX). LESIONS DUE TO VARIOUS CAUSES. - There are various types of lesions that cannot be confused with either plant diseases or wounds as just described, but which the gardener must be aware of in order to remedy them when necessary. LESIONS CAUSED BY HEAT. - Excessive heat is only to be feared for plants grown in gardens when watering is neglected in proportion to need, and to prevent plants from suffering from both heat and drought. Heat can be particularly harmful to plants grown in pots, when the rays of a hot sun heat up the walls of the pots and burn the delicate roots in contact with them. Frequent watering is not enough to prevent such accidents, which lead to the death of plants; pots must also be arranged in such a way that the sun cannot strike them directly, at least during the hottest hours of the day. LESIONS CAUSED BY COLD. - Every type of cultivated plant goes into dormancy under the influence of a given degree of heat, and ceases to vegetate as soon as the outside temperature drops below that level. With the exception of a small number of plants, which seem to be completely insensitive to the most rigorous cold of our winters, all suffer to a greater or lesser extent from very intense cold; vines sometimes freeze right down to the lower end of the shoots, which then have to be completely folded back onto the stump; the largest trees split, and sores or ulcers are the consequence of these cracks; but, fortunately, this only happens in exceptionally harsh winters. The crucial fact that dominates the whole question of the deleterious action of cold on cultivated plants is the state in which the frost catches them. If their vegetative sleep is complete, unless the cold is so severe that it thwarts all predictions, trees and shrubs do not suffer appreciably; if, on the contrary, late spring frosts seize the same plants after they have awakened from their winter sleep, a few degrees of cold can kill them. Thus, in the parterre, the garden carnation does not freeze when it is kept in healthy, dry soil, which completely interrupts the movement of its sap; as soon as this movement is resumed, whether a frost of only one or two degrees occurs, the same carnation perishes without resource. The knowledge of this fact should guide the gardener in the care he takes to preserve the plants in his domain from the lesions caused by the cold, especially in the climate of Paris, during the months of March and April, when a few days of mild temperature are followed by a resumption of very sharp cold. If, through negligence on the part of the gardener, the cold has penetrated the greenhouse or orangery, and the plants housed there have been hit by frost, they should be sprayed with fresh water at a temperature of four to five degrees, and the same temperature maintained as evenly as possible, day and night. By following this method, only some of the most delicate plants are lost; the others are saved. They would all be lost if, in an attempt to repair the damage, the temperature in the greenhouse or orangery were raised a little higher. INJURIES CAUSED BY THUNDER. - When a vigorous tree is struck by lightning, it is not always completely killed; cutting off the branches that die, either immediately or in the following days, causes new branches to emerge, and the tree can recover. When the trunk is torn to a greater or lesser depth by a lightning strike, the injured parts are removed to the bone, and as the result is usually a wound far too extensive to be treated with the usual St. Fiacre's ointment or grafting wax, the crack is filled with plaster. More often than not, the tree, although severely damaged, can be preserved. LESIONS CAUSED BY HAIL. - Not only does hail cause purely mechanical damage to the herbaceous parts of the plants it affects, it also disorganizes them through the small quantity of nitrous acid it contains; the presence of this acid can be detected after a storm, through the particular odor of hail clusters that do not melt immediately. On the leaves and stems of melons, for example, every spot hit by hail forms a small spot which grows, turns from green to brown and causes the affected part to die. There is no remedy for lesions of this kind; the careful gardener must always have glass frames and straw mats within reach of his melon beds during the storm season, each of which may be accompanied by hail. It's better to cover a precious crop ten times over than to risk losing it in a few minutes, if you haven't taken the trouble to protect it in good time from the fatal damage caused by hail. Hail caused by foul air. - In the vicinity of factories producing various products, habitual contact with air contaminated by a mixture of gases and vapors harmful to plant life causes more or less serious damage to plants cultivated in gardens; gardens should only be established out of contact with these destructive causes. To maintain the health of cultivated plants, the air must not be too pure. Smoke alone, in cantons where tall factory chimneys are concentrated in large numbers in a small area, has an unfortunate effect on certain plants which, without being a real poisoning, nevertheless disturbs the normal course of their vegetation. In England, for example, and in some parts of Belgium, rose collections can only be cultivated at a certain distance from factories, and out of reach of the streams of smoke that their chimneys constantly pour into the atmosphere. Under the influence of the air altered by this smoke, rose bushes produce shoots, leaves and buds every year, but they flower poorly, and even those of the most beautiful varieties do not flower at all. CHAPTER XI Animals harmful to garden produce Animals harmful to gardens. - Mammals. - Moles. - Its galleries, - Time when it works. - Rat. - Rat trap. - Four of a kind. - Dormouse and ferret. - Dormouse trap. - Bait for this trap. - Mollusks. - Slugs. - How to destroy them. - Ducks hunt slugs in gardens. - Snails. - Crush oyster scales to keep them away. - Insects. - Beetles. - Hunting beetles. - Damage caused by their larvae. - Flea beetle. - Plants attacked by flea beetles. - Grapevine flea beetle. - Its various names. - How to destroy it. - RynchiteBacchus, or green vine weevil. - Cantharides. - Scolyte. - Mr. E. Robert's method for destroying the bark beetle. - Wasp. - Finding and destroying bee-eaters. - Ant. - Finding and destroying ant hills. - Golden beetle. - Forficule or earwig. - Mole cricket. - Green aphid. - Black aphid. - Woolly aphid. - Casting to destroy it. - Caterpillars. - General weeding procedures. - Cabbage worm. - Delivery. - Grape vine borer. - Carpocapsa, or fruit moth. - Ways to reduce its ravages. Garden produce is exposed to damage by a large number of animals of various kinds. It is very important for the gardener to be familiar with them and to do his utmost to prevent their ravages. It's easy to understand how unpleasant it is to grow dahlias for snails, carnations for earwigs, peach trees for wasps and ants, and apple trees for woolly adelgids. Animals harmful to garden produce belong to the three classes of mammals, molluscs and insects. Mammals. - The mammals whose presence is most to be feared in gardens are: the mole, the rat, the toir and the lérót: TAUPE. - The soil in any well-kept garden is so frequently shaped in all seasons that the mole cannot easily make it his home. If by chance they do find their way in, their presence is betrayed by the rounded mounds of crumbled earth they form above the center, around which radiate their admirably symmetrical underground galleries. Nothing is easier than spotting it at the hour when it is working between two plots of land to hunt down the insect larvae it feeds on. It is usually in the morning, from 10 a.m. to noon, that its work is most active and you can catch it at work, spade it out of the ground and kill it without giving it time to return to the soil. For gardens, where the presence of the mole can never be more than rare and accidental, this means of destruction is sufficient; it is never necessary to have recourse to the various mole traps, nor to the intervention of professional mole catchers who make it their trade to destroy moles in fields and meadows, where they often multiply in such numbers as to become a veritable scourge. RAT. - When garden walls, or those of nearby buildings, are old and in a state of disrepair, they serve as a home for rats, which multiply at their leisure. It is rare for rats not to pay frequent nocturnal visits to espaliered fruit trees when the fruit ripens. The most commonly used trap for destroying these bold and voracious rodents is known as the "four of figures", because of the way in which the sticks are adjusted to balance a plank loaded with a heavy stone. It must be primed with grilled rancid bacon, the strong smell of which attracts rats from afar. LOIR AND LÉROT. - These two pretty animals, not very different from each other, are fortunately not very common in France, except in a few localities not far from large woods, where they live on the tallest trees, like their close relative the squirrel. The dormouse and the ferret are caught in a trap shaped like a wicker cage; the ammal can enter easily, but cannot get out; with this type of trap, it can be caught alive without injury; if it is young, it is easily tamed and becomes as familiar as a squirrel. Dormice and ferrets only eat fruit; to start the trap, place a nice ripe fruit in the center, but of a different species from those you wish to protect from the teeth of these animals. If, for example, at the foot of a peach tree you place a peach as bait in the dormouse trap, this bait will not attract them; they would prefer to stick to the same fruit available to them on the espalier. Molluscs. - Two kinds of molluscs, slugs and snails, are often the despair of gardeners in spring and autumn; they can cause very serious damage in gardens if measures are not taken to destroy them. SLUGS. - The two small species of slugs, the brown and the gray, multiply so rapidly and are so voracious that, in wet years, they are a scourge in gardens with cold or compact soil; young seedlings are their favorite food. The easiest way to reduce their numbers is to lay cabbage and romaine leaves flat on the ground in the evening. Slugs invade these leaves, both to feed on them and to shelter under them at night. In the morning, before sunrise, they can be found in great numbers under these leaves. Instead of crushing them, they can be fed to farmyard birds, which are very fond of them. The duck does not, like the hen, have the unfortunate habit of scratching the earth, which means it must be kept away from all cultivated land; it can be a useful auxiliary to man by hunting slugs; although this bird does not disdain vegetable herbs, when introduced into a garden on an empty stomach in the morning, as long as there are earthworms and slugs, it will not touch any gardening produce. The only thing to do is to keep an eye on its hunt and remove it from the garden as soon as it has finished. LIMAÇONS OR ESCaRGoTS. - Although they multiply less rapidly than slugs, and are never as numerous as slugs in gardens, snails should be sought out and destroyed in vegetable, fruit and flower gardens. Especially after a heavy shower of rain, during the summer months, it's easy to catch large numbers of them; they then set off, with as much agility as their nature allows, in search of their food; the young shoots of all kinds of vegetable and ornamental plants, ripe fruit and flowering buds of dahlias are especially to their liking. To keep them away from dahlia clumps and fruit trees, a circle of coarsely crushed oyster shells is formed on the ground. These scales divide into sharp blades which the snail cannot touch, forming a barrier that it is impossible for it to cross. Insects. - An entire volume could be written on the insects that cause varying degrees of damage to field and garden produce, and on the more or less effective means used or proposed to destroy them. We shall confine ourselves here to mentioning the most widespread, the most harmful, and those whose ravages it is most necessary to prevent or stop. These insects are, in the coleopteran order: the hanncton, the flea beetle, the vine eumolpe, the Bynchite-Bacchus, the cantharide and the scolyte; in the social hymenopteran order : the wasp and the ant; in the orthopterans, the forcicle or earwig and the mole-cricket; in the hemipterans: aphids, and in the lepidopterans or butterflies: the cabbageworm, the tent caterpillar, the vine moth and the carpocapsa. HANNETON. - The most damaging of all European insects is undoubtedly the chafer. Many other insects are only harmful during their larval stage, and cause no further damage once they have undergone their final transformation into perfect insects. The cockchafer gnaws at plant roots for the three, sometimes four, years of its larval existence; then, having become a perfect insect, it devours the green parts of all kinds of plants, trees and shrubs. The female beetle digs a hole in the ground, usually a decimeter deep, at the bottom of which she deposits her eggs. It is one of the most extraordinary facts to emerge from the study of entomology that the instinct common to all females of all insects, without exception, is to constantly place their eggs where the young larvae, at the moment of their birth, will find within their reach the kind of food necessary for their sustenance, even when this food differs most from that which is suitable for the perfect insect, when the latter needs food; for many perfect insects do not eat tont in their last form. For example, the female beetle doesn't eat roots, yet this insect never lays its eggs in vegetation-free soil; the young generation of beetles, when the eggs hatch, is surrounded by provisions and cannot fail to prosper. Destroying beetles is not difficult, but it can only be effective if all the inhabitants of a township take care of it at the same time and in a consistent manner, working together at the same hours. Every evening, the beetles retire to the tall trees; they cling by their legs to the underside of the leaves and spend the night there in a state of numbness that lasts until quite late in the morning, and from which they only emerge when the sun has evaporated the dew. It has been suggested that resin-coated straw torches should be carried under trees laden with beetles; this procedure is dangerous for the trees and useless for making the beetles fall; the branches have to be shaken strongly; the beetles can neither prevent themselves from falling to the ground, nor fly away to escape. This simple method, generally practised, would result in the complete destruction of the beetles; but for this to happen, it would 6. have to be made compulsory by law, like weeding. It is all the more necessary for gardeners in every canton to reach agreement on this subject, as the chafer larva does not spare shrubs or young trees any more than it does vegetable plants; in areas infested with these larvae, known as mau, turc or white worm, it is impossible to keep roses, dahlias or young fruit trees in the nursery; As soon as you see the leaves of strawberries and lettuces wilting, you can be sure that the roots of these plants are being eaten away by several white grubs, which can be exposed with the stroke of a spade. When a garden plot is infested with grubs, we destroy a considerable number at ploughing time by bringing in turkeys that have been left to fast on purpose. As each grub is brought to the surface, it is devoured. ALTiSe. - This insect is known to gardeners as the flea beetle and the ground flea. The flea beetle mainly attacks the seminal leaves of vegetable plants in the cruciferous family: cabbages, cauliflowers and turnips. In large-scale cultivation, flea beetle control is so difficult that it usually has to be dispensed with; this is not the case in gardens, where the seedlings of plants attacked by flea beetles never occupy large areas. As soon as the seedlings are covered with flea beetles, they can be watered with a strong infusion of tobacco, or well water mixed with chimney soot. But the real remedy against the ravages of the flea beetle is to sow the seeds of the plants it feeds on only in such conditions that they pass through the first phase of their vegetation very quickly. As soon as they have acquired a certain degree of strength, their tissues have enough consistency to have nothing to fear from the mandibles of the flea beetle, which is too weak to penetrate them, so that the insect is reduced to starving to death.- In its multiplication, the flea beetle offers a phenomenon that has long passed for an inexplicable mystery. Sow cabbage, turnip or rape seed in a well-ploughed field, where there is obviously not a single flea beetle, or in any of the neighboring fields; as soon as these plants emerge, they will be invaded by millions of flea beetles, often leaving not a single one behind, so that sowing will have to be repeated. Naturalists have recognized that the flea beetle deposits its eggs in the thickness of the ribs or veins of the leaves of cruciferous plants, whether wild or cultivated; the species maintains itself in this way and remains unnoticed because of the small number of isolated individuals. However, as soon as suitable food is within its reach, it arrives, probably attracted by the scent of crucifers, and takes possession of sown fields; there, as it undergoes its transformations in a very short time, it soon becomes prodigiously numerous, and its ravages are impossible to stop. In gardens, it is always possible, by careful weeding, to leave no plant that could serve as a refuge for flea beetles and their larvae, and thus to be completely free of them. GRAPEVINE FLEA BEETLE. - This insect hardly multiplies in gardens to the point of becoming dangerous there; it is only fearsome in vineyards, where it is known, depending on the locality, under the various names of gribouri, bud cutter and writer. This last name derives from the fact that the marks left by the vine eumolpe on the leaves whose green substance it has gnawed away quite distinctly represent several letters of the alphabet, especially the capital letters I, L, A and V. This singular fact is only natural; the eumolpe, starting from any point on the surface of a leaf, gnaws straight ahead until it encounters one of the main veins in its path, which is too hard for it to penetrate; it then turns away at right angles, following the edge of the vein: hence the characters it seems to trace, and which have earned it the nickname writer. Like the chafer and most coleopteran insects, the vine eumolpe is unable to escape until it awakes from its nocturnal numbness. The vines on which its presence is noticed must be stripped early in the morning and shaken briskly over a basket where the eumolpes fall without being able to escape; this hunt, repeated two or three times, leaves not a single one remaining. RYNCHITE-BACCHUS. - Under the common name of green vine weevil, we know the insect that naturalists call Rynchite-Bacchus; it's a pretty beetle, with beautiful green elytra, whose presence on vine stocks is revealed by the way it lodges itself in the leaves, which it rolls up like a paper cone, in order to shut itself in and undergo its transformations. As the fresh vine leaf is not flexible enough to lend itself to the shape the rynchite wants to give it, its larva, in the form of a whitish worm, begins by gnawing the tail of the leaf, about halfway through its thickness; this is not enough to make the leaf fall, but to wilt it and make it flexible enough for the larva to roll it without too much effort. Multiplication of the rynchite is prevented by removing all the rolled leaves, each of which is home to a larva. CantHarid. - We mention the cantharid here, not as an insect harmful to garden produce, where it does no damage, but solely because various species of ash tree, especially the weeping ash with its drooping branches, used to decorate our gardens, are often frequented in summer by cantharids, which can produce painful blisters when they fall on the necks of people sitting in the shade of these trees. It is therefore advisable to shake the branches of ash trees in pleasure gardens early in the morning, in order to remove the cantharids which, like all coleopteran insects, are immersed in their nocturnal numbness. SCOLYTE. - Several species of bark beetle create galleries between the wood and bark of elm and other coniferous trees, eventually causing the bark to fall off in patches and seriously jeopardizing their existence. Rarely do bark beetles show up in dangerous numbers =- Re- 9 91 in groves where, moreover, the scoIvte's prized trees rarely feature. Various methods have been proposed for destroying the elm bark beetle, which has been blamed for the death of most of the elms on the public promenades in Paris. Perhaps a closer look would have revealed that these very old trees were attacked by the bark beetle because they were sick, and not sick because they were invaded by bark beetles. The most widely-used method, developed by Eugène Robert, involves lifting evenly-spaced strips of bark from the top to the bottom of the tree trunk, in order to disturb the bark beetles in their retreat. There's no doubt that this method kills the bark beetles; unfortunately, more often than not, it also kills the trees. WASP. - The wasp rarely wanders far from its home. When a garden's ripe fruit is the prey of wasps, it's best to look nearby: the beehive is not far away. The wasp's stings are extremely painful, so once you've identified the location of their home, pour one or two liters of boiling water over it during the night; surprised in their sleep, the wasps perish without vengeance. If the beehive tree cannot be found, and the fruit has been damaged by a few isolated beehives, small vials full of honeyed water are hung from the branches of the trees; the beehives come to perish in them, victims of their taste for all sweet liquids. FOURMI. - Like the wasp, the little black ant, all too common in gardens, greedily seeks out anything sweet, making this insect the most dangerous enemy of fruits which, like apricots and peaches, cannot be picked until they have reached maturity. A large number can be destroyed by attracting them in vials full of sugar water or honeydew; when the anthill is found, boiling water with a few spoonfuls of oil is poured over it in the evening. Above all, gardens should encourage the multiplication of the golden beetle, an insect known as the gardener's beetle, which wages fierce war not only against the little black ant, but also against a host of other harmful insects. The carabid is all the more useful in this respect as it lives exclusively on the product of its hunt, and does not eat any vegetable substance. FORFICULA OR EARWIG. - This insect is particularly harmful to carnations, gnawing the buds ready for flowering rather than any other food. To prevent this, recently slaughtered sheep's hooves are hung from the stakes supporting the stems of budding carnations in the evening. The earwig spends the whole day withdrawn in holes or under large stones, and only comes out to seek its life at night, when it spreads its folded wings under its horny elytra and flies great distances. If it comes across clumps of carnations, the strong smell of sheep's hooves attached to their stakes attracts it more than that of the carnation, and it retreats to spend the night. Early the next morning, it can be caught there still numb, and destroyed without difficulty. COURTILIÈRE or TAupe-GRillon. - The mole-eater wreaks havoc in the inner layers and heavily smoked flowerbeds of the vegetable garden, by cutting the roots of cultivated plants between two plots of land, not to feed on them, but to create, like the mole, underground galleries where it lives and hunts insects and their larvae, its only food. The various methods used to destroy the cricket are of little use, with the exception of the following procedure. When a garden bed is so infested with crickets that it is impossible to grow anything, which is all too often the case, we pull up any plants that may remain, then soak them in horse or horned beast urine, heated to 40 or 50 degrees. This liquid immediately kills not only crickets and their eggs, but also earthworms and any subterranean insects it can reach. Interrupted crops can then be safely resumed; their main enemy has disappeared. BEETLES. - Gardeners have three species of aphid to contend with: the green aphid, or common aphid, the black aphid, or bean aphid, and the woolly aphid, or apple aphid. Green aphid. - They often appear in prodigious numbers on roses, sucking the young shoots and buds, and on the seedbeds of cruciferous vegetables such as cabbages, cauliflowers, radishes and turnips, sucking the siliques, which very often dry out to the point of sterility. When the aphid invades only a few plants, it is killed by fumigating them with tobacco in the evening or morning, when the air is perfectly still. To give these fumigations to high-stemmed grafted roses attacked by the aphid, a large melon bell is hung over their heads; the smoke produced under this bell would harm the rose if it stayed there too long; as soon as the asphyxiated aphids fall, the bell is removed so that the tobacco smoke dissipates, without giving it time to damage the rose's vegetation. Black aphid. - Naturalists regard this aphid as the same as the previous one; they suppose that its black color is due to the juice of the bean on which it lives and multiplies with the same fecundity as the green aphid. It multiplies so rapidly that plants are usually lost before they can be rescued. If the plantation is not very large, you can remove all the black aphids, which always start by invading the leaves at the top of the plant; these leaves are then removed and placed in a basket to be burned immediately, taking great care not to leave any behind; otherwise, from one evening to the next, you'll find as many black aphids on the beans as you removed, and you'll have to start all over again. Woolly aphid. - This insect is not even remotely related to the previous two; all it has in common with them is its rapid spread and the way it lives at the expense of apple trees, sucking the bark and creating cankers that are often fatal. The woolly aphid rarely attacks apple trees in the fruit garden; it is especially formidable on the large apple trees in orchards whose fruit is used to make cider. In groves, however, it quite often kills the semi-double-flowered apple tree, a charming spring-flowering ornamental. Various caustic liquids are used against the woolly aphid; these liquids have the double disadvantage of not always killing the woolly aphid, preserved by the fleece of white hairs to which it owes its name, and of doing almost as much damage to the bark of the trees to which they are applied as the woolly aphid itself. The only effective remedy is the operation known as coulinage, which has eliminated the woolly adelgid from cider apple orchards in Normandy and Picardy. In winter, coulinage consists of passing a torch made of twisted straw coated with resin over trees infested with woolly aphids. The heat produced by this flame is too short-lived to harm the trees; it scorches the hairs of the woolly aphid, causing it to perish without fail. WILLS. - Plants grown in gardens, as well as vines and fruit trees, are attacked by a multitude of caterpillars; those living in isolation, or dispersing shortly after hatching, are difficult for the gardener to reach; he must rely on insectivorous songbirds to chase them away. To this end, place a hollow stone in a quiet, secluded corner of the grove, always full of water, and a small wooden begging bowl into which a few mealworms are placed once or twice a week. This is enough to attract and fix the warblers and other insect-eating songbirds, who, as a reward for this politeness, seek out the caterpillars that are their main food source when these birds have a brood to raise. At the time of winter pruning, the gardener destroys all the caterpillar nests in the grove and fruit garden, which are easy to distinguish because of the whitish webs they have spun in autumn in order to overwinter under 2 8̀ 2 this shelter; he also makes the more difficult search for the caterpillar egg clusters deposited by the females of various butterflies around the small branches of the trees, and stuck to the bark, by the sticky matter that envelops them. When, despite this care, the trees are invaded by caterpillars whose eggs have escaped his attention, he seizes the moment when, towards evening, the caterpillars gather in clusters at the junction of two large branches, and sprays them with a concentrated soap water that kills them. A strong sprinkling of fresh water on the bark of the tree is necessary after this operation, otherwise the concentrated soap water will do the tree about as much damage as the caterpillars could have done. The above information applies in general to all caterpillars that live on fruit and ornamental trees in horticulture. CABBAGE WORM. - This green caterpillar, mottled black-brown, attacks mainly cultivated plants of the

crucifers, cabbages, turnips and turnips, which it destroys completely. It should be hunted early in the morning, shortly after sunrise, before it has retired to the ground, where it hides to avoid the heat of the day. POULTRY. - The most common caterpillar to attack fruit trees, especially plums, this caterpillar, living in groups and not dispersing to eat, is one of the easiest to find and destroy, even when the trees have taken their foliage. PIRALE. - The pyralid is a very small caterpillar, born from the eggs of a very small butterfly, which caused the vineyards of France to lose many millions, until a winegrower near Beaujeu found a way to destroy it. The method consists of boiling water to scald the vines and stiles into which the moth caterpillar retreats to hibernate. The heat of the boiling water, too short-lived to harm the vine, is enough to kill the moth. When this dangerous caterpillar does appear, the vine must be scalded in winter, while vegetation is completely suspended. The caterpillar of this insect lives inside apples and pears, where it emerges from the egg deposited by the female carpocapsa moth on the head of the newly tied fruit. When fully grown, the caterpillar emerges from the fruit, cutting a cylindrical gallery through its thickness, and retreats to the ground or into cracks in the tree's bark to undergo its final transformations into a butterfly. The number of moths can be significantly reduced by washing the bark of trees with a strong milk of lime during the winter, and by removing some of the soil from the base of the tree and replacing it with new soil before vegetation resumes in spring. CHAPTER XII Gardener's meteorology. Gardener's meteorology. - Phenomena of importance to the gardener. - Winds. - Causes of winds. - Hurricanes. - Wind speed during a storm. - Study of local climate. - Violent winds always harmful to gardens. - Rainfall. - Average amount of rainfall in a given area. - Signs of a wet summer, a dry summer. - Insufficient barometer and hygrometer readings. - Snow. - Produced by the same causes as rain. - Useful for field crops. - Harmful to winter crops in gardens. - Hail. - Hailstorms useless. - Hail insurance disappointment. - Fog. - Dew. - White frost. - Effects of cold. - Heat. - Electrical phenomena. Atmospheric air, at the expense of which cultivated plants subsist for the most part, and which they cannot do without in any case, is the scene of a large number of phenomena whose study constitutes one of the most interesting branches of physics, under the name of meteorology. The gardener undoubtedly has much more to do than devote himself to the in-depth study of meteorology, a study which is sufficient in itself to fill the entire existence of a hard-working man; but there is in this division of physics a set of facts and notions that he cannot dispense with knowing, because he can draw from it at every moment useful indications for the practice of gardening. Winds, rain, snow, hail, fog, dew, white frost, the effects of cold and heat, and electrical phenomena, are the facts of meteorology that the gardener must study in particular. Winds. - Warm air is, for the same volume, significantly lighter than cold air; the colder the air, the heavier it is. In the atmosphere, therefore, there is a continual tendency for the coldest portions to be displaced, as their weight forces them to rush from north to south, to take the place of air masses warmed by their contact with the ground in tropical regions. Another permanent cause of atmospheric mass displacement is the earth's rotational movement. This movement and the differences in temperature at various points on the surface of the globe are the main general causes of winds, whose speed and intensity vary over a wide range, from a light, barely perceptible breeze to a storm whose highest calculated speed is 65 kilometers per hour. The most violent winds periodically prevail in regions close to the equator. When the Spaniards discovered the West Indies, the natives of these islands called the storm's breath hurracan; this word is a veritable onomatopoeia; it depicts the howling of a furious wind and the cracking of the trees it overturns in its path. European nations have adopted this term, modifying its pronunciation to create the French word ouragan. The gardener must make a thorough study of the local climate in his or her area. The direction of the prevailing winds, some of which bring rain, others drought, merits particular attention, so he must frequently consult a weather vane placed on a building visible from inside his garden. Whenever winds exceed the force of even a slightly brisk current of air, they should be considered harmful to gardening, and delicate plants should be protected from their effects by means of strong fences called windbreaks, and various other shelters. It's true that foresters consider high winds to be favorable to tree growth, as they clear them of dead wood and superfluous branches; but in landscape gardening, the gardener must not count on such help; he must prune his trees without waiting for the winds to do this part of his work. When sowing, transplanting or planting, he should consult the state of the atmosphere, and adjust according to what the wind direction allows him to expect in terms of dryness or humidity. Rain. - One of the features of the local climate that the gardener must study most carefully is the average amount of rain that falls each year, and the distribution of rainy days and sunny days between the various months of the year. When, in the first few months, the average is not reached, he can count on a rainy summer and frequent thunderstorms; in the opposite case, he must expect a more prolonged drought than in ordinary years. There isn't a gardener in the world who hasn't made his or her own observations about the signs of approaching rain, snow, drought or severe cold in his or her region, simply by living in the open air. These signs vary according to the proximity or remoteness of the sea or the mountains, which are the main causes of the abundance or scarcity of rain, as well as the severity or mildness of the climate, in relation to latitude. The prognostications formulated in almanacs, and in special treatises on meteorology, have the defect of lacking precision; their application is subject to so many exceptions, that they most often give rise to nothing but errors. When, following a more or less prolonged period of drought, the weather becomes overcast as the full or new moon approaches, this is a fairly certain sign that the weather is about to turn to rain. The indications of the barometer, nor those of the hygrometer representing a moinc taking off or putting back its hood, never announce rain with certainty; a rising or falling barometer simply says that the air is heavier or lighter; the kvgromêtre, which lengthens or shortens as it caps or uncaps the religious person it represents, says that the air is more or less dry, more or less humid; it doesn't necessarily follow that it will soon rain or shine: nothing certain can be deduced from this. Snow. - Snow is frozen rain; when it snows, it rains ice crystallized in the atmosphere, in needles whose confused agglomeration forms flakes. The gardener needs to know by observation which winter winds are most likely to bring snow; he must therefore adjust the direction of his ados in order to avoid snow piling up on his winter salads and those plants, the object of his care, which must overwinter in the open air. For while the farmer is pleased to see a thick blanket of snow covering his winter cereals, to which such a blanket can only do good, the gardener, placed in different conditions, can only see snow as the enemy of his winter crops. Hail. - Hail is the most formidable enemy of all garden crops; in a matter of minutes, it can destroy everything. The gardener has no way of predicting it or preventing its ravages. The paragrels advocated a few years ago consisted of tall poles similar to cocagne masts, topped by a magnetized iron point to which a thick brass wire was attached, guided along the length of the pole and buried in the ground. The usefulness of hail protection was so questionable that it was eventually abandoned. Insurance against hail is no less illusory; self-respecting companies do not insure bells, frames, greenhouses and all the glazed equipment of the gardener, nor the products of his industry; the risks are too great to be covered by even a very high premium. Those who insure against this kind of risk receive premiums as long as there are not too many claims; when there are too many, they go bankrupt. So what can a gardener do against hail? Nothing, as far as his outdoor crops are concerned. For his crops under glass, it's a different story. As long as the thunderstorm season lasts, and any storm can be accompanied by hail, the gardener keeps rolled straw mats within constant reach of his melons and other produce grown under glass and uncovered only in midsummer. With a flick of the wrist, he can spread them over them as a sure-fire protection against hail, unless he moves them after the storm, with the same promptness. Mists. - In spring and autumn, the fog that rises from the earth at dusk and is dissipated by the morning sun is more beneficial than harmful to garden crops; the gardener doesn't have to worry about it. Dew. - Like fog, night dew is beneficial to all garden produce; it refreshes plants and can, to a certain extent, make up for insufficient watering, where it is not possible to water thoroughly. It is due to the condensation of atmospheric humidity on the surface of plant leaves, just as air in an inhabited area condenses on window panes when it's cold outside. White frost. - The phenomenon of white frost often occurs on clear days, when the thermometer suspended in the atmosphere does not drop to the freezing point of water. It frequently occurs in spring on moonlit nights. Hence the bad reputation of the red moon. While it is very true that the moon has nothing to do with late white frosts, which damage or even completely destroy the flowering of fruit trees, the fact is no less real, and gardeners have always been right to oppose the disastrous effects of white frost with all the types of shelter available to them (see Shelter, chap. V). In the chapter on plant diseases, we explained the effects of cold, heat and electrical phenomena, as well as the nature of the lesions that frequently result (see chap. X). CHAPTER XIII Perennial vegetables. Market gardening. - The hortillons of Amiens. - Market gardeners in Paris. - Perpignan. - Nantes. - From Metz. - Cavaillon. - From Pézénas. - Plants for market gardening. - Perennial vegetables. - Vegetables proper. - Root vegetables. - Edible bulb vegetables. - Edible leaf vegetables. - Salads. - Vegetables with edible flowers. - Vegetables with edible fruit. - Asparagus. - Wild asparagus. - Cultivated asparagus. - From Holland. - Ghent. - Ulm. - Vendôme. - Common asparagus. - Nursery culture. - Claws. - Roots. - Root removal. - Planting claws. - Cultivation care. - Sowing. - Harvesting asparagus. - Forced cultivation. The hortillons of Amiens. - Vegetable gardening, generally referred to in France as "maraichère" (market gardening), has been brought to its greatest perfection in the dry marshes of the Somme valley near Amiens, and in those of the Seine valley near Paris. The history of this branch of gardening is of great interest, both in itself, from a horticultural point of view, and in relation to those who practise it, from a moral point of view. The market gardens around Amiens still bear the name of hortillons, obviously derived from the Latin word hortulani (gardeners); this name applies to the land of these gardens and to those who cultivate it; hortillons have had an uninterrupted existence, perfectly proven, since the time of Lorzine domination in Gaul. A few years ago, when a hortillon appeared as a witness in a trial, the presiding judge seized the opportunity to state publicly that, having examined not only the annals of the current courts since they came into existence, but also those of the former parliament of Douai, he had not found the name of a single hortillon involved in a criminal or simply correctional trial. The president's words are a kind of letter of nobility for the hortillons of Amiens. The market gardeners of Paris. - The market gardeners of the Paris region are also remarkable for the high moral standards they maintain in their contact with the halles population, without deviating from the straight and narrow. Family spirit, love of work, deep attachment to their parents and their duties, are also common qualities among Parisian market gardeners. There are families of market gardeners who have been devoted to the same profession for centuries; they have carefully preserved the titles of concessions made in the 21st century by Charles V, known as the Wise, granting marshlands to families who still exist and all of whose members are exclusively gardeners, on condition that they dry them out and sell the produce on the halles floor. Proportionately, the same is true of market-gardening populations in various parts of France, especially around Perpignan (Pyrenées-Orientales) and Nantes (Loire-Inférieure); there, as in the beautiful market gardens of Metz, Cavaillon and Pézénas, gardening families set an example of regular morals, and their names never appear in the annals of justice. In Paris, the fortified enclosure on the one hand, and the encroachment of buildings on the other, have displaced market gardening; it has retreated, but without losing any of its perfection; it is still to the market gardeners of the Paris area that one must come to learn the best that can be done in terms of the most perfect cultivation of vegetable plants. 7. Because of the importance of this crop in feeding the people of the cities, it shares with the farmer the task of bringing the nation's food supplies out of the soil. Not only does the scarcity and high cost of vegetables cause great inconvenience to the worker, but public health is always more or less compromised when the products of market gardening are not abundant and moderately priced in the markets of populous cities. Vegetable classification. - Vegetables are classified into eight sections: 1° perennial vegetables; 2° vegetables whose seeds are eaten; 3° root vegetables; 4° edible bulb vegetables; 5° edible leaf vegetables; 6° salads; 7° edible flower vegetables; 8° edible fruit vegetables. Although the plants in each of these sections do not always belong to the same botanical family, they all require cultivation care that differs little from one to another, which justifies their natural similarity from a gardening point of view. PERENNIAL VEGETABLES. This division includes only two plants, asparagus and artichokes, both of which are widely cultivated, producing an enormous amount of excellent produce for urban consumption. Since all points of our territory have been easily and rapidly connected by rail to all major population centers, large-scale cultivation of perennial vegetables is possible and advantageous where previously it was impracticable and totally unknown, because its products would not have found buyers. ASPARAGUS. - An asparagus patch is indispensable in any vegetable garden, whether grown with the aim of sending produce to market, or just for family consumption. Asparagus is one of the most sought-after and healthiest vegetables a garden can provide. Wild asparagus. - In all our southern departments bordering the Mediterranean, from Antibes to the Spanish border, asparagus grows in the wild, stretching 90 to 100 kilometers from north to south. It is especially abundant in the Var region, where, in spring, we carefully seek out its young shoots, which are the size of a feather pipe, tender green and more flavorful than garden asparagus. In this part of France, asparagus is virtually uncultivated; we make do with what comes naturally along ditches, on the sides of ravines and in hedgerows. Enthusiasts will always miss a large number of them. These grow to heights of two meters and more, and are laden with flowers that give off a strong vanilla scent, a sure sign of their presence. As a result, country folk take Sunday strolls when the wild asparagus is in bloom, and mark the places where it grows, so that they can visit them the following spring. Growing asparagus. - In gardens, asparagus can be grown by sowing or planting; in all cases, it is important to obtain either seeds or seedlings of the best sub-varieties. Asparagus has no distinct species or variety in the strict sense of the term; the most esteemed sub-varieties are Holland, Ghent, Ulm and Vendôme asparagus. Common asparagus is nothing more than Dutch asparagus, reduced to a lesser volume by conditions of soil, climate and cultivation less favorable than those found in its native country. Asparagus seed is usually sown in nurseries, in order to obtain a plant that can be planted after one or two years of preparatory cultivation; it can also be sown in place, in pits prepared in the same way as for planting. The best soil for growing asparagus is very light, but fertile; if you want to grow this plant in strong soil, you must first amend the soil with silica sand and ashes, in high doses. Peaty soil, made suitable for cultivation by the deacidifying action of lime and horse manure, produces excellent asparagus. They are also very good, albeit small, in sandy soils of mediocre fertility. Nursery sowing. - Nursery sowing is done in rows or broadcast, from February 10 to March 20; it can be done much later, but with less chance of success. The seed should be covered with 3 to 4 centimetres of soil; in addition, a centimetre or so of good potting soil from broken layers should be spread over the seedlings, so that if droughts occur and watering is necessary, the soil will not be compacted and hardened on its surface by the water from watering. Sowing in rows is preferable to broadcast sowing, simply because the plant is easier to see when it emerges. The young asparagus plant needs more than any other to be freed from weeds by frequent weeding. When the seed has been broadcast, the plant, which is excessively small and resembles barely visible threads, gets lost under parasitic plants and is partly removed during weeding. This doesn't happen with seedlings in rows; as the place where the seedling should be is known in advance, it's easier to respect it. One-year-old nursery stock is at least as good for planting as two-year-old stock. Nevertheless, opinion is so strongly in favor of the two-year-old nursery stock that, in all countries where asparagus is grown on a large scale, gardeners who raise plants for sale are forced to cultivate them for two years, otherwise they would not be able to sell them. Cultivation care during the second year must be the same as during the first; weeding, hoeing and watering as necessary must not be spared. When the plant is uprooted, great care must be taken to avoid damaging the roots. Asparagus tubers with fleshy divisions called fingers are called claws. These are not asparagus roots in the strict sense of the term; true fibrous roots, rather like those of the violet, extend from between the fingers and plunge into the soil as far as its more or less penetrable nature will allow. It is important to keep these hairy roots as whole as possible when pulling them out. Pulling should only be carried out when everything is ready for planting, so that the claws remain out of the ground for as little time as possible. Planting claws. - Several methods are in use for planting asparagus claws; here is the most commonly used. The ground is divided into plots 1 m 30 cent. wide, separated by intervals of O mêtre 60 cent. If the lay of the land permits, the planks of indeterminate length should be laid from east to west. The surface of the planks is removed to a thickness of 0 m 40 cent; the soil removed is deposited on the intervals. The bottom of the planks is then deeply ploughed and widely smoked with half-consumed manure. If the subsoil is damp and impermeable, a bed of dry broken branches, chopped broom or heather, about a decimeter thick, is placed at the very bottom of the pit, forming a sort of drainage system that prevents the ends of the asparagus' fibrous roots from coming into contact with the stagnant subsoil humidity. On top of the ploughed and smoked bottom soil, a bed of soil from the pit itself is spread, taken up at the intervals; this bed should be one decimeter thick. Once these arrangements have been made, the surface of the pit soil is levelled with a fine, close-toothed rake, and the claws are planted. Two lines are first drawn with a chalk line at o meter 16 cent. from the edge of the pit, on each side. The interval between these two lines is then divided in two by a third line occupying exactly the middle of the pit. On these three lines, we mark the place of the claws, spaced o meter 40 cent. apart and arranged in a chessboard pattern. A good handful of potting soil forming a small mound is placed at each spot where a claw is to be planted. The purpose of this precaution is to prevent a void forming under the claw's tray, where air could enter and expose it to rot. The fingers of the claw and its fibrous roots are spread out in all directions, taking care not to break them; the whole is then covered with a decimetre of good soil, over which a little compost is spread, the fine rake is passed, and the operation is completed. Many authors criticize this method of planting asparagus, even though it is the most common, because it has two serious disadvantages: firstly, the air does not circulate well in asparagus pits, which can harm their vegetation to a greater or lesser extent; and secondly, gardening is more difficult in such pits than on boards set at the level of the surrounding soil. However, in ordinary circumstances, when the soil is of good quality and light rather than strong, these disadvantages are offset by the undeniable advantage of having on hand, for several years, the soil necessary for the annual replenishments required by asparagus cultivation. By not exceeding the depth indicated above, the advantages significantly outweigh the disadvantages. Asparagus can also give very good results when planted flat in rows on well-ploughed, well-smoked soil, with 0.60 m intervals between beds. This should be done when the soil is strong rather than light, and when the subsoil is of poor quality or saturated with stagnant humidity dangerous to asparagus roots. All planting conditions remain the same. For subsequent cultivation, the soil needed for annual replanting is taken from the gaps, which become deeper and deeper, and eventually deep gullies, while the asparagus beds become higher and higher. In autumn of the first year, the pit floor, which must have been kept free of weeds by frequent weeding, is topped with a layer of long manure equivalent to half a manure. The dried-out stalks of young asparagus are cut off at ground level, and everything remains in this state until the following spring. The intervals between the spring and autumn beds have been used for crops that don't grow very high, and don't provide shade, such as bush beans, onions and various types of lettuce. From the end of February, the asparagus beds receive a very superficial treatment, carefully applied with an iron-tined fork, in order to mix into the soil the manure decomposed by the weather during the winter. Immediately afterwards, enough soil is taken from the spaces between the beds to refill their surface by 5 centimetres. The same care is taken during the second and third years, after which the asparagus can be harvested. Sowing in place. - When it is difficult to obtain good one- or two-year-old asparagus from a nursery for planting, sow two or three seeds in each hole, in the pits laid out exactly as described above and spaced at the same intervals. When the plant is well established, we pull out the two weakest plants, and leave in place the one that seems to be the most promising. The rest of the cultivation of asparagus beds created by sowing is very similar to that of beds formed by planting. The only difference is that, when sown, the first harvest is not due until the fourth year at the earliest, and the fifth year in less fertile soils: this is a year later than with claw plantations. Harvesting asparagus. - The way asparagus is harvested varies from country to country. In northern France, like the Dutch and Belgians, consumers only want asparagus that is completely etiolated, entirely white, and can be eaten almost whole. To get them in this state, you have to cut them between two plots of land as soon as the top shows, and before it has had time to color on contact with light. Around Paris and in the rest of France, asparagus is only harvested when it has sprouted a shoot about a decimetre long, lightly coloured green and purple. The knife used to cut the asparagus should not be too long; during harvesting, care must be taken to avoid damaging the central plate of the claws, which could cause numerous voids in the boards; this harvest can only be well done by dexterous and practiced hands. You must not, through misguided greed, prolong the asparagus harvest too far into the season; especially during the first three or four years, you will ruin the plantations. Forced cultivation. - In the vicinity of large cities, it is advantageous to treat asparagus during the winter by forced cultivation; this method of growing asparagus is also easy to practice by the amateur gardener, who grows only for his own consumption. The best asparagus for forced cultivation are those that have been planted for five or six years, so that almost all the soil deposited in the gaps between the beds has been used for annual replanting, and the asparagus pits are completely filled in. At a depth of Om.40, gullies are dug in place of the plank gaps; these are filled with fermenting stable manure, which is lightly moistened and trampled underfoot. The boards are then covered with a thick layer of fresh manure, on top of which are placed chests covered with glass frames. Economy frames, covered with canvas or oiled coarse paper, can be used for the same purpose. The operation can be started in December and continued until February; the asparagus beds are only forced successively, so that forced asparagus can be harvested throughout the winter, when it is most valuable. From time to time, we lift the frames and disturb the manure to watch for the first asparagus shoots. As soon as they appear, the manure cover inside the frames is removed; new manure replaces that in the gutters, whose heat is exhausted; doormats or dry litter protect the asparagus from the cold of the night, and are moved from over the frames during the coldest hours of the day, as long as it doesn't freeze. If care is taken not to force it two years in a row, and to give it a year's rest, asparagus can be forced every two years without ruining it or shortening the duration of the planting. It sometimes happens that an asparagus plantation made in good soil, with good manure, a vigorous plant, and all the necessary care, fails completely. This is usually due to a peculiarity worth mentioning. Asparagus is one of those plants that cannot succeed itself, either because it leaves excretions of a special kind in the soil, or because of some other cause that escapes observation. The land on which an asparagus plantation has done its time is excellent for any other crop; but asparagus can only return and prosper there after an interval of at least ten years; the earth is tired of asparagus, say the gardeners; it must relieve itself with other crops. So, when planning an asparagus plantation, it is essential to ensure that the land has not produced asparagus for at least ten years. CHAPTER XIV Continuation of Perennial Vegetables. Artichoke cultivation. - Provence artichoke. - Gros camus from Tours or Brittany. - Gros vert de Laon. - Artichoke hay. - Multiplication by eyelets. - Seedling propagation. - Planting. - Site preparation. - Spacing. - Ridging. - Winter care. - Annual artichoke cultivation. - Advantageous conditions. - Preservation of artichoke heads in winter. - Duration of planting. ARTICHOW. - The artichoke ranks second only to asparagus as a perennial vegetable, occupying an important place in the vegetable garden for several years running. It is a plant with long, strong roots, closely related to the thistle, native to North Africa and southern Europe; it can only succeed in soil that is both rich and deep. Artichoke species and varieties. - Three distinct varieties of artichoke are grown in France: the petit artichaut de Provence, of which there are two sub-varieties, one purple, the other pale green; the gros camus de Tours, also known as the artichaut de Bretagne, and the gros vert de Laon, the most esteemed and widely grown of the three. The artichoke of Provence is sometimes referred to as artichaut sans foin, to distinguish it from the other species: this expression is inappropriate; there can be no artichoke sans foin in the true sense of the term. Artichokes are eaten with the base of the leaves, which are not true leaves but calicinous scales, and the base or common receptacle that these scales surround. What we call artichoke hay is the reunion of the flowers before their full bloom. Left to the natural course of their vegetation, these flowers would blossom into a silky, violet aigrette, followed by thistle-like seeds. The artichoke head, when picked and delivered for consumption, is a compound flower bud. In this bud, the hay is short and inconspicuous in the small Provence artichoke; it is a little longer in the large Camus artichoke and very long, very hard and very tight in the Laon artichoke, filling the entire interior. The distinctive feature of the artichoke gros camus is the shape of its scales, which are indented at the top and laid one on top of the other. Less sensitive to the cold than the artichoke from Provence, which does not succeed outside the olive and mulberry region, the artichoke gros camus is very well suited to the climate of central France; it thrives particularly in the Loire Valley and is only half successful in the climate of Paris. The artichaut gros vert de Laon is distinguished by the shape of its pointed scales, which diverge in all directions; it is the only variety that can be grown with any chance of success in the climate of the Seine valley and to the north of this valley. Multiplication. - Artichokes are propagated by separating the offshoots or "œilletons", detached from the base of old stocks, each of which can supply 8 to 10 in the spring; these œilletons, used for planting, maintain the varieties in all their purity. Artichokes can also be propagated by sowing their seeds, but the seedlings do not always reproduce the same variety as those from which they were sown. Eyelets. - Around March each year, when the cold weather seems to have passed and the artichokes have nothing to fear from the return of late frosts, the artichoke stalks are removed to detach the eyelets, which are separated by pulling them up and down, so that each one retains a heel, which sometimes has roots. Whether it has roots or not, this plant is usually used as if it did; they are true cuttings that rarely fail to take root. In dry, slightly thin soils, where it may happen that not all the carnations root, which would leave gaps in the planting, they are planted in nurseries, very close to each other; they are only definitively put in place when they have formed good roots, thus ensuring the evenness of the planting. Artichoke seedlings - When, following an extraordinarily harsh winter, most of the artichokes have frozen, and consequently there are not enough eyelets to renew the plantations, we are forced to resort to seedlings. This is a foreseen circumstance, as a result of which far more seeds are sown than would be necessary if all the seedlings could be used for planting. In this way, you can be sure of having enough after cutting back on the one whose stiff, sharply-divided leaves indicate a tendency to turn to thistle, as gardeners say. To avoid being caught unprepared, even though artichoke seed retains its germinative properties for 5 or 6 years, it's a good idea to let a few of the most beautiful heads flower and bear seed every year. The seed not used for sowing can be used in place of rennet; it curdles milk very well without imparting any foreign flavor to the cheese. Planting. - The soil for planting artichokes must be prepared by deep ploughing and heavy manuring. In the South of France, where few cattle are raised, and where manure is therefore always in short supply, artichokes are planted in pits om.50 deep and of the same width; manure is mixed with the earth removed from the pits, which is then filled with the same well-smoked earth; the artichokes are planted 1 meter apart in all directions; the half of the soil where their roots should not extend, receives no manure. In the rest of France, where manure is less scarce, the entire artichoke plot is smoked and planted 1 meter apart in all directions; their roots eventually invade almost the entire plot, and the manure benefits them in full. The plant's recovery cannot be guaranteed unless it is thoroughly wetted at the time of planting, and watered thoroughly at least every two days until vegetation is vigorously growing. Plants treated in this way, either with eyelets or seedlings, planted in April, produce their first harvest in autumn. Wintering. - Winter is the critical period for artichoke cultivation, at least in the climate of Paris; in the Midi, artichoke plantations spend the winter in the open air without any kind of protection. From the Loire Valley to our northern frontiers, artichoke gros camus and gros vert de Laon can only overwinter with continuous care, which doesn't always save them. At the end of autumn, before the first frosts arrive, you need to start buttering the artichokes. Choose dry weather for this work, so that the mounded earth around each clump, whose outer leaves have been cut back beforehand, is as moisture-free as possible. Mounding not only protects artichokes from the cold, it also helps the formation and development of eyelets around the stump. Once the work is done, a generous supply of dry leaves and litter is spread in the spaces between the mounded artichokes, where it remains until the time of a serious frost. The artichokes must then be covered, and carefully uncovered during the coldest hours of the day. As long as it doesn't freeze, the center of the artichoke clump must remain uncovered, otherwise it will wither and rot. Their preservation depends on the gardener's careful covering and uncovering of artichokes throughout the winter. When spring returns, the leaves and litter are removed for good; the mounds are dismantled, the artichoke patch is levelled, the clumps are grommeted and two of the best grommets are left on each for annual production. Plantations treated in this way produce three good harvests, after which they must be renewed. They could be left for another year, but in the fourth year they would only produce tough artichokes of a volume below the normal size for their variety. Annual calture. - In gardens with rich, cool, very deep soil, you can avoid the embarrassment of winter storage by planting artichokes every year, and requiring only one harvest per planting. By sparing neither manure at the time of planting, nor watering throughout the summer, the artichokes all rise, without exception, before the end of autumn; the abundance and beauty of the produce make the harvest very advantageous, after which the clumps are pulled up, and the land is given over to other crops. Only the number of plants needed to produce sufficient carnations the following spring are kept. This is the method used since time immemorial in the market gardens around Amiens; this method, which boils down to treating artichoke cultivation like that of an annual plant, is applicable wherever the same soil and cumat conditions prevail. When, at the start of winter, a patch of artichokes that has reached the end of its third year, or has been treated as an annual crop as we have just seen, retains a certain number of half-formed heads, they can be delivered successively for consumption throughout the winter, by uprooting the clods and transporting them to a cellar, a healthy cellar, or any other frost-free location. If they retain enough soil around the roots, and if they are also buried in fresh sand, they will keep as well as at the natural harvest time. In Paris, artichokes preserved in this way fetch very good prices in winter. When artichokes have yielded their annual crop, the stems should be cut off at ground level, at the root collar. If any are left, the growth of the eyelets will suffer, and the following year's harvest will be more or less compromised. You should not hesitate to sacrifice part of the harvest of small artichokes growing sideways, which are intended to be eaten raw under the name of artichokes à la poivrade, on artichoke plants that still have several years to live. If the artichoke vines are exhausted by overabundant production of low value, by the second year they will not yield half of what could be obtained with care. CHAPTER XV Vegetables proper Vegetables proper - Peas. - Principles of cultivation. - Peas for Saint Catherine's Day. - Candlemas. - Wood, coal and peat ashes for growing peas. - Sowing times. - Cultivation care. - Pea weevil. - Species and varieties. - Early peas. - Late peas. - Snow peas. - Forced cultivation of peas. - Chick peas. - Beans. - Transplant cultivation. - Forced cultivation. - Dwarf beans without oars. - String beans. - Mangetout beans. - Marsh bean. - De Windsor. - Julienne. - Common lentil. - Queen lentil. In the language of botanists, the word vegetable does not have the same meaning as in ordinary language. A vegetable is a pod- or silique-shaped fruit that gives its name to the numerous legume family. Vegetables proper are therefore those whose seeds are eaten in fruits that are true vegetables. Peas, beans, broad beans and lentils are among the leguminous plants grown in the kitchen garden for human consumption. PEAS - Fresh shelled peas, known as petits pois, are one of the most sought-after vegetables, the return of which is eagerly awaited each year by all consumer classes. The cultivation of peas, whatever the species, is subject to a number of simple and easy-to-apply principles, without which it cannot produce good results. The best soil for growing peas is light rather than strong, yet sufficiently fertile; this plant does not tolerate the immediate contact of fresh manure; it does very well in soil that has been smoked the previous year, and which has yielded some kind of crop on manuring. Peas sown in strong, recently-smoked soil produce long stems and abundant foliage; they flower poorly and produce almost no grain. Peas are among the plants that cannot be cultivated for several years in a row in the same place, otherwise their products become bitter and cease to be edible; this is what happened in several communes around Paris, where peas were, a few years ago, grown very extensively to supply the capital's markets; By persisting in constantly sowing peas on the same land, the gardeners in these communes ended up harvesting only small quantities of inferior quality produce; they were forced to give up altogether on a crop that no longer covered their costs. In any well-managed garden, the square where a crop of peas has been harvested should be given over to other crops for at least a year, after which the peas can return without inconvenience. Saint Catherine and Candlemas peas. - Peas are native to warm climates, and can only be grown in the open air between the time of year when it no longer freezes and the time when it doesn't freeze yet. Nevertheless, a few sub-varieties that are a little hardier than the others can be sown at the foot of a wall in the midday sun, towards the end of November: this is what gardeners around Paris call "Sainte-Catherine peas". Under the same conditions, peas can also be sown in the first days of February: these are known as Chandeleur peas. The peas resulting from these sowings always die as a result of frosts, against which their situation only half guarantees them. But this doesn't mean they're lost: their roots don't freeze, unless there's an exceptionally severe cold spell; as soon as the weather is fine, two stems emerge to the right and left of the root collar. These stems flower and produce shelled peas, long before peas of the same species sown in the open air after the last late spring frosts. In any case, St Catherine's Day peas, like Candlemas peas, can only produce produce you can't count on too much, so only a limited amount of space should be devoted to them each year, choosing the best possible exposure. If there is a lack of land at the foot of south-facing walls, this can be made up by planting a row of stakes in an east-west direction, to which straw mats can be attached, forming a sort of temporary espalier in front of which the peas are protected from the cold, as well as they can be. Although strong soils are unsuitable for peas, this vegetable is so necessary for cooking in summer that it should not be neglected in gardens with very strong soils, cultivated to provide a family living in the country with its vegetable supply. In this case, the plot where peas are to be grown is amended with a heavy dose of wood ash. The best for this purpose are the charcoal ashes collected from kitchen stoves, and from those where laundresses heat their irons. If these ashes are not available, coal ashes, properly sifted to separate the slag, and even peat ashes, in cantons where this type of heating is generally used, can be substituted for wood or charcoal ashes to make soils that are naturally too strong, suitable for producing good quality peas. Wherever possible, a small quantity of ashes mixed into the soil at the time of sowing peas is always very beneficial to their rapid growth; it helps to make them productive and gives quality to their produce. Sowing. - Cultivation care. - Most garden peas are sown in March and April. In localities where long droughts are not to be feared, peas can be sown in the open ground from March 15 onwards throughout the summer season, but no later than July 15. The last sowings should be done with peas of the earliest varieties. Peas sown later will grow beautiful stems full of flowers, but these flowers will not produce grain. Fertilization of the pea flower is only possible during the day, under the influence of bright light; flowers that bloom when the days have already become too short are only imperfectly fertilized; the siliques or pods that follow them are empty, or nearly so. A fortnight or so after they have emerged, peas need very careful hoeing, after which, if they are of a dwarf species, they can simply be left to the natural course of their vegetation, until the time comes to harvest their produce. In gardens, when peas are in full bloom, it is always useful to summer the plants, i.e. to remove the top of the stem with the flowers and flower buds it usually bears. Most of these flowers would be sterile; removing them, far from reducing the harvest, tends to increase it by making the pods at the bottom and middle of the stem fuller and fuller. After hoeing, species with more or less long stems need to be supported by oars to which the peas cling by the tendrils of their leaves, which makes them much more productive than if they dragged unsupported on the ground, as in open field cultivation where the use of oars is not possible: too many would be needed. We etè̂te rowed peas like the others and with the same result. Everyone is keen, and rightly so, to have the earliest peas in their garden. Apart from the earliness specific to each species, between which there is plenty to choose, very early peas can be obtained by the following procedure. As the peas flower and bear fruit, instead of removing the full pods, as is done to consume their contents, the first peas are left to ripen, and to accelerate their maturity, not only the top, but the entire upper part of the stalks is removed, leaving only 3 or 4 pods at most. Peas from these pods used for seed the following year gain in earliness over those of their species, for which the same measure has not been taken. As the flowering period of peas is very long, the pods arrive successively at the point where they can be harvested; the gardener would suffer a considerable loss on this product if he did not take great precautions when harvesting peas, a task that can only be entrusted to trained hands. The stem of the pea is tender and fragile, especially at the bottom, when the pods begin to be harvested; this stem is held to the ground only by delicate, short roots, which give way at the slightest effort. If, when the first pods are picked, the plant loaded with half-full pods and flowers ready to open has broken or been torn off, the rest of the harvest is lost. Insect enemy of peas. - The pea's insect enemy is a beetle called the bruchid, whose female bites into the pods to lay one of her eggs in each newly-formed grain. The larva of the bruche lives inside the pea, gnawing its substance, undergoing its transformations and emerging as a perfect insect. Peas whose cotyledons have been pierced by the bruchid larva should not be considered as lost; more often than not, this larva, commonly known as the pea worm, does not attack the germ, so that pierced peas can be used for sowing just as well as others. Ripe peas, stored as seed grains, retain their germinative properties for several years; they should only be shelled when ready for use. Species and varieties. - There are many species and varieties of peas, usually divided into early and late varieties. The best early peas are the early dwarf pea, of which there are three varieties: the early dwarf from around Paris, the dwarf from Holland and the dwarf from Brittany; the green dwarf from Prussia and the wrinkled dwarf are less early than the previous ones; all of them are recommended only for their rapid vegetation, which makes it possible to obtain peas very early, but in small quantities; they are generally not very productive. Other early peas include Michaux, or petit pois de Paris, Michaux de Hollande, Ruelle and Prince-Albert, an English variety of excellent quality. The most esteemed of the late peas are the large sweet dwarf, the Marly pea and the Clamart pea, the best of all the late peas; the latter two need to be supported by large oars. The late pea series also includes Knight's finger pea and wrinkled pea, two very good English varieties, the giant pea and the large Norman green pea. The latter, whose seeds remain green when fully ripe, is mainly grown for consumption as a dry vegetable, and is found more frequently in the field than in the garden. In addition to these two series, there are many other varieties of peas known as goulus, mange-tout or sans parchment. The distinctive feature of these peas is the absence of parchment or tough skin inside the pods, which means they can be eaten without shelling. Their cultivation is not widespread in France, except towards our northern border; in the rest of France, they are preferred to early or late shelling peas, whose flavor is indeed more delicate. Snow peas are grown in the same way as other peas. Forced cultivation. - Since the establishment of the railroads, which bring the various points of the territory closer together and put them in communication with the major cities, the cultivation of early peas on beds and under frames has lost much of its importance; Paris receives early peas from the Midi whose cost price makes it impossible to compete with peas from forced cultivation. Nevertheless, as it is always a pleasure for the amateur gardener to be able to produce early peas for his own consumption, we present here the procedures for their forced cultivation. The most successful are early dwarf peas, selected from the least developed and earliest varieties. Sow in the first days of January, either in the field, 8. on a warm layer covered with 30 centimeters of good light soil mixed with compost, or in a nursery on a similar layer. In the latter case, the peas should be sown very thickly, pulled out as soon as they are 5 to 6 centimetres high, and transplanted in rows onto other layers prepared in advance to receive them. As the aim of this crop is not to harvest as many peas as possible, but only to harvest them as early as possible, we pinch off the top of the stems as soon as they have 3 or 4 flowers. Another operation necessary to the success of forced cultivation is to lay the pea stems down before they begin to flower, which is done by placing a lath over them to keep them flat for a day or two. When the lath is removed, the upper part of the stems straightens out on its own; the lower part remains flat. This curvature of the stems contributes significantly to hastening fruiting. CHICKEN PEAS. - A plant closely related to peas, but of a different genus, known as chickpea, is widely cultivated in the south of France. In the Paris climate, its grain, which has a very pronounced, distinctive flavor, does not ripen; it must be harvested half-ripe. The thick husk makes chickpeas rather difficult to digest, but they make excellent purée. Chickpeas can only be sown in the open air around April 15 in the Paris region; in the Midi, they are sown in autumn; they survive the winter very well in our southern departments, flowering early in spring and producing ripe produce towards the end of summer. The plant is low, stocky and doesn't need oars. BEANS. - Beans are easier to grow than peas, in that they are equally at home in heavy and light soils, provided they are well fertilized, and their yields do not decrease in quantity or quality when they are grown several times in a row on the same site. Beans are much more sensitive to cold than peas; they can only be sown outdoors in the Paris climate between April 15th and 20th. Beans are sown either in clumps or in rows; clump sowing is the most common; 3, 5 or 7 beans are sown per clump, depending on how large the plants need to grow, so that they eventually cover the whole plot. A little wood ash, coal ash or peat moss, mixed into the soil at sowing time, is no less useful for beans than it is for the various types of peas. When part of the pods are harvested before the grain has formed, to obtain what are known as green beans, care must be taken not to give the plants too many shocks; they are more resistant and have better roots than peas. Beans can continue to be sown in the vegetable garden until mid-summer, when the year is not too dry. Late-sown crops are unable to ripen before the first frosts, which destroy them; but their yield of fresh green and shelled beans is as abundant as that of spring-sown beans. When you want to harvest the first beans early, sow a few liters very close together on a warm or hot bed under a frame, or more simply on a pile of manure covered with 20 to 25 centimeters of soil at the top. These seedlings are sown at the end of March, at a time when beans cannot vegetate in the open air. A good covering of straw mats or bedding is spread over the seedlings, which are removed whenever the temperature permits. Beans sprout en masse and remain in a stationary state, as long as care is taken not to over-water them. As soon as the weather is favorable, they are transplanted, two by two, in rows, at the foot of a wall facing south; they gain in earliness all the time they would have taken to emerge and take their first leaves in the open air. Beans are also forced in winter, using the same method as for peas; the only difference is that forced beans don't want to be laid down or topped. The list of bean varieties grown in gardens is very long, and comprises three distinct sections: 1° dwarf beans, without oars; 2° oar beans; 3° snap beans. Species and varieties. - The best dwarf or pole beans are flageolet, Soissons dwarf, sabre dwarf, American white dwarf and Bollande dwarf. The latter is preferred as the earliest of all for forced cultivation. Flageolet is unrivalled as a green bean and as a fresh hulling bean. Among the pole beans grown mainly for dry harvesting, the best is the large pole Soissons bean; then, in order of quality, the saber bean, the Swiss bean and its many sub-varieties, the Prague bean, the runner bean and the Lima bean. The last two, more remarkable for the abundance than the delicacy of their products, are especially productive in the Midi; their roots, annual in the Paris climate, are perennial in that of the Mediterranean shores. These turnip-like roots are pulled out at the onset of winter; they are stored in the cellar and replanted in spring, like the dahlias in our gardens. Among snap beans, the best are the pre-domme or prudomme bean, and the princess bean, which is widely grown in Belgium and northern France. Beans of all kinds, harvested dry and intended as seed grains, are kept in their pods and only shelled at sowing time. If you grow beans in one of our southern departments, you'll need to make room in your garden for the runner bean, which is well known throughout the rest of France as an ornamental plant, thanks to its beautiful clusters of scarlet flowers. This variety is not fixed; if you sow runner beans with dark purple grain, marbled with light purple, you'll always harvest a few siliques filled with all-white beans, but of the same volume as the purple ones. In autumn, when the stems die after yielding their harvest, the root, the shape and size of a long turnip, does not die; it is uprooted in November to be stored in the cellar in fresh sand and replanted in March; it grows, flowers and bears fruit in the same way for an indeterminate number of years. As an edible vegetable, the runner bean is not of the highest quality; but in the Paris climate, as in the Midi, it can be grown in large quantities in the kitchen garden, to convert its grain into cooked flour. To do this, the harvested, ripe grain is boiled in water, without salt, skinned, crushed in a marble mortar and ground to a paste. This paste, dried in the open air, is pulverized with a rolling pin; it is preserved in bottles and used to make excellent and economical soups or purées. BEANS. - Fava beans never take up much space in the vegetable garden, and are sown in rows or clumps from February 15th to April 15th. They are happy in just about any type of soil - a slightly strong, fresh, well-smoked soil is best. When the pods in the middle of the stem are well formed, remove the top with its flowers, which should not produce seeds; this removal hastens the formation of beans in the lower pods. When the beans have been harvested at half their normal volume, so that they can be eaten fresh, the stems can be cut off at ground level; if they are not allowed to suffer from drought, they grow back from the stalk and give a second harvest in autumn, but this harvest is not very abundant. In the vegetable garden, we grow the marsh bean, the long-podded Windsor bean and the little julienne bean, a dwarf species of excellent quality. LENTILS. - Lentils are sown in April, in rows spaced 25 centimeters apart, because the plant remains small; they are not very productive, each pod containing only one or two lentils. This vegetable can only be eaten dry; lentils only retain their germinative properties for two years. Two types of lentils are grown: the common lentil and the smaller, reddish-brown queen lentil, both of which are cultivated in the same way and have the same properties. CHAPTER XVI Root vegetables. Carrots, Turnips, Parsnips. Root vegetables. - Carrot. - Origin. - Sowing. - Choice of seed. - Broadcast sowing. - Sowing in rows. - Spacing. - Théridion; spider mite. - Means of protecting young carrots from attack. - Soot. - Corporal tobacco. - Forced cultivation. - Uprooting. - Preservation. - Species and varieties. - Turnip. - Little-used spring seedlings. - Summer sowing. - Time of uprooting. - Grains. - Species and varieties. - Parsnips. - Cultivation. - Common parsnip. - Metz parsnip. Vegetables whose roots are eaten play an important role in the daily diet of all classes of the population. This section includes carrots, turnips, parsnips, radishes, salsify, scorzonera, scolyme and beet. Potatoes and Jerusalem artichokes are also included in this section, although the edible parts of these plants are tubers rather than roots. CARROT. - M. Vilmorin's fine experiments in 1837 leave no doubt as to the origin of the carrot; seedlings of wild carrot, renewed under the same growing conditions as those of other vegetable plants, have given him in three or four generations all the varieties of cultivated carrots, red, white and yellow. These varieties are obviously the result of the art of gardening, which has been able to maintain and improve them. Carrots are propagated by sowing their seeds; to preserve the purity of these varieties, particular care must be taken when harvesting the seeds. The best roots of each species, selected for this purpose in autumn, are set aside in a frost-free gauge and planted the following spring at a distance of one meter in all directions. As the umbels successively ripen their seeds, they are harvested and gathered by the stems into bundles that are hung in a dry place. The seeds remain in this state until they are sown; only then are they peeled, and the seeds at the edges of each umbel are separated out; these are always the largest and best fertilized; the seeds in the center of the umbels are smaller and imperfectly fertilized; when they are used for sowing, some of these seeds do not germinate; the products obtained from those that do germinate are never of the highest quality. Carrot seed retains its germinative properties for at least three years; unless absolutely necessary, carrot seed harvested the previous year should not be sown. Although cultivated carrots are generally biennial, some seedlings behave like annuals and go to seed in their first summer; this is a loss for the gardener; any roots that do go to seed become tough and woody on the inside. If you were to harvest the seed of these prematurely-risen carrots, it would be the surest way of producing completely degenerate produce. Annual carrots, which flower prematurely, are always numerous in seedlings made from one-year-old seed; two- or three-year-old seed should therefore be preferred. Sowing. - Carrot seed is sown in rows or broadcast; for even sowing, it's a good idea to first rub the seed between the hands, handful by handful, with fine, dry sand, so as to wear away the roughness; it is then easier to distribute evenly over the whole surface of the ground to be sown. Broadcast sowing is preferable when carrots are to be eaten before they reach full size, as a spring vegetable, because the plant, if it has not sprouted at equal distances from one another, will nevertheless end up being suitably spaced out by the pulling up of carrots which successively become fit for consumption. Sowing in rows is preferable for species that are allowed to grow to full size, and which are to be harvested in autumn for use as a winter vegetable. The plants of the latter species are thinned out two or three times; the young carrots from these thinnings are used either for cooking or as rabbit food. The rows are spaced 15 to 20 centimetres apart, depending on how big the carrots need to be. Thinning stops when the carrots are about as far apart as the rows are, i.e. when they are 15 to 20 centimetres apart in all directions; this is the distance they need to grow without getting in each other's way. No matter how it is sown, carrot seed should not be buried deeply; simply mix it into the soil with the tines of a rake; then spread a layer of one or two centimetres of dry, pulverized loam over it. When the soil is very light, it is useful to firm it up after sowing carrot seeds, either by tapping the surface of the planks with the back of a spade, or by walking on them with square planks where the foot fits by means of a rope whose end the gardener holds in each of his hands. This way of treading seeded soil, when it needs to be firmed up by compaction, is widely used in Belgium and throughout northern France; it is quick and gives the soil a very even pressure over its entire surface. Theridion. - Newly emerged carrots are attacked by the black spider mite, whose real name is theridion. The smell of carrots attracts them from afar, and as they multiply rapidly, young carrot beds are soon covered with them. This insect, eager for anything sweet, bites and sucks at the plant's collar, causing it to perish. When the soil is fertile and the temperature favorable, carrots grow so fast that they are soon beyond the reach of the theridion, which is unable to damage them once their tissue has reached a certain consistency. On the other hand, if the soil is not very fertile, especially if the temperature is unfavorable, carrots grow slowly and theridia have plenty of time to take advantage of them. In this case, everything is devoured and it becomes necessary to renew the seedlings. Soot and tobacco infusion are used to prevent the proliferation of theridia. Soot, which is readily available in fairly large quantities at low cost, is diluted in water and sprinkled morning and evening on recently emerged carrots infested with theridia. This is just about the only method applicable to larger seedlings. Although soot does not destroy all theridia, it significantly reduces their numbers, which may be enough to save carrot seedlings. Smoking tobacco infusion can only be used on small seedlings, especially on seedlings on beds, when they are invaded by theridia. The best tobacco for this purpose is the strongest, known as "corporal's tobacco". Put about 60 grams into a 12-liter watering can. Boiling water is poured over the tobacco; it is not used until it has completely cooled. Forced cultivation. - Carrots are best grown in a bed or under a frame; the bed should be filled with 20 to 25 centimeters of good potting soil. Sow several times during the winter, to have young carrots ready for consumption in the first days of spring; this is a highly-prized early vegetable. Forced cultivation of carrots on a bed and under a frame is very easy; sow fairly lightly, thin out the plant if it is too tight, give it air whenever the weather permits, and take the usual precautions against the cold, taking care not to over-water. Carrots for winter supply could, in a pinch, be left unharvested; in the Paris climate, they would only freeze in years of exceptionally severe cold. This crop is removed not so much to preserve it from the cold, which it does not fear, as to be able to give the soil where the carrots have vegetated the necessary preparations for other crops. Harvesting is carried out either with a spade or a flat-tined fork; the latter is the best instrument for harvesting very long carrots, which are difficult to avoid damaging when using a spade. Immediately after harvesting, cut off the leaves and collar, and stack the carrots in a healthy cellar, in alternating beds of fresh sand. If, towards the end of winter, the carrots begin to sprout etiolated leaves, as soon as this is noticed, the piles should be dismantled, what remains of the crown cut off, and the carrots placed back in fresh sand. In this way, the carrots are preserved until the new harvest follows on from the previous one. Species and varieties. - Garden-grown carrots are naturally classified into three divisions: red, yellow and white. The most esteemed of the reds are the short red from Holland, the English red from Altringham, the half-long red, or Meaux carrot, and the common long red. The rouge courte de Hollande, of which gardeners around Paris have obtained a very good sub-variety that they grow in preference to any other, is the best of all for forced cultivation on beds and for the first spring sowings in the open air. Altringham red and Meaux red, both semi-long, are prized for their tangy flavor and beautiful color. Since the fresh dried vegetable industry has expanded greatly, especially to supply armies in the field and ships' crews on long voyages, these two varieties of carrot have been grown on a large scale in the marshes around Paris. Of all the carrots, the common red and the pale red of Flanders keep best from one year to the next. Of the yellow varieties, only the short yellow and the long Achicourt are grown in gardens, both of which are mainly found in the vegetable gardens of northern France. In the white series, the best are the blanche commune, the blanche de Breteuil, shaped like a large spinning top, and the blanche transparente, obtained from seed in Mulhouse in 1849, which is excellent but not very widespread in gardens. The other white species, grown mainly as fodder roots for cattle feed, are only allowed in the kitchen garden by way of exception. Apart from these three series of carrots, the almost black purple Spanish carrot, also known as the Indian black carrot, is grown more as a curiosity than for its real value. TURNIP. - The turnip is the most common and least sought-after of the root vegetables, so it never occupies much space in the vegetable garden. If the soil in your garden is stronger than light, it is essential to amend it with a high dose of fine silica sand, if you want to grow good turnips. Sowing and cultivation. - The turnip is generally treated as a biennial plant, even though, left to its own devices and sown in spring, it is an annual, i.e. ready to flower and bear seed in the year it is sown. For this reason, turnip seeds are usually only sown in gardens from June to August. The root, the only edible part of the plant, has time before the first frosts to acquire all the volume specific to each species, and the plant's vegetation is stopped by the cold before the flower stalks form. However, spring sowing can be done in March and April, using two- or three-year-old seed. In cool or well-watered soil, in a climate not prone to extreme heat or prolonged drought in summer, spring sowings can produce quite good turnips in summer. Turnip seedlings are very vulnerable to flea beetles, a small beetle that eats away at the emerging seminal leaves of turnips that have just emerged. The best way to prevent flea beetles is to sow only in soil that has been recently ploughed and fertilized with well-consumed fertilizer; under these conditions, turnips grow so fast that they soon have nothing to fear from flea beetle attacks. Turnips should be harvested before they suffer the first frosts; although frosts cannot destroy them, they do alter their tissues to a greater or lesser extent, giving them an unpleasant taste and indigestible properties. Turnips should be stored in a healthy cellar or storeroom, in fresh sand, with the same care as for carrots. Turnips that are to be planted in the spring as seedbeds should be kept in good condition over winter. Turnip seeds, which ripen early in summer, are often eaten by eager sparrows, despite the use of scarecrows to frighten the birds away. The seed retains its germinative properties for three or four years. Species and varieties. - For a long time, the turnip was, along with cabbage, the most widely grown vegetable in kitchen gardens. Because of its low price, it was regarded as the food of the poorer classes and the symbol of frugality. Its cultivation in various climates has given rise to a large number of varieties, some flattened and onion-shaped, also known as turneps, others round or more or less elongated. The most sought-after are the yellowish-fleshed Freneuse turnip, oblong in shape and very tasty; the very voluminous Scottish yellow and the much smaller Finnish yellow, both very good for cooking; the Meaux turnip, the long Alsatian turnip and the Claire-Fontaine turnip, the best of the long white-fleshed ones; and the common round turnip, with a pink collar, used above all as an accompaniment to pot-au-feu. PANAIS. - Parsnips are grown in the same way as carrots; the seed is sown in the open air at the same time as carrot seed, but much lighter, as the plant needs more space to develop. In Belgium and on our northern border, parsnip seed is broadcast in March and April, about as tightly as carrot seed. The seedling is thinned out when the young parsnips are the size of a little finger: in this state, it is a very good spring vegetable, which can be eaten seasoned like new carrots harvested at the same stage of development. The parsnip's value is too low and its uses too limited for it to be subjected to forced cultivation. Seed carriers are protected from frost in winter and planted in spring; after a year, the seed loses its germinative properties. In cultivation, parsnips have produced only two varieties, differing only in root volume. The common parsnip is the most deeply rooted of all root vegetables, and can only be grown in very deep soil; the Metz parsnip, short and stubby like the short red Dutch carrot, has all the properties of the common parsnip, and can be grown in gardens where the soil is shallow, and where the common species would not succeed. CHAPTER XVII Root vegetables. - Radish, salsify, scorzonera, beet, potatoes, Jerusalem artichokes. Root vegetables. - Radish. - Spring, summer and winter cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Small radishes. - Black radish. - White and pink Chinese radishes. - Scorsonera. - Cultivation. - Salsify. - Scolyma. - Beet. - Cultivation in the vegetable garden. - Uses. - Garden species. - Cultivation of seed carriers. - Potatoes. - Autumn planting. - Forced cultivation on beds in winter. - Harvesting produce. - Potato seed sowing. - Jerusalem artichoke. - Its place in the vegetable garden. - Its usefulness in forming good shelters. RADISH. - The radish, whose slightly pungent root is eaten raw, is the most common hors d'oeuvre on well-served tables; it is also, because of its low price, much sought-after by workers in big cities; for several months of the year, it forms the usual staple of their morning meal. As a result, year-round cultivation of radishes is equally indispensable in the kitchen garden of a country home, and in the garden whose produce is destined for the market. Radishes are very easy to grow. Radish seed is sown in spring, either alone or mixed with lettuce and onion seed for transplanting. In order to grow radishes early in the open air, these seedlings should be sown on a hillside, with a southern exposure, in soil that has been thoroughly loaded with good loam, and well trodden after sowing, otherwise the radishes would not take on the normal shape of their species. Thin out the plants by harvesting the most advanced in succession to make way for the others. During the summer, radishes should only be sown in a shady position; they should be watered often and generously. Despite this care, most radishes grown during the hot season are hard, stringy and hollow inside. With the exception of those whose customers want radishes in summer and pay them accordingly, commercial gardeners can stop sowing radish seed, at least during July and August. In winter, radish seed is sown on a warm bed, filled with firmly packed loam. These sowings can be repeated every two weeks, until the first radishes grown in the open air in spring are harvested; the speed of radish growth makes forced cultivation advantageous in winter, although this product never sells at a very high price. Species and varieties. - The same method is used to grow the common pink radish, the early pink and white radish, the yellow radish and the half-long radish, a variety that is currently more popular than all the others. The same process is also used to obtain the small white, pink and violet rabe varieties, almost abandoned today due to a pure whim of fashion that is making its influence felt even in the kitchen garden; small rabe varieties are as good as the best radish species in every respect. The black radish, more like a turnip than a true radish, is sown in spring and only ready for harvesting in autumn, to be eaten successively throughout the winter; it needs a lot of water throughout the summer; well watered, grown in light, cool soil, it becomes very voluminous; but it always remains hard: it is a food suitable only for the strongest stomachs. The European black radish is rightly preferred to two excellent species, one pink, the other white, now introduced from China and less widely grown than they deserve to be. Their flesh, firm without being hard, is very tasty and easier to digest than that of the black radish. SCORSONERA-SALSIFY-SCOLYMA. - These three roots have the same uses and are obtained by the same method of cultivation; scorsonera is the most widely cultivated of the three. The seeds of this plant are sown either in spring, in February and March, or in summer, in July and August. Spring sowings produce roots that can be harvested in late autumn and throughout the winter. This root doesn't freeze, so it can be left in place and pulled out only as needed. Summer sowings produce roots that are good for harvesting only the following year, before the plant begins to flower and bear seed. Before sowing scoronera seed, it's a good idea to try it out on a cork float, in order to use a greater or lesser quantity of seed, according to the observed proportion of those that don't germinate; because scoronera seed, even when harvested in the best conditions, never lifts in its entirety; it doesn't retain its germinative properties beyond two years. Water until the plant has fully emerged; thin out, if necessary, after fifteen to twenty days, after which it is no longer necessary to care for it. Salsify scolyma. - Salsify, which differs from scorsonera only in its pale yellow outer bark, is treated in exactly the same way as scorsonera. Both roots are equally insensitive to cold and can, in the Paris climate, overwinter in the open air without any protection. The Spanish bark beetle, very common in the wild in our southern departments, can be grown like scorsonera and salsify; it is very prone to climbing, which makes its root tough and of little value; moreover, this root is as good and more vorumine than salsify. It fears the cold and should be placed in gauges with a good cover of dry litter, before heavy frosts. BETTERAVE. - Beet belongs more to field cultivation than to gardening; it is nevertheless a vegetable garden plant, albeit always in small numbers, because the custom of adding slices of baked beet to salad, and eating it fricasseed in a pan with onion, has not been entirely abandoned. Garden beet can only be considered to be the smaller species, of various shades of pink or red; the small, very sweet, very dark red Castelnau dary beet is the most widely grown in gardens. The seed is sown in spring, better in a nursery than in the field; the plant must be transplanted young and watered until it is well established; beets are pulled out around Saint Martin's Day (November 11), to be stored in the cellar like carrots; those to be used as seedbeds are placed in gauges and covered with litter over winter. In countries where sugar beet is widely cultivated, it is usually the gardeners who carefully cultivate the seedbeds of the best beet species, in order to sell the seed to farmers. This seed retains its germinative properties for four or five years. POTATO. - Of the innumerable species and varieties of potato grown in Europe in large quantities under the most varied conditions of soil and climate, only the earliest varieties are suitable for gardening; the later species would take up too much land that could always be put to better use. Tubers for planting. - Tubers are planted either whole, or cut into pieces, each of which should have one or two good wants. Nothing could be less rational than the practice still followed by many gardeners of planting only small tubers which they have not been able to dispose of. Potatoes that are too small have remained small only because they were formed too late in the season, and have not had time to take on their normal volume; their eyes are badly shaped and they cannot give rise to vigorous plants. What's more, the small quantity of early potatoes that can be grown in a garden does not require the use of a large number of tubers for planting; it would be a very ill-judged economy not to use the best preserved potatoes from the previous harvest for planting. When potatoes are too large to be planted whole, they should be cut into pieces and left to dry out in the open air for a few hours, otherwise some of the pieces will rot in the soil and fail to sprout. e. Planting. - Planting should be done either very early in the spring, or at the onset of winter: the latter is the most favorable time. Care should be taken to bury potatoes that are to spend the winter in the ground a little deeper than those planted in February and March, after the severe cold has passed. Autumn planting does not increase the earliness of potatoes; it does not appreciably advance the time when their first products can be harvested; but tubers intended for planting, if they are put in the ground before winter, keep much better there than in a cellar where they have to stay when they are only planted in spring. Vegetation is more vigorous, because the tubers have not exhausted themselves by prematurely emitting etiolated shoots, and the end result is a better harvest at equal cost. The best species for garden cultivation are: marjolin from France, kidney from England and the two Belgian varieties known as nine-week and seven-week; the latter is the earliest of all. Forced calture. - In the vicinity of Paris and other large cities, it can be advantageous to subject potatoes to forced cultivation in winter, on a warm bed under a frame; the tubers obtained are not nearly as good as the well-preserved potatoes from the previous harvest, but they are easily sold at high prices. To force the potato, we start, at the end of November, by putting the tubers we intend to force into the sprouter. The germinator is simply a glazed frame with a box, placed on a flowerbed at the foot of a south-facing wall, and under the shelter of which the potatoes are placed close together; they soon produce young shoots and roots. To prevent this vegetation from withering, the germinator should only be covered with bedding or straw mats during the night; light must be able to penetrate freely, at least during the coldest hours of the day. On the other hand, a warm layer is prepared with a 25-30 cm thick bed of good soil mixed with compost. When the potatoes are well advanced in the germinator, they are planted in rows in the soil of the warm layer, with a very shallow tread. Their underground stems quickly take over all the soil, forming small tubers which are removed several times by carefully removing the clumps, so that they can continue to vegetate and produce new tubers, until the heat of the bed is exhausted. The space left free on the surface of the bed between the rows of forced potatoes can be used to sow radish, lettuce and tomato seed, which produces very early seedlings that can be transplanted once on a warm bed and again in the open air at the end of April. Combined in this way, forced potato cultivation can be very profitable, provided you are sure in advance of the placement of products which, if they are not sought-after and in demand, are of very mediocre value in themselves. Sowing potato seeds - It is always advantageous for the gardener who cultivates a sufficiently extensive vegetable garden to sow a certain quantity of potato seeds every year in spring. These seedlings never produce more than very small tubers in the first year, but these tubers, used for planting the following year, always produce extraordinarily fertile plants. However, experience shows that seed potatoes remain vigorous and productive for several generations, and are much less prone to disease than other varieties. By sowing a little every year, the gardener ensures that his own crops will have a supply of tubers at their most fertile; if he has more than he can use, he will easily be able to dispose of the surplus at planting time. TOPINAMBOUR. - If there's an area in the kitchen garden that's less fertile and less well situated than the rest of the plot, that's the place to grow Jerusalem artichokes, with or even without manure; it's a plant that grows everywhere; it's the providence of the poorest soils. Medium-sized whole tubers are planted early in the spring, and harvested in autumn. Once established, the Jerusalem artichoke plantation supports itself for an unlimited period of time; the smallest fragment of tuber left in the ground at harvest time grows back with astonishing vigor; every year, as many Jerusalem artichokes are found in the same plot as were harvested the previous year. When growing ornamental plants in cold or temperate greenhouses, which must spend the summer in the open air, as these more or less delicate plants dread the violent gales that accompany thunderstorms, we protect them by planting Jerusalem artichokes in rows, tightly packed together, around the space intended for them. The Jerusalem artichoke's ample foliage and sturdy stems provide excellent shelter for greenhouse plants, while allowing the constantly renewed air they need to reach them. Two varieties of Jerusalem artichoke are grown, one white or yellowish, the other purplish-red. Both can be grown in the same way and are equally hardy; they do not need to be uprooted in autumn; the cold of the harshest winters in Paris and even northern France does not damage them in any way; they are only uprooted as and when required for consumption. CHAPTER XVIII Edible bulb vegetables. Edible bulb vegetables. - Onions - Cultivation by sowing in the field. - Quantity of seed for a given area. - Seed testing. - Soil compaction. - Time of sowing. - Twisting of leaf. - Time of uprooting. - Cultivation by transplanting. - Spacing - Nouvellon's method. - Onion species and varieties. - Leeks. - Transplanting. - Cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Garlic. - Chives. - Shallot. - Civet. The series of vegetables whose bulbs are used includes onions, leeks, garlic, chives, shallots and civets. Three of these vegetables, onion, leek and garlic, are of great economic importance in France, because of their many uses in French cuisine; the French climate is particularly suited to them. ONION. - Onions can be grown by sowing or transplanting; the former is the more common method. With the exception of two or three species, some of which produce bulblets and others cloves or small onions for propagation, the onion varieties most widely grown in gardens can only be propagated by sowing their seeds, either in situ or in a nursery. To sow onions in situ, choose soil that is perfectly healthy, soft, light, free of stones and pebbles, and has been smoked for at least a year. No bulbous vegetable plant tolerates contact with fresh manure. If you don't have enough fertilized soil for onion cultivation, you should mix in a high dose of potting soil from broken layers. Manure, even in large doses, can only be useful for growing bulbous plants when it has completely turned into potting soil, because then it no longer ferments and cannot release any principle capable of causing the bulbs to rot. Seed selection and testing. - The average quantity of seed to be used for sowing is one gram per square meter. But as onion seed, even when harvested in the best conditions, is never good in its entirety, and a more or less considerable portion does not raise, the dose for sowing is increased or decreased according to the quality of the seed tested with a float. The

proportion of one gram per meter is only sufficient when the gardener has harvested the seed he sows himself. In the seed he buys, there is almost always a little of the old mixed with the new; two-year-old seed lifts very well; three-year-old seed hardly lifts at all. Once the quality of the seed has been checked on the float, it is most often found that it should be sown at a rate of one and a half grams per square metre. If the seedling rises a little too tightly, once it has taken on the diameter of a feather pipe, it is thinned out, and the one pulled out is transplanted in rows to complete its growth. When circumstances do not allow us to take advantage of the plant pulled out for thinning, we take care to sow a little lighter; then we only start thinning when the plant is strong enough to be delivered for consumption as a spring onion. Around Paris, two-thirds of onion seed and one-third of leek seed are broadcast, mixed together. When the leek, easy to distinguish by the particular shape of its leaves, is strong enough to be uprooted and transplanted, the onion is suitably spaced and does not need to be thinned out. Sowing. - A very important point to remember when sowing onion seed, either alone or in combination with leek seed, is to pack the soil firmly before and after sowing, and never to sow on too recent a ploughing. The ground on which you intend to sow onion seed in spring is ploughed at the start of winter, unless it has already borne a crop of potatoes or scorzonera, in which case it is sufficiently loosened by the removal of these roots, and needs only a superficial tilling either with a hoe or an iron-tined fork. As soon as the first fine days of February arrive, the soil is carefully ploughed, then left to firm up for at least three weeks. When it's time to sow, the surface of the beds is levelled with a rake, then trampled down hard and sown. Immediately afterwards, the surface is raked again, and trampled down a second time. The seed is then in the best possible conditions to germinate properly. The best time to sow onion seed is from around February 20 to March 15, but these dates should not be strictly adhered to, even though they generally represent the most favorable time; it often happens in the Paris climate that prolonged bad weather makes it impossible to plow the vegetable garden beds early; in this case, sowing must be delayed. Cultivation care. - During the first period of growth, onions are very sensitive to drought and weeds. Newly emerged onion beds should be watered as often as the soil appears dry, otherwise young onions will partly perish from the spring droughts known to gardeners as the March sunburn. Weeding must be carried out by hand, without the aid of any instrument, and with great care, so as not to tear off part of the onion plant at the same time as the weed. As they approach maturity, onions whose leaves are still green need a final cultivation treatment to help the bulbs swell. The gardener rakes through the onion beds, pressing the underside of the rake down on the leaf-beds, so that they lie on the ground, where they soon turn yellow. If you've only sown a small quantity, you can hand-twist the onion leaves or tops at their base, to produce more beautiful onions. When the bulbs are fully grown, they can be pulled out in dry weather. After two or three days on the ground, the onions lose some of their water, making them easier to preserve. Transplanting is done either with seedlings obtained from nursery sowing, or with seedlings thinned from broadcast sowing. The seedling can be transplanted at a very young age, 10 cm apart in all directions; the rest of the cultivation is the same as for broadcast sowing. Only one species, the early white onion, is sown in midsummer, in July and August, to be transplanted in autumn; it is covered with litter during severe cold, which, despite this precaution, always destroys part of the plant; it begins to vegetate again in spring of the following year and is harvested half-formed in May and June. In our southern departments, where winter is almost non-existent, this cultivation method can be applied to all varieties of onion, without causing any loss to gardeners; in the Paris climate, it is applied only to early white onions, because onions are the usual seasoning for peas. However, by the time the pea season comes around, supplies of storage onions are exhausted, and onions from spring seedlings are still too small to be used. Finally, a particular method known as the Nouvellon method, named after one of the most successful horticulturists, is widely used, especially in Orléans and in the Varennes or market gardens of the towns on the banks of the Loire. The onion seed is sown in a nursery in August, much thicker than when the plant is to be transplanted; it is watered just as much as is necessary to make the seed stand up, then the plant is left to wither and dry on the ground. In this way, each seed produces a very well-formed onion; the largest are the size of a hazelnut, the smallest the size of a pea. They are removed and stored in a dry place, to be transplanted in rows in spring, at distances proportionate to the presumed volume of the bulbs of each species. The main advantage of Nouvellon's method for growing onions is that it saves on seed, which is often scarce and expensive. Onions to be grown as seedlings should be kept away from humidity, in a cold rather than warm place, where only heavy frosts can reach them. If kept in winter under the influence of too mild a temperature, it would exhaust itself, producing etiolated shoots prematurely; placed in the ground in this condition, it would flower poorly and bear no seed. This natural tendency of onions to overwinter can only be countered by cold; it alone makes it difficult to keep onions of most species from one year to the next. Seed-bearing onions, as their flower stalks lengthen, need to be supported by sturdy stakes, otherwise a strong gust of wind will blow them over, and all will be lost. The ripe seed keeps well in its head-shaped capsules, which are gathered in bunches and hung in a dry place; it is only peeled when you want to sow it. Species and varieties. - The main varieties of onion grown in gardens are dark red, Niort pale red, Vertus yellow, Cambrai yellow, double-stemmed, late white and Spanish yellow. All these onions are good for storing; the last two are better suited to the vegetable gardens of southern France than to those of central and northern France. White onions are grown for summer consumption, and a large proportion of them are used when the bulbs are half their size. The above-mentioned onions are by far the most widespread and the best overall. The following onions are grown only in exceptional circumstances, or for a variety of special purposes. The small, round white onion from Nocera or Florence is grown for pickling in vinegar and eating as an hors-d'oeuvre with gherkins. It is very tasty, but in the Paris climate, it tends to swell and is difficult to keep clean; in the Midi, the pyriform, furiform or ox-horn, Madeira, potato and Egyptian or bulb onions are grown mainly. The stem of the latter provides an ample supply of bulblets that are planted like the small onions obtained by Nouvellon's method; this onion does not multiply by sowing its seeds; the bulblets take their place. It is these bulblets, known as "rocambole", that often give the name to the Egyptian onion. The potato onion can only be multiplied by separating the bulblets it produces in abundance, when it is carefully butterred several times during the summer. LEEK. - Leeks fear fresh manure, especially cattle manure, even more than onions. It never grows well from seed, and must always be transplanted. Leek seed is sown in March and April, either alone or in combination with onion seed; the plant should be pulled up when it is the size of a feather pipe. Before planting, shorten the tops of the leaves and the tips of the roots. Leeks should be transplanted immediately after uprooting; the less time they spend out of the ground, the better they will vegetate. A plant that has been uprooted too long in advance, and has withered before being transplanted, will never produce anything but mediocre results. Plants are planted in rows spaced 15 centimetres apart, with a decimetre between rows. The tray from which the roots grow should be sunk into the ground to a depth of s or 10 centimetres. Fully-formed leeks have little fear of the cold, and can be left in the open air all winter without any problems in the Paris climate. Leeks, an indispensable seasoning for stews, would be unavailable on the market for part of the year if we didn't employ easy-to-use methods to obtain them in all seasons. In spring, when leeks are ready to bolt, we pull them up and put them in the shade in a northern exposure; in this way, they remain in good condition for a month longer than if they had not been pulled up. In November and December, leek seed is sown in a frame on a bed, giving a plant that can be transplanted early in the spring; this plant needs to be carefully protected from the cold, because if the fully formed leek doesn't freeze, the leek plant freezes, even when it's not very cold. This plant, planted in March and April, produces leeks suitable for harvesting when those from the previous harvest begin to run out. Leek seed can also be sown late and very lightly in September, in a sheltered location. These seedlings don't freeze, and are strong enough to withstand the winter before the cold sets in. In the spring of the following year, it comes up much later than leeks grown in the traditional way, when there are no others; it is never very good, but it sells at a good price in the season when this necessary vegetable is scarce on the markets. Three varieties of leek are grown by the same methods: the long or common leek, the gros court du Midi, and the gros court de Rouen, the largest of the three. GARLIC. - The cultivation of garlic is important only in the Midi: southern cuisine accepts garlic in all dishes. In spring, garlic is planted in rows, one decimeter apart in all directions, in healthy soil that has only been smoked for a year or two. In Paris, where garlic consumption is much lower, it can be planted in borders around some of the squares in the vegetable garden, preferably in a south-facing position, in soil that is dry rather than too moist. Garlic should not be planted as a border around beds where Ton grows plants that need frequent and ample watering; it would rot there from excess moisture. In the first week of June, the leaf and flowering stem of garlic are twisted and tied together; this prevents the plant from flowering, and encourages the enlargement of the cal̈eux called garlic cloves, enclosed in a tunic or common envelope. Garlic should only be harvested when the leaves have completely dried out. Garlic can be propagated by sowing its seeds, which can be obtained by letting a few plants rise. But the seedlings produced by sowing these seeds would only be used for the following year's planting, and would be wasting a year without any benefit in return. That's why we're content to multiply garlic by separating the cloves, which are the only ones used for planting. In the Paris climate, only two types of garlic are grown: common garlic and early or "Vertus" garlic. In the south of France, in addition to the common species, which is the most widely cultivated, vegetable gardens grow rocambole garlic, whose stem produces bulblets like those of the Egyptian onion, and ait d'Espagne or red garlic, both of which are suited to the southern climate. CIBOULE - Ciboules can be grown in two ways: as a biennial plant or as a perennial. The usual method is to sow the chive seed in the spring, like leek seed; the plant is transplanted at a very young age and produces chives that are good to pick all summer long. Sow a second time in July to harvest in autumn. Chives, which are never used in very large quantities, can also be planted in borders, like garlic, where they form large clumps that can be doubled twice a year. Three varieties of spring onion are grown: the common spring onion, the early white spring onion, and the perennial spring onion, the most commonly used for border planting. This last species is aptly named, as it is no more perennial than the others, which are all perennial to the same degree. SHALLOT. - Shallots are grown in the same way as garlic; they are planted at the same time in the same soil and require the same care. In addition to the common species, the most widely grown in the kitchen garden, two other varieties are known: the Jersey shallot and the German shallot, both larger than the common species, but with a more delicate flavor and more difficult to preserve. CIVET. - This plant, also known as chives and appéut, is grown like garlic and shallots, in the border. The slender, tapering, green leaves are the only edible part of the plant; clumps should only be removed every three years; it thrives only in slightly dry soils. CHAPTER XIX Edible leaf vegetables. - Cabbage, Kohlrabi. Vegetables whose leaves are eaten. - Cabbage. - Its health-giving properties. - Transplanting. - Winter preservation. - Replanting. - Species and varieties. - Head cabbage. - Round-headed. - White cabbage. - Red cabbage. - With smooth leaves. - Blistered leaves. - Brussels sprouts. - Conical cabbage, - Green cabbage. - Kohlrabi. - Turnip cabbage. - Cultivation. - Preservation. - Species and varieties. - Growing seed cabbage. The vegetables whose leaves are eaten are not all of equal importance; some are simple salad supplies and are therefore used in very-small quantities, although their presence in the vegetable garden is essential. This series of vegetables includes cabbage, sorrel, spinach, celery, cardoon, purslane, parsley, chervil, tarragon, watercress, rhubarb and fennel. CABBAGE. - Cabbage is the most important of all edible leafy vegetables. It has been cultivated since ancient times in France and Italy, and has produced a multitude of sub-varieties, all recommendable in different ways. As a food, cabbage is healthy and easy to digest when properly seasoned. In Rome, for several centuries, cabbage tea was the only medicine used to treat all kinds of illnesses. At least, this system of medication had the rare advantage of doing no harm when it didn't cure. Cabbage cultivation is extremely simple, based on general principles that apply to all species, even though there are many of them and they differ from one another in very pronounced ways. Above all, cabbage requires fresh, substantial soil, rather strong than too light; nevertheless, in light soil, very good cabbages can be obtained, provided they lack neither water nor manure. Sheep manure is the most suitable for growing cabbage. Growing the plant. - Manure should be lavished on the land where the cabbage seed is sown. The seedling is carefully cultivated, weeded and thinned out if necessary, until it is strong enough to be transplanted. Transplant permanently, in staggered rows, at distances ranging from 50 centimetres for the smallest species, to 80 centimetres for the largest. When transplanted in dry weather, a few waterings ensure the plant's recovery. Head cabbages, the only varieties that can be kept from one year to the next, have little fear of the cold. When you don't need to dispose of the land where they've been growing, you can simply uproot the cabbages when they're fully formed, and leave them on the spot, head down, root up; they keep just as well and better than anywhere else. Head cabbages only freeze during the coldest weather, and rot when the thaw comes, if you don't pull them out, because the water from cold rain and melted snow has penetrated the gaps in their outer leaves and become icicles: this is how they perish in winter. As they are uprooted, they have nothing to fear from the cold. However, since most of the time, a plot where cabbages have grown to their full potential needs to be ploughed and smoked in order to receive other crops, the cabbages are pulled up, stripped of their largest outer leaves, and stored in a cellar or a healthy cellar, to be delivered successively for consumption. They can also be placed close together at the foot of a wall with good exposure, and covered with branches over which old mats or long litter are spread. This protects them from contact with snow and cold humidity, which they fear far more than the most intense cold. Counterplanting. - Several species of cabbage can be advantageously grown at the same time as other plants they replace, once the latter have brought their produce to maturity. For example, cabbage plants are transplanted between rows of very-early potatoes. When the potato crop is removed, the gardener only has to give the soil a light tilling to even out the surface; the potato patch becomes a cabbage patch, which soon covers the whole plot. This saves precious time, and is what Parisian market gardeners call "contreplanter". The counter-planting method can be applied with the same advantage to lettuces and various other products. Species and varieties. - Cabbages are divided into two series, one comprising headed cabbages and the other green cabbages, which are not all green, but which do not form apples. Head cabbage-This series, the larger of the two, is divided into two sections: the first comprises round-headed cabbages, and the second, conical-headed cabbages. Round-headed cabbages are divided into two very distinct subdivisions: those with smooth leaves and those with blistered leaves, or curly cabbages. The best smooth-leaf cabbages are the Alsatian white cabbage, also known as quintal cabbage and sauerkraut cabbage; there are many good varieties, the most recommendable of which, grown especially in the western departments, is known there as Nantais cabbage. It is with these cabbages, in preference to all other species, that sauerkraut, so sought-after by the German population, is prepared. Red cabbage, with its particularly mild flavor, belongs to the same series; it is grown only in the gardens of northern France. It is eaten either cooked with apples and sausages, or raw, cut very thinly and dressed as a salad with melted butter and vinegar. This type of salad can only be digested by the strong stomachs of the Flemish people of France and Belgium. Blister-leaved cabbages or kale are no less rich in sub-varieties than smooth-leaved cabbages; they are native to Lombardy and Savoy; in France, they are generally called Milan cabbages; the most esteemed variety is the milan des vertus, very much cultivated around Paris. Spruyt or Brussels sprouts belong to this subdivision. It is grown like all other cabbages, but instead of peeling, it produces a strong, tall stalk, covered with leaves along its entire length: from the axils of these leaves sprout small, tightly packed cabbages, which are the edible part of the plant; they are harvested successively from September onwards; moderate cold does not interrupt their vegetation; it is one of the most delicate fresh vegetables that the kitchen garden can provide in winter. If you want to keep it perfectly true to its species, you need to send the seed from its native land. The most discerning connoisseurs bring in seedlings ready for planting from the Brussels area. Among conical-headed cabbages, the superiority of the English York cabbage cannot be disputed. This cabbage is not widely grown by professional market gardeners, because its heads have little volume, which makes it unattractive for sale, but as for taste, there is none better. The conical Pomeranian cabbage, which is larger and more elongated than the York cabbage, but very prone to degeneration, is more or less on the same level. The most cultivated of the conical cabbages, although not the best, are the pine and oxheart cabbages, with their slightly tightly packed heads and not very delicate flavour, but very early; they arrive on the markets precisely when the previous year's supply of other preserved cabbages is exhausted; the preference given to them has no other cause. Green cabbages, which do not pomace, are generally more suited to field cultivation than to gardening, and are in fact forage plants rather than vegetables. A few species, however, can be found in the kitchen garden, and are eaten chopped and prepared like sorrel and spinach. It's more of a purgative than a food, and should only be used in moderation. The most highly esteemed green cabbages are the dwarf kale, of which there are two sub-varieties, one green, the other red; the variegated kale, and the proliferous kale, both remarkable for the quirkiness of their foliage, and for this reason accepted in the parterre as ornamental plants, as well as in the kitchen garden as vegetables. Another series of cabbages, much less cultivated in France than it deserves to be, but highly esteemed in Germany and England, is known as kohlrabi. Although the leaves are not the edible part, we mention them here, because kohlrabi is a true cabbage, and an excellent vegetable, very easy to grow and very productive. The kohlrabi series comprises two well-characterized divisions: that of kohlrabi proper, whose edible part is not a root, but a bulge at the bottom of the stem, and that of turnips, which form a true root in the ground, similar to that of turnips. All these cabbages are grown in the same way; they are sown in nurseries early in the spring, and may be continued until the end of May, so that the produce does not all arrive at the same time. When the seedling is strong enough to be transplanted, it is planted in fresh, well-smoked soil. The cultivation of kohlrabi differs from that of other cabbages in that good yields can only be expected from it with water; it must be watered continuously and abundantly, otherwise the ball or swelling at the bottom of the stalk does not develop and remains stringy and tasteless. Kohlrabi, like turnip cabbage, doesn't fear the cold; if you don't need to dispose of the land it occupies, you can leave it there; it doesn't freeze in the open air in the Paris climate; kohlrabi are usually pulled up, and after removing the leaves, they are stored in a gauge or in the cellar, like turnips. Kohlrabi, which are more hardy than kohlrabi, are grown like cabbages; in the event of drought, they are watered only when planted, to ensure that the seedlings recover; they are harvested and stored in the same way. Among kohlrabi, white, red and dwarf kohlrabi from Vienna, Austria, and among turnips, yellow-fleshed rutabaga, improperly called Swedish yellow turnip. Some gardeners still follow the old method used in the past to obtain cabbage seed, which consists in keeping the best apples of each species as seed carriers over winter. This method is reprehensible from every point of view: on the one hand, the apples are often spoiled inside, and on the other, even if they are healthy, the shrivelling that gives them their merit as food is detrimental to the vegetation of the flower stalks. It's much simpler to cut off the heads of cabbage for consumption in autumn, keep the cores, transplanted in a sheltered position, and wait for them to emit flowering shoots in spring, whose natural vigour has not been altered by shrivelling. To keep varieties straight, after splitting the horizontally sliced core slightly in four, only one shoot is left at each quarter, and the top is removed when it starts to flower. If the flowering stem produces too many side shoots, cut off some of them. Seed-bearing cabbages treated in this way produce a moderate quantity of very good seed on the middle part of their stems, capable of preserving or even improving the qualities specific to each species. As cabbages are very prone to accidental cross-breeding, seed-stocks of different species should not be planted close together. This method can be applied with equal success to all series of cabbages; in general, the plant only degenerates when each stalk, born from an etiolated apple instead of from a vigorous stalk, is loaded with too many seeds, some of which are imperfectly fertilized and can only produce a weak, degenerating plant. CHAPTER XX Edible leaf vegetables (continued). Edible leafy vegetables other than cabbage. - Spinach. - Procedure for restoring frozen ones. - Species and varieties. - Sorrel. - Winter cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Celery. - Cultivation. - Threshing. - Species and varieties. - Celery root cultivation. - Cardoons. - Cultivation. - Winter storage. - Watercress. - Establishment of a watercress farm. - Cresson alénois or passerage. - Rhubarb. - Cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Parsley. - Its value in winter. - Chervil. - Its uses. - Resemblance to hemlock. - Tarragon. - Purslane. - Fennel. Vegetables whose leaves are eaten, with the exception of cabbages, are of secondary importance; their common characteristic is that they provide very little nourishment; for this reason, they are never given much space. SPINACH. - Spinach has little intrinsic value; its nutritive power is practically nil, so that anyone eating nothing else would soon starve to death. Nonetheless, it is a popular dish with city dwellers, and has its place in the vegetable garden. Spinach seed is sown in spring and autumn. Sowing could be continued throughout the summer, but on the one hand there would be almost no leaves to harvest, the only edible part of the plant; on the other, the vegetable garden provides a profusion of other vegetables in summer, which are preferred to spinach. For the professional gardener, growing spinach is especially advantageous in autumn; the plant's rapid growth makes it eminently suitable for garnishing squares that have been harvested too late in the season to be suitable for further cultivation. Spinach seed, sown very lightly and broadcast, sprouts in 10. just a few days and quickly produces harvestable leaves. If, during winter, spinach leaves appear to be frozen because they have turned a dark green, semi-transparent color due to the action of a bit of bitter cold, you should hurry to pick them and plunge them into a tub of water as cold as possible. Immediately remove them to dry on the floor of a very clean room. As soon as the water adhering to the leaves has evaporated, the spinach has regained its good appearance and is as good as if it had not been frozen; it is mainly in winter that it is best sold. Species and varieties. - Several varieties of spinach are grown in the same way, some with smooth seeds, others with spiky seeds from which their name derives. The most esteemed spinach varieties are common and English spinach, and spinach from Holland, Flanders and Esquermes. In terms of flavor and green hue, qualities sought after in this vegetable, there is no spinach preferable to the common, pungent-seeded species; for this reason, it is the most widely cultivated. Spinach seed is harvested by sowing a bed late in autumn, with the plant flowering the following spring. As soon as the male plants have flowered, they are pulled out to give the female plants more space. The seed, threshed as soon as it is ripe, can be kept for several years. The two-year-old seed is the best for both spring and autumn sowing. OSEIL. - The nourishing properties of sorrel are not far superior to those of spinach; but its habitual use, mainly in soup form, is very beneficial to the health of city dwellers engaged in sedentary occupations; this makes its consumption very widespread, and its cultivation as advantageous as that of any other vegetable, in the vicinity of large cities. Everywhere else, and when the products of the vegetable garden are not to be returned, it is always necessary to have sorrel in every season. Sorrel is propagated by sowing its seeds in rows, in spring or autumn; it succeeds in all soils and at all exposures. To counteract the tendency of most species to bolt in summer, which makes leaf production almost nil, sow a little in a shady spot with a northerly exposure; the formation of flower stems is thus delayed as much as possible. Calture in winter. - Sorrel is not valuable enough to benefit from forced winter cultivation. However, to ensure that the cold does not completely interrupt the vegetation of sorrel, whose young leaves fetch a good price in winter, during the hardest frosts, straw or dry litter can be spread over the sorrel beds and moved around when the weather permits. Sorrel can also be multiplied by dividing clumps in spring or autumn; but to ensure that each species retains all its properties and does not degenerate, it should always be sown from time to time, preferably in autumn. Species and varieties. - In the vegetable garden, we grow common sorrel, the best variety of which is known as Belleville sorrel, obtained from seedlings around Paris; blister-leaved sorrel and virgin sorrel. The latter species is dioecious, meaning it bears male and female flowers on separate plants. By cultivating only male specimens, which can be multiplied by dividing clumps, we avoid the inconvenience of other varieties which spread everywhere and invade more land than the gardener wants to allow them, through the natural sowing of their seeds. CELERY. - Celery grows wild in the meadows of our southern départements, where it is known as "bonne herbe" (a good herb); it deserves this nickname for its stomachic and fortifying properties. Celery can only be grown successfully in naturally cool soil, and requires abundant, continuous watering. Celery is very sensitive to cold; GARDENERS can only start sowing outdoors in April, after the last late frosts, and seedlings only thrive in a southern exposure. Sowing should be very light, so that the seedling can gain considerable strength before being planted. Cultivation. - Ridging. - Celery's aromatic flavor is only really pleasant when softened by blanching; it is only suitable for cooking when it has been blanched. It is in anticipation of the need to butter it to blanch it that the plant must be transplanted in rows separated by sufficient intervals so that the soil required for the buttages can be taken from them, which are given three or four times in succession as the plants lengthen. In the North, we follow the method of Belgian gardeners who, to butter celery more easily, only transplant it to the bottom of a ditch, between two embankments whose soil is later used for ridging. When you want to harvest celery very early, sow the seed on a bed under a frame, starting in January, so as to have good seedlings to transplant at the time when the first sowings are possible in the open air. If you start sowing celery seed in the first days of January, you can supply it for consumption all year round, without interruption. For winter storage, we keep a portion of celeriac in the cellar, protected from the cold that this vegetable fears more than any other. An extra supply is kept in reserve, in a well-sheltered spot, and care is taken not to butter it. As the first part of the supply diminishes, the celery stalks kept green are tied up with one or two straw ties, then partly buried in sand in the cellar, where they soon turn white. This is the best way to avoid running out in winter. Plants used as seedbeds should be transplanted to a southern exposure, where they can easily overwinter with a bedding cover that is moved when the weather permits. In the climate of northern France, the gardener who wants to harvest celery seed is obliged to overwinter the seed-bearing plants under a frame; the following spring, he puts them back in place in the open air; the celery flowers abundantly and sets seed towards the end of summer; this seed retains its germinative properties for no more than two years. In departments north of the Seine valley, gardeners are well advised to bring celery seed from Paris, or even from the banks of the Loire. Species and varieties. - The main celery species allowed in the kitchen garden are early short celery, full white celery, dwarf triseed celery and violet Tours celery. All are cultivated in the same way and produce the same type of product. Hollow celery is also grown, but in smaller quantities. Gardeners call it cutting celery, to distinguish it from the species whose ribs are whitened by shrivelling. Hollow celery cannot be harvested; its leaves are used only as a salad ingredient, and if nothing else, for stews and various stews. Only a few years ago, celery root began to be cultivated in France, a very common crop in northern countries. It differs from its predecessors in shape and uses, but is still quite rare in vegetable gardens, because the very aromatic taste of its edible part is not to everyone's taste. Growing celeriac - Celeriac can only be grown successfully where the soil is naturally cool, and where there is enough water to water it continuously. The root, the only edible part of this species of celery, only develops with water. Seedlings sown at the same time as other celery species are sown outdoors, are transplanted in rows 40 cm apart in all directions. When the lay of the land and the quantity of water available permit, the celeriac beds can be surrounded by a rim of earth that retains the water used for irrigation; in this case, watering is done not with a watering can, but by soaking; this is the method used by German gardeners, who excel in this type of cultivation. The celeriac is then continually soaked in water, which considerably diminishes its aromatic flavor, which is too pronounced and difficult to tolerate for those who are not used to it, when the plant has vegetated in soil that is not dry (it would not grow there) but insufficiently watered. When the root has reached its full size, remove all leaves except those in the center; celeriac can be stored in the cellar like root vegetables; the rootstocks are less sensitive to cold than those of other celery species; they overwinter in the open air, with a light covering of litter during hard frosts. CARDONS. - The various species of cardoon can only be propagated by sowing their seeds; although the cardoon is a true thistle like its close relative the artichoke, it does not tolerate transplanting and must be sown in the very place where it is to grow. Spacing varies according to the volume of each species, from 80 centimetres to 1 mềtre in any direction. Several seeds are sown in each hole, leaving only the most vigorous plant. A pit should be made around the base of each plant, to retain water for watering, which should be frequent and abundant. During the heat of summer, you can't water less than three times a day, very generously each time, if you want the ribs of the leaves, the edible part of the plant, to be tender and fleshy. When the leaves are fully expanded, they are bundled together with two or three ties of wet rye straw, then wrapped in a strong straw jacket to bleach them. The main disadvantage of growing cardoon is that, as soon as the ribs have etiolated to the point required for cooking, they must be eaten immediately, otherwise they will rot in very few days. For this reason, cardoons intended for winter storage should be lifted in clods in late autumn, planted in fresh sand in a cellar or other frost-free location, and blanched as needed for consumption. Every year, a few of the best cardoons of each species should be kept as seedlings. They are protected from the cold by staking them like artichokes; they flower and set seed the following summer. The main cardoon species grown in vegetable gardens are Tours, Spanish, red-ribbed, full Juerne and Puvis cardoons, the largest of all. Although the edges of its leaves are bristling with prickles, which clumsy gardeners are liable to injure themselves on, Tours cardoon is the most widely grown, because of its less bland and more delicate taste than the other varieties, with the exception of Puvis cardoon, which is given a marked preference in the vegetable gardens of southern France. CRESSON. - The cultivation of watercress, which is very advantageous in certain localities, is only possible where there is a trickle of running water that does not dry up in summer; for this reason, it is rarely possible in the vegetable garden, although it essentially belongs to market gardening. To set up a watercress bed, you divide a plot of land into perfectly level plots, the whole of which must have a sufficient slope for the water to run off, circulating slowly but continuously, without becoming stagnant anywhere. Each board is surrounded by a rim with two openings that can be closed at will with a handful of greasy earth; one is for the water to enter, the other for it to leave. Stems of watercress are placed flat in rows on the surface of the boards, 15 to 20 centimetres apart in all directions. The stems are taken from very clean water and harvested just before flowering. These stems, held in place by wooden forks, take root immediately, provided there is no lack of water. All buds ready for flowering are then removed, to allow the side shoots to develop. In a few days, the beds are covered with abundant vegetation, which grows back as it is picked for sale. This is one of the simplest crops, and a very profitable one wherever product placement is assured. A well-maintained watercress bed lasts indefinitely. Watercress enthusiasts who do not have irrigable land in their vegetable garden suitable for this crop, usually limit themselves to filling tubs with soil, in which they plant watercress stems that grow quite well, as long as the soil in the tubs is kept constantly submerged. However, no matter how carefully the water is renewed, it is impossible to prevent it from stagnating in summer, which gives the cress an unpleasant odor and flavor. Because these young shoots have a taste similar to that of watercress, they are improperly referred to as "Alenois cress". Passerage, a species of small thlaspi, is sought-after as a salad ingredient, especially in spring. Cresson alénois only grows in warm, dry soils with a southern exposure. Those who wish to have it all summer long should repeat sowing two or three times a month, as the plant goes to seed very young, and once it has gone to seed it is worthless. RHUBARBUS. - Wherever there are English people, rhubarb pies, a much sought-after national delicacy among Britain's wealthy families, are consumed in large quantities, ensuring a profitable investment for the products of rhubarb cultivation. These products consist of the petioles of the radical leaves of the plant, which are used peeled and cut into sections. What makes rhubarb petioles always rather expensive is that they can only be harvested after the plants, propagated by sowing their seeds or dividing clumps, have been grown for a year in a nursery. Rhubarb seed is sown early, in March, when it reaches full maturity, on plants that have been kept as seedbeds, and which have spent the winter in the open air, as they are in no way sensitive to the cold in the Paris climate, or even that of northern France. Growing care is limited to frequent watering during the first summer, to ensure that plants are well supplied for the following year's harvest. The best types of rhubarb are currant rhubarb, which is not widely grown, although it is considered preferable to all the others, wavy rhubarb and southern or Nepaul rhubarb. In England, many varieties are grown in vegetable gardens, and are readily available in localities frequented by English tourists, the only places where the products of this crop can be sold on a fairly large scale. PARSLEY. - The aromatic flavor of parsley, a little less pronounced but just as pleasant as that of celery, is so widely tasted that parsley is one of the most indispensable seasonings for a large number of dishes in French cuisine. Following long, harsh winters, the absence of parsley from city markets is a real calamity for caterers and cooks; what little parsley is available is sold by weight, at exorbitant prices. As a result, well-managed parsley cultivation can yield significant profits in winter. When they anticipate a hard and prolonged winter, Parisian market gardeners don't hesitate to transplant a certain quantity of parsley in autumn to the foot of a south-facing wall; a glass frame placed on top protects the plants from frost; in this way, they grow more or less during the worst days of winter, and the gardener can profit from the temporary high price of a product that has very little value the rest of the year. Parsley is sown in spring, in a bed well covered with potting soil; the seed usually takes 5 to 6 weeks to germinate. Parsley does not flower or set seed until its second year. Three varieties of parsley are grown in vegetable gardens, often in borders: common parsley, curly parsley and very curly dwarf parsley, all suitable for the same uses. The last two varieties are not con11 stant; sowing them often results in common parsley. PARSLEY. - Chervil is suitable for all soils and exposures, its main fault being that it rises very quickly in summer, producing very few leaves, the edible part of the plant. It can nevertheless be grown in any season, provided the seed is sown in a bed with a northern exposure, and the leaves are cut off as they grow, which delays the formation of the flowering stems. In Paris, chervil is used only as a salad garnish; but in the eastern departments, soup is rarely served without a bunch of chervil, which is cut into the soup as it is eaten. Chervil is also used extensively in medicine, either for baths or as a herb juice, which absorbs fairly large quantities. Whatever you use chervil for, you must peel it very carefully to avoid leaving behind any small hemlock (ethusa cynapium), a plant that resembles chervil, but can be easily distinguished from it by the darker green and sharper divisions of its leaves; small hemlock is a very violent poison, all too often the cause of fatal accidents. This deadly plant can be recognized by the same signs when weeding chervil seedlings, which must be sought out in order to eradicate it with the utmost care. In addition to common chervil, curly chervil and musk chervil are also grown in vegetable gardens. The latter variety has a very strong aniseed flavor, which is not to the taste of most consumers, so it is not widely grown. ESTRAGON. - As the uses of this plant are much more limited than those of chervil, its cultivation is much more restricted; it suffices to have a few tufts whose leaves and young shoots, with a pleasant aromatic flavor, are used as a salad garnish and also to give a spicy taste to the vinegar in which pickles are preserved. Tarragon is not sown, as it is essentially a perennial plant of indefinite duration, and clumps that have become too strong are divided every year. In the Paris climate, tarragon overwinters well in the open air, but north of the Seine valley, it is advisable to cut back the stems on the stump, which is then mounded and covered with dry litter to ensure its preservation during hard frosts. POURPIER. - Purslane leaves are no longer eaten in salads, as they were in Boileau's day; in Paris, this plant has been all but abandoned. In northern France, people follow the Belgian practice of eating purslane stewed, and adding it to lean soups, to which it imparts a less pronounced acidity than sorrel. Purslane seed is sown in the early days of May, in a south-facing position. It should be sown lightly, as the stems spread out in all directions, flat on the ground, which they soon cover. To prolong the production of purslane leaves as much as possible, cut off the tops as they begin to flower. Purslane's very fine and abundant seed remains in the ground for several years, but only lifts when ploughing brings it to the surface. This is why, in a vegetable garden where purslane has been sown once and left to bear seed, it reproduces in perpetuity among other crops, as a weed, without having to be sown again. FENNEL. - The uses of fennel in French cuisine are even more limited than those of purslane. In the Paris area, it is only cultivated by market gardeners whose clientele includes Italian caterers. They blanch the ribs of the fennel leaves in boiling water and use them as a vegetable in a variety of ways. It's a very hot dish, and should only be used with care. Fennel seed is sown in March in the Paris climate; this plant requires dry rather than damp soil, and thrives best in a southern exposure; moreover, it requires no special cultivation care. CHAPTER XXI Salads. Plants whose leaves are eaten as salad. - Lettuce. - Superior to other salads. - Grown in the open air. - Its products. - Forced cultivation. Suffocated cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Spring lettuces. - Summer lettuces. - Winter lettuces. - Cutting lettuces. - Romaine lettuces. - Harvesting the seed. - Scarecrow to keep birds away. - Chicory. - Open air cultivation. - Forced cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Scarole. - Flemish method for blanching. - Wild chicory. - Chicory beard. - Lamb's lettuce. - Rapunzel. The plants whose leaves are eaten in salads form a separate series of edible leafy vegetables, both in terms of the way they are used and the way they are grown. The Italians were the only people in Europe to have retained the custom of eating various vegetable plants raw, seasoned with oil and vinegar, a custom handed down to them by the Greeks and Romans, when, during the French wars in Italy under Charles VIII, this custom was imported into France, from where it spread throughout Europe, along with the cultivation of plants suitable for eating in salads. In France in particular, the taste for salad has become so widespread that it's a dish that all classes of consumers can't do without. For a soldier to be satisfied with his ordinary fare, he is said to require only two dishes: soup and salad. Lettuce, chicory, lamb's lettuce and raiponium are grown as salads. Lettuce is the best and most esteemed. In many départements, when people talk about salad, it's only lettuce they're talking about; in fact, it's the salad par excellence. LAITUE. - Lettuce can be grown in the open air in all types of soil, provided they are not too compact. The best lettuces are obtained from soil that is both fertile and light. Lettuce is sown in March, so that the plant is ready for planting in April. As the saying goes, lettuce only turns, or forms its head, after it has been transplanted. However, if you mix a little lettuce seed with onion and scorzonera seedlings, and leave a few lettuces here and there to grow where their seed has sprouted, they will end up peeling, without ever becoming as beautiful as those that have been transplanted. In big cities, large-scale lettuce cultivation is a very important part of the kitchen garden, so it's important to make the principles clear. The lettuce plant should only be put in place when it has reached a certain stage of development. Transplanting is done in staggered rows, 30 centimetres apart in all directions; one acre of land therefore receives an average of 189 lettuces. The rapid growth of lettuce, favored by abundant manure and watering, means that three lettuce seasons can be planted on the same bed, as gardeners say, i.e., the plantation can be renewed three times, giving 567 lettuces per are, after which there is still time to ask the soil for another harvest of some kind before the bad season. Lettuces are worth 10 centimes a piece in spring, and only 2 and a half centimes in midsummer, i.e. an average of 5 centimes. This represents a gross income of 28 fr. 35 cent for one are. So, despite the low price at which lettuces are sold, a hectare devoted to this crop would yield a gross income of 2,835 fr. and provide yet another harvest. The most important point in growing lettuce is to avoid compressing the root collar by compacting the soil. The milky juice, from which lettuce derives its name, is most abundant at the neck of the plant; if this part is obstructed by soil compaction, the plant suffers; the head has difficulty forming; the lettuce, despite watering, is inclined to climb, that is, to flower and bear seed, instead of turning. So, before transplanting lettuces, the surface of the soil should be covered with a thick mulch, to prevent the water from watering the soil from compacting the surface too much. When transplanting, the plant, whose tissues are extremely delicate, should be pulled out and transplanted only with care, to avoid crushing the central leaves and damaging the root, either by pressing it too hard between the fingers, or by trampling it with the planter. After transplanting, the plant should be thoroughly wetted and, unless heavy rainfall occurs, watered thoroughly. When a planting of lettuces is to follow another on the same plot, after giving the surface of the soil a superficial treatment, the mulch is renewed, then the lettuces are transplanted, as far as possible, into the gaps where the previous crop of lettuces was removed. All you have to do is mark the place of the first lettuce at the beginning of the first row of each bed, measure the distances exactly for the first row, and continue planting with care, placing a lettuce just opposite the middle of the interval between two lettuces in the previous row; in this way, you obtain a very regular staggered row. Forced cultivation. - Forced cultivation of lettuces, practiced on a very large scale around Paris, is a source of considerable profit for the professional gardener. When well managed, the produce can be sold in winter at very moderate prices, so that the bad season does not interrupt the consumption of lettuce salads. In order to have planting material available for when the forced lettuces have to be planted on pre-prepared beds, the seed of the earliest lettuces is sown under a bell on a bed lined with potting soil at the foot of a wall, facing south. The whole process, from sowing the seed to harvesting, should be carried out in a "étouffée" system, giving the plant as little air as possible at all stages of its growth. As soon as seed lettuces have gained some strength, they are not transplanted immediately, but transplanted under other cloches, very close together; this transplanting is necessary to prepare the plant for rapid growth. When transplanting, only the space strictly necessary for the development of early lettuces should be left between the soil of the bed and the inner surface of the glass; the less air there is between the frame and the bed, the more successful the forced cultivation of lettuces. In the large-scale market gardening around Paris, lettuce beds are heated, like all early-growing beds, by the heat pipes of a thermosiphon. From time to time, it's not necessary to provide air - forced lettuce never needs it - but to lift the frames in order to wipe away the moisture condensed on their inner surface. If this cold moisture, which gardeners call mist, were to fall in icy droplets onto the lettuce leaves, it would produce stains that would be detrimental to the sale. SPECIES AND VARIETIES. - Among the many varieties of lettuce produced by cultivation, there are two clear-cut divisions: lettuces proper, or round-headed lettuces, and lettuces with elongated heads, or romaine lettuces; those of the second division are called romaines by abbreviation; they are also called chicons in several central departments. Among the lettuces of the first division, we distinguish spring or early lettuces, the earliest of all; summer lettuces, the most voluminous and the least suiient to assemble; and winter lettuces, which are treated as biennial plants and are planted in autumn to be delivered for consumption in the spring of the following year. Cutting lettuces, which do not head, also fall into this division. Spring lettuces. - These are almost exclusively used for forced cultivation; the two main species are crepe lettuce and gotte or gau lettuce, both of which are of little value in their own right, but have their earliness as a merit. A species with reddish edges, known as cordon rouge, has been cultivated around Paris. It is a variety of gotte lettuce, which can be grown in the open air on a south-facing hillside from the first fine days of spring. Summer lettuces. - There are many varieties of summer lettuce, the best of which are Versailles lettuce, one of the most delicate, lazy blonde, and cabbage lettuce, or Batavia lettuce. Cabbage lettuce, whose heads often reach the size of the largest cabbages, is not very tasty; it is only recommended for its size. It contains the highest proportion of the calming principle known to chemists as thridace. In several départements, Batavia cabbage lettuce is cultivated in large quantities for distribution to pigs; it facilitates their fattening by making them sleepy. Another variety almost as large, Naples cabbage lettuce, has the same properties, but with a slightly better taste. Winter lettuces. - Winter or biennial lettuces include passion lettuce, moraine lettuce and sometimes small crepe lettuce. Seedlings sown in autumn are transplanted to the foot of a south-facing wall as early as October, to give them time to fortify themselves before winter, and to resist the frosts that these types of lettuce withstand fairly well. In reality, they're pretty bad lettuces, with hard green leaves and an unpleasant herbaceous taste. But they do have the merit of being hardy; they pick very early and, as far as consumption is concerned, fill the gap between the harvest of the last forced lettuces and that of the first summer lettuces; this is what makes their cultivation advantageous, even though they are really only of inferior quality. Cutting lettuces. - Cutting lettuces do not refer to specific species, but to very thickly sown crepe and gotte lettuce plants, usually under a frame, and delivered for consumption without being transplanted. This is a very mediocre type of lettuce, sought after only because of its earliness. Cutting lettuce is often eaten in combination with lamb's lettuce and raipons. Romaine lettuces. - Romaine varieties and sub-varieties are even more numerous than those of round lettuces. The most widespread are blonde maraîchère, verte maraîchère, alphange and romaine de la madeleine. Blonde maraîchère is the most commonly grown. All romaines have a tendency to curl up, i.e., to fold their leaves over each other at the top, without needing to be forced by artificial means. However, when they are almost fully developed, gardeners are accustomed to tighten them around the middle of their height with a tie of wet rye straw, which speeds up and completes the process of shrivelling the inner leaves, making them whiter and more tender. Romaines are grown in the same way as round lettuces; they thrive in the same soils and receive the same cultivation care. Green romaine is grown under cloche or under a frame, either for forced cultivation on a bed, or just to be able to transplant it very early in the open air, and have romaine available for consumption from the beginning of spring. Harvesting the seed. - Only the most beautiful lettuces of each variety should be reserved as seedbeds; those of the romaine series that are to be allowed to flower should not be tied. Some of the birds that frequent vegetable gardens, such as goldfinches, are so greedy for lettuce seeds that they prey on the seed-bearers before the seeds are ripe; they would not leave a single one if you neglected to scare them away with scarecrows, the most effective of which are small 11. ten-cent mirrors suspended by a string from a slightly inclined post. Lettuce seed retains its germinative properties for several years; two- or three-year-old seed is preferable for sowing; the plant supplied by this seed is less quick to bolt than that from seed harvested the previous year. CHICORY. - Chicory is, if not the best, at least the healthiest of all lettuces; its mild bitterness in the good varieties makes it both invigorating and refreshing, a property that no other lettuce possesses. In Paris, chicories suitable for salads are consumed almost as widely as round and romaine lettuces; what's more, their ease of preservation makes them invaluable as a winter salad. Many are also used as stuffing, like sorrel, to accompany various meats. All varieties of curly endive are very sensitive to cold, and cannot be grown outdoors before April. It is better not to bury the seed at all, but to sow it on a bed lined with potting soil, and spread a very thin layer of dry potting soil powder over the seed. Only plant when strong enough; as with lettuces, spacing is 30 cm in all directions. The rest of the cultivation of curly endive in the open air is the same as for lettuces, up to the moment when their round leaves meet those of their neighbors on all sides. This is the point in their development when they need to be tied to blanch them. Chicory can be sown in the open air from month to month, until July. When the late season is fine, the chicories obtained from these late plantings are the best for winter supply. They are not very large, but they keep very well in a cellar or storeroom where frost cannot reach them, as they do not tolerate even mild cold. Forced cultivation. - To obtain a plant that can be planted in spring as soon as the outside temperature allows it to be transplanted in the open air, curly endive seed should be sown on a bed under a frame in February and March. Curly endive seed is sown at the beginning of January, on a bed that is as warm as possible, when you want to obtain very early curly endive. In this case, the seedling is transplanted onto an equally warm bed, 20 centimetres apart in all directions; it soon produces small but excellent curly endive plants, which the gardener is sure to find a very good price for. Species and varieties. - The main varieties of curly endive are Italian endive, the best and most widely grown, Meaux endive and Rouen endive, also known as stag's horn. Italian chicory is preferable to the other two for late sowing and forced cultivation on a warm bed. In Paris, known as scarole or escarole, and in northern France as endive, another chicory breed is available in several good sub-varieties. Like curly endive, escarole is grown from point to point in the open air; it is never treated with forced cultivation. When, in late autumn, a patch of escarole is caught by early cold weather before it has been possible to bind the escarole to make it blanch, you can fold the outer leaves all on the same side, lay their joined ends on the ground, and keep them in this position by throwing a shovelful of earth over them. As long as it's cold, don't touch them. As soon as the weather eases, the escarole is pulled off, the outer leaves more or less damaged by frost are cut off, and the blanched heart is delivered for consumption. This method is generally only used in Belgium and on our northern frontier, where escarole, known as endive, is the only salad eaten in winter; it could be used everywhere and applied to late varieties of curly endive. Wild chicory, as it grows in uncultivated areas and along roadsides, or what is known in the North as coffee chicory, because its fleshy root is used in the preparation of indigenous coffee, is also grown in gardens in the least complicated way. Wild chicory seed is sown in the open air in the ground; seedlings should be very thick. The smallest leaves are picked as they grow, and are eaten in salads, often mixed with leaf lettuce and lamb's lettuce. Wild chicory is used to make a type of salad known in Paris as Barbe de Capucin, which is a little tough and bitter, but healthy and very inexpensive. To obtain this salad, in midsummer, sow a few tightly packed beds of wild chicory in loose soil, where the plant's roots grow long like scorzonera, without branching. Towards the end of autumn, everything is pulled out, and the roots are gathered into bunches the size of a bunch of asparagus, taking care to remove all the leaves except those in the heart. These bunches are placed in a perfectly dark cellar, in piles formed by alternating beds of half-consumed manure and bunches of wild chicory roots. The heat of the manure soon causes the roots to emit long, white, etiolated leaves; these are the leaves that make up Capucin's beard chicory. The same result can be achieved more quickly, but with a little more expense, by planting bunches of wild chicory roots close together, upright, in a layer of fermenting manure. This layer should be set up in a room where no light can penetrate. CHEESE. - In France, lamb's lettuce is cultivated only in the vegetable gardens around Paris and a few large cities; everywhere else, we are content to pick what grows wild, particularly in cereal fields; this is why it is known throughout northern France as wheat salad; it is also known as doucette and oreille de lièvre. Three distinct varieties, mâche commune, mâche ronde and mâche d'Italie or mâche Régence, are grown in the kitchen garden; mâche d'Italie is the most highly regarded. The seed is sown towards the end of summer, or even in autumn, on beds that have borne one or more harvests of other vegetable beds. Lamb's lettuce grows very unevenly, so that if you take the ones that are at the right stage of development to be eaten as a salad, you can harvest them all winter long. This salad is most tender and best when the frost has passed over it. Lamb's lettuce seed is rather difficult to harvest, because it ripens successively, and falls off as it ripens. A certain quantity can only be obtained by uprooting the seed-bearing plants before the seeds have fully ripened. These plants, placed in the shade in a healthy but not too dry location, complete the ripening of their seeds, which can then be easily collected, retaining their germinative properties for several years. RAIPONCE. - Riponce seed is sown in midsummer, in light soil heavily amended with potting soil; this plant does not germinate when buried too deeply; it should simply be mixed into the surface soil with the tines of a fine rake. If you neglect to water it abundantly, raiponce does not grow less; but its white, fleshy root, of excellent taste, becomes so hard that it is almost not edible. When sufficiently watered, raiponce is, if not very tender, at least very edible; it usually accompanies lamb's lettuce salads, which it makes much more pleasant. Rapunzel grows wild all over France; the young plants found in February and March along hedges and ditches are as good as, if not better than, those cultivated in the kitchen garden. CHAPTER XXII Vegetables with edible flowers. Vegetables whose flowers are eaten. - Cauliflower. - Edible properties. - Year-round availability. - Suitable soil. - Transplanting, - Watering. - Growing the plant. - Wintering. - Planting. - Spring sowing. - Summer cultivation. - Its disadvantages. - Autumn cultivation. - Advantages. - Product preservation. - Forced cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Cultivation of rootstocks. - Broccoli. - Nasturtium. - Use of flower buds and seeds. - Borage. There aren't many vegetable plants grown for the purpose of eating their flowers: cauliflower, broccoli, nasturtium and borage. The first two are the only vegetable plants in the true sense of the term. Nasturtium is an ornamental plant, and borage is a medicinal plant. CAULIFLOWERS. - There's no vegetable in our gardens that beats cauliflower: it's healthy, light and nourishing, with a delicate flavor that's sought-after by all classes of consumers. It's the best vegetable food you can offer to the sick, to convalescents, and to anyone whose digestive organs are more or less fatigued. It is therefore one of the most important vegetables to be able to supply the kitchen with all year round, without interruption. In the climate of Paris, this is quite easy to achieve, and the high price of cauliflowers at the times of year when they are least abundant amply compensates the gardener for the expense and trouble he must take to ensure that the markets are never short of them. Light, fertile soil is best suited to growing cauliflower. If you want to grow cauliflowers in such soil, you need to amend it generously with potting soil, and if clay dominates, with a little lime and fine silica sand mixed together. Successful cauliflower growing is based on two main conditions: transplanting and watering. Irrespective of when you sow the cauliflower seed, the plant must always be transplanted at least once, and more often twice, before it is finally put into place. Simply uproot the plant and replant it immediately, close to the spot it has just occupied, or in the same spot, it doesn't matter. The aim of transplanting is to make the cauliflower plant stocky, to enlarge the root collar, and to hasten the formation of the head. Transplanting applied to various plants, and especially to different species of cabbage, would produce similar effects; but if it is useful for cabbages, it can be considered indispensable for cauliflowers, although several gardening treatises assert the contrary. Cauliflower is rarely grown entirely in the open air; the plant that finishes its growth in the open air in the vegetable garden is almost always raised under a bell or under a frame, at least during the first period of its growth. To produce cauliflowers that can be harvested from around May 15 to June 15, cauliflower seed is sown in the open air in the first half of September in the Paris climate; this is the most suitable time for the plant to overwinter easily. As the cold approaches, gardeners first transplant the cauliflower plant under a bell or under a frame, at the foot of a south-facing wall; they cover it with litter or straw mats in times of snow or heavy frost, and give it as much air and light as possible whenever the temperature permits. When the severe cold has passed, in the second half of February, the plant is transplanted a second time, under the same cloches or frames, so that it can be transplanted permanently in the first half of March. In small gardens, where a sufficient number of cloches and frames are not always available, you can achieve much the same result by sowing the cauliflower seed at the bottom of a pit, carefully ploughing the soil and mixing in a large quantity of good compost. This pit, no more than 30 centimetres deep, is dug in a flowerbed at the foot of a wall facing south; the soil extracted from it is thrown back to the right and left, where it forms two embankments on which poles of suitable length are placed. If it's cold, mats or dry litter are thrown over these poles to protect the cauliflower plant; transplanting is done in another similar pit at the times indicated above, and the plant, if it has been well managed during wintering, i.e. if it has been covered and uncovered at the right time, is ready to be put in place at the same time as the one that has spent the winter under a bell or under a frame. A circular depression is made around each cauliflower plant, when they are finally transplanted, 50 or 60 centimetres in all directions, depending on the volume they are to acquire. From that day on, they should be thoroughly and continuously wetted, except in the event of prolonged heavy rainfall. When the apples start to form, if you want them to be a beautiful white, don't forget to cut a piece of fresh leaf and lay it flat on the apple to protect it completely from contact with air and light. The qualities required of a good cauliflower are an evenly rounded shape, a more or less even surface, free from small leaves and cracks, and a grain that is both fine and tight. Abundant watering with the neck of the watering can without the sheaf, morning and evening, is what contributes most to developing these qualities in cauliflower, which make it so attractive to buyers. Cauliflower seedlings are sown again in March under a sowing frame, but this time on a warm bed, otherwise the plant will not advance sufficiently and cannot be planted in good time. Seedlings sown at this time are transplanted only once, in the first half of April. The heads of these cauliflowers form around Midsummer and are ready for harvesting in July, but even with all the cultivation care they require, you can't always count on a good crop. In years when the hot weather arrives earlier than usual, summer cauliflower, despite assiduous watering, becomes partially "bollarded", as the saying goes; in other words, the head splits, divides and tends to flower prematurely, rendering it worthless. Cauliflower seed cannot be sown in the open air before April 10th or 15th in the Paris climate, or eight or ten days later in northern France. The plant obtained from these seedlings only needs to be pricked out before being transplanted. It is exposed to the hottest summer weather, and therefore very prone to budding. This is the time of year when cauliflower cultivation offers the least chance of success; it is also the time when this crop takes up the least space in the vegetable garden. On the contrary, it's very advantageous, and its success is certain with little expense or hassle, when you sow cauliflower seed around Midsummer's Day, in the last days of June, choosing a position in half-shade, as gardeners say. At the end of July, after transplanting, the plant can be put in place. As it is well watered, it suffers little from the heat of August, which has passed by the time it forms its head, and therefore cannot hinder its development. Depending on temperature and exposure, these cauliflowers can be harvested successively in September and October; the last ones to form can be kept as a winter supply, by stripping them of their large leaves and hanging them upside down in a frost-free place. The later the season, the higher the price of cauliflowers preserved in this way; however, you mustn't be greedy enough to wait until they begin to spoil before disposing of them. When winter is wet, rot quickly invades them, and you risk losing everything by trying to gain too much. When a few frames are available at the onset of winter, cauliflowers with only half-formed heads can be transplanted close together, on a muted layer mainly made up of leaves and well covered with potting soil; they grow slightly and can be delivered successively for consumption throughout the season when fresh vegetables are the rarest and most sought-after: this gives them a fairly high value, even though they remain small. Forced cultivation. - To avoid any interruption in the consumption of cauliflowers, it is necessary to take steps to harvest them as early as April, the time of year when preserved cauliflowers from the previous year and those that have been overwintered on a deaf bed are in short supply on the market. For this purpose, cauliflower seed is sown in early September; the resulting plant spends part of the winter in a cold frame; after being pricked out on an unheated bed, it is planted out on a new warm bed at the foot of a south-facing wall. Depending on the gardener's material resources, a bell is placed over each cauliflower and radish seed is sown around it, or it is covered with glass frames. In this case, the warm layer must be set in a pit deep enough to leave enough space between the glass and the potting soil for the cauliflowers to grow. If you sow the seed of Lenormand cauliflower, an excellent variety introduced to market gardening only a few years ago, in the open ground, choosing the last week of August or the first week of September for sowing, depending on the state of the season, the plant placed at the foot of a wall facing due south will survive the ordinary winters of the Paris climate quite well, provided it is protected as follows: short brushwood is planted at an angle, in front of the planting line and inclined towards the wall; in frosty weather, a little straw or dry litter is thrown over the brushwood, and uncovered when the frost thaws. Unless the winter is exceptionally harsh, Lenormand cauliflower does not freeze; it starts growing very early in the spring of the following year, and bears apples from the end of April to the end of May. Not all of these cauliflowers grow, but those that do are of excellent quality; like other cauliflowers, the plant does not need to be pricked out once or twice before being permanently transplanted to the place where it is to spend the winter. Species and varieties. - The cauliflowers known to gardeners under various names are simple sub-varieties that are often indistinguishable from one another to the untrained eye. In the marshes around Paris, only one variety is grown, although three are known, and are quite distinct in the way they behave in cultivation: these are tender, semi-hard and hard cauliflowers, whose names sufficiently describe their qualities. Demidur is the most widely adopted, either for cultivation in the open air or for forced cultivation. The soft variety, also known as petit Salomon, is best suited to summer cultivation, while the hard variety is fairly successful for late cultivation, and its apples keep well for part of the winter. However, it has the serious drawback of being hopelessly slow to form apples, and sometimes of not forming them at all, which does not help the gardener. For some years now, a fine sub-variety of semi-hard cauliflower has been grown under the name of Lenormand, after the gardener who introduced it, and is remarkable for the extraordinary volume of its apples. As for cauliflowers from Malta, Saint-Gilles (near Brussels), Roscoff (Finistère) and several other localities, they offer no distinguishing qualities; they are all hard or semi-hard cauliflowers, in no way superior to commonly grown varieties. A few of the best cauliflowers from each sub-variety are set aside in the spring as seed-bearing plants. If the seed is to retain all the qualities of the mother plant, the flower stalk should be topped at the start of flowering, leaving only a moderate number of siliques on the side stalks. Cauliflowers grown for seed are quite often invaded by the green aphid; as soon as this is noticed, they should be freed by strong fumigation with corporal tobacco. BROCOLI. - Although broccoli is botanically a very different species of cabbage from cauliflower, the cultivation of one is exactly the same as that of the other; however, broccoli is much more sensitive to cold than cauliflower; the plant is much more prone to melting during the winter, and as, in the final analysis, broccoli is in no way superior to cauliflower as a foodstuff, it is rarely grown in the Paris climate. Their cultivation is easy and advantageous only in the south, from the Loire valley upwards; the seed sown in June produces a plant that is good for setting, after a single transplanting in July and August. The apples, half-formed at the start of winter, can, in the mild climate of this part of France, complete their growth in the open air with a little shelter, which, in the climate of Paris, is only possible with pain and expense for which the gardener is not compensated by the sale of broccoli. The main broccoli varieties are: white, which differs little from cauliflower except for its wavy leaves, green and purple. A beautiful white variety with a very large head, introduced from England as mammoth broccoli around 1850, has not lived up to its promise in terms of hardiness; it is no more resistant to cold than other broccolis and has not spread to France for this peremptory reason. CAPUCINES. - This pretty plant, of which several very fine species are grown as ornamental plants, is sown in March and April and flowers all summer long, along trellises, cradles or any other support required by its climbing stems. The flowers, picked without their support, are not only an ornament to the salad; they also impart a pleasant aromatic odor, a flavor similar to that of watercress, and properties similar to those of the latter plant, which people have rightly dubbed the health of the body. So, for cooking purposes, the kitchen garden must always have a small area devoted to nasturtium. As they form, the seeds are harvested at half their size, and candied in vinegar like capers; these seeds have the pungent taste of mustard. When a large enough number of nasturtium plants are in bloom, part of the bloom can be sacrificed and the pea-sized flower buds picked; the spur is removed, and they are then candied in vinegar, either alone or mixed with the green seeds; they have a milder, more delicate flavor than the seeds, and can replace capers with advantage, especially when candied separately. BOURRACHE. - This plant is listed as a vegetable only for its very pale blue flowers, which, like nasturtium flowers, are used to decorate salads; they are otherwise devoid of odor, flavor and stimulating properties. Borage is very floriferous; if its usefulness were limited to adorning salads, it would suffice to have a few plants here and there in the vegetable garden, by sowing the seed in March or September; moreover, the plant requires no cultivation care. But as its dried leaves are an excellent sudorific, it is always useful in the countryside to place borage in a corner of the vegetable garden as a medicinal plant, whose flowers can also be picked to decorate salads. CHAPTER XXIII Vegetable plants with edible fruit. Strawberries. Importance of vegetables with edible fruit. - Strawberries. - Properties of the strawberry - Multiplication of the strawberry plant - Net or runner planting. - Clump division. - Sowing. - Planting. - Suitable soil for strawberries. - Time of planting. - Spacing. - Cultivation care. - Insect enemies. - White worm. - Moth. - Means of protection. - Forced cultivation. - Shelters to hasten strawberry flowering. - Species and varieties. - Remontant strawberries. - Non-remontant strawberries of American origin. - Strawberry high wood bifere. Plants cultivated for their fruit occupy an important place in the vegetable garden; although these fruits are not among the plant foods we cannot do without, they are the object of very widespread consumption; when they are rare and expensive, this is a very sensitive deprivation for all classes of consumers; their production is one of the most lucrative branches of gardening for the professional gardener, and a source of varied pleasures for the amateur gardener. This series includes strawberries, melons, cucumbers, gherkins, squash, tomatoes, eggplants and chillies. Mushroom cultivation has also been included, although this cryptogam is not a fruit in the true sense of the term. STRAWBERRY. - The fruit of the strawberry tree is the one that ripens in the harshest climate; the plant does not freeze, no matter how cold it is. Towards the northern extremities of our planet, in Iceland, Greenland and Siberia, the strawberry is the fruit found closest to the North Pole; the strawberry plant vegetates there with such activity that it has time to flower and ripen its fruit in the very short interval during which the surface of the ground thaws between two winters of 9 to 10 months. Everyone knows about the strawberry's pleasant taste and refreshing properties; what is not generally known is that strawberries eaten several times a day are the most effective of all known gout remedies. The father of modern botany, Linnaeus, discovered this property of strawberries through his own healing. Multiplication. - All strawberry plants, with the exception of a single species, send nets or runners around them in all directions, whose nodes take root and produce plants which in turn give nets, so that a single strawberry plant left to its own devices covers a considerable area in a short space of time. In woods where a few strawberry plants have survived here and there under the dead leaves, if a cut is made, the air and light develop their vegetative force so well that the following year the ground is literally covered with strawberry plants, as if they had been planted on purpose. The runners developed first after fruiting are the best for planting. Strawberry bushes, which do not produce runners, are propagated by dividing the clumps in spring and autumn. Strawberry plants are only propagated by sowing strawberry seeds, to regenerate good species and keep them unaltered, or to obtain new varieties. The innumerable large-fruited strawberry varieties of American origin, whose invasion of cultivation has revolutionized strawberry production over the last twenty years, owe their origin to sowing. The strawberry seed harvested from the best fruit of each variety, which is left to dry in the shade and then crushed in water to separate the seeds, only grows well in heather soil. Seedlings must be watered assiduously until they have sprouted; if the half-sprouted seed suffers from drought, it will not sprout. The seedling can be transplanted at a very young age, at varying distances according to the volume of the species, to be planted when it has gained sufficient strength. Planting. - Any good garden soil is suitable for strawberry plants, provided it is not too compact; in strong, clay soil, strawberry plants develop a useless luxury of leaves and runners, flower poorly and bear little fruit. In all cases, the soil must be ploughed very carefully and fertilized abundantly with well-consumed manure. When ploughing a garden bed to plant strawberries, be very careful to remove any bindweed roots or other perennials that may be present. Strawberry beds must be mulched thickly, both to keep them cool from watering, and to prevent the contact of bare earth from soiling the fruit. If the perennial weed develops later, it will be difficult to get rid of it; as for the annual weed, the mulch is enough to suffocate it as it emerges; it cannot invade the plantation. Strawberry plants are usually planted in autumn, better in mid-September than in October; in beds planted too late, there are almost always gaps to be filled in the spring of the following year. The wild strawberry plant you intend to grow in your garden should also be uprooted from the woods in the first half of September, leaving as little time as possible between uprooting and planting. Large strawberry plants with very large fruits should be planted at 35 or 40 centimetres in all directions; small and medium varieties should be planted at 25 or 30 centimetres. From the moment it is planted, the strawberry plant needs plenty of water. If planted in autumn, watering should stop when the first white frosts appear; if planted in spring, watering should continue throughout the summer. Apart from the chapter on accidents, a strawberry plantation planted with good seedlings, in the right season, well mulched and properly watered, is in full production in its second and third years, after which its yield declines; it must be renewed. To avoid losing ground, market gardeners plant a row of long-headed cabbage or two rows of leeks between the rows of large strawberry plants in autumn. The produce from this intercrop is removed in good time, so as not to interfere with the growth of the strawberry plants. As for those of the smaller species, which start producing in their first year of planting, they are not spaced far enough apart to admit other crops between their rows. Cultivation care. - Strawberry plants require a lot of water at all times of growth, and nets must be removed once or twice a week, as they exhaust the plant and interfere with fruiting. After the strawberries have been harvested, a part of the plantation is cared for separately, leaving all its nets, so as to have enough planting material to renew the plantations. Observation has shown that rainwater, especially storm water, is harmful to flowering strawberry plants when the soil is more or less hardened by drought. This is why, when a storm approaches, Parisian market gardeners are quick to wet their strawberry plantations thoroughly. Enemies of the strawberry plant. - In the garden, the strawberry plant has only one enemy, whose attacks often bring despair to the gardener. The Turc, man, or white worm, larva of the chafer, attracted by the particular smell of strawberry roots, which it prefers to any other food, often digs very long galleries underground to reach its roots. When a strawberry plantation falls prey to white grubs, there's nothing to be done: it's lost. Accidents of this kind are all the more difficult to avoid as, when ploughing to plant strawberries, the soil can be full of chafer eggs without the gardener noticing. In this case, if the planting is not too extensive, the beds should be dug out to the depth of a spade-shoe, all the soil removed, the bottom of the pit lined with a thick, well-trampled bed of carpenter's shavings or dry chestnut leaves, the soil put back on top, and panted as usual. The mandibles of beetle larvae are not strong enough 12 to pierce this obstacle, especially when dry chestnut leaves have been used, whose tough tissue resists attack.

The leaves of oak, lime or any other tree would not be a sufficient barrier; the white worm would penetrate them to reach the strawberry roots. Strawberries that ripen successively should not be harvested without care; stems bearing ripe fruit, green fruit and flowers at the same time would become sterile, and most of the crop would be lost, if the plants were shaken too much when the strawberries were harvested. The mole cricket also often wreaks havoc on strawberry plantations, especially when the soil has been smoked with fermenting manure, which attracts this destructive insect. When there is reason to fear its presence, the soil should be thoroughly soaked with warm cattle urine, as we have previously advised (Chap. XI), before shaping it for strawberry planting. Forced cultivation. - The vigorous vegetation of the strawberry plant means that strawberries can be harvested without interruption by means of forced cultivation; it is well known that at the English court, as at the Belgian court, it is etiquette to serve a dish of strawberries for dessert at the royal table, every day of the year, without exception. Forced strawberry cultivation offers no serious difficulties. The best plant for forcing is taken from the nets produced in July by young strawberry plants planted in March of the same year; the runner plant from plantations that are already a year or two old would not give nearly as good results. This seedling, detached from the runners as its young roots begin to form, is raised in a shady nursery until the first days of September. It is then lifted and planted at the rate of three strawberry plants in a medium-sized pot filled with the best possible soft, light and very-substantial soil. From December onwards, these strawberry plants are successively forced into portions, either in the pineapple greenhouse, or in frames where the pots are buried in tannin or in the manure of a warm layer. Professional gardeners who force strawberry plants throughout the winter do not heat with manure; they run thermosiphon pipes through a series of chests covered by their glass frames. The forced strawberry plants want to be under the frames as in the pineapple greenhouse, placed as close as possible to the glass, so that they receive as much light as possible. This precaution is especially necessary to give the strawberries good color as they ripen. The strawberry obtained by forced cultivation is always produced in small quantities, for the exclusive use of the most fortunate consumers. At a time when the first strawberries harvested in the open air are eagerly awaited by the public, the gardener can make a handsome profit by simply hastening the ripening of the strawberries by very inexpensive means. The simplest of all consists in planting young strawberry plants in narrow beds, in three rows, running east-west: behind these beds, stakes are erected to which straw mats are attached, forming a sort of temporary espalier facing south. From five to five meters away, the same system is used to establish strawberry mat shelters the same width as the beds; this combination places the strawberry beds in a sort of sheltered area on all sides. They flower very early and produce ripe strawberries eight to ten days before the ripeness of strawberries of the same species grown without shelter; this is enough for the gardener to sell them at relatively very advantageous prices. These strawberry plants can be made even earlier if, in addition to the procedure just described, glass frames are placed over the strawberry beds during very cold weather. Doormats or litter are thrown over these frames, which are uncovered and lifted to provide air when the temperature permits. In this way, without resorting to any artificial heat production, Parisian market gardeners, who do not subject strawberry plants to forced cultivation, are nevertheless able to obtain a fair quantity of very early ripening strawberries. Species and varieties. - From a gardening point of view, strawberry plants, of which there are many collections, form only two distinct series: remontant strawberry plants, which produce several successive harvests in the same year, and non-remontant strawberry plants, which produce only one harvest a year. So far, all efforts to include large-fruited strawberries in the remontant series have been completely unsuccessful. Everbearing strawberries. - The best of the remontant strawberry plants - indeed, the best of all cultivated strawberry plants - is the Alpine strawberry, known as the four-season strawberry. Its strawberries are fragrant, pleasant-tasting and highly productive, giving one of the earliest yields and only ceasing to produce at the onset of winter. It is also one of the most advantageous for forced cultivation, although it is never very voluminous. The Gaillon strawberry bush is an excellent variety of the previous one, obtained from seed. Its fruit is exactly the same; it is just as productive and just as remontant; what distinguishes this strawberry is that it is the only one that does not produce nets or runners and forms large tufts or bushes, which makes it eminently suitable for planting at the front and back of flowerbeds lining vegetable garden paths. It is important to double the clumps every two years to rejuvenate the plantations; otherwise, the bushes become too thick, and the central shoots, blocked in their development, do not flower, which reduces the strawberry harvest. Non-remontant strawberry plants - Most non-remontant strawberry plants, of American origin, were first introduced into England, which is why they are often referred to as English strawberry plants in continental gardens. However, two European species are still grown: the woodland strawberry, with very small, round fruit of excellent flavor, which can be made medium-sized by cultivation in good soil, and the Montreuil strawberry, with very large fruit and the flavor of the woodland strawberry. As for the latter, to obtain it with all the qualities that make it so highly prized, you simply have to plant it in the woods, preferably on the sides of ditches facing south, and treat it like the other garden species. Caprous, with their large, lightly-colored, slightly musky fruit, used to be very popular, but have been more or less abandoned since the introduction of American strawberries. Their main fault is that they are dioecious, i.e. they bear male and female flowers on separate plants; the male plants, which are necessarily sterile, needlessly take up space in the garden beds. Pineapple strawberry plants, remarkable for their swollen stalks, have also been abandoned for strawberry plants of American origin; their somewhat bland and very mussy flavor is not to everyone's taste. American strawberry plants have given rise to countless new varieties every day through hybrid crosses and seedlings, as can be seen from the catalogs of the growers who sell them. A general remark applies to all these varieties: those with rounded fruit are sweeter than acid; those with fruit ending in a point are more acid than sweet; their tip often remains green while the upper part of the fruit is perfectly ripe. The most worthy of cultivation among American strawberry plants are: Virginia Scarlet, easily distinguished by the bluish-green of its leaves and the depth of the fruit cavities in which the seeds are housed. The best sub-variety of the scarlet strawberry is found near Liége in Belgium, where it has long been naturalized. It is the earliest of the non-emerging strawberry species; 12. The Chilean strawberry, with its very large fruit, of which there are several good sub-varieties, is only very productive in warm, south-facing soil; Goliath and superb Wilmolt produce fruit almost as large as that of the Chilean strawberry. Bicton white is the best of the white strawberries. British-Queen is one of the most productive and best of the American round-fruited varieties. Those who have enough space, by allocating a compartment to each of the species we indicate, can harvest non-remontant American strawberries for five to six weeks. Another very remarkable species is called "haut bois", because of the height of its flower stalks. The fruit is very dark in color, with a vinous flavor, and often aborts, a defect that makes the highbush strawberry less common in vegetable gardens. However, this defect can be corrected by cultivation, and is compensated for by a valuable quality. Although it is not precisely a remontant plant, the highbush strawberry is biferous, meaning that in autumn it produces a second bloom followed by a fairly abundant crop of strawberries. In any case, an American large-fruited strawberry as remontant as the four-season Alpine strawberry remains to be conquered. The gardener who obtains it will render a great service to horticulture, and his fortune will be made. = - CHAPTER XXIV Vegetable plants with edible fruit. - Melon. Melon. - The modern revolution in cultivation. - Sowing in beds. - The need to hasten melon growth. - Root ball transplanting. - Precautions to be taken. - Sowing in the open air. - Melon pruning - Natural melon vegetation. - What it becomes when left unpruned - Purpose of pruning. - Results - How to prune - Choosing between meshes. - Cultivation care. - Forced cultivation. - Species and varieties -Cantaloupes. - Embroidered melons. - Smooth-skinned melons. -Seed harvesting. - Accidental crosses. - Watermelons. MELON. - The melon is an entirely artificial product; the good quality of its fruit depends entirely on intelligent cultivation. This is so true that in our Midi departments, whose climate is eminently favorable to melons, they are not eaten as perfectly as in Paris, even though the Parisian climate is not nearly as well suited as that of the Midi to the vegetation of this delicate plant, originally from the hottest regions of Asia. Like many other garden crops, the melon has undergone a complete and very happy revolution since the beginning of this century. Fifty years ago, only the least delicate types of melon were cultivated in the Paris region; nothing was rarer than a good melon, and this state of affairs had lasted for a very long time, for a poet of the XVth century had the right to write the following verses, so often reproduced: Les amis de l'heure présente Sont d'un naturel de melon; Il faut goûter plus de trente Avant que en trouver un bon. Today, the opposite is true; what is rare, wherever market gardening is intelligently practiced as it is in the Paris area, is a bad melon. At several points on the Normandy coast, especially around Honfleur, melon is grown in large quantities for export to England, making it a flourishing and highly profitable branch of gardening. Sowing in beds. - In the Paris climate, melon seeds can only be sown in the open air during the month of May, when there is no longer any fear of cold nights, or only cool nights, which the plant would not tolerate. In years when summer temperatures follow their normal course, and when this season brings its annual quota of heat, the melon has time to blossom and ripen its fruit, while the weather is still warm enough for the sale of melons to be easy, and for this fruit to be sought after by consumers. But if, as often happens, summer is wet and brings with it only a few rare fine days in the Seine valley, the melons sown in the open air, no matter how much care is taken to hasten their growth, flower too late; their fruit, barely fully formed in autumn, ripens badly or not at all, and can only be offered to consumers at a time when the greatest heat has passed, and the melons are no longer sought after. For all these reasons, melons are rarely grown entirely in the open air in Paris. Even those that should grow and bear fruit in the open air come from seedlings sown on a warm bed in a frame. After transplanting, these seedlings are ready to be transplanted at home, at the time of year when, if the gardener had not taken the time to save time, the outside temperature would have allowed them to be sown in situ. - Transplanting. - The melon, like all plants in the Cucurbitaceae family, to which it belongs, is very difficult to transplant; its roots need to be disturbed as little as possible. This is why it has become common practice among gardeners who excel in this type of cultivation, to sow melon seeds only in pots. Two seeds are sown in each small pot, filled with light soil mixed with compost. The pots are immediately placed in a good layer covered with a glass frame. Seedlings of this kind are sown twice, in March and April. Once the seed has set, the least vigorous plant is removed, and as it's still quite cold outside at this time of year, the frames are kept closed, with air only being let in when the weather eases. The inside of the windows are wiped down to prevent the mist from falling in icy drops on the young melon plant, which would then perish. When the plant has its first two well-formed leaves, in addition to the seminal leaves, it's time to transplant it onto a second warm layer, prepared in advance. If the plant is not raised in a pot, much of it will be lost in the transplanting process, but it is easy to remove it from the pot without disturbing the roots. Immediately plant it as a clod in larger pots, filled with soil similar to that in which the seed was sown. The pots are immediately plunged into the new layer; the melons remain there until they can be transplanted definitively to a final layer, established at the foot of a wall, to the south. Sowing in the open air. - Once the seed has been sown and the melon plant transplanted as described above, on two different occasions, one month apart, you can produce, as gardeners say, two seasons' worth of melons, with the seedlings sown indoors. If the weather is favorable, a third season of melons can be grown outdoors. To sow melon seed in the open air, from the 10th to the 20th of May, heaps of half-decomposed manure are prepared on a south-sloping bed, spaced 1.5 meters apart from their centers. When the piles have been on the ground for ten to twelve days, and have more or less settled in on themselves, top them with ten to fifteen centimetres of light garden soil, mixed with half loam, and sow the melon seed; seedlings sown in place do not need to be transplanted. Melon roots tolerate very well contact with the most active fertilizers, which would burn those of any other plant; this property is common to all plants in the same family. As the plants grow, their vegetation is stimulated by spreading a few handfuls of dovecote, or barnyard bird droppings, from the cleaning of the dovecote and henhouse; if dovecote is not available, guano can be used. The water from the sprinklers penetrates these fertilizers right down to the roots of the melons, which benefit greatly from them. Melon pruning. - As soon as the melon plant, whether raised on a bed or sown in the field, has taken its fourth leaf, above the seminal leaves, it's time to think about pruning. To prune a melon successfully, it's essential to understand the principle and to be aware of the melon's natural growth habit. When a melon is left to its own devices and left unpruned, this is how it behaves. At first, it grows a long, straight, simple stem, which crawls along the ground; this stem only branches when it has already moved away from its starting point; it first produces a fairly large number of male flowers, which are perfectly useless, as there are no female flowers yet. It's only when it has grown sufficiently that each branching produces one or two meshes at its tip, the name gardeners give to the female flowers that are to be followed by fruit. These fruits, which are always few in number, never have the normal volume of their species on plants that are not pruned, because while they are forming, the stem continues to lengthen more or less, absorbing sap to their detriment; they lack both flavor and volume, and ripen very late. Observation has shown that the closer a melon is formed to the root collar, the better it ripens; it can only be so far from the root collar on a stem that is not pruned; the unnecessary prolongation of the vegetation of this stem necessarily delays the ripening of the fruit. The above clearly shows the purpose of melon pruning. On the one hand, the aim is to make the fruit grow as close as possible to the root collar; on the other, to hasten ripening by stopping the growth of the stems above the melons as soon as they start to swell. By pruning, the gardener also aims to produce a large number of fruits on each plant, although only one or two, rarely three, should be reserved. The most perfectly shaped fruits, according to their species, are always the best; when each melon plant produces only two or three, whether well or poorly shaped, they must be allowed to grow; when it produces eight or ten, there are always some of good shape; only these are kept, and the gardener removes the others. Now that the need for pruning, its purpose and results are well understood, here's how it's done. First, the central shoot of young plants is pinched off above the fourth leaf. This entrenchment leads to the development of two lateral shoots. When these are eight to ten centimetres long, they are treated in the same way, and after a few days produce two shoots each, making four branches which, pinched back when they have lengthened sufficiently, eventually produce eight good shoots. Pruning stops here for the moment, and the gardener waits for the meshes to form. As each shoot should produce one or two, he can count on a dozen fruits, which he will let grow just enough to judge them with a clear conscience. Once he's made up his mind, he prunes severely, leaving each plant with an average of just two shoots, each bearing a beautiful fruit. Later on, pruning will be aimed at containing the shoots above the fruit, and preventing the development of any branches that might tend to form on parts of the stem whose sap must be concentrated on the fruit. Pruning, as described above, is particularly suitable for melons of the best species, which are grown on a bed under a frame, from the time the seed is sown until the fruit ripens. A little less care should be taken with second-quality melons, whose seed is usually sown in the ground. After pinching once to obtain two shoots, and a second time to obtain four, these four shoots are left to grow away from the collar, producing one or two good meshes each. The greater hardiness of the plants and the less delicate quality of their fruit mean that four to six can be left on each plant; all that remains to be done then is to regulate the subsequent growth of the stems, as above, by pruning, so that the plant's sap is used exclusively for fruit development. Cultivation care. - The best melons, whatever their variety, are known as "bed melons", because the seed is sown on a bed, the plant is transplanted, and the plant goes through all the phases of its vegetation until the fruit is ripe. Once the right season has arrived, bedding melons remain uncovered day and night, and need frequent watering as long as it doesn't rain. The gardener must always be in a position to protect his melons against frost, which, even when it is not very large, causes them to perish without remedy. If, after a storm, you examine the parts of the melon stem that have been hit by hailstones, you can see a small spot; the next day, it's a wound that becomes gangrenous and leads to the death of the plant. As any summer storm can be accompanied by hail, the prudent gardener always keeps glass frames and straw mats within reach of the melon beds. In the twinkling of an eye, when a threatening cloud approaches, this precious crop is sheltered; doormats and frames are removed when the storm has passed. As the fruit nears maturity, a piece of broken tile or pot shard is placed under each melon to prevent the moisture in the layer from rotting the side of the fruit in contact with it. Melons sown in place, and some of those transplanted onto a deaf layer but without a frame, are known as cloche melons. A glass bell raised on one side to give access to the air is placed over each well-formed fruit, and old mats and litter are kept within reach of the bells, which are hastily thrown over the bells when a storm approaches, as melon bells cannot withstand a strong hailstorm when it hits them directly. Forced calture. - Near large cities, it is highly advantageous to force-feed melons, which can produce edible fruit as early as April on a warm bed. To this end, melon seed is sown in pots on a very hot bed from the first days of January. Transplant on an equally warm bed, and place on a third bed as warm as the previous two. Maintain warmth by applying new manure around the bed in the form of stoves, renewed as needed. The pruning and management of forced melons is based on the principles set out above; forced melons are usually left with only one fruit on each plant. These melons, even for professional gardeners who heat them with the thermosiphon, which is less costly than manure when used in large quantities, come at a very high price and are never very good, but as they are sold in proportion to what they cost to produce, this method of cultivation can be very advantageous, provided the sale is assured. Species and varieties. - Among the many varieties of melon, the superiority of the Cantaloupe cannot be disputed. In the climate of Paris, melons from this series can be grown on their own and satisfy all consumer requirements. The best of the Cantaloupes are the black Carmelite, the orange and the fine early, all three of which are not very large, but are fast-growing and, for this reason, eminently suitable either for forced cultivation or for the first season. Prescott, Petit Prescott and Noir de 13 Hollande, all from the Cantaloupe series, are equally suitable for the first and second seasons. For seedlings in the field, we prefer the brodé melon, or market melon, which has gradually been banished from cultivation and replaced by cantaloupes, the elongated Honfleur melon, the Tours melon and the sweet green Angers melon, both excellent, but not very large, and better for amateur gardens than for sale. In the south of France, smooth-skinned melons are preferred, the most highly regarded varieties being the Cavaillon or winter melon, of which considerable quantities are produced for the Lyon and Marseille markets, the Malta melon and the Odessa melon. Harvesting grains. - Great care must be taken to ensure that melon seeds are harvested only from the most beautiful, fully ripened fruits of each species. Pumpkins, squash, cucumbers and generally all cucurbits contain a great abundance of pollen or fertilizing dust, which the bees, in their incessant work, carry from one flower to another, thus effecting frequent accidental crossings. These crosses, when they occur between melons and other plants of neighboring genera, or only between different varieties of melons, completely denature them, causing them to lose the properties that constitute the particular merit of each species. In this respect, there is no danger in keeping varieties that flower at different times close to one another, as this makes accidental cross-breeding impossible. However, species that you wish to keep pure and that flower at the same time as others that are entirely different should only be cultivated at a distance, and in careful isolation. PASTEQUES. - We mention only for the record the watermelon, whose cultivation is only possible on a few points of our extreme southern border; outside the orange region, the watermelon does not ripen its fruit, and the plant does not lend itself to forced cultivation. The watermelon is not a true melon, although it resembles smooth-skinned melons on the outside. In the Var and Eastern Pyrenees regions, watermelons are grown without any precautions, like pumpkins, in open fields, in holes filled with a mixture of good soil and manure. Once the seed has been sown in these holes, no further attention is paid to it. Watermelons, grown only on irrigable land, take their share of general irrigation; they are not pruned or cared for in any way, and nonetheless produce large, healthy and pleasant fruit, thanks to the climate alone. CHAPTER XXV Luminous vegetables with edible fruit. - Cucumbers, Gherkins, Squash, Tomatoes, Aubergines, Peppers. Cucumbers. - Sowing. - Open air cultivation. - Forced cultivation. - Species and varieties. - Gherkins. - Snake cucumber. - Squash. - Pumpkin. Health properties. - Sowing. - Trausplantation. - Protection of the plant by counter-soils. - Watering. - Marcottage of stems - Species and varieties. - Siam ball. - Hungarian or Spanish green. - Giraumont. - Tomato. - Open-air cultivation. - Its disadvantages. - Sowing in layers. - Transplanting. - Stem pruning. - Trellising. - Artificial ripening of tomatoes. - Forced cultivation. - Eggplant or melongene. - Purple fruit. - Blauc fruit or egg plant. - Chili pepper. - Cultivation similar to eggplant. - Species and varieties. - Its properties as a seasoning. - Grows as an ornamental plant. CUCUMBER. - The consumption of cucumbers has little place in French cuisine; in Paris, in particular, the main outlet for this type of product is in the hotels where English travelers, who are great fans of cucumbers, stay. As a result, cucumbers do not occupy much space in the kitchen garden. Cucumbers are grown like melons, either in beds or in the open air. Open-air cultivation is easy and uncomplicated. In May, better after than before the 15th of the month, dig holes 50 cm in diameter and 30 cm deep, spaced 1.5 m apart from the center. The holes are filled with fresh manure, topped with 15 to 20 centimetres of soil mixed with compost. Cucumber seeds sown in these holes soon produce vigorous plants that grow very quickly, provided they are well watered. Cucumber roots, like those of melons, tolerate contact with fermenting manure very well. The free space between the holes is covered with a good mulch on which the long cucumber stems stretch out in all directions. The gardener prunes them to make them branch out; he leaves each plant a number of fruits proportionate to the strength of each species, and he takes care, when the fruit is well formed, to concentrate the sap to his benefit, by arré̂tant the useless prolongation of the stems. The mulch preserves the cleanliness of the fruit, which, depending on the species and the purpose for which it is to be used, must be picked at various stages of development. From each variety, a few of the most beautiful fruits are selected and left not only to ripen, but also to rot on the spot, due to excess ripeness, a necessary condition if we are to be able to count on the complete ripeness of the seed. In some cantons around Paris, the large white Bonneuil cucumber is grown on a very large scale, not for cooking, but for perfumers, who buy considerable quantities to make cucumber pomade. This ointment, excellent as a harmless cosmetic for chapped lips and skin, is the subject of a large export trade from Paris. Cucumbers are sown in rows in a ploughed and smoked bed, just like any other garden crop. As the aim is to obtain as many medium-sized fruits as possible, rather than just a few of the most beautiful, the gardener prunes the stems only once, so that they can grow a few side shoots, which are then allowed to bear all or almost all their fruit, which perfumers buy by weight. Wherever the placement of products for the perfume industry is assured in advance, this simple and economical method of producing a large mass of mediocre cucumbers is highly advantageous. Forced calture. - Gardeners whose clientele includes cucumber lovers wealthy enough to pay for them properly, obtain large quantities of early cucumbers by forced cultivation. Forced cultivation is carried out on a hot bed under a frame, from point to point, like forced melon cultivation. Sow in pots and transplant into slightly larger ones, taking the same precautions as for melon seedlings to avoid disturbing the roots. The cucumber plant, placed on a new layer, is pruned to make it branch out and obtain a good number of meshes, leaving only one or two at each foot. Species and varieties. - In countries such as England, where cucumbers are a speciality, and where special societies are devoted exclusively to perfecting their cultivation, there are a great many varieties. In France, the large white Bonneuil cucumber is grown mainly in the open air, while the early white and early Dutch cucumbers are grown on beds. CURNICHONS. - Gherkins are true cucumbers, picked in the first period of their development; any gherkin left to its natural course of growth becomes a cucumber. The small green cucumber is grown exclusively as a gherkin, and is never subjected to forced cultivation. All other cucumbers are grown in the open air. As it branches naturally and each branch produces a great abundance of fruit, it is not pruned; it needs to be watered often and very generously. The smaller the gherkin, the more delicate the flavor. The snake cucumber, considered a botanically distinct species, is also sometimes grown as a gherkin. The fruit of this cucumber, when allowed to grow to its full size, becomes very long and bendy, hence its nickname. Picked at finger size, it makes very good pickles, which retain their green color in vinegar better than the fruit of the small green cucumber. As a gherkin, the snake cucumber is less advantageous to grow than the common species, because it branches less and does not produce as many meshes. CURRANTS. - A very large number of squash varieties are grown in southern countries, and play an important role in the vegetable garden and in cooking. In our central departments, especially around Paris, only the large squash, better known by its vulgar names of pumpkin and potiron, is widely grown. The flesh of this plant's very voluminous fruit is used to make refreshing soups whose health-giving properties are so well recognized that the administration of the Paris hospices uses huge quantities for convalescents. Just to supply the hospitals, a large number of pumpkins are grown on the outskirts of Paris by market gardeners who are awarded contracts. To produce pumpkins that ripen very early in the summer, the seeds are sown on a bed in March and April; these seedlings produce plants that can be transplanted in the open air from May 1 to 15. Most often, pumpkins are sown in the first fortnight of May, in holes similar to those used for growing gherkins and cucumbers, but larger, deeper and more widely spaced, depending on the size of the varieties to be grown. The largest pumpkins are grown in holes one meter in diameter and 50 centimeters deep. As far as possible, pumpkins should only be grown in more or less sheltered areas; open ground exposed to strong winds is unsuitable. As for the quality of the soil, this is of little importance, as the plant should live only at the expense of the manure and good soil with which its holes are filled. If the pumpkin seed has not been sown in place, the plant suffers to a greater or lesser extent from transplanting; some of it would be lost to the drying action of the sun's rays if, when planting, you neglected to shelter it under counter-soils which, without intercepting air or light, only provide as much shade as the pumpkin plant needs, until its roots have taken hold of the soil in the holes, which is a matter of a few days. In the absence of counter-soil, three sticks can be planted in the ground, joined at the top by a rush tie, and a bit of long litter or a piece of old doormat thrown on top. Pumpkins require a lot of water at all times of growth; their excessively long stems cannot be pruned; each plant is usually left with two fruits; the stem is stopped two or three leaves above the fruit. If the part of the stem crawling on the ground between the root collar and the fruit is partly covered with soil, as would be a grapevine, it roots quickly, and this kind of layering contributes significantly to increasing the volume of fruit. All squash species can be grown in the same way, except for the size of the holes, which varies with the volume of fruit in each variety. Species and varieties. - The old pumpkin from the Paris area, with its almost smooth rind, not very pronounced ribs, and very often enormous volume, has been gradually abandoned today; it is rightly preferred to the sub-variety known as the Siam ball, which keeps better and contains as much edible substance as the former, because it has almost no interior void, which makes it easier to preserve, and less prone to mildew. The Hungarian green pumpkin is also widely cultivated in vegetable gardens. It is the same shape as the Siamese ball pumpkin, with extremely sweet flesh; it is the variety from which sugar is made in Hungary and Poland, just as beet sugar is made here. This variety is also known as the Spanish pumpkin, and should be preferred by those who value quality over extraordinary fruit size. Giraumont, also known as turban or Turkish bonnet, because of the unusual shape of its fruit, is smaller but sweeter than pumpkins; it is used for the same purpose. Gourds proper, whose flesh is eaten fried in oil with garlic, onion and strong pepper, do not ripen well and are generally only used in the South of France; the most esteemed varieties are the Marseilles or nutmeg squash, and the Messinaise squash, from Sicily, both of which have almost no inner cavity. The Ohio squash, originally from America, and the marrow squash, a very nourishing English variety, do well in the Paris climate. The latter merits the name "vegetable marrow" given to it by the English. We mention only for the record the congourde or pilgrim's gourd, the club gourd, and a host of others whose fruits are not edible. You can, however, make room for them in the vegetable garden, by supporting their climbing stems on trellises or long poles. Their dried and emptied fruits can be used to store all kinds of vegetable seeds. TOMATO. - For the past thirty years, the tomato or "pomme d'amour", which was once only found in the kitchens of wealthy gourmets, outside the departments of the Midi where it has been eaten by everyone from time immemorial, has entered the consumption of the most modest households, which has given its cultivation great importance. Tomatoes don't stand the cold any better than melons and squash; they can only be sown in the open air around the middle of May. Plants sown at this time of year do not always ripen before the first autumn frosts, in which case some of the fruit is lost. The gardener can only count on harvesting tomatoes when the seed has been sown on the bed in February and March. The edges and empty parts of the beds on which melon plants are grown are used for this purpose; the same temperature is suitable for both plants. Tomatoes are excellent transplanters; to bring them forward, they can be bedded out until the temperature allows them to be placed in the open air. In all cases, the plant should be uprooted and transplanted to 13. make it stocky and reduce its tendency to form a profusion of branches, which is detrimental to fruit production. As soon as the season is far enough advanced, tomatoes can be transplanted into the open ground; the plant is naturally very rustic and not very fussy about soil quality; with a little water and manure, it can grow almost anywhere; but it can only bear fruit at the foot of a wall facing south, or under the protection of a temporary espalier of straw mats supported by stakes and facing south. As soon as the fruit has formed, the stems above it are pinched off. Without this precaution, the stems would continue to flower and bear fruit too late to ripen; as the sap rises to the top of the plant, the fruit formed first would not grow, and the harvest would be nil. As the fruit grows, the plant's soft stem can no longer support itself; it needs to be trellised, either at the bottom of an espalier trellis, or on poles placed transversely for this purpose. Great care must be taken to cut back any shoots that appear at various points on the stem, either above or below the reserved fruit. When, despite all the care taken to speed up vegetation, tomatoes still bear only half-ripe fruit when the first cold weather arrives, even though the drop in temperature does not allow us to hope that they will reach full ripeness, they should not be considered as lost. Tomatoes, provided they have only just begun to change color, can become fully ripe in two or three days on a shelf in the kitchen, near the fireplace, in a warm greenhouse, or in any other room where the temperature is sufficiently high. It is understandable that tomatoes ripened artificially in this way are never as good as those that have ripened on the plant during the summer, but they are of good enough quality to find buyers and can be delivered for consumption without any inconvenience. In all our departments in the Midi, tomato seeds are sown on irrigable land; the plant is thinned out to give it suitable spacing; it is never transplanted, and later the plant is left to grow freely. The stems are simply supported by a few branches, without being trellised in the true sense of the word, and the fruit is harvested as it ripens. Forced calture. - In the Paris climate, tomatoes can be forced very easily by sowing the seed on a warm bed from the first days of January. The seed is sown in the same layer, then transplanted to another warm layer, and planted on a third, which is surrounded if necessary by heaters that are renewed once or twice. In this way, the tomatoes reach the time when the glass frames can be raised for most of the day, and then removed altogether. Only a few fruits are left on each plant, which are supported on strings stretched from one edge of the trunks to the other, so that the fruits don't get dirty from contact with the potting soil. Forced tomatoes begin to ripen around June; the more severely they are pruned, the less fruit is left on each plant, and the sooner the fruit ripens. AUBERGINE. - Eggplant, also known as melongene, is an essentially southern fruit, suited to the stomachs of the Midi, but causing frequent indigestion in those who are not used to it. In Paris, eggplants are mainly grown for the large number of southerners who live in the capital. They only produce good fruit by forced cultivation, which is carried out in exactly the same way as forced tomato cultivation, with the only difference being that to increase the volume of the eggplant fruit, it is transplanted three times, eight or ten days apart, before it is finally planted. Eggplants can also be sown on a bed in March, then transplanted in April, and then grown in the open air, at the foot of a south-facing wall. But in this case, the fruit, which ripens late and imperfectly, is even more difficult to digest, however it is prepared. In Paris, only the violet eggplant is grown for cooking purposes. In the Midi, we also eat the fruit of the white eggplant, known as an ornamental plant under its vulgar name of egg plant, because of the oval shape of its fruit. It is more or less unwise to eat these fruits when they have not ripened under the influence of the Midi sun: they are much more indigestible than those of the purple eggplant. CHILI. - As a seasoning, pimento or long pepper also belongs to the cuisine of the Midi, as its fruit has a fiery flavor similar to that of pepper. Peppers are grown in the same way as eggplants. Except in our southern departments, where it grows without difficulty in the open air, this plant is not actually considered a vegetable; it is grown more as an ornamental plant, due to the color of its fruit. There are several varieties with elongated, red, yellow and violet fruit. There is another species with a very large, irregularly shaped fruit, called "tomato chili" for this reason; the fruits of all chili peppers have the same properties; it is an excessively hot seasoning, which should only be used in moderation. CHAPTER XXVI Mushrooms. Edible mushroom. - How it grows. - Mycelium. - Mushroom cultivation. - Production of mushroom spawn. - Preservation of spawn. - Manure preparation. - Choice of manure. - Placement of layers. Layering. - Larding. - Goptering. - Production time. - English method. - Mushroom greenhouse. - Properties of cultivated mushrooms. - How good ones become bad. - Research into the production of muskmushrooms. - Morels. - Truffles. The mushroom's mode of vegetation differs completely from that of all other vegetable plants; it is not a complete plant, but a portion of a plant, which can be taken strictly as neither a flower nor a fruit, but which nevertheless seems to be more like a fruit than any other vegetable product. The plant that produces the mushroom is a kind of subterranean moss, with white, filamentous, highly branched stems, from which the mushrooms grow; this plant is called mycelium; it is what gardeners call mushroom spawn. Mushroom cultivation. - The whole purpose of mushroom cultivation is to place the mycelium, or mushroom spawn, in the best conditions for fruiting. Mushroom spawn can only live at the expense of horse, donkey or mule manure. Horse and donkey manure are the best; however, they are the least used, because in areas where mushroom production is most advantageous, only horse manure is available in considerable quantities. In the countryside, when you only want to grow a moderate quantity of mushrooms for household consumption, there is no better manure than donkey or mule manure, wherever it is available. Production of spawn. - Before starting to cultivate mushrooms, even on a small scale, the first thing to do is to obtain good spawn. Mushrooms cannot be multiplied either by sowing their seeds (they don't produce any) or by taking cuttings from their outer parts. Mushroom spawn can be purchased in Paris from seed merchants, who are now able to ship it to all parts of France, thanks to the railroad network of which Paris is the hub. Mushroom spawn can also be made yourself, using a very simple process. Open a pit in dry soil, and fill it with good horse, donkey or mule manure. This manure must not be too mixed with straw; it must 1 above all be dry rather than wet, and contain no i foreign bodies, nor dry or fresh hay; all these materials are detrimental to the formation of the spawn. Once the pit is full and the manure moderately trodden, about half of the soil extracted from the pit is placed on top, and the operation is complete. After three to five weeks, depending on the season, when the pit is reopened, the manure is converted into a mass of mushroom spawn. You can also, as market gardeners in Paris often do, build up a small layer, as for mushroom production, and when it is well penetrated by the mycelium, dismantle it without giving it time to produce, and sell the substance or use it as mushroom spawn; the spawn obtained by the latter process is considered the best; it's what gardeners call blanc vierge. Whichever way it is produced, blanc has the singular property of being able to be preserved almost indefinitely, provided it is kept dry. If after a year, or even several years, dry spawn is returned to the right growing conditions, it behaves like fresh spawn and can give rise to abundant mushroom production. Manure preparation. - Around Paris, mushroom production is an important and lucrative industry, carried out exclusively by people who have no other occupation. To get an idea of this, it's enough to remember that several mushroom growers, as they are called, build layers several kilometers long in the immense underground tunnels from which the stone for Paris buildings is extracted. As they pay a high price for the manure they are obliged to buy to build layers of this size, it is clear that their industry requires considerable capital. Large-scale mushroom cultivation would not present any serious difficulties, if it were possible to build mushroom beds in the same way as hot, warm or dull beds are built for any other crop. But here, the role played by manure in the operation is no longer the same: it does not serve to produce the artificial heat necessary for the vegetation of this or that forced plant; it must be completely penetrated by the filaments of the mycelium, and these filaments must live at its expense, acquiring, by absorbing its substance, the property of producing mushrooms. If the layer is too hot, the spawn burns as it passes from white to black, and produces nothing; if it is too moist, the spawn cannot attach itself to it, and mushroom production is also nil. Experience alone, acquired through practice, gives the mushroom grower the knack for the correct preparation of the manure he uses, so that he almost always succeeds, whereas by apparently doing as he does, many inexperienced gardeners fail. Choice of manure. - First of all, manure must be chosen with discernment; manure from animals that eat too much fresh fodder does not always give good results. Manure from very large draft horses, which work hard and are therefore heavily fed, is to be preferred to any other. The first thing to do is to form a 1.30-meter-high, squarely-dressed millstone, from which hay, long straw and any foreign matter accidentally mixed in are carefully removed as it is put up, and which is levelled by compressing its surface by trampling. When operating in dry weather, the manure must be kept well moistened as the millstone is raised. After a strong burst of heat, it begins to turn white after a period of time which may vary according to the state of the temperature, but which never exceeds 12 days. The grindstone is then dismantled and immediately restored; 10 to 12 days later, it is reshaped for the last time, remade as at the start of the operation, and left to rest for a week. If all this work has been carried out correctly, the manure can be used to build up the mushroom beds. Location. - Layering. - The best location is a cellar free of humidity, a storeroom, or any other similar room where the air is renewed, but where light does not penetrate. Layers are given a height of around G0 centimeters, with a hump-backed shape, wide at the base and narrow at the top. After three or four days' rest, the layer is ready for larding. Barding a mushroom bed means inserting slabs of spawn, usually cut in a diamond shape, while lifting the manure. Two parallel rows are barded, equally spaced from each other, and equally distant from the base and the top of the layer. If the white takes well, the mycelium invades all parts of the layer within eight or ten days. We then sprinkle it with pulverized dry earth, which we gently tap on the surface of the layer with the back of a spade; this is what we call Goptering the layers, a final operation after which all we can do is wait for the mushrooms to show up. In the subterranean areas around Paris, the layers are gopted only with local tuff limestone, grated and pulverized. Production time. - When all goes well, a mushroom bed will produce for about three months, provided that, when harvesting the mushrooms, care is taken not to disturb the surface, not to remove mushrooms in the process of developing, and to put back a few handfuls of soil wherever the harvest has caused it to fall. When the layer is exhausted, if it is at a short distance from the wall of the room where it was established, and if this wall is salpêtré, a very curious vegetation phenomenon often occurs. The mycelium emerges from all sides of the layer, climbs up the walls or subterranean walls and produces a final crop of mushrooms, after which it dries out and dies. Based on this indication, attempts have sometimes been made, with success, to prolong mushroom production by watering the beds with various saline dissolutions; ammonium sulfate seems to have given good results; we recall these attempts because they are very worthy of repetition and can be expected to produce very useful progress in mushroom production. Manure from completely used mushroom beds is almost worthless as fertilizer; it has even acquired properties that are harmful to certain vegetable plants. If, for example, this manure is used to mulch strawberry beds, it poisons them in a way; the strawberry leaves turn red, the fruit hardens and no longer grows, and the strawberry plants have to be uprooted and the plantation renewed. The mushroom production method just described is unquestionably the most economical of all for large-scale cultivation, enabling Paris mushroom growers to deliver prodigious quantities of mushrooms for consumption at very reasonable prices. It is the only process that can be recommended to gardeners who want to produce mushrooms for sale. Those who have not seen professional mushroom growers at work will only succeed after some trial and error. Apart from our indications, there are modifications in practice which are easily discovered by experience, and which cannot be specified in advance because they depend on the feed of the animals whose manure is used, the local climate, the state of the temperature, and a host of other accidental causes. It should be noted that, in order to reach the precise degree of decomposition necessary for the production of the fungus, the manure must ferment in fairly large masses; for this reason, it is more difficult to achieve success when working in small quantities. I - 4 English method. - When you intend to produce only a moderate quantity of mushrooms for a family's use, you can, with less embarrassment and more certainty of success at the first attempt, use the following ab process, very common in England. In a pile of manure recently removed from the stable, from animals fed mainly on oats, broad beans and dry fodder, lia sort the value of two or three wheelbarrow loads of crot-- tin, without any mixture of bedding. The dung is crumbled by s hand to form as homogeneous a heap as possible. It is immediately used, without any further preparation, to form layers which are given a thickness of around 20 to 25 centimetres without treading; so that after a few days, their thickness is reduced to 12 or 15 centimetres by al packing. Then, towards the middle of their thickness, the white mushrooms are introduced, which take hold of them almost immediately and soon produce beautiful mushrooms whose production lasts for six weeks or two months, without ever being, all things considered, of an abundance comparable to that of the mushrooms on the layers laid out by the champigno--on nists. In the English method, layers of this kind are never established on the ground; they are placed on shelves with a rim, like those on a fruit tree, in a room that is both warm and dark. Often, the gardener of a large house where mushrooms are widely consumed will have a closed shed built against the wall of a single-sided greenhouse. Mushroom racks are arranged along this wall like the shelves of a library, one above the other; heat pipes communicating with the greenhouse heating system maintain a good temperature in what may be called the mushroom greenhouse. When only a small quantity is required, the layer is established, again by the same procedure, in a sufficiently wide and deep drawer, which occupies the underside of the kitchen table; the mushrooms are thus born as close as possible to the stove on which they are to be cooked. Without doubt, this method of production means that mushrooms do not fetch as low a price as those produced by mushroom growers, but the purpose for which they are cultivated is no less achieved. The properties of cultivated mushrooms. - We know how many deplorable accidents can occur when wild mushrooms of varying degrees of poisonousness are confused with those of harmless species. The danger of such misunderstandings does not exist, however, when we confine ourselves to cultivated mushrooms, between which no bad ones can be found. However, it is very useful for everyone to know that the best mushrooms, both cultivated and wild, are only perfectly good when they have just hatched. If the cultivated ones have aged enough before being picked for their inward-rolled edges to have unfolded, and the blades on the underside of the cap to have turned from purplish pink to brown or black, the mushrooms, although all belonging to the best species, have become bad. While retaining their pleasant, delicate flavor, they can cause, if not actual poisoning, at least cruel indigestion. Mushrooms should therefore be harvested every day, or twice a day when their rapid growth seems to require it, so that they can be delivered to the kitchen in the least harmful state; for mushrooms are a difficult food to digest, which many delicate people cannot tolerate, and which, when used without moderation, give rise to serious stomach ailments often attributed to other causes. In recent years, the truffle has been the subject of a large number of propagation attempts, which have not led to any serious results; but they have made it increasingly probable that the truffle is not a fungus. Indeed, there is every reason to believe that the truffle, whose internal context examined under the strongest microscope bears no resemblance to the tissue of true mushrooms, is an outgrowth analogous to the beguar and the walnut, and that this outgrowth is produced on the thinnest filaments of the root tips of some species of oak, in particular the chénevert, by the sting of an insect of the order Diptera and of the genus Cynips, in exactly the same way as the sting of another Cynips 2 2 3 - E 2 produces on the veins of the oak leaf the external "excrescence" known as the Galle nut. We know that many female insects bury themselves in order to deposit their eggs within reach of the substances necessary for the nourishment of the worms or larvae to which these eggs must give birth; there is therefore nothing but natural in admitting that the female of a cy8 I S nips buries herself in order to deposit her eggs in the roots of the oak, whose extravasated sap would be the truffle. At the Great Exhibition of 1855, a landowner in the Vaucluse department claimed the proposed price for the artificial multiplication of truffles; the commission delegated to visit his truffle fields found vast areas planted with holm oaks, known as chènes truf- fiers. Truffles were indeed found at the foot of some of these oaks, but since there was no evidence that they were the product of cultivation, the commission declared that the solution to the problem remained to be found. Twenty-five years ago, Count de Noë obtained truffles in considerable quantities by burying truffle peelings under oak trees; but he obtained them by chance, never at will. If it is to be solved, it will be through the study of the truffle cynip, its habits and its particular mode of multiplication. CHAPTER XXVII New or little cultivated vegetables. New or little cultivated vegetables. - Diff̂cultés of their introduction. - Sweet potato or batate. - Calture. - Cutting out shoots. - Spacing. - Tuber preservation. - Species and varieties. - Dioscoree or Chinese yam. - Suitable soils. - Multiplication by bulblets. - Precautions for uprooting. - Oralide crenelée - Tuber planting. -- Spacing. - Stem layering. - Tuberous nasturtium. - Poor quality of tubers. - Psoralier or piquotiaue. - Its uses in America. - Di Eculte of its cultivation in Europe. - Uhuco. - Chervil bu beur. - Tetragon. - Its superiority over spinach in summer. - Cultivation. - Pe-tsai, Chinese cabbage. - Quinoa. New vegetables are making slow and difficult headway in European vegetable gardens. The amateur gardener is never in a hurry to adopt a dish whose flavor deviates even slightly from those to which he is accustomed; the professional gardener is in even less of a hurry to cultivate any vegetable, however excellent, whose sale is uncertain. A few new varieties, some recently introduced, others of long standing, are nevertheless making progress, and seem destined to take a distinguished place in our vegetable gardens in the not too distant future. The plants we have yet to discuss. In order of their relative importance, among the root vegetables, sweet potato or batato, tuberous nasturtium, edible psoralier, ulluco and bulbous chervil; among the edible leaf vegetables, tetra one and pe-tsai or Chinese cabbage; and among the plants whose seeds are used, dotique and quinoa. SWEET POTATO. - Despite its health-giving properties, the voluminous, nourishing root of the sweet potato has not taken a very important place in the diet, even in the south of France, where its cultivation is assured of success. This is due to its particular flavor, which is excellent, but too sweet; it can only be eaten in the same way as all sweet foods, from time to time as a delicacy; it cannot form part of the usual diet, like carrots or potatoes. It is also difficult to store over winter. Cultivation. - The potato can only be grown in the open air in the climate of our southernmost departments; it cannot withstand even moderate cold. In the climate of Paris, beautiful tubers are planted in a warm layer of potting soil towards the end of March or in the first days of April. They soon begin to sprout and give very numerous sprays, which are successively removed from the 10th to the 15th of May, to be placed in the open air in good garden soil that has been deeply ploughed and generously smoked. Ordinary spacing is 30 centimetres in rows spaced one metre apart; 1.30 metres may even be left between rows for species whose tubers are to become very large. Potato shoots grow with the greatest of ease, whether or not they have roots when they are first planted. In no time at all, their bindweed-like stems cover the whole ground; the potato suffers no vegetation other than its own. Tuber preservation - When the harvest is small, the best way to preserve tubers is not to pull them out. At harvesting time, at the end of September or during October, depending on the temperature, glass frames are placed on the potato beds to prevent autumn rains from drying out the soil; wilted stems are removed and the surface of the soil is cleaned. During the frosts, the frames are covered with litter and straw mats, as if they were housing a crop of delicate plants that needed to be protected from the cold. Tubers are harvested only in proportion to consumption needs. The most valuable provisions are kept in the cellar in dry sand, but despite all possible precautions, some are always lost. Species and varieties. - Several varieties of sweet potato have been introduced into European gardens, some of which have flowered and produced fertile seeds. Sowing these seeds has produced some fine new varieties, all more or less widespread in cultivation. The most esteemed are the white from Ile de France, the long red, the violet, the ovoid and the yam. Some of these varieties can, with very careful cultivation, produce tubers weighing several kilograms. DIOSCORÉE or CHINESE IGNAME. - One cannot make the same objection to dioscorea or Chinese yam as to sweet potato; it is not sweet; its slightly prolonged flavor, although different from that of potato, associates it with all kinds of seasonings; it is at least as nourishing as potato. But a serious difficulty slows down its propagation; it only produces considerable yields after two years of cultivation, and although these yields are equal to or greater in quantity than those of two potato crops, it is more or less inconvenient for the gardener for part of his land to be "occupied for two years, without interruption, by the same crop. As it plunges its tubers vertically into the earth, it needs very deep soil; it thrives there even when the soil is only moderately fertile, and with a moderate dose of fertilizer. he stems produce a profusion of bulblets in the leaf axils, which serve to multiply the plant. These bulblets are planted in rows spaced 25 centimetres apart, 18 centimetres apart in the rows. The following year, finger-sized tubers from these bulblets can be lifted and planted in rows spaced 30 centimetres apart, 20 centimetres apart in the rows. Extraction requires great care, as the tubers, which are never very large in diameter, are often quite long. Cultivation of the Chinese yam is still in its infancy in Europe; among recently introduced food plants, it is the one that seems to have the most future, both in the field and in the kitchen garden. CRENELLATED OXALIS. - The slightly acid taste of crenellated oxalis tubers is not to the taste of most consumers; potatoes are preferable in every respect. The very small tubers only become numerous through continual cultivation, and the real value of the harvest does not sufficiently reward the gardener. All these disadvantages explain why the crenellated oxalis fell into neglect in France, after a period of favor when it was first introduced. Oxalis tubers are planted in April, in the open air, in rows 50 centimetres apart and 1 metre apart. As the stems lengthen, they are marcotted, leaving only their tips above ground, so that they eventually occupy the whole ground. The tubers are harvested as late as possible, in autumn, and stored in the cellar like potatoes. They can only be eaten if boiled in the first water, which is then discarded, and which strips them of some of their acidity, after which they are prepared like potatoes. TUBEROUS NASTURTIUM. - Tuberous nasturtium is only mentioned here because a few horticulturists are still working on it, in the hope of improving its tubers. In their present state, tubers of tuberous nasturtium have only one defect: they cannot be eaten. Cultivation of this plant is similar to that of the potato. Those who wish to try to improve it should force it into the soil, so that it flowers early, produces ripe seeds and multiplies seedlings, which can produce good sub-varieties. PSORALIER OR PIQUOTIANE. - This plant, long known to botanists, was the subject of great expectations a few years ago. M. Lamarre-Piquot, who substituted his own name for that of the psoralier by naming the plant piquotiane, saw in it a plant worthy of rivaling the potato, and here's why. The continent of North America still contains immense deserted regions, periodically battered by fur hunters. The edible psoralea, which grows abundantly in these solitudes, is the great food resource of the hunting bands. Although small, its root is very nourishing, with an excellent taste, suitable for accompanying meat, and for all kinds of fatty and lean seasonings; it was hoped that, as the plant's mode of vegetation was not known, cultivation would increase the volume of the roots, and that the psoralier, now known as piquotiana, would be a good acquisition for the vegetable gardens of Europe, as well as for large-scale cultivation. But when the cultivation of the psoralier was first tried, it turned out that, on the one hand, the plant required several years of cultivation to reach a diameter of only a few centimetres, and that, on the other, it was very difficult to produce fertile seeds in Europe, the sowing of which could have given rise to improved varieties; it therefore had to be abandoned after many unsuccessful trials, trials which have not, moreover, been entirely abandoned. ULLUCO. - Great hopes had also been pinned on ulluco, the main food of part of the Peruvian population; but in Europe, ulluco tubers, quite similar to small yellow potatoes, form late, remain small and are not worth cultivating. In fact, from a gastronomic point of view, they are so bad that, like nasturtium 14, they have the slight defect of not being edible. BULBOUS CHERVIL. - Cultivation of this chervil is straightforward, but its tubers, so far not very large, are no more suitable for cooking than those of the preceding plants. However, gardeners with time on their hands and land to spare can multiply seedlings of bulbous chervil and test their cultivation under a variety of conditions. They will probably obtain a very good food plant for livestock, and will be able to sell the tubers with advantage, to introduce it into field cultivation. TERRAGON. - This plant, whose beautiful green leaves have the same properties as spinach, does not have the disadvantage of climbing in summer as spinach does. Provided it is sufficiently watered, it continues to produce abundant fresh leaves throughout the summer. It is grown for this reason in many gardens; its taste differs so little from that of spinach, when its leaves are prepared in the same way, that it is difficult not to be mistaken. Tetragonia seed is sown in March and April, 60 to 80 centimetres apart in all directions between the holes, because the plant radiates outwards and occupies a very large space. The leaves grow back as they are picked, especially when the ends of the stems are pinched from time to time. Tetragonia is so easy to grow, and its health-giving properties are so well established, that it deserves a place in every well-tended vegetable garden in summer. PE-TSAI, or Chinese cabbage. - Pe-tsai, widely favored at the time of its introduction to Europe, is completely forgotten today. Strictly speaking, it is neither a cabbage, nor a salad, which apples with difficulty, or rather never apples in the true sense of the word, and which is not distinguished by any superiority over our European vegetables for the same uses. Pe-tsai seed is sown either in the field or in a nursery for transplanting; the plant is so tender that the same precautions must be taken when transplanting it as when transplanting a romaine plant grown under a bell. The two-year-old seed is the one that most easily produces apples of passable volume; but, despite the most careful cultivation, it almost always happens that most of the plant flowers and goes to seed in the first heat of its first year, which deprives the petsai of any nutritional value. DOLICA. - The cowpea, originally from Egypt, does not tolerate the Paris climate; even when we manage to grow it at the foot of a south-facing wall, it is so unproductive that the least esteemed of our bean species are far superior to it. It is also grown as a dwarf bean without oars. It is a highly esteemed vegetable in our southern departments, especially in the Var, where it is grown on a large scale in open fields; it is as productive there as in its native country. QUINOA. - Quinoa is easy to grow: the seed is sown in spring in good, ordinary garden soil, where it thrives without any special cultivation care. But quinoa seed, whose flour is one of the main foods of the inhabitants of South America, has an unbearable bitterness in Europe, which is very difficult to get rid of. Nevertheless, quinoa can still be cultivated in the vegetable garden, either for its leaves, which are eaten as spinach but are no match for tetragonia, or for its extraordinarily abundant seeds, which are used to feed all kinds of poultry. CHAPTER XXVIII Medicinal plants. Medicinal plants. - Marshmallow - Propagation. - Harvesting and drying of roots and stems. - Patience. - Cultivation at the water's edge. - Harvesting and drying of roots - Soapwort. - Cultivation. - Desiccation and preparation of roots. - Peppermint. - Round-leaf mint, or balsam. - Pouliot mint. - Lemon balm. - White-flowered dracocephalus - Wormwood. - Dwarf variety. - Sage. - Harvest leaves. - Violet. - Natural seedlings. - Lavender. - Suitable location. - Roman chamomile. - Bittersweet. - Harvest and dry stems. - Angelica. - How to candy the ribs. - Anise. -Coriander. - Harvesting their seeds. As a complement to the cultivation of vegetable plants, we can consider the cultivation of a certain number of medicinal plants taken from among those used in greater quantities by pharmacists, herbalists, perfumers and distillers, and which are not found in the wild; most of these plants belong to the field of domestic medicine; they are therefore perfectly at home, albeit in lesser quantities, in vegetable gardens whose produce is not intended for sale. The most commonly used medicinal plants in this category are: marshmallow, soponaria and patience, grown for their roots; mint, lemon balm, wormwood and sage, for their stems and leaves; violet, lavender and Roman chamomile, for their flowers; bittersweet and angelica, for their stems; aniseed and coriander, for their seeds. GUIMAUVE. - Marshmallow thrives in all types of soil; the lightest, even when of mediocre fertility, is particularly suitable when it is deep enough for it to establish itself with its long, strong roots. If you sow marshmallow seeds in the spring, the roots won't be ready for harvesting for two or even three years; this is why gold generally prefers to propagate marshmallow by dividing clumps in the spring, which gives an abundant harvest of roots every two years. Fresh roots are stripped of their bark before being dried, suspended in bundles in a well-ventilated room, where they can be stored indefinitely. The stems and leaves of marshmallow, rich in mucilaginous principles, are used fresh or dried for emollient decoctions; they are no less useful than the roots themselves. SAPONAIRE - Single-flowered soapwort is frequently found in the wild, and its leaves, crushed in water, give it some of the properties of soap water. The roots of this plant are used medicinally as a depurative. A double-flowered variety whose roots have the same properties is cultivated in gardens; it thrives in damp soils and must be watered abundantly in summer; it is propagated exclusively by separating its many offspring at the onset of winter, the most suitable time for harvesting the roots, which can be kept dry and used in herbal teas, after being split lengthwise and cut into pieces a few centimeters long. PATIENCE. - The dried root of the Patience plant is one of the most widely used and effective bitter teas. In gardens with a water feature, or with a trickle of running water, a few clumps of Patience growing along the water's edge produce a beautiful ornamental effect with their ample green foliage, when combined with other aquatic plants. In the absence of such a location, Patience can only be planted in cool, deep soil; it requires no cultivation care and multiplies by splitting the clumps to harvest the roots, which are best harvested in spring rather than autumn. The best way to preserve Patience roots for medicinal use is to cut them into small sections 14. so that they dry quickly, and to preserve them carefully from humidity, which could cause them to mildew. MINT. - Among the aromatic plants of the Eupean climate, mint is unquestionably the most useful. For domestic medicine, it is the infusion that provides the most immediate relief from nervous affections and stomach diseases. It succeeds only in fresh, light soil, where it forms very voluminous clumps. It should not be cut to dry until the tops of the stems are ready to flower. If well watered, it grows back immediately and can be cut a second time before the end of the summer. The commonly cultivated species has narrow, pointed leaves and a penetrating scent; it's known as peppermint, and is to be preferred to all others when you intend to grow it for sale. However, if you only wish to have a small supply of mint for household use, you may prefer round-leaf mint, known in the countryside by the vulgar name of balsam; this mint is found throughout France on the banks of still waters. By transplanting a few vines, either to the banks of a body of water, or to fresh ground that is wetted thoroughly every day in summer, round-leaf mint produces strong clumps that can be cut at least three times from spring to autumn. The sweet smell and delicate flavor of this mint make it eminently suitable as a substitute for tea. An infusion of round-leaf mint is taken in the evening, not only when digestion is difficult, but also in perfect health. Pouliot mint is also often found in uncultivated areas, on the underside of ditches. This small, very minty species can be grown anywhere and, like most other mints, does not need humidity. You can carry clumps of it from distance to distance in the grass borders of flowerbed compartments, or in a corner of the vegetable garden. Its properties are the same as those of other mints; its scent is closer to that of round-leaf mint than peppermint. MINT. - The most sought-after plant for making lemon balm water, whose properties and uses are well known to everyone, is not lemon balm, but a plant of a related genus, commonly known as melissa, although its real name is dracocephalus. There are two varieties, one with red flowers, the other with white; the white is the more highly regarded. Dracocephalus is an annual plant whose seeds are sown in spring in good, ordinary garden soil; it requires no special cultivation care. It is cut when in full bloom and sold to perfumers and distillers, who use it fresh. ABSINTHE. - Although some of the wormwood used in large quantities by distillers in Paris and the large cities of the départements comes either from Switzerland or from the French Jura mountains, growing wormwood in the dry, hot soils that are particularly suited to it is no less advantageous. The best wormwood for sale is the black variety, very fragrant, frankly bitter and less persistent than grand wormwood. The plant is perennial; it is multiplied by dividing clumps in spring, and cut when its foliage is most abundant, just as it begins to flower. SAGE. - Sage, of which several beautiful varieties are grown in flowerbeds for the brilliance of their flowers, some red in various shades, others dark purple, is very little used today in European medicine, even though it possesses properties similar to those of mint: in a few localities in our maritime departments, sage is grown on a fairly large scale for export to China; the Chinese value our sage as much as we value their tea. As the leaf is the only useful part of the sage plant, the young shoots are pinched off to make them branch out, and the flower stalks are removed before the flowers bloom, in order to obtain a greater abundance of leaves, which are dried in the shade and retain their sweet, aromatic scent for a very long time. When these leaves are properly dried, sage cultivation is very lucrative. VIOLET. - In spring, pharmacists, confectioners and perfumers use considerable quantities of violet flowers, not including those kept dry for use in pectoral infusions. Large-scale cultivation of violets in the vicinity of major cities therefore has no shortage of outlets for its products. It is rather difficult to propagate violets by sowing their seeds, whose capsules open when ripe, making them difficult to harvest. Nevertheless, young plants can be obtained easily enough to renew plantations by natural sowing. If you don't harvest the last violet flowers, the seeds that follow them spread to the ground and germinate immediately. As soon as the young plant is strong enough, it should be uprooted and transplanted in a row, 20 to 25 centimetres apart in all directions; the plantation flowers abundantly in spring the following year. LAVENDER. This plant is one of the most commonly used in the perfume industry for the preparation of various cosmetics, including lavender eau-devie. These flowers are also sold in large quantities in bundles, which are wrapped in clean linen to give them a pleasant scent and keep insects away. The gardener can multiply lavender in borders around vegetable garden squares with southern exposure, with the certainty of selling the flowers at a decent price. Lavender flowers well only in warm, dry soils; it can be propagated by dividing clumps in spring. ROMAN CHAMOMILE. - The flowers of Roman chamomile are frequently used in stomachic infusions in common medicine; the presence of this plant is also an ornament to the vegetable garden, where it can be grown in borders, in the same soil and exposure conditions as lavender. Roman chamomile is particularly sensitive to excess humidity, which is detrimental to its flowering. If you wish to harvest a large enough quantity of its flowers for sale, you should avoid growing it around those vegetable garden squares that need to be watered often and generously. Roman chamomile can only be propagated by dividing clumps. BITTERSWEET. - The stems of bittersweet, split lengthwise, dried and cut like soapwort roots, are frequently used medicinally. The plant, which is sarmentose and climbing, is best placed along a trellis or cradle, where it decorates with its dark purple flowers, followed by clusters of bright red berries. Stems to be dried for medicinal use should be cut in autumn, when the leaves have fallen. ANGELICA. - Angelica cultivation is confined, so to speak, to a few localities where confectioners use large quantities. Everywhere else, angelica cannot be cultivated for sale; but a few plants can be grown in the vegetable garden, in order to preserve the ribs or petioles of the leaves, which are quite similar to those of celery. All you need to do is put them in boiling water for a few seconds, then, after letting them drain well, dip them several times in a very-cooked white sugar syrup. Candied angelica is very stomachic. The seed is sown either in spring or summer, as soon as it reaches maturity. The plant is placed 80 cm apart in all directions in cool soil. The plant flowers after three years, after which it must be replanted. ANISE AND CORIANDER. - These two plants are grown in much the same way as fennel; they belong to the same family. The seeds, harvested as they mature, can be stored dry in a dry place. (See FENNEL, chap. XX.) When the placement of the seed is assured, the cultivation of anise, which is used more frequently than coriander, is quite advantageous. re=eTROISIÈRE PARTIE ARBRES FRUITIERS CHAPTER XXIX Preliminary notions. - Multiplication. Benefits of fruit tree cultivation. - Current state of fruit tree cultivation in France. - Necessity of propagating the right species. - Classification of fruit trees. - Fruit tree cultivation. - Multiplication. - Sowing. - Overview of the Van Mons system. - How to obtain good seeds and pits for sowing. - Preparing the soil. - Fertilization. - Pre-cultivation of vegetables. - Core stratification. - Sowing seeds. - Transplanting seedlings. - Grafting. - Need for regular order in the nursery. - Transplanting grafted plants. - Spacing. Man has all the more reason to enjoy cultivating fruit trees and harvesting their fruit, since fruit, more than any other garden product, is his work. In the cold or temperate countries "inhabited by the most active and enlightened part of the Roman race, nature does not produce any really good fruit on its own. Pears and apples, for example, as found in the wild in our woods, are small and unpalatable. It's by happy sowing, by effe, by accidental cross-breeding, by cultivation in the most varied conditions of soil, climate and exposure, that good fruit has come into being, and continues to improve day by day. Is there any fruit that can be eaten with greater pleasure than that of a tree that has been grafted, planted and cultivated with assiduous care, from the moment when the seedling or stone destined to become a tree was entrusted to the earth, to the moment when the first fruit of this tree appears on the table, at dessert? As for the professional gardener, it can be said that it is the cultivation of fruit trees, either to sell them fully trained, or to sell their produce, that most surely leads him to an honest ease, acquired through intelligent work. A glance at the current state of fruit tree cultivation in France shows how much remains to be done in this branch of horticulture, especially now that the completion of our railroad network means that fruit can be easily transported from the places of production to the markets where they are sure to find buyers. In most cantons, however, where the soil and climate are particularly favorable to all kinds of fruit trees, gardens and orchards produce only fruit that well-behaved cows and self-respecting rabbits would refuse to eat. Yet there is no shortage of good fruit, and horticulturists are not to be blamed for laziness or carelessness. Since the beginning of this century, they have provided gardening with a wide choice of excellent novelties in every series of fruit trees. But few of these novelties, some of which are no longer in their infancy, have so far migrated from the amateur's garden to that of the professional gardener; if their fruits appear on the market, it is only from time to time, and by exception. The amateur who sets his sights on propagating the best species of fruit, according to the soil and climate conditions of his canton, is therefore doing something that is both pleasing to himself and useful to society as a whole. Horticultural fruit trees naturally fall into three divisions, the first of which includes seeded fruit trees, the second 2 u 3 - 9 4 9 4 5 11 1 I 1 9 9 2 9 4 stone fruit trees, and the third berry fruit trees, including fig trees and edible fruit bushes that deserve a place in the fruit garden. Fruit trees that don't fit into any of these divisions, such as walnut, chestnut and beech, are not, strictly speaking, part of gardening. The cultivation of fruit trees includes, in the broadest sense of the term, a number of important operations, the most important of which are: the multiplication, pruning and management of these trees. Fruit tree multiplication. - Multiplication of fruit trees is the nurseryman's most important industry, from the moment the tree is born from the germ of the seed or stone, to the moment it is sold, fully trained, to be planted permanently in the place where it is to complete the entire course of its plant life. Seedlings and grafts are the main means of propagation used by nurserymen. Seedlings. - It is a great and generally accepted mistake to believe that the propagation of fruit trees by sowing is the exclusive province of the professional nurseryman. Anyone with a large enough garden can sow a certain quantity of pips and stones every year, with the well-founded hope of obtaining novelties of great value. This hope is based on a fact whose significance has only been fully understood since the successes achieved in Belgium and France, which have given rise to the best fruit now found in orchards all over Europe. Many excellent species of fruit trees flower at the same time, and insects, flitting from one flower to another, inevitably make accidental crosses. Fruit seeds from trees in a fruit garden containing a selection of the best species can always give rise to new sub-varieties, which can be recommended for various reasons. If it happens 15 that the seedling obtained by sowing these pepins does not live up to expectations, this seedling is still used to graft the good species, and the gardener's trouble is not wasted. On this subject, we think it useful to mention the system of the famous Professor Van Mons (from Louvain), a system which was the starting point of a whole revolution in fruit gardens. Van Mons began sowing seedlings and pits at a very early age, and found that trees sown for the first time only ever produced bitter, inedible fruit. However, by sowing seedlings or pits from the fruit of these trees, the second generation already produces fruit superior to that of the first; the improvement progresses from generation to generation, and we end up with fruit that is as good, often better, and in any case almost always entirely different from that which provided the seed for the first sowing. We know that it takes a young seedling a considerable number of years before it decides to show its first fruit, so that a man's lifetime is too short to see the results of seedlings according to the Van Mons system, which doesn't say its last word until the fourth generation. But if we graft twigs only two years old onto vigorous trees sacrificed for this purpose, they quickly bear fruit, so that we reach the fourth generation without suffering too long a delay. Those wishing to complete an experiment of this kind should, to give themselves the best possible chance of success, initially sow only pepins of the finest fruit of each species. If they make a small sacrifice, they can obtain sufficient quantities either from restaurant owners in large towns, or from the main fruit merchants. The latter have a vested interest in keeping fruit of the best species for as long as possible, in order to sell them at a higher price; by prolonging their preservation, they inevitably lose some of it to rot. The pepins contained in fruit corrupted by over-ripening are the best of all for seedlings; these pepins can be collected from fruit trees for next to nothing. When you're working on a large scale, and just want to grow the plant you intend to graft by sowing seedlings, as is the practice in large nurseries, you sow seedlings selected from the pomace of fruits used to make cider, and from the stones of various fruits.

bought from confectioners, at a time when all stone fruits are used by them in considerable quantities to make jam. We also sow almonds and Damask and St Julien plum kernels; all these seedlings provide subjects for grafting. Preparing the terraïn. - The soil in which fruit tree seeds and kernels are sown must not be overly fertile. When sown in soil that has been brought to maximum fertility by the use of highly energetic fertilizers, young trees will grow rapidly in a short space of time; but their roots will be prone to canker disease, and if the purchaser places them in soil that is much less fertile than that of the nursery, several years will pass before they decide to vegetate properly. When the soil in the nursery needs fertilizing, it can be given quite abundantly a year before sowing. This fertilizer can be supplemented by a vegetable crop, which absorbs some of the fertilizer, and the following year the soil is in the best condition to start the nursery. Stratification. - Precious time would be lost if fruit tree cores were sown in the spring without preparation. To encourage their woody hulls to open up and obtain good emergence, they are laid out in alternate beds with fresh sand, in a cellar or other frost-free location: this is called stratifying the cores (see chap. VII, page 68). Piles of stratified cores are dismantled at the end of March or beginning of April, depending on the temperature. The kernels are then planted one by one, at the appropriate depth for each species, in gutters opened for this purpose; the radicle end that has already emerged from the kernel during stratification is trimmed, and you can be sure of obtaining a plant from each kernel. If sown without prior stratification, many kernels would not have emerged before the second year. Sowing seeds. - They are kept dry for sowing in March, in rows or broadcast. Amateurs whose seedlings are aimed at conquering new varieties should keep their seedlings of pits or pepins in order, giving repeated numbers to each compartment in their register, and not mixing seedlings from known species. At the end of autumn, when young trees lose their leaves and need to be transplanted, set aside those whose wood and foliage resemble those of the right species, and reserve them until they show their fruit by grafting onto old trees, carefully preserving the trace of their origin. Transplanting. - When a seedling loses its first leaves, it is not always of equal growth. Many nurserymen transplant just about everything, eliminating only the most defective and unwanted subjects; the amateur, who is not guided by the same considerations, may transplant only the best-conformed and most vigorous seedling, and sacrifice everything else. Transplanting distances vary according to the dimensions the trees are expected to acquire before being grafted in the nursery; no space should be spared so that the young trees, once grafted, receive the unobstructed air and light from all sides necessary for their development in good conditions. Once the grafting process has been resumed, the grafted trees are transplanted, i.e. transplanted one last time to the place they must never leave, until they leave the nursery. Grafting. - The various types of grafting applicable to fruit trees have already been described (see Grafting, ch. IX). In the nursery, it is best to delay grafting until the tree is strong enough to feed the graft. No less important is the careful matching of subject and graft. The professional gardener, and even the amateur, provided he is in the habit of observing fruit trees, knows the temperament of each species well enough; he is careful not to give grafts that are too vigorous to feed to more or less delicate subjects; likewise, he does not entrust grafts of delicate species to robust subjects; if he makes this mistake, the sap arrives in too great abundance and it is said, with good reason, that the subject has drowned his graft. It is especially among young, recently grafted trees that the most regular order is essential; without order, the gardener himself is unaware of what he has in his nursery; he can lose his reputation and alienate his clientele, by delivering cooking fruit trees for dessert fruit trees, and vice versa. When the grafts have taken hold, the grafted trees are transplanted one last time to the place where they are to finish growing. Nowadays, they are given much more space than they used to have in the nursery. The fact that fruit trees can be transplanted, so to speak, at any age, has been perfectly demonstrated, and wealthy enthusiasts prefer fully trained trees in the nursery to the very young trees planted in the past. The nurseryman who has his interests at heart must always be able to supply trees that are already strong, prepared for the various most advantageous shapes, so that the gardener only has to direct these trees without embarrassment, continuing a job well begun. It is easy to see that, in order to prepare the trees properly in their various forms, they must be spaced sufficiently apart when they are last transplanted to the nursery. CHAPTER XXX The fruit garden. - Planting. Fruit garden. - Spacing. - Trees requiring southern exposure. - Palissage à la loque. - Circumstances in which it should be preferred. - Oak trellis. - Advantages and disadvantages. - Palissage à la baguette. - Wire trellising. - Wire netting. - Fruit tree beds. - Distribution of fruit trees of various sizes - Spacing. - Site preparation. - Choice of trees in the nursery. - Transportation. - Root dressing. - Orientation. - Planting. - Most favorable times. - Root placement - English system of platforms for espaliered peach trees. Fruit garden. - The previous chapter showed how fruit trees can be multiplied at will by sowing and grafting. Before showing how each species of fruit tree should be pruned and trained in the various forms that suit it, it is necessary to give an idea of how to distribute these trees in a garden that is supposed to be devoted exclusively to this kind of cultivation, although most often fruit and vegetables are produced in the same garden, which in this case is both a vegetable and fruit garden. Espaliers. - In France's average climate, some of the best species of fruit trees can only produce good produce under espaliers and counter-espaliers; this is why the fruit garden, in addition to the walls it must be surrounded by at least on the north and east sides, must contain several dividing walls pierced with false doors, in order to multiply the surface area at the most favorable exposures for espaliered fruit trees. Peach trees, a few early apricot and cherry trees, and vines producing the best table grapes, cover the well-exposed surfaces of all these walls. The vines can be planted on the opposite side, so that their roots and those of the other fruit trees don't interfere with each other. The arms of the vine, which are to extend in cords at the top of the wall, are introduced on the southern side through openings made in the masonry for this purpose. The north side is planted with late-succession apple trees. Palissage à la loque. - To take full advantage of the warmth reflected by the wall, espaliered fruit trees need to be fixed or trellised, as the saying goes, either immediately on the surface of the wall, or on a trellis. Immediate trellising is only possible when the gardener can have the walls plastered solid enough for nails to be driven into them without detaching them. In Montreuil-aux-Pêches and the surrounding communes, where vast tracts of land are devoted exclusively to the cultivation of espaliered fruit trees, trellising is unheard of. The abundance of plaster, of which there are large quarries in the area, means that walls can be plastered solidly at low cost, and trellises can be placed on the plastered surface without any intermediary. If tree branches, especially those of peach trees, which are softer and less woody than others, were tied to the nails with rush or wicker ties, they would be more or less damaged. To avoid this inconvenience, gardeners get cloth clippings from the tailors' workshops, which women and children cut in their spare time, in pieces the shape of a long square. The gardener takes the branch of the peach tree he wants to trellis from one of these pieces, folded in half, then presses the point of a nail onto the two joined ends, and hammers it into the plasterwork of the wall. This highly economical and convenient method has serious drawbacks when espaliered trees need to be removed, either for annual cleaning of the surface of the branches facing the wall, or when it is necessary to give strength to a weak shoot by temporarily holding it in an inclined position in front of the wall, a method which never fails to produce results. In this case, when the tree has been trellised, there would be too many nails to move. Trellises. - Most gardeners, either out of taste or necessity, not having the elements of good trellising to hand, trellis their trees in espalier, either on a trellis or on wire. The most commonly used trellis is made of oak slats that cross to form square or diamond-shaped meshes; this type of trellis is fastened to the wall with large hooked nails. Trees attached to the wooden trellis by wicker ties are easily stripped in whole or in part. The trellis itself, divided into medium-sized pieces, can be easily removed for cleaning on both surfaces. This prevents the proliferation of insect pests that make their habitual home on the rear surface of the trellis, which can be periodically repainted to make it more durable. Compensating for these advantages, wooden trellis is very expensive. More often than not, when planting young espalier trees, the owner, simply to give his fruit garden a more pleasing appearance, has the entire surface of the walls covered with trellis. Many years must pass before the new planting reaches the top of the wall. In the meantime, the trellis remains exposed to the inclemency of the seasons; it deteriorates from year to year, so that its upper part is worn and must be renewed before it is used. In the part of Walloon Belgium that includes the provinces of Liége, Namur and Luxembourg, a more economical and rational method is used for trellising espaliered fruit trees. Rods of dogwood, or any other strong yet flexible wood, are fixed to the wall with hooked nails, behind the space covered by the young tree. As the tree grows, new rows of rods are added, suitably spaced out. If one of the rods is accidentally broken, it is replaced without disturbing the rest of the trellis; cleaning and untrimming are equally easy; trellising with rods, as it is called in countries where it is in use, prevents immediate contact between the wall and the espaliered trees; it combines all the advantages of wooden trellises, and has none of their disadvantages. Wire. - Wire can be used for trellising in two different ways. The most commonly used consists in fixing wooden uprights vertically along the wall. These uprights, set 2 or 3 meters apart, are pierced with holes through which horizontally-tensioned wires pass, in tiers spaced 25 to 30 centimeters apart; the spacing between the wires can vary according to the shape of the trees to be trellised on them. In townships close to factories, where wire is readily available at moderate cost, the entire wall surface is covered with a mesh similar to that of a rabbit warren; each mesh is 10 to 15 centimetres square, and nails with hooks from distance to distance secure this mesh to the wall; it has the advantage over all possible trellises of solidity and durability. It is not widely used, however, as it is very expensive to build. Clumps of fruit trees. - Once the two surfaces of each wall have been planted with espaliered trees, suitably matched, trellised according to local resources and spaced out in proportion to the dimensions they are to acquire, the rest of the fruit garden should be filled with the best fruit trees that the nature of the soil and the local climate will allow. The first step is to place a certain number of these trees on the edge of the flowerbed at the foot of the walls. These trees are directed as if they were espaliered; poles, some straight, others horizontal, hold the branches of the counter-spaliered trees in a direction parallel to the wall. If the garden has a higher, drier area than the rest, this is the place to plant a few high-stemmed open-air trees, mainly cherry, plum and apricot 15. trees, including one or two blackberry bushes, taking care not to place them on the edge of a pathway, as their fruit, which falls at every moment as they ripen, can stain clothing. Pyramid pear trees, which should be given as much space as possible in the fruit garden, should be placed at a sufficient distance from the walls so that their shade does not interfere with the ripening of the fruit of espaliered trees. To ensure that air and light, essential elements of fertility, circulate freely around the pyramid-shaped pear tree beds, the central part of the fruit garden is occupied by dwarf apple trees grafted on doucin, and dwarf apple trees grafted on paradis. These are combined with squares of raspberry, redcurrant and currant bushes. With this arrangement, everything is in its place in the fruit garden; open areas alternate with shady ones, and the available space is put to the best possible use, with each tree placed in the best conditions to grow and bear fruit without harming its neighbors, and without suffering from their proximity. Spacing. - The spacing of trees in a fruit garden can only be given as a rough guide; trees grow more or less because of the more or less vigorous nature of each variety, according to the degree of fertility of the soil. In soil of average fertility, high-stemmed open-air trees should be planted at 8 meters; pyramid-shaped trees at 4 or 5 meters; half-dwarf apple trees on doucin at 1.50 or 2 meters, and dwarf apple trees on paradise at only 1 meter. Preparing the ground. - Planting a fruit garden is a necessarily costly operation, the results of which, good or bad, must be prolonged indefinitely. Nothing must therefore be neglected if it is to be carried out in the best possible conditions. If the soil is clayey, compacted and lies on impermeable subsoil, drainage is essential. The soil must then be broken up to purge it of any stones and roots it may contain, mark the spot for each tree, open holes that are larger than they are deep, and leave the soil removed from the holes exposed to the air for at least a few months before planting the fruit trees. The amendments that fruit-garden soil may need should not be spared; calcareous amendments, mainly plaster, are always very useful for planting stone-fruit trees; on the contrary, a soil that is stronger than light is suitable for seed-fruit trees. If the soil in the fruit garden is very light, due to an excess of silica sand, it should be amended with a little lime and a heavy dose of clay. All these measures having been taken, we can proceed with the planting of fruit trees; but first of all, we must choose the trees that are going to be planted. Tree selection - Transport. - If, as is often the case, the gardener has not raised the trees he wants to plant himself, he should choose them early in the autumn at the nursery. If he waits until the planting season is over, he may no longer find the species and varieties he wants in good samples at the nursery. He will try to be present at the uprooting, to ensure that the young trees retain all their roots; he will supervise the packing, so that the trees don't have to suffer during transport. As a general rule, and except where it is impossible to obtain fruit trees for a large plantation from a distance, it is preferable to go to the nearest nursery, especially now that the practice of planting very young trees has been more or less abandoned. Trees bought fully trained from a nursery, however well packed they may be, always suffer to a greater or lesser extent during the journey from the nursery to the place where they are to be planted. The less time that elapses between uprooting and planting, the greater the chances of success. If the garden where the trees are to be planted is in a situation more exposed to the cold north and east winds than the nursery, it is useful to mark on the bark, with a brush stroke and an oil color, the side that faced north in the nursery, so as to preserve the same orientation for the planted tree. When the trees have suffered more or less from being transported in dry or cold weather, cow dung is mixed with a very small amount of water in a large tub, so as to form a clear broth in which to soak the roots at the very moment of planting. As for what we call root dressing, anyone planting fruit trees must be convinced of the truth that a fruit tree can never have too many roots. Root dressing should therefore be limited to removing the parts of the roots damaged by uprooting and transport, while retaining all the rest. Planting. - Advances in modern horticulture have completely changed people's ideas about planting fruit trees. For a start, people are no longer reluctant, as they once were, to pay prices commensurate with their real value for fairly large trees, which produce a fairly good crop of fruit the year they are planted, or at the very latest the following year. If, for construction or any other reason, fruit trees of a fairly advanced age have to be moved, they are no longer considered as lost. We know that by raising these trees in rootballs, and taking the wise precaution of coating the trunk and main branches with the mixture of cow dung and clay known to gardeners as Saint-Fiacre's ointment, the trees can be planted, so to speak, at any age. For those whose position does not oblige them to look too closely at the expense, it is always much better to plant well-developed trees that have been in the nursery for 4 to 6 years, than to plant very young trees whose first fruits will be delayed for several years. The best time to plant fruit trees is from the end of November to the end of April. In winter, trees can be planted as long as it doesn't freeze; in spring, trees in full sap, already with leaves, can be planted with as much chance of success as winter planting, provided they are protected from the effects of drought by timely watering, and evaporation of the sap is prevented by coating the bark with Saint-Fiacre ointment. This coating gradually falls off, when the tree no longer needs it and has taken possession of its new place with young roots. When planting a fruit tree, care must be taken not to bury its roots too deeply. The first thing to do is to line the bottom of the pit with a sufficiently thick layer of good soil, suitably amended as necessary, then spread the roots in all directions over this layer, avoiding forcing them and causing them to burst on insertion. The aim of this part of the work should be that, after planting, the roots run horizontally between two layers of soil, close enough to the surface to take full advantage of atmospheric influences. When the roots run too deep into the ground, not only does this result in excess vigour, causing the trees to produce a useless luxury of wood and hindering fruit production, but the fruit itself does not possess the qualities proper to its species, to the same degree as if the tree's roots had felt, during fruit formation, the beneficial action of alternating rain and sunshine. If the soil in the fruit garden has been properly drained, the roots of fruit trees can be spread a decimetre or two below the level of the surrounding soil, and then covered with the rest of the soil taken from the hole where the tree is planted. But if the soil has not been drained, or if, despite drainage, there is reason to fear excess moisture in the subsoil, then there is no need to fear planting flush with the ground, except to form a mound of good soil around the foot of the tree, so that its roots are sufficiently covered. Flats. - The same rules apply to the planting of espaliered fruit trees. A very rational method is followed in England, which should be imitated wherever espaliered peach trees are to be planted in soil and climate conditions similar to those in Great Britain. At the point where the peach tree's roots are to be planted, all the soil in the bed in front of the wall is removed; a pit is thus opened that is the full width of the bed, 50 to 60 centimetres deep, and 1.5 to 2 metres long. The bottom and sides of the pit are lined with paving and light brickwork, then some of the soil is replaced, and the peach tree is planted according to the principles outlined above. The peach tree's roots are prevented from overgrowing in this kind of embankment, which English horticulturists call a platform; the tree's vegetation then grows steadily; the equilibrium of the sap in all its parts is easy to maintain; the result is a regular production of the best possible fruit. Peach trees planted on a platform should be kept to an average size; allowing them to cover too much surface area on the espalier would give the trapped roots too many branches to feed, and the aim of this type of planting would be missed. CHAPTER XXXI pruning and management of trees with pepino fruits. Necessity of pruning fruit trees. - Pruning fruit trees. - Principles of pruning fruit trees - Balance of sap. - Natural pear tree vegetation. - Annual budding. - Staves. - Buds. - Twigs. - Pruned pear branch. - Various forms of pear tree management. - Simple horizontal cordon. - Trees à la Jamin. - Pruning. - Pinching. - Disbudding. - Their effects on pear trees. - Double horizontal cord. Necessity of pruning fruit trees. - Fruit trees planted in our gardens cannot be left to grow naturally. Although they belong to long-established breeds that have been modified by cultivation, if left unpruned, these trees would set fruit late, exhaust themselves producing a multitude of confused branches, and in no way meet the gardener's requirements. What matters to him is that the fruit tree should produce regular harvests for as long as possible, and that it should occupy precisely the place assigned to it in the garden, retaining the form in which it was originally established; this, in a nutshell, is the main aim of pruning, an aim that could not be achieved if the tree were left to its own devices. Pruning seeded fruit trees. - From an economic point of view, seedling fruit trees rank first in the fruit garden. The art of pruning them to develop and maintain their productive force is one of the most essential skills for both professional and amateur gardeners. For a very long time, this art was regarded as one of those mysteries accessible only to the initiated; the old gardeners, guided more by routine than by reasoning, carefully kept to themselves whatever notions they might possess in this respect, and passed them on to a small number of pupils only with great diffidence and circumspection. Butret's and Dalbret's treatises, remarkable for their time, published at the beginning of this century, paved the way for other works in which the correct methods for pruning fruit trees were brought within reach of the general public. The first to really set out the true principles in this field, and the sound applications of these principles, was Count Le Lieur, Intendant of the Crown Gardens, in his justly famous work entitled Pomone française. Since the publication of this work, the principles of pruning have become increasingly popular, so much so that nowadays it is impossible for anyone involved in gardening not to be familiar with them. Principles of fruit tree pruning. - These principles are based on a vital fact, which everyone can verify by direct observation. Each tree has its own particular mode of vegetation, its own way of successively forming its wood and fruit products, and of directing the course of the sap that sustains it; it is therefore impossible to prune according to uniform rules trees whose vegetation does not follow the same course; any rational method of pruning fruit trees must be based on observation and in-depth knowledge of the way they vegetate when not pruned. Another principle from which we must never deviate is to always seek to direct the sap without antagonizing it, and to distribute it as evenly as possible in all parts of the tree; this is what we call the principle of sap equilibrium, a principle equally applicable to all fruit trees, whatever the form in which they are trained. So, before considering pruning any tree, it's important to have an exact idea of the nature of its branches, its fruit production, the way it forms, and its overall vegetation. Natural vegetation of the pear tree. - Careful examination of a fully-formed pear branch reveals various branch sprouts, each easily distinguished from the others by the eyes or gems it bears, and by the characteristics of these eyes. The one-year-old branch or budFig. 54. Woody branch of the pear tree. Fig. 55. Bunch of pear tree flowers. nual (fig. 54), is the simplest of the pear tree's branches; it bears only woody eyes, all similar to each other; each of these eyes is formed in the axil of a leaf; this shoot is born during the summer, from a woody eye developed in spring; from the following year, it will show other characters. The upper eyes will open with wood, as the gardeners say; buds will emerge that are similar to the first, except for their length; the terminal eye will be used to extend the shoot. The lower eyes will not open like the upper ones; they will grow larger or smaller, protected by persistent scales, and their base will be surrounded by two or three leaves. Every year, the number of leaves will increase, the bud support, marked by as many scars as there have been successive leaves to protect it, will lengthen more or less; the bud will grow and eventually open into a bunch of flowers followed by fruit (fig. 55). All this, if the tree is not pruned, will take a considerable number of years. Not all branches of a pear tree are buds. Others, short and stubby, ending in a fruit bud more or less advanced in its development, bear only fruit buds; these are called Lambourdes (fig. 56); they are the most valuable of the pear tree's fruit-bearing branches. On lambourdes, groups of fruit buds are often very close together, placed on a common, swollen, fragile support, furrowed across the scars left by the fall of the leaves that helped feed it; these are called bursae (fig. 57). DuringFig. 56. Pear tree stalk. Fig. 57. A pear tree bursa. a woody eye is found among the fruit buds, the gardener is quick to encourage its development, even if it means sacrificing part of the fruit, in order to rejuvenate the bursa by attracting sap, in the hope of giving birth to a lambourde. In addition, the pear shoot has small, thin branches bearing buds of varying degrees of development; these are called twigs (fig. 58); the fruit buds are very evenly distributed on all the branches of the shoot, at their lower end. Here is an unpruned pear shoot, three years old; all its terminal branches are buds bearing exclusively woody eyes. The other, older parts have a few buds which will eventually flower, but not one of which is yet ready to blossom; there is no bursa, lamburd, twig or branch ready to become one of these productions (fig. 59). Opposite this branch is another of the same age, pruned regularly from its first year. The woody branches that were not useful for fermation of the framework, and from which no fruit-bearing branches could be expected, were removed; the terminal bud extended the branch, not Fig. 58. Twig Fig. 59. Unpruned pear tree. branch, as if it had been left to its own devices, but moderately, by pruning each year on a good wood eye. The sap, no longer diverted by a multitude of superfluous buds, has flowed back to the bottom of each branch, many of which bear fruit buds, bursae and short twigs that will become lambourdes. A comparison of these two branches gives an exact idea of the application of the principles of rational pear pruning, and the results of this pruning (fig. 60). Fig 60. Pruned pear tree branch. Ge 9 3 Various forms of pear tree management. - Pruning, as has already been pointed out, is not only intended to regulate the growth of a tree and the production of fruit; it must also give it a specific shape, according to the gardener's views, and maintain it in this shape: this is what we call training a tree. Pruning and training of fruit trees therefore run in parallel. Each type of fruit tree can be trained in a number of ways, depending on its purpose and the place assigned to it in the fruit garden. The main shapes suitable for pear trees are the horizontal cordon, single or double, the pyramid, the cattail, which differs little from the horizontal cordon, the spindle, also known as a colonnade, and the vase or basket. When pear trees are planted in espaliers or center-espaliers, they are nowadays only grown in the two forms of simple and double palmette. The other forms in which pear trees were once grown in espaliers have been completely abandoned, to such an extent that it would be difficult today to find pear trees for espalier or counter-espalier that are not prepared for simple or double palmette. Horizontal cordon. - Of all the forms in which pear trees can be trained, the horizontal cordon is the most recently introduced. Pear trees in this form are known in the horticultural trade as Jamin trees, after the skilled horticulturist to whom this new form is due (fig. 61). Like all possible forms, the horizontal cordon starts from a young tree grafted the previous year, better on quince than on franc, i.e. on a subject obtained from pear seedlings. The latter is generally unsuitable for trees grown in a form that allows them to develop very little. The graft has been pruned on a good eye, and this eye, opened into a vigorous bud, has given rise from spring to autumn to the shoot which is to become a tree (fig. 62). If the horizontal cordon is to be simple, as soon as the twig begins to drop, i.e. to pass from the herbaceous to the woody state, after the movement of the second sap in August, we incline it without forcing it, on the side where it should be established horizontally, in which position we fix it 50 centimetres from the ground, either on a wire stretched by means of two stakes, or on a strand of trellis supported by the same Fig. 62. One-year-old pear tree. If, when first planted, the horizontal cordon were allowed to grow too long, the eyes on the one-year-old branch, all of which are woody, would be too slow to develop into fruit buds or fruit production. It is therefore pruned according to its strength at a certain distance from the bend. The following year, the shoot coming from the eye on which we have pruned is also shortened according to its strength; the cordon thus gradually reaches a length of 1.50 to 2 meters, which it must not exceed. The buds that develop along its length, between the bend and the terminal shoot, are pruned shorter or shorter to obtain fruit-bearing branches, or removed altogether if they are badly placed and disturb the harmony of the tree. Pruning is not the only resource available to the gardener for the management of his fruit trees; he also has pinching, almost as useful as pruning itself, disbudding and breaking to regulate their vegetation. The application of these operations to pear trees in horizontal cordon, the least complicated form of all, makes their usefulness perfectly clear for trees pruned in any other form. Pinching consists in cutting back, in summer, the part of a bud that has not yet passed from the herbaceous to the woody state; it stops the useless extension of the bud, enlarges its lower eyes, and hastens their conversion into buds or fruiting branches. When the horizontal cordon pear tree has reached the length it should retain, its extension bud is pinched off, then pruned in winter, and the bud that follows it is treated in the same way in subsequent years, so that the horizontal cordon ceases to lengthen. If buds develop along the cordon, they are pinched off in the same way, so that their lower eyes can benefit, becoming fruit buds. Disbudding, whose effects differ from those of pinching, consists in suppressing a herbaceous bud at the start of its growth. On regularly pruned trees, many buds are always born here and there from misplaced eyes, which the gardener cannot allow to develop, even halfway, because he does not expect them to produce fruit. These buds must be completely removed, which requires a great deal of care and discernment, so as not to have, later on, reason to regret buds removed inconsiderately. Breaking is the complement of pinching; it consists in breaking buds that have become woody after the second sè́ve. If they were pruned instead of broken, these buds would not be stopped completely enough in their extension; the eye below the cut would immediately start again in a new bud, and the desired effect would not be produced. On the broken bud, the eye below the break does not start up again; the entire sap turns to the benefit of the eyes that are to become fruit buds. Thus, by pruning proper, the gardener has given the horizontal pear tree the shape and length it needs; by pinching, he has prevented the buds from developing too much, preparing them for fruiting; by disbudding, he has eliminated buds that would have disturbed the harmony of the tree's shape; by breaking, finally, he has prepared the retained buds that have already become woody to take on fruit production. 1 The same operations performed on trees grown in any other form produce the same results. We had to demonstrate the first applications on a pear tree in a single horizontal cordon, for the sake of clarity. To form the double horizontal cordon, more commonly used than the single, we let two buds develop on the right and left of the tree being pruned for the first time, instead of one, and we bend these two buds, one to the right, the other to the left. They are usually allowed to grow to a length of 2 meters from their starting point; the rest of the pruning and handling is the same as for the single horizontal cordon uia pear tree. CHAPTER XXXII Pruning pear fruit trees (continued). Pyramid pear trees. - Pyramid formation. - Spiral arrangement of lateral branches - Gradual extension of the spire. - Cattail. - How it differs from the pyramid. - Why it is abandoned - Spindle or column - Size of roots - Mandatory stakes. - Pear tree in vase or basket - How to establish it - Its disadvantages - Pear tree for espalier in simple palmette - Shaping the palmette. - Double palmette. - Pruning and training. - Half-dwarf apple on doucin. - Dwarf, on paradise. - Normandy. - Freeing dwarf apple trees when their graft is buried. The indications given in the previous chapter contain all the principles of pruning trees with pear fruits, and their application to the simplest form in which the pear tree can be trained. When it comes to pruning pear trees into any other shape, the same principles are applied in practice. Pyramid-shaped pear tree. - The pyramid shape (fig. 63) is the most commonly used for pear trees, either in the fruit garden proper, or in the beds that frame the vegetable garden squares. Pear trees in this form do not cast too thick a shadow on their neighbors or on the surrounding parts of the vegetable garden; their fruit, receiving air and light in all directions, possess all the qualities proper to their species; once well established, pyramid-shaped pear trees easily maintain good vegetation; Unless they are left to careless hands, these trees never tend to become overgrown with superfluous wood or to take on greedy branches, whose excessive vigor would disturb the harmony of the form. Today's preference for the pyramid is therefore entirely justified. Pyramid formation. - The pear tree destined to become an unc pyramid starts, like all possible pear trees, with a single shoot born from a graft pruned over a good eye. If you examine the woody eyes distributed along this shoot, you'll see that they are naturally arranged in a spiral; it's also in a spiral that the pyramid's lateral branches should be established. Start by pruning on a good eye, leaving four or five buds below the cut. To ensure that the sap benefits mainly the lateral branches, on which the tree's future depends, the central shoot, known as the arrow of the tree, is only allowed to grow moderately, by pruning on a vigorous eye until it has gradually takenFig. 63. Pyramid-shaped pear tree. the height it should not exceed. The side shoots are likewise shortened to a greater or lesser extent, to give them sufficient strength to retain their share of the sap that continually tends to flow towards the top of the tree. If they do not naturally take the desired direction, the lower lateral branches are tied with wicker ties either to the tree's spire, or to the stake which supports them during the first few years and prevents them from deviating from the vertical line. Nowadays, for planting purposes, it is customary 16 to buy ready-made trees from nurseries, which the gardener only has to continue, and which effortlessly maintain perfect regularity. Cattail. - The only difference between the pyramid and the cattail is that, starting from the ground, the first tiers of lower branches widen out to around two meters; from this point on, the shape of the tree becomes entirely pyramid-like. This shape has the disadvantage of not giving enough strength to the lower branches, which bear almost no fruit, the sap being attracted by the tiers of lateral branches immediately above. Spindle or column. - The spindle or column pear tree is only suitable for small gardens where a large number of pear varieties need to be grouped together in a limited space. These trees have virtually no lateral branches, or at least their branches, pruned very short, are used exclusively to support fruit production. Trees can only be preserved in this somewhat unnatural form by allowing them to increase in height, and by subjecting them from time to time to root pruning in autumn, after the leaves have fallen. To this end, the tree is dug up all around its base, and all the slightly extended roots are cut off, leaving only sections of length proportionate to the tree's strength. Plant physiology recognizes that roots make branches, and that branches make roots; a tree that retains almost no roots, and whose underground part is pruned regularly, forms almost no branches. However, in well-amended, naturally fertile soil, spindle- or column-grown pear trees, while not very long-lived, are, all things considered, as productive as others and produce excellent fruit, depending on their species. For the duration of their life, unless they are planted in clumps in a perfectly sheltered position, these trees need to be supported by good stakes, without which the shortness of their roots would expose them to being blown over by strong winds. Vase or basket pear trees. - This form is mentioned here because it is still in use in some amateur gardens; vase pear trees take up a lot of space because of the interior void that must be created; they offer no real advantage either for abundance or for the quality of the fruit, which compensates for this disadvantage. To obtain a well-formed vase, the young pear tree is pruned on two eyes, each of which produces a good bud. The following year, these two buds are each pruned over two eyes, giving four buds, the basis of the tree's framework. As they continue to grow, adding lateral branches, these main shoots are attached, at equal distances from each other, to circles of barrels, which are chosen to be larger and larger from tier to tier, until the fully-formed vase can support itself. Only pear trees grafted on quince should be grown in vase form, as these species are not inclined to grow too much; vases that are too high are bound to have a very large diameter at the top, making them bulky and very inconvenient. Simple palmette pear trees. - As mentioned above, this is the most common form of espalier and counter-espalier at present. Among the species of pear trees that give the best fruit, there are varieties that are more or less sensitive to cold, or that flower very early in the spring, so that late cold often prevents the fruit from forming. These are the varieties that should be placed on the espalier with good exposure. To establish the simple palmette pear tree, which is almost the only form used for the espalier pear tree, the spire, or central stem, is pruned successively over two eyes, one on the right and the other on the left; the buds born from these eyes are lowered and trellised in an almost horizontal position; they begin a tier of the framework. The following year, the spire, which has been allowed to grow only moderately, is pruned to produce a second tier, and so on. Great care must be taken to regulate the growth of the lateral branches or cords of the palmette, so that they are all of equal strength and grow with the most perfect equality, a condition easily obtained by pinching. If one side of the young tree gets carried away and becomes much more vigorous than the opposite side, the weaker side should be depressed while the stronger side remains attached to the trellis; this is enough to restore the balance. When you buy pear trees prepared by a skilled nurseryman, nothing is easier than to make the well-started framework take on all its growth, maintaining symmetry and regulating the distribution of sap in all parts of the tree. On an espalier pear tree, the buds born from the woody eyes are almost always too numerous; by disbudding, without giving them time to absorb any of the sap unnecessarily, we remove the poorly-placed buds, as the cords of the simple palmette pear tree should only present a bare surface to the wall, and have all their growth in front of the wall. Retained buds, if they show excessive vigor that prevents the tree from setting fruit, are pinched off, then broken, to obtain fruit production from their lower eyes; in this way, the trees quickly reach their highest degree of fertility. The procedure is the same for counter-espalier trees in the same form, but as both surfaces of the counter-espalier are exposed to air and light, whereas the espalier receives light and air only from one side, the gardener allows buds to develop equally on the two opposite surfaces of the cords of the single-palmette counter-espalier; he can thus obtain a double number of fruit productions (fig. 64). Double palmette pear tree. - This shape begins with pruning on two eyes, leaving the buds to grow vertically. On each of these buds, which have become the base of the tree's framework, we let them grow, Tig. C4. A simple palmetto tree, pruned in much the same way as the simple palmetto, with equally spaced lateral cords. This form offers no real advantage over the simple palmette; it is best suited to species with a Fig. 65. Pear tree prepared for the double palmette. high vigor, destined to cover a large area on the espalier (fig. 65). 16. Pruning and training. - The apple tree's natural growth habit, woody branches, fruit production, pruning principles and applications are exactly the same as those of the pear tree. However, these two trees, which are so close to each other, cannot be joined by grafting in a lasting way, which indicates more radical differences in their constitution than the complete identity of their way of vegetating. Apple trees grafted on franc or doucin form pyramids and vases, in the same way as pear trees. The vase shape is more advantageous for apple trees, which are less inclined to get carried away than pear trees. The apple tree also has the ability to graft by approach when its branches are crossed, either on its own branches or on those of another apple tree; when it is trained as a single horizontal cordon on wire, 50 centimetres from the ground, the end of one cordon is grafted by approach, by means of a slight notch in the two barks, on the bend of the following cordon. The result is a continuous line of indeterminate length, through which the sap supplied by the roots of all the plants circulates, making them more durable and productive. In fruit gardens where space is at a premium, you can devote a square of a certain size in the fruit garden to establishing what is known as a normandie. This involves planting alternate rows of half-dwarf apple trees, in small pyramids, 1.5 meters apart, and dwarf apple trees only 1 meter apart; the rows are evenly spaced at 1.5 meters apart. Great care must be taken when planting a Normandy composed of doucin and paradis apple trees, not to bury the grafts. When the grafts of these trees are buried, they act as cuttings; they emit roots of their own, they become free, according to the very apt expression used by gardeners. In fact, grafts rooted as cuttings are no longer nourished exclusively by the subject; as a result, instead of remaining small, in half-dwarf pyramids or dwarf bushes, apple trees grow unevenly and excessively, and behave exactly as free-standing trees would, i.e. born from seedlings of pepins, or grafted onto free-standing subjects, which would not allow them to be kept in Normandy. We can take advantage of the ease with which all species and varieties of apple trees can be grafted, or, to put it more accurately, welded by approach, to form hedges and arbors that are both very solid and very productive. For example, to separate the fruit or vegetable garden from the other sections of a large garden, instead of a bower or a fence of dogwood or hawthorn, plant a row of apple trees and direct them so that their branches intersect in diamond shapes, either with each other or with those of their neighbors. At each point where two branches meet, the bark is incised, and the two parts that are to be welded together are held together by a ligature. From the first year, the weld is consolidated; apple trees trained in hedges in this way are just as productive as if they were trained as counter-paliers. The same procedure can be used to establish an arbor of diamond-shaped welded apple trees within a few years. CHAPTER XXXIII Pruning and management of stone fruit trees. Stone fruit trees. - Natural vegetation of peach trees. - What happens to unpruned peach trees. - Pruning and management of peach trees. - Various peach tree branches - Disbudding and pinching. - Various peach tree shapes - Egyptian pyramid peach tree - Single palmette peach tree. - Double palmette. - Its advantages in small gardens. To rationally apply the pruning and management principles set out in the previous chapters to stone fruit trees, it is first necessary to understand exactly how each tree grows, so as to be able to act with full knowledge of the facts. The stone fruit trees grown in our gardens are: peach, apricot, plum and cherry. The peach tree is the most important, either because of the high value of its fruit, or because of its fecundity and the number of good species that horticulture has been able to obtain from it. Natural vegetation of the peach tree. - If you sow a peach pit and leave the resulting sapling to grow untouched, it will form a stem of its own, branching out at a certain height and ending up with an irregular head made up of young branches that follow one another from year to year. Some of these branches blossom and bear a certain number of fruits; those that have borne fruit once can never bear fruit again, however long the tree lasts; they can only produce young branches that can blossom and bear fruit once, never more. All the sap flows towards the top of the tree, the lower branches remain entirely bare, and no young wood is ever naturally produced there, so powerful is the suction of sap by the upper part of the branches in the peach tree: such is the invariable course of the natural vegetation of this tree; this course is exactly as it has just been described in a grafted peach tree, left to its own devices, without being pruned or guided in any particular way. Pruning and training. - The preceding notions already show what the main aim of peach tree pruning and training should be. Those known as vine peach trees, which are not grafted and which grow in vineyards as God pleases, can be left to the natural course of their vegetation without great inconvenience, until they die of exhaustion; this is what happens in the United States of America in the immense orchards planted with peach trees of this kind, whose fruit is used to supply alcohol by fermentation and distillation. In gardens, it's not possible to give peach trees the same freedom. In the climate of Paris and the whole of France, from the Loire basin to our northern frontier, the peach tree only produces good fruit when cultivated in espaliers; the counter-espalier is not even sufficient for it; peaches ripen too late, or not at all, due to lack of heat. When a peach tree is grown in an espalier, it's easy to understand that, even without taking into account the beauty of the view, a wall lined with trees whose branches are all bare at the bottom and bear only a little greenery at the top, would be a cause of serious loss for the gardener. When pruning, therefore, he must combat the tendency of the sap to leave the bottom of the peach tree, retain it and distribute it evenly to all parts of the tree, which he must know how to make equally productive, and knowing that a peach fruiting branch flowers and bears fruit only once, provide uninterrupted replacement branches for the branches he removes after they have borne a crop (fig. 66). The annual bud on a peach tree branch is not, like that of the pear and apple tree, furnished exclusively with woody eyes; these eyes are accompanied by one or two flower buds, on which the fruiting branch rests (fig. 66). Peach fruit branch. Fig. 67. Flowering branch of the peach tree. of the year's harvest (fig. 67). Sometimes, small, very short branches bearing a tuft of leaves and several flower buds are produced on the branches of the peach tree: these are called bouquets. Bouquets are to the peach tree what bursas are to peach trees; they are carefully tended as the best of fruit production (fig. 68). When a young peach branch, born from a woody eye from the previous year, has borne fruit, it is pruned on its lower eye, so that it opens onto a bud which will be a fruiting branch in its turn. The result of this repeated pruning every year is a certain number of short branches, evenly distributed throughout the tree's structure, whose function is to produce fruiting branches; these are what gardeners call spur branches (fig. 89). When one of these branches produces a good eye with inferior wood, this eye should be pruned to rejuvenate the branch, thus preventing excessive extension and exhaustion. Fig. 68. Bouquet The whole art of pruning the peach tree, apart from the peach tree itself, consists in providing it with a sufficient number of evenly distributed spurs to ensure that all its branches are Fig. 69. Peach tree spur branch. parts of the espalier give their quota of good peaches, and to give birth, at the bottom of the branches that have just borne fruit, to a certain number of replacement branches. Peach trees planted in the right conditions are more likely to produce too many annual shoots than too few. It often happens that a very vigorous annual bud doesn't stay simple, and the eyes of the upper leaf axils open prematurely to form false or early buds. Whatever the vigor of the peach tree, the gardener should never be embarrassed by it; as long as he doesn't allow the sap to carry more to one side than the other, and maintains the balance of vegetation, the peach tree will never have too much strength, since it will always be possible to use this strength for the benefit of the production and quality of the fruit. Disbudding and pin¬- cementing are the easiest ways for the gardener to prevent disorder and maintain harmony of form. Unnecessary or misplaced buds should not be removed too early; they should be allowed to grow to a certain extent, so as not to have to regret an ill-considered retran¬ chection later on. It's for the same reason that the gardener doesn't give the peach tree its main annual pruning until the tree begins to flower; he can see his job more clearly and knows better what he's doing. If he were to carry out this pruning in winter, while the peach tree was asleep, he would often compromise the harvest, by keeping only those branches with a wooden eye too weak to attract sap and nourish the fruit, and by pruning the extension branches on an eye which is strong enough in appearance, but which would only give the shoot a defective bud." Various shapes of peach trees. - As we have seen, the high-stemmed open-air peach tree, or vine peach tree, is not pruned; it is only pruned to remove dead, diseased or accidentally broken branches; it is not trained in any regular shape. The pyramid shape is not used for peach trees; only one species, the Egyptian or Syrian peach tree, of very modern introduction, lends itself to the pyramid shape and produces passable fruit in this form; the framework is established according to the principles set out for forming the pyramid pear tree; all other peach trees want the espalier shape. The main shapes of espaliered peach trees are the single palmette (fig. 70), the double palmette, the Vouvert, the square shape, the Demoustier shape, and the single or double oblique cordon.  ~ Fig. 70. Peach tree with single palmette. Simple palmette peach tree. - To grow peach trees in this form, the one-year-old peach tree is grafted onto a good eye, which produces a single shoot destined to be the central stem or arrow of the palmette. The first pruning produces two lateral arms, one on the right, the other on the left, at the same height; these are the first lower cords of the palmette. Carefully managed by pinching and disbudding, they are easily maintained in the necessary state of vigor and equality; the following year, the spire, sufficiently prolonged, gives two more cords which are treated in the same way, and the tree is completed year after year by the same process, until it has reached the top of the wall. When the arms are spaced far enough apart to give them a filling of sprigs and fruiting branches on both sides of each cordon, care is taken not to trellis them quite horizontally, so that the small branches on the lower part can attract their share of the sap. When the cords are closer together, they are trellised more or less horizontally (fig. 71); but then they only have spur and fruiting branches on their upper part; the first of these two methods is by far the most common. Fig. 71. Single palmette tree with horizontal strings. Double palmette peach tree. - This form is started with two buds of equal strength, trellised vertically facing each other, on each of which cords are placed at the same level on each side. The double palmette offers no advantage over the single palmette, and is almost never used. It is especially suitable for very vigorous species, whose cords are very long and cover a large area on the right and left of the espalier. Open V shape. - This shape, referred to in older treatises as the Montreuil shape, no longer merits this name; it is mentioned here only as a reminder; Montreuil gardeners have gradually abandoned it in favor of the square shape, now gradually replaced by the palmette; the reason for this is obvious. When a young peach tree is established on two diverging branches which are made to produce a complete regular framework, a fairly long time always passes before the gap left on the espalier by the divergence of the two arms of the open V can be filled. The result is a very noticeable loss in fruit production. The palmette offers the undeniable advantage of covering the entire surface and using all of it for fruit production. Square shape. - This shape has long enjoyed great favor; it is superior to the open V shape in that it covers the surface of the wall more quickly; it is inferior to the palmette in that some of the branches of the frame, beginning like the open V with two divergent first arms, are in a position too close to the vertical. Any peach tree branch in too upright a position sucks in too much sap and continually tends to get carried away at the expense of the others; the balance of vegetation can only be maintained with care and attention. Nevertheless, many espaliers still feature square-shaped peach trees, which are very beautiful and productive; but they are successively replaced by simple palmettes, as they die of old age. Demoustier shape. - This form, now completely abandoned, starts with an open V; the first branches are given a very large extension, so that the framework is only complete after a large number of years. Undoubtedly, in the garden of an amateur who values the beauty of the view, and who has a lot of free surface on his walls, it's a very beautiful thing to have an old peach tree trained in the Demoustier style, 6 to 8 meters long on each side of the trunk, and equally covered with flowers in spring and fruit in summer throughout. But for a professional gardener, who pays the rent for the land he cultivates and can lose neither precious time nor most of the espalier surface, this shape cannot be adopted and its complete abandonment is fully justified. Oblique cordon shape - The oblique cordon peach shapeFig. 72. Simple oblique cordon peach tree. oblique cordon peach tree is one of the most successful innovations in modern horticulture (fig. 72). The peach tree in this form does not, strictly speaking, require pruning to establish its framework. Once a vigorous bud has emerged from a good pillar, it is allowed to grow without being shortened, simply by being inclined at an angle of 45 degrees. The eyes that open up along the cordon give more than enough spurs and small fruiting branches. The inclined position of the cordon allows it to extend so far that it stops of its own accord before reaching the top of the wall; otherwise, it is contained by the pinch. Peach trees in this form can be planted 75 centimetres apart; the way they fit one on top of the other leaves no gaps in the espalier, and not 1 square centimetre is lost to fruit production. The double oblique cordon (fig. 73) is formed in the same way as the single, with two buds which are allowed to grow, taking care to 2 9 9 9 2 "maintain them at equal strength by pinching, disbudding and trellising; they are spaced at Fig. 73. Double oblique cordon peach tree. 40 centimetres apart, at the same angle, as the single cordon. Double-cord peach trees should be planted 1 meter apart. One of the main advantages of the oblique cordon is that it enables a whole collection of peach trees to be grouped together in a small espalier, which is not possible when each individual tree occupies 2 or 3 running meters of surface area to the right and left of its base. As you can see, pruning and managing the peach tree, in whatever form it takes, in accordance with its particular mode of vegetation, offers no serious difficulties. On the contrary, this tree is extremely docile, quick to set fruit and regularly productive when enough care is taken to direct it according to the requirements of its temperament and the natural course of its sap. CHAPTER XXXIV Pruning and management of stone fruit trees and vines. Pruning and management of apricot trees. - In the open air. - Espalier. - Fan shape. - How to establish it. - Difficulty of maintaining it. - Apricot tree branches. - Pruning and management of plum trees. - In the open. - Espalier. - Pruning and training cherry trees. - Espaliered cherry, simple palmette. - Vine pruning and management. - Natural vegetation. - Bushes. - Weeds. - What happens to them if they are not pruned. - Necessity of pruning. - Its purpose. - Its effects. - Spurs, similar to peach tree spurs. - Their rejuvenation. - Summer pruning. - Vine training. - Thomery shape. - Advantages. - Vertical cordon shape. Pruning and management of apricot trees. The fruit of the apricot tree only really possesses all the qualities that give it its merit, when it is harvested from trees trained in the open air, with high stems. These trees are established on four main branches, following a similar pattern to that used to form vase or basket pear and apple trees. For the first few years, the branches of the framework are kept at the desired distance, by attaching them to one or more barrel hoops; they are then left to grow freely. Apricot trees, whose wood is always extremely gummy, are among those which, as gardeners say, don't like iron, and want to be pruned as little as possible, once they are well established in the desired shape. Espaliered apricot trees. - In a fairly large fruit garden, apricot trees are always given a place on the espalier, either to have ripe apricots very early, or to have very beautiful apricots, even though we know in advance that they will never be as good as full-wind apricots. The form usually adopted for espaliered apricot trees is the fan shape, which, when complete, consists of 5 or 7 regularly diverging branches, like the pins of a fan. Like the peach tree, this form begins with two buds facing each other, diverging like the first shoots of a Vouvert peach tree. In the second year, these two branches, pruned to 25 or 30 centimetres on two good eyes, form the lower branches of the framework, which continues in the same way in subsequent years, allowing the extension shoots to take on only a moderate length each year, so as to fix the sap in the lower branches before allowing those in the center, whose direction is closer to the vertical, to develop. Moreover, however much care is taken to establish perfect symmetry between all the parts of an espaliered apricot tree, this harmony of form, even in the hands of the most skilled gardener, never lasts very long. The apricot tree is more prone than any other tree, at least in the climate of Paris, to sudden loss of a part of its framework from which, without any apparent cause, and without it being possible to prevent it, the sap suddenly withdraws, or which is struck dead by an engorgement of extravasated gum. These fairly frequent accidents do not prevent many espaliers from growing very productive old apricot trees. The generous nature of this tree quickly makes up for its losses with vigorous sprays that emerge from the old wood below the stricken part, and the gaps in the framework are filled in no time. Apricot tree branches - This tree sets fruit of its own accord; its two-year-old branches bear both woody shoots and flower buds, both supported on a sort of very strong bracket (fig. 74). These branches remain fertile for several years, after which they usually wither and die. On full-wind trees, they should only be touched to prune them when they are dead, leaving nature to develop new ones. On espaliered apricot trees, superfluous or misplaced buds are removed as soon as they are born; buds that tend to grow too far forward are contained by moderate pruning, pinching and trellising; a certain number of small branches, 10 to 15 centimetres long, are always formed, loaded with fruit buds only; these branches are to the apricot tree what bunches are to the peach tree; they are not pruned; fruits follow one another on these short branches, for several years without interruption. Pruning and management of plum trees. - Once established on three or four good branches, and left to its own devices, this tree naturally takes on a regular shape, with a fairly high head if it belongs to a species with oblong fruit and hard wood, and a spread, rounded head if it is of a variety with round fruit and soft wood, such as the Reine Claude. The pruFig. 74. Flowering branch Apricot trees are less prone to losing parts of their framework through sudden death or gum engorgement. It also easily repairs its losses through the vigor of its vegetation. The most sought-after plum species, contrary to what happens with apricot trees, are better espaliered than in the open air; but even the best plums are never sufficiently valuable for plum trees to be given part of the available surface area on walls with good exposure. As a result, plum trees are only grown in espaliers by way of exception, in the gardens of a few enthusiasts who make a special case for plums. The pruning and management of espalier plum trees is very similar to the pruning and management of espalier apricot trees. Cherry pruning and management. - Full-wind cherryFig. 75. It is hardy and vigorous and requires no particular direction, once its head is formed on four branches that are as equal as possible (fig. 75). Espaliered cherry. - In the vicinity of towns, it is often very advantageous to devote part of the wall surface to a few cherry trees of the earliest and most esteemed species; the fruit of these trees, which are ten to fifteen days ahead of fruit of the same species harvested from trees in the open air, sell very well, and the cherry tree adequately pays the rent for the space it occupies on the espalier. It can be trained either as a very wide fan, like the apricot tree, or as a simple palmette, like the peach tree, by subjecting it to the same pruning, to which its vegetation lends itself quite readily. When space is at a premium, the arms of the framework, which are more numerous and closer together than those of the apricot and peach trees, do not need to be pruned for extension; the arms can be allowed to grow without 17. shortening them; it is enough to ensure that they remain as equal as possible; these arms fill themselves with small fruit-bearing branches along their entire length, and their fertility is virtually inexhaustible. Pruning and vine training. - It is impossible to find even the remotest analogy between the nature of the fruit of the vine and that of the peach tree. However, by a remarkable coincidence, the vegetation of the vine and that of the peach tree are exactly the same, and follow the same progression from point to point, so that the pruning of these two fruit trees is based on the same principles. To convince yourself of this, you need to carefully observe an unpruned annual vine shoot, and see how it behaves when left to its own devices. Natural vine vegetation. - The eyes of the vine are born on the shoot, in the axil of a leaf; they are known by the special name of "bourres", because they are surrounded by a thick, russet-colored down or "bourre", which helps to protect them from the effects of frost. In spring, when the temperature is sufficiently mild, the bud opens to produce an annual bud, or shoot. Like the fruiting branch of the peach tree, once it has borne fruit, it can never bear fruit again, no matter how long it has been in existence. As the shoot lengthens, the bunches on its lower part blossom, followed by grapes. After the second movement of the sap, in August, most of the shoot passes from the herbaceous to the woody state. When it is only imperfectly so, which happens when summer and autumn have not brought their normal quota of warmth and fine days, the grape ripens badly or not at all; this is why the winegrower rightly says that the vine must ripen its wood at the same time as its fruit. At the end of the year, the vine shoot, left to its own devices, bears downwards a number of more or less ripe bunches of grapes, topped by a branch that is usually very long, woody at the base, herbaceous at the top. During the summer, a wad is formed in the axil of each leaf. In the spring of the following year, each of these buds, if the shoot has not been pruned, opens to produce a bud whose annual vegetation reproduces all the phases just described. But, as the shoot has a very large number of buds to feed, some abort, others can only grow to a mediocre length; only a few of them bear one or two seedlings whose very light-colored seeds cannot reach the normal volume of their species. If the experiment were extended for another year, the shoots would be even more numerous, even shorter, and the harvest would be reduced to a few grapes. Pruning is therefore just as necessary for vines as it is for grapevines; its purpose on both of these fruit trees is to create replacement branches for those which, having once borne fruit, can never bear fruit again, and from which we must consequently seek to obtain eyes or buds capable of giving fertile shoots, if we want to have any harvest at all the following year. Vine pruning. - Whatever the form in which the vine is trained, pruning is always based on the same principle; it infallibly gives the same result. In winter, when there is no frost, when the leaves have completely fallen off the vine, and when the vegetation is as asleep as it can be, each shoot is cut back over the two eyes closest to its base; these eyes will be more or less productive shoots in the spring. Since the vine only has to feed a number of eyes proportionate to its strength, it produces regular harvests, and the grapes retain all the qualities specific to their species. In this way, the shoots are born successively on a first shoot which served as their starting point, and which is called the spur, just as, on the branches of a peach tree, the spur supports the annual branches or small branches which alone can bear fruit: the identity in this respect could not be more perfect. As the vine gets older, the spur, after having supplied a large number of fertile shoots, ends up being too long, so that the grapes are formed too far from the main branch of the vine on which the spur is inserted. The gardener has to watch carefully for the birth of an inferior eye on the spur, which always appears from time to time; he pulls the spur back over this eye at winter pruning, and at the sacrifice of a year's or two's harvest, the spur is rejuvenated, without the overall harvest being very noticeably diminished, because the spurs are only rejuvenated one after the other if necessary. Summer pruning. - When the vegetation of vines properly pruned in winter follows its regular course, the bunches flower in June and the grapes are formed immediately after flowering. However, in very fertile soil, or when the summer is particularly favorable to vine shoot growth, the shoots continue to overextend, drawing most of the sap to themselves. The vine then "sinks", as the saying goes, meaning that most of the flowers don't produce grapes, and some of the bunches abort and turn into tendrils, reducing the harvest to nothing. This is also known as summer pruning, and must be repeated when the eyes below the cut have opened into false buds. If the gardener were to allow these false buds to grow as they wish, they would delay the ripening of the grapes, which would lack flavor and quality. Even in the best-governed espalier vineyard, in the best soil and under the most favorable climatic conditions, the vine shoot should always be kept in check by disbudding once the grapes are well formed; after the top of the shoot has been cut back, not only will the grapes grow bigger and ripen more fully, but the eyes at the bottom of the shoot, on which the winter pruning should be based, will become stronger and better prepared for the following year's harvest. Vine management. - Since the beginning of this century, there has been a complete reform in the way vines are trained to produce table grapes. In the Paris climate, the vines that produce the best dessert grapes only produce really good fruit under espalier and counter-espalier conditions. Everyone knows the justly-deserved reputation of the Fontainebleau chasselas, the largest quantity of which is produced near Fontainebleau, in the village of Thomery. Since the superiority of the Thomery gardeners' method of espalier vine training cannot be disputed, and since good horticultural treatises have made knowledge of this method commonplace, the entire Fig. 76. Vines à la Thomery. ionde started to grow vines, not in the same way everywhere, but according to the same principles, which has greatly improved the production of good table grapes. Thomery shape (fig. 76). The vine shoot used as a base for this type of vine training is first brought by successive prunings to the height where its two horizontal arms are to be started, on the trellis of the espalier or counter-espalier. If we were to take advantage of the natural vigor of this vine shoot to bring it to this height in a single spurt, the wood of its upper part would not be well enough balanced, and the shoots on which we would have to prune to create the two arms of the trellis would not have enough Fig. 77. Vertical cordon vine. By asking only a moderate amount of growth from the shoot each year, the vine at the point where it is to bifurcate is I robust, and the pruning is based on two shoots as vigorous as the gardener may wish. These two treads give rise to 9 two shoots which are lowered to the right and left, and which, by successive prunings, always based on the same principle, are extended very evenly to 1 meter or 1.50 meters at most, from the bifurcation. When the vine, planted on the north side of an espalier wall, is introduced through a hole in the masonry, on the southern surface of the wall, its arms or horizon cords R rates are established on the right and left, in the same way. The above contains the key to the entire Thomery method of vine training, which anyone can apply without error. On an espalier wall of any height, cords of vines à la Thomery are staggered one above the other, the first 30 centimetres above ground level, the others 50 centimetres apart. The wooden or wire trellis is laid out so as to be able to conveniently trellis the cords or framework arms of the vine, and the annual shoots responsible for the harvest. The most important point is that the canes, on each of which two shoots are allowed to develop every year, should be spaced as evenly as possible, and not too far apart. With the Thomery method, there can be no question of these huge vines covering immense surfaces, or running in cordons of indeterminate length. It's easy to see that, when vines are allowed to acquire these exaggerated dimensions, the equal distribution of sap and spurs is no longer practicable. The Thomery-style arrangement of rows of vines on an espalier, which the rows cover from top to bottom, means that the vines have to be planted very close together; this prevents them from being carried away by useless wood, and their grapes are much better for it. Vertical cordon vineyard (fig. 77). - The layout of walls to be planted with espaliered vines does not always allow us to adopt the Thomery shape, although it is obviously the best. Based on the same principle, vines can be trained with the same ease in vertical rows, which are allowed to grow slowly so as to space their spurs appropriately, and which are pruned, disbudded, trellised and managed according to the principles set out above, principles which are easy to apply and infallible in their results. The cultivation of vines has undergone a complete revolution thanks to the recent work of Doctor Jules Guyot, applicable to vines in gardens as well as in large vineyards. Instead of the usual vine training, each vine is pruned in winter to leave a shoot with all its buds, which alone will bear the current year's harvest. In spring, this shoot is trained horizontally on a wire, forty or fifty centimetres from the ground. The other buds, as they develop, are trained straight onto a stile or vertical wire. This arrangement is as easy to adopt in a garden as in a vineyard. Trees trained with a single fruit-bearing shoot are just as productive and take up just as little space in the garden as trees trained horizontally; mats can be laid in the event of late frosts to preserve budding, or in times of storms that may be accompanied by hail to preserve the harvest. Isolated vines can be planted in rows behind the flowerbeds, alternating with apple or pear trees in horizontal rows. The result is a series that is as productive as it is pleasing to the eye, on which pears, apples and grapes of the best species are harvested in abundance. CHAPTER XXXV Shrubs with edible fruit. - Fig tree. Shrubs with edible fruit. - Currants. - Multiplication. - Cuttings. - Marcottes. - Sowing. - Pruning and training. - Head shape on a single stem. - Counterpallet or candelabra shape. - Species and varieties. - Gonduin currant. - Cherry currant. - Thorny or gooseberry; - bush; - palmette; - fan. - Species and varieties. - Raspberry. - Pruning and management. - Species and varieties. - Fig tree. - Multiplication. - In the South of France. - Cuttings in pots. - Pruning and management. - Wintering in the Paris climate. - Species and varieties. The products of edible fruit bushes play a fairly important role in the domestic economy; the confectionery and distilling industries cannot do without them, and they are widely consumed. Near large population centers, the cultivation of these shrubs is in itself a lucrative branch of gardening; everywhere else, it can be considered an indispensable accessory to any fruit garden. This series of shrubs includes currants, gooseberries, raspberries and figs. Although in southern countries the fig tree is a medium-sized tree, it is really only a large shrub in the average French climate. Currants. - Multiplication. - There is no shrub whose propagation is quicker and easier than that of the currant. When grown as a bush, each clump produces numerous rooted offshoots every year, which are ready-made subjects for renewing plantations. If these offshoots are not numerous enough to meet needs, we lay down part of the lower branches and cover half their length with soil; they root by layering with the greatest of ease; they are weaned at planting time, in the spring of the following year. In nurseries, cuttings are taken from the annual pruning of redcurrant bushes; these cuttings root very quickly and almost anywhere, and are particularly well suited to cool, light soil. The best time to take redcurrant cuttings is at the beginning of spring, when the bush resumes its annual growth. Redcurrant seedlings can also be sown in spring, in light soil in a shady location, but only in the hope of obtaining new sub-varieties. As it is important for the seedlings to be as perfectly ripe as possible, a number of the best bunches are left to dry on the branch. When the currants are completely dry, they are soaked in water for a few hours, then crushed between the fingers, and the seeds separated from the pulp by washing. These seeds can be sown in autumn, or kept dry for sowing the following spring. Pruning and management. - In most gardens, the currant bush is not pruned regularly; it is simply left to grow into bushy, irregular bushes, and branches are removed if their productive force seems exhausted, or if they are dying of old age. However, professional gardeners who grow large numbers of currants for sale regularly prune them in winter, at the same time as they winter-prune all their fruit trees. The redcurrant bud, given over to the natural course of its vegetation, begins to produce in its second year; it is in full ratio by its third leaf, and begins to wear out by the fourth. Accordingly, if you want to keep redcurrants at their most fertile, you need to prune to encourage the birth of young replacement branches, so that you always have shrubs made up of two- and three-year-old branches, the most productive of all. It's because of this pruning practice that gardeners in villages around Paris, where this shrub is widely cultivated, sell redcurrant branches full of ripe fruit to Parisians on country feast days. These are the three- or four-year-old branches that should disappear during winter pruning, and which are removed in summer because they can be disposed of with advantage. In both fruit and landscape gardens, gooseberries are planted in clumps, not as bushes, but as rounded heads on a single stem. Redcurrants can easily be grown in this form by propagating them with cuttings made from one-year-old twigs, cut in an upright position. The eyes along the entire length of these branches are removed, with the exception of the three closest to the top; the terminal eye is also removed. In this way, the cutting becomes a young currant bush, with a head of three branches, each pruned over two good eyes. Within two years, the head is sufficiently supplied with fruit-bearing branches, which are removed, like bushes, before they are exhausted, and replaced by buds which pruning brings out from their base in more than sufficient numbers. The fruit harvested from currants grown in this way is always very clean, having been born far enough from the ground not to be splashed by it during the heaviest rains. Currants trained on a single stem are very productive and last indefinitely, so to speak. Trellises separating different divisions of a garden can also be planted with currants. In this case, the best shape to give them is that of a candelabra. This shape is obtained by pruning a redcurrant cutting over two eyes, to the desired height. The buds born from these eyes are inclined, one to the right, the other to the left, and trellised horizontally on the trellis. Vertical branches are formed by subsequent pruning on the horizontal cords or arms, at a distance of 15 to 20 centimetres from each other. When their fertility is exhausted, these branches are replaced by buds sprouting from their base. Candelabra-shaped currants are long-lasting and graceful (fig. 78). Fig. 78. Redcurrant candelabra. Species and varieties. - In addition to the two old species, one with red fruit, the other with white, seedlings have produced one with light pink fruit, a little too acidic, though of good quality. The Gonduin and cherry currants, two species much sought-after as dessert fruit because of the extraordinary volume of berries in their bunches, are due to the same propagation method. Nursery catalogs list numerous sub-varieties with red, pink and white fruit, most of which are indistinguishable from one another, with the exception of those mentioned above. Gooseberry. - This shrub multiplies like the currant, either by cutting or by separating its rooted suckers. If you wish to propagate it by sowing, in the hope of acquiring good new varieties, you should only sow the seeds of fruits whose skin bursts as a result of over-ripening. These seeds are sown under the same conditions as those for currants. For a long time, thorny currants were left to grow as they pleased, without any care other than cutting back dead or exhausted branches. For some years now, it has been trained on trellises, either in a palmette or fan shape, a form to which its vegetation lends itself perfectly. By giving the thorny currant this shape, you can harvest the fruit without pricking your fingers; it's bigger and tastier than fruit of the same species harvested from thick bushes, which are difficult for air and light to penetrate. Species and varieties. - The two common species, one with yellowish-green fruit when ripe, the other purplish-red, were for a long time the only ones known and cultivated in France. By persistent sowing and careful cultivation, English and Belgian growers have conquered a large number of varieties of various shades, with walnut-sized fruit. These varieties, which have a stronger flavor than the common species, are now widespread in all gardens; they are both very rustic and very productive. To avoid having to wash some of the gooseberries, which fall off in the slightest wind when ripe, it's a good idea to lay a bed of clean, fresh straw at the foot of the thorny currant bushes when the fruit ripens. Raspberry. - The European climate produces no fruit with such a delicate fragrance as the raspberry. Thanks to a happy elasticity of temperament, the raspberry can grow and bear fruit in a wide range of climates.

Like the bramble, of which it seems to be only a variety, the raspberry tree is found in both northern and southern Europe; it is in temperate climates that it produces the most abundant and fragrant fruit. All soils are suitable for the raspberry, in the sense that it does not refuse to grow even in the most ungrateful ones; but it is only very productive in good soils. When you want to prolong the raspberry harvest, you plant raspberry bushes with southern exposure, and others with northern exposure; the fruit of the latter is no less abundant than that of the former, but they ripen only when the harvest of the former is exhausted. Raspberry pruning and management. - Although a good raspberry plantation can last indefinitely, if it is not denied a sufficient ration of manure every two years, this sub-shrub is perennial only through its roots, which produce annual stems every year. These stems die after bearing a single crop; they are replaced by the year's suckers or offshoots, which in turn die after bearing a single crop. Raspberry bushes are planted either in clumps, staggered 40 to 50 centimetres apart in all directions, or in rows spaced 40 to 50 centimetres apart. Raspberry bushes may be planted 20 to 25 centimetres apart. Raspberries can only be propagated by separating suckers, which are always produced in overabundant numbers; they can also be easily propagated by cuttings. In row plantations, which are the most advantageous for large-scale cultivation, cross-pieces consisting of long, thin poles supported by stakes 60 centimetres above the ground are established; all the raspberry stems are trellised along these poles, giving them a slight curve that favours fruit production. Every year, from the first days of February, raspberry bushes are pruned. This involves cutting back the upper part of the previous year's shoots, so as to reduce their length to 90 centimetres or 1 metre. If retained, they would needlessly absorb part of the sap, to the detriment of the eyes in the middle of the stem, which alone can produce an abundance of beautiful raspberries. To avoid losing some of the fruit, which doesn't adhere well to its support when ripe, the soil between the rows of raspberries should be covered with fresh straw. At the start of winter, the most vigorous shoots are reserved for production of the following year's crop; the others are removed and used, if necessary, to renew or maintain the plantations. Raspberry plantations require shallow ploughing with an iron-tined fork at the onset of winter, when superfluous suckers have been removed. It is also at this time that the fertilizer needed every two years is ploughed in. Species and varieties. - Only four distinct varieties of raspberry are grown in gardens: the small-fruited or woodland raspberry, the large-fruited red raspberry, the large-fruited white raspberry and the remontant or four-season raspberry. Those that appear in fairly large numbers in English growers' catalogs, including the Falstolff raspberry, are barely distinct sub-varieties of the large-fruited red. Fig tree. - The fruit of the fig tree plays an important role in the diets of the peoples of the Midi, but mainly as dried fruit; little is eaten fresh; the species and varieties whose fruit is best for drying are the most widely cultivated for this reason in the departments along the Mediterranean coast. To the north of these departments, figs are sought after only for fresh eating. As far as the Loire valley, from Roanne to Nantes, the fig tree needs no protection from the cold; it overwinters in the open air in well-sheltered places; it is mainly planted in large courtyards and gardens at the inner angle formed by two walls, one of which faces south. In the climate of Paris, it requires a more effective guarantee against the rigors of winter. Fig tree plantations in the south of France are maintained using seedlings obtained from cuttings and raised in nurseries. For some years now, fig trees have been cut in large pots, where they form an abundance of foliage and grow more rapidly than cuttings taken from the ground. Around Paris, the small number of fig tree varieties grown as bushes in the best-sheltered locations, at the foot of hills facing due south, multiply only by separating their rooted suckers. These suckers can be used directly in plantations, without the need for nursery cultivation. The best fig trees propagated by layering are available from professional nurseries. Planted in good, deep, light soil, they soon form thick bushes, usually leaving only three sprigs per clump; the others are removed even when they are not needed for planting. Even in the Paris climate, the fig tree can bear two harvests a year; the second only matures in years with exceptionally favorable temperatures. In ordinary years, if you have a large enough number of fig trees, you sacrifice the first harvest of some of them by removing the half-formed fruit; this speeds up the formation of autumn figs, which can almost always become, if not perfectly ripe, at least edible before the end of the summer. Fig tree pruning is reduced to cutting off the top shoots of fruit-bearing branches, and periodically removing tired or exhausted stems. In large-scale cultivation, fig tree clumps are planted in staggered rows, four meters apart in all directions. Every year, before the first cold spells arrive, the fig bushes are tied together with wicker ties, then carefully laid down to the bottom of an open pit in very dry soil; they are maintained in this position with the earth extracted from the pits, which is refilled to prevent frost from reaching them. In this position, fig trees grown in the open fields of Argenteuil and neighboring towns only freeze in excessively harsh winters. When a similar disaster occurs, the stumps don't freeze; they give offspring the following year, enabling the plantations to be repaired. In gardens where you wish to have a few fig trees for household consumption, they should only be planted close to a wall facing south, and should not be allowed to exceed a height of one and a half to two meters. Instead of bending them all the way down to the ground and burying them to overwinter, you can then simply bundle the stems together with wicker ties, and wrap them in a thick jacket of fresh straw, held together with twisted hay ties. This method, which would be impractical for large-scale cultivation because it would be impossible to obtain the necessary quantity of straw without enormous expense, is the best way of keeping a small number of fig trees frost-free. In spring, fig trees should only be uncovered when the last of the late cold returns are no longer to be feared. Species and varieties. - Only two species of fig tree are grown for fresh consumption, one with white fruit inside, pale green outside, the other with purple fruit inside and out. The white fig is the better and more widely cultivated variety, with two sub-varieties, one with round fruit, known as the white round fig, and the other with oblong fruit, which gardeners call the long white fig. Both are vigorous and highly productive. CHAPTER XXXVI Cultivation and rejuvenation of fruit trees. Cultivation care required for fruit trees. - Manuring. - Fresh manure harmful to stone fruit trees. - Potting soil. - Compost. - Watering. - Ponding. - Their useful effect. - Cleaning. - Lime milk for old fruit trees. - Scabbing. - Ring-shaped incision. - Fruit thinning. - Removal of part of the leaves from peach trees. - Vines. - Rejuvenation of trees with pome fruits - By grafting onto the main branches - By pruning. - Crown grafting. - Rejuvenation of stone fruit trees. Having followed the fruit tree from the earliest stages of its vegetative life, and having led it in the form best suited to its nature, until it is in full strength and bearing, it remains to describe the various cultivation treatments it requires to prolong the duration of its productive strength and to rejuvenate it, when it is exhausted by a long age. These include fertilizing, watering, ponds, cleaning, arching, ring pruning and rejuvenation. Fertilization. - Like all cultivated land, fruit garden soil retains its fertility only through periodic fertilization. However, the gardener would be making a mistake that would be highly detrimental to his fruit trees, if the soil in which their roots grow were smoked indiscriminately. In general, stone fruit trees, whose wood is gummy, do not tolerate the immediate contact of their roots with fermenting manure. Anyone who, for example, makes the mistake of burying horse, horned-beast or sheep manure on the roots of peach, apricot and cherry espalier trees, as 18 it is removed from under these animals, will lose most of his trees in the same year; all of them will be affected by gum and red blight, and those that do not immediately succumb to these two diseases will remain languid and unproductive for several years. When the soil in the bed in front of the espaliers is tired, and it is deemed necessary to revive its natural fertility, it should only be fertilized with compost from old, broken layers. The best potting soil for this purpose is the one that is the most past its prime, as gardeners say, i.e., the most completely denatured, so that it retains no trace of its primitive state. If you're growing large stone fruit trees, either espaliered or in the open air, there's no better manure to give them than compost made up of alternating beds of good garden soil and all the plant debris that comes from weeding the vegetable garden squares and dressing the vegetables. The compost heap grows throughout the summer; it is dismantled and reworked with a spade to mix the elements well, once or twice during the winter. In spring, the soil covering the roots of stone fruit trees is very gently tilled with an iron-tined fork. Some of the divided soil is removed and transferred to other squares, where it is replaced by an equal quantity of compost. Soil and compost have the property of maintaining the fertility of the soil without transmitting the seeds of any disease to stone fruit trees. Trees with stone fruit tolerate better the contact of their roots with fresh manure; however, it is better to give these trees, as well as vines, only half-decomposed fertilizers, which are the ones from which their vegetation benefits most completely. For espalier and counter-espalier vines, when they alone occupy the whole plot, the best fertilizer is herbaceous leaves and shoots, coarsely chopped with a spade and buried on the vine roots. This type of entirely plant-based fertilization maintains the soil's productive capacity and in no way alters the quality of the products of the vine, which produces the best dessert grapes. Watering and irrigation. - With the exception of the southern departments of France, where fruit tree plantations are exposed to five to six months of uninterrupted drought, and would dry out if not irrigated, fruit trees rarely need to be watered. However, it is useful to pour a bucket of water every two days at the foot of espaliered peach trees, when the drought continues into midsummer. It's a good idea to use only water that has been sitting for at least a day in underground barrels, and whose temperature has equilibrated with that of the surrounding soil. You always run the risk of causing some of the fruit on espaliered trees to fall off when you pour very cold water on their roots in soil heated by the rays of a scorching sun. When the fruit is half full-grown, espaliered fruit trees are occasionally given not watering, but "bassinages", i.e. sprays of fresh water distributed over the entire surface of the tree with a portable pump. Drenching removes the dust that clogs the leaf pores, helping to keep the trees in good health; it helps the fruit acquire its normal volume; and it prevents the fruit stalks from drying out and falling off before ripening. Don't hesitate to drench espaliers thoroughly in summer, as soon as eight to ten days have passed without a beneficial shower of rain. Cleaning. - The gardener is well advised to keep the bark of his trees perfectly clean at all times, especially that of espaliered trees. It's easiest to remove the bark from peach and apricot trees without damaging the buds, and to clean both sides of the branches and the trellis supporting them, as well as the surface of the wall. In this way, as far as possible, we prevent the multiplication of harmful insects; we encourage transpiration, so necessary to the health of the trees; and we give them a vigor of vegetation that is never observed in trees for which this care of cleanliness is neglected. Older fruit trees, especially those growing in more or less damp soil, are covered with grey, white or yellowish moss and lichen, which must be removed at the same time, after a good gentle spring rain. If their bark is chapped and overgrown with moss, at the onset of winter, as soon as the leaves have fallen, the trees should be whitewashed from top to bottom with a whitewash similar to that used to whiten ceilings. This very flimsy coating will not withstand the action of winter rains and alternating frosts and thaws; it will have carried off part of the old bark and with it the insects, their eggs and larvae, which are always lodged in large numbers in the cracks. This easy and very inexpensive operation immediately revives the vegetation of old pear and apple trees in all forms, and makes them produce abundant harvests. Scabbing. - This outdated procedure, long since abandoned by the most skilful practitioners, is mentioned here only because they may find themselves having to manage fruit gardens whose trees, long badly pruned and poorly managed, resist the ordinary means of bringing them to fruit by pruning, pinching and disbudding. Arboring is only practicable on large pyramid-shaped trees whose branches have been allowed to get carried away and produce a profusion of useless wood. In this case, once the tree has been pruned back, the main branches are bent into an arc, with their ends attached either to the trunk or to the larger branches below. By counteracting the natural flow of sap, the arching keeps it at the bottom of the branches, giving rise to fruit buds. It also has the serious disadvantage of deforming the tree and hastening its exhaustion. If, in order to bring vigorous, but previously misguided trees back to fruit quickly, we are forced to resort to bowing, we should stop using this method as soon as it is no longer essential and we have obtained the desired effect. Ring incision. - The annular incision is mentioned here only because it can give rise to experiments which are not devoid of interest. It consists in detaching a very small ring of bark from the branch of a fruit tree or a vine shoot, with the aim of promoting fruit enlargement. This aim is not always achieved, but it seems that it can be, and indeed sometimes has been. This alone is enough to recommend that gardening enthusiasts multiply ring incisions under a variety of conditions. When done with due care, using cutting pliers specially designed for the purpose, ring-shaped incisions can give certain fruits extraordinary volume and prevent grape run-off, without in any way compromising the health of the fruit trees or vines. De-stemming. - In large fruit gardens, pruning is a very delicate operation, involving the removal of part of the leaves from vines and peach trees, in order to give the fruit a lighter color and enable it to fully benefit from the sun's heat and light to ripen. Pruning is only ever necessary on fruit trees and espaliered vines; in years of great abundance, it should be preceded by thinning out the fruit. It's a bad idea to leave too much fruit on espaliered peach and apricot trees. If the same trees are planted in full wind, hurricanes and insect bites take care of dropping the overabundant fruit, which almost never happens on the espalier. When the fruit has reached about a third of its normal volume, a portion should be removed from all overloaded branches, and only as much should be left. 18. branches, leaving only enough to make a good ordinary crop. By doing so, you not only spare the tree, which excessive production would exhaust before its time, but you also ensure that the fruit retained retains all the qualities proper to its species. When vines grow in cool, very fertile soil, the bunches often become enormous and the grapes, packed too tightly together, ripen only imperfectly. To prevent this, one in three grapes is removed with a pair of sharp scissors, when the grapes have about a quarter of their normal volume. This removal produces no appreciable reduction in the harvest; the retained seeds, not being hindered in their development, become very large, and as they receive air and light freely in all directions, they become as ripe and as sweet as they can be. Peach trees, when the time comes for the peaches to ripen, must be stripped of their leaves in order to uncover the fruit and expose it to the sun; this operation is carried out twice, eight or ten days apart: if all the leaves to be removed were removed at once, both the fruit and the tree would suffer. Vines are also pruned twice, as the grapes approach maturity. Shucking gives the grapes more color and quality than they would have if they remained hidden under the vine's ample foliage. Replanting fruit trees. - When a gardener, who has himself reached a fairly advanced age, sees old fruit trees that he has tended and cultivated for many years withering away through exhaustion, and which he regards almost as old friends, he feels a real sense of sorrow and spares no effort to prolong their life by reviving their productive strength. The resources at his disposal for this purpose are quite numerous, and vary according to the nature of the trees to be rejuvenated. Rejuvenation of trees with pome fruits. - The trees the gardener should be most concerned about rejuvenating are the best espalier-grown pear trees. After a certain length of time, the main branches of these trees cease to produce woody buds. At this point, their fruit production is exhausted and cannot be replaced; for every fruit-bearing branch began as a wood-bearing branch, and the moment the production of new wood stops in a fruit-bearing tree, it is in decline. For a few more years, it will flower abundantly, but it won't have the strength to tie its fruit, and all this luxury of flowering will be sterile, and then the arms of the framework will die successively. To cure the disease, you mustn't wait until it has progressed too far. At winter pruning, the arms of the partly exhausted tree are stripped of all fruiting and other branches, converting them into long, completely bare poles. From distance to distance, grafts taken from trees of the same species in full vegetative vigor are placed along the entire length of the arms. The energy with which these grafts suck in the sap imbues the tree with new life; young buds with well-formed wood are born on all sides, and it still has a long future of robust, productive plant life ahead of it. When this most rational method of rejuvenation is too long overdue to be practicable, we can simply resort to "recepage", folding the framework arms back onto the trunk and waiting for buds to emerge that can serve as the starting point for a new framework. This expectation is often misplaced; after exhausting its remaining strength by producing a few delicate branches, the tree succumbs and cannot be rejuvenated. But it's a very different story when, after "ivoir recepé", the base of the frame's branches are grafted with crown grafts. In this way, each graft that takes over gives a well-constituted shoot, so that in a few years the tree can be completely re-established and have as much future as it had when it was planted. The above applies to both apple and pear trees. Berrying of stone fruit trees. - When an old peach tree is exhausted, since the natural life span of this tree is never very long, we must not try to rejuvenate it; it is better to sacrifice it and replace it, and this is what professional gardeners do. But if you're an amateur who cares about your old peach trees, and you know that it's the older ones that produce the best peaches, even if they don't produce many, you can try to rejuvenate them by receiving them. The peach tree is reluctant to produce young shoots on old branches, to reject old wood, as the saying goes; but it nevertheless produces them often enough for us to always take the chance when it comes to prolonging the life of old peach trees that we don't want to sacrifice. If you succeed, it's almost never completely; the young wood obtained is never abundant enough to give the peach tree a regular structure; but it can still, for several years, give fair harvests of excellent peaches. Plum, apricot and cherry trees rejuvenate themselves in the sense that the natural energy of their vegetation provides them with the means to replace dead or exhausted branches with young wood for a long time. From the moment they lack the strength to repair these losses, they can be considered as lost; no practicable procedure can be successfully employed to rejuvenate them. CHAPTER XXXVII Forced cultivation of fruit trees and pineapples. Forced cultivation of fruit trees. - Fruit trees forced in situ. - Peach trees forced on site in the temporary greenhouse. - Day and night temperatures. - Part of leaves removed. - Apricot trees forced with peach trees. - Fruit trees forced into greenhouse. - Vines forced. - Stocks planted outside the greenhouse to be forced. - Vine forced on site. Forced vine in temperate greenhouse. - Forced dwarf fruit trees. - Pre-cultivation in pots. - Pineapple cultivation. - Multiplication of eyelets and crowns. - Length of pineapple growth. - Suitable temperature. - Root amputation. - Open-ground cultivation in the greenhouse. -Sowing pineapple seeds. - Duration of seedling growth. - First fruiting. The forced cultivation of fruit trees, when well managed, can be a source of considerable profit for the professional gardener, and a source of varied pleasure for the amateur gardener; moreover, it is of real interest only in temperate and northern countries; in the Hidi climate, this branch of gardening becomes completely useless and is not practiced. For France in particular, forced cultivation of fruit trees begins at our northern border 11 and stops at the Loire valley. Fruit trees can be forced either on site or in the greenhouse. In Paris, this method of cultivation applies only to espaliered vineyards and orchards; trees that are still young, but nevertheless vigorous and in full bearing, are forced into place. These trees are pruned, trellised, pinched and disbudded as if they were to flower and bear fruit in the open air. Peach trees forced into place. - From the end of January, or 1 at the latest during the second half of February, movable glass frames are hung from the top of the wall lined with espaliered peach trees, and held inclined in a fixed positiono by means of a board, placed on the field, on the edge of which the lower edge of the frames is placed, so as to form a single-sided temporary greenhouse, the width of which at ground level is equal to that of the flowerbed in front of the espalier wall. Both ends are closed by two plank partitions, one of which has a door. Near the end opposite the door, a heating unit is set up outside, with heat pipes running inside the temporary greenhouse on brick supports. When a large number of espaliered peach trees are heated in this way, there's no more advantageous appliance than the thermosiphon; to heat just a few, a simple cast-iron stove can be used; In this case, however, during the often very cold nights of February and March, you have to stay up all night to feed the stove's fire, which must give a gentle, uninterrupted heat; whereas, when using the thermosiphon, this heat is produced by lighting the fire in the evening, without having to worry about it during the night. The thermometer should not mark more than ten to twelve degrees centigrade during the first week. As flowering approaches, which develops rapidly under the protection of the temporary greenhouse, the temperature is gradually raised to 15, then 20 degrees centigrade. When the temperature is mild outside, the fire is left off during the day; the sun is enough to maintain the desired temperature inside the greenhouse; more or less fire is always needed in the evening, to avoid cooling during the night: this is the crucial point on which the success of the operation depends. Don't forget that when peaches are at about half their normal volume, a cold night is all it takes to make most of them fall off. You need to start removing some of the leaves that prevent the peaches from coming into contact with the light, as soon as they are about their full size, so that they can color properly; forced peaches always have a little less color than peaches ripened in the open air. The frames dismantled and tightened after harvesting forced peaches can last a very long time, provided they are I well maintained. As for forced peach trees, although most treatises recommend letting them rest after they have been forced, experience shows that, if they have only been asked for a moderate quantity of beautiful peaches when forced on the spot, they are no more tired after being forced than if they had not been; they are, on the contrary, in better condition than those of the same species, whose spring vegetation may have been more or less thwarted by the sudden variations in temperature so frequent at this time of year in the Paris climate; they can therefore be heated in the temporary greenhouse for several years running, without the slightest inconvenience. Apricot trees of the best species, grown in espaliers 4 alongside peach trees, can be subjected to the same kind of forced cultivation; but they are less amenable to it than peach trees; it is very important to strip them of a good part of their fruit when they have reached a quarter of their size, when they are too full. By leaving the whole crop on the branches, the gardener runs the risk of seeing them die suddenly at the moment when the shell of the stone should become woody, so that for wanting to have too much, he could lose not only the crop, but the trees themselves. The forced cultivation of espaliered trees, as described above, is so inexpensive and easy to implement, that it is surprising that it is not widely practiced. The high price of peaches on the big city markets, a month or six weeks before the natural ripening time of this excellent fruit, provides the gardener with an adequate return on his efforts and advances. What's more, he can use the soil of the bed converted into a temporary greenhouse, without harming the forced trees, and obtain strawberries, peas, cauliflower and tomato plants very early on, so as to make a very profitable profit. Fruit trees forced into the greenhouse. - When building a greenhouse designed exclusively for forced cultivation of fruit trees, fill the flat strip along the greenhouse wall with the soil best suited to the vegetation needs of the trees to be forced into it. This wall is then filled, not with young trees that need to be trained and raised in the greenhouse, but with fully-formed trees which, with the precautions indicated in the description of fruit tree planting, are highly transplantable and immensely productive. The pruning and management of these trees in the forcene greenhouse is no different from the pruning and management of the same trees in the open air. Heating starts at a more or less advanced stage, depending on the desired degree of earliness of the fruit harvest; usually, the forcing greenhouse is divided by glass partitions into several compartments which can be heated one after the other; this arrangement means that the forcing fruit does not all reach maturity at the same time, which is a favorable condition for placement when the fruit is to be sold. Cultivation care is the same as for espaliered trees grown under the shelter of the temporary greenhouse. After harvesting, keep the greenhouse panels open at all times; you can even remove them altogether, and only put them back in place towards the end of the summer season. Prolonged contact with the outside air fortifies the forced trees, and sets them up to produce abundant harvests every year. Forced vine. - Vines that are to produce forced grapes indoors are usually planted outside the greenhouse. The vines are planted in the bed, along the wall supporting the greenhouse glass, and inserted through holes made for the purpose in the macom nery of this wall; they are led in cords on thick wire, parallel to the glass. Pruning, training, trimming, thinning out over-tight bunches and removing shoots around the time of ripening are all carried out in the forcing greenhouse according to the same principles as for cordon vines grown in the open air. In winter, during hard frosts, it's a good idea to cover the soil in the outside flowerbed with litter or long manure, which supports the roots of the vines grown in forced cultivation. Around Paris, professional gardeners who force vines to sell their produce do not force them into permanent greenhouses. The vines are planted at the foot of a south-facing slope. In the year when they are to be forced, a plank placed on the field at the top of the slope serves as a support for an inclined glazing system, which covers the vines very closely; a ditch, deep enough for the gardener to move around freely, runs in front of the vines, which are planted horizontally in two rows, very close to the ground; thermosiphon pipes heat the inside of this sort of long, low and narrow temporary greenhouse, which is therefore easy to set up and heat very economically: it's the least expensive way of forcing vines. The amateur gardener, guided by other considerations, introduces vines of the best species from outside, into a temperate greenhouse intended mainly for the cultivation of ornamental plants. In this greenhouse, he forms elegant arches which, without in any way harming the vegetation of exotic plants, the main object of his solicitude, give him an ample harvest of excellent grapes, and enable him to invite his friends to come and harvest in his greenhouse, at a time of year when there are still neither flowers nor fruit in the gardens. Forced dwarf fruit trees. - Several stone fruit trees, especially cherry, apricot and several plum trees, can easily be forced into the temperate greenhouse and produce very good quality, ripe fruit from May onwards. For this purpose, dwarf fruit trees are planted a year in advance, in fairly large pots filled with good ordinary garden soil, and are available in small cattails from any nursery. These trees, well cared for, watered and cultivated for a year in the open air, are successively introduced into the greenhouse, starting, for those that are to bear the first fruit, as soon as the leaves have fallen. The pots should be placed as close as possible to the windows, turned over frequently so that the trees receive light from all sides, and watered as much as necessary so that the soil they contain is constantly fresh, without excess moisture. Some watering is useful for the foliage of these trees, to keep it clean, and for the fruit, to encourage its growth. Dwarf trees forced into pots are very heavy; their small size means they can be placed on the table, where each guest can pick his or her own share of the dessert, helping to make the fruit taste better. Redcurrant and raspberry bushes, treated in the same way, are forced with the same ease; they produce ripe fruit at the same time. Pineapples. - Although the pineapple is the fruit not of a tree, but of a simple herbaceous plant, its cultivation must be included here because it is entirely forced, from the beginning until the fruit is fully ripe. The pineapple can be propagated by the eyelets at the bottom of its stem, by the tufts of leaves called crowns that crown the fruit, and by sowing its seeds. The first two methods are the only ones used in normal cultivation; seedlings are only used in the hope of obtaining new varieties. Carnations and crowns should not be planted as soon as they are detached; they are true cuttings which should be treated like all cuttings from succulent plants, allowing the cut at the heel to dry out in the air before planting, otherwise they may rot and fail to put down roots. Since pineapple cultivation is forced from one end to the other, it can be started in any season. To calculate the time at which the fruit will reach maturity, and to make this maturity coincide with consumption needs, it is necessary to be aware of the exact duration of its cultivation. It does not last, as most treatises say, for three whole years, but for eighteen months to two years, including two months of the first year, the whole of the second, and four to six months of the third. If the carnations are planted in the first week of November, they should be in pots filled with heather soil, immersed in a very hot layer, the heat of which is maintained by frequently renewed stoves. For the first winter, this layer is usually set up under a simple frame; the plants make little progress there, but they take root firmly and are ready to take on great growth when the fine weather returns. The temperature should not be allowed to fall below 20 degrees centigrade at night, and 25 degrees during the day. In spring, a new, equally hot layer is added, in which the pineapples, ready for rapid growth, are immersed until the pots can no longer contain the roots, which have become too voluminous. We then resort to a highly energetic treatment, which few other plants would withstand, and whose constant success proves the pineapple's essentially robust temperament. All the plant's roots are cut off at the collar, and the pineapple, after the wound has dried for twelve hours in the open air, is cut out again in a large pot filled with a mixture of potting soil, heather and good garden soil, in equal parts. The pots are then immersed, no longer in a warm layer, but in the tannin of a forcing greenhouse. For large-scale cultivation, very low greenhouses are specially built for pineapples, with just the right height for indoor use; the tarpaulin containing the pineapple pots is arranged so that the plants are as close to the glass as possible; pineapples can never have too much light or too much heat. Provided it is watered and sprinkled from time to time with a watering can with a sheaf of very fine holes, in the form of a very divided shower, the pineapple can be constantly exposed to a temperature of 35 to 40 degrees; it will only vegetate more vigorously. Pineapple's long leaves often need to be cleaned on both surfaces with a fine cloth pad or a slightly damp piece of sponge. Quite often, the plants are invaded by insects, which need to be killed with strong tobacco fumigations. Towards the end of summer, the pineapple, planted in November of the previous year, begins to develop its flowering stems; it is then in reed form, as the gardeners say. They don't all come up at the same time, even though they were planted at the same time, and it's to the gardener's advantage that this is so, otherwise all his pineapples would ripen at the same time, making placement less easy. When flowering is over and the fruit has formed, many gardeners subject the plants to a second complete cutting of the roots; this amputation is only necessary when the soil in the pots seems exhausted, and the pineapples are not growing vigorously enough. In this case, the pots are filled with new soil, and the pineapples, treated as for the first amputation, are placed back in the tanned soil, with only a slight delay in their growth. Following the English method, now adopted in France by the most skilful practitioners, rooted pineapples can be planted immediately after their first winter, in the soil of a 60 to 80-centimeter-deep tarpaulin, strongly heated by the thermosiphon. Here, they are as if they were in the ground, and must not suffer any further displacement or amputation of the roots. Watering should be plentiful throughout the formation of the fruit, unless, to satisfy his customers, the gardener finds it necessary to hasten ripening. All he has to do is keep the plants warm, and only water them as much as is necessary to prevent them from dying of thirst. Pineapples treated in this way ripen very quickly and are as good as their species requires; but they never reach their normal volume. If you want to try your hand at conquering a new, recommendable variety by sowing pineapple seeds, you need to be very patient. Seeds sown in spring in heathery soil soon sprout and produce a very weak plant that takes five long years to grow and produce its first fruit, which rarely lives up to the gardener's expectations. However, a fairly large number of very good pineapple sub-varieties are due to the persevering care zealously practised in England, Belgium and France since 1815, when pineapple cultivation, after a long interruption, was resumed in the greenhouses of Europe. CHAPTER XXXVIII Fruit trees grown in pots. - Fruit harvesting and preservation. Growing fruit trees in pots. - Gardens à la Rivers. - How to establish them. - Their advantages. - Parts of France where they can be useful. - Fruit gardens on terraces. - Fruit trees in groves. - Harvesting stone fruit. - Cherries. - Apricots. - Plums. - Peaches. - Careful brushing. - Harmful properties of their down. - Harvesting fruits with seeds. - A sure sign of the right time. - Fruit trees. - Fruitier à la Dombasle. - Grape preservation. - Hollow tin cylinders for this purpose. In recent years, the cultivation of fruit trees in pots has been applied in so many ways that it is essential to go into a few practical details, which are indispensable to those who find themselves in conditions where this way of growing fruit trees can be both pleasant and advantageous. The successes obtained in the cultivation of fruit trees, grown in columnar form and subjected to periodic root pruning, so that a fairly large number can be gathered on a very limited surface area, demonstrate first of all the possibility of making fruit trees of various species live and bear fruit, in sufficiently spacious pots, filled with very substantial soil, the fertility of which is maintained at its maximum by frequently repeated watering with liquid fertilizers. These trees, placed in pots a year or two after being grafted, are pruned very short, in columnar form; their spire is only allowed to grow to about half the height it would reach in the open ground. In this way, while they produce very little young wood, they carry a lot, and if they are not very durable, it costs little to replace them when they are exhausted. Rivers-style gardens. - A skilful English horticulturist, Mr. Rivers, has based a whole system of fruit gardens on the pot culture of fruit trees, for use by those who, in a severe climate, have only a very small space at their disposal. The first step is to surround with a living hedge, regularly trimmed in the shape of a wall, the square of garden you intend to devote to potted fruit trees. Stakes 20 to 25 centimetres higher than the hedge itself are placed at intervals in the hedge. These stakes should be strong enough to serve as a base for a very light wooden frame, but strong enough to be covered with straw mats in the form of a gable roof. In this sheltered space, the potted trees are arranged in three or four parallel rows, with internal paths in the center of the square and along the hedge, for service. During the summer months, the mats disappear and the trees are more or less in the open air; nevertheless, the protection they receive from the hedge, equal to two-thirds of their height, is enough to prevent them from being knocked over by violent gusts of wind. As soon as the leaves have fallen and the trees have entered their dormant period, the mulch roof is put back in place, where it remains until the potted fruit trees have flowered and set fruit the following spring. The aim of this method of cultivation is not to obtain earlier fruit than would be possible in the open air; but, in a Rivers-style garden, the potted trees, protected from snow and ice during the winter, and from hail and late frosts while flowering, produce regular harvests of the best fruit every year, which would not be the case if they were exposed to the open air and grown in the ground all year round. Growing in pots also makes it easier to renew the soil in which the tree roots live, when there is reason to assume that its fertility has been exhausted. In France's average climate, Rivers-style gardens offer no real advantage; but north of the Seine valley, especially in the Aisne, Ardennes and Nord departments, they can be established in many localities where, under ordinary conditions, fruit tree cultivation would yield only uncertain results. Terrace fruit gardens - There are quite a few horticultural enthusiasts in Paris and other major cities in France who have no other resource for satisfying their taste for gardening than a window garden, sometimes on a terrace level with their apartment. When this terrace is not too small, it's easy to convert it into a cradle covered with ornamental climbing plants, to which you can add three or four vines grown in pots like those used for forced cultivation. These vines, in pots that are deeper than they are wide, filled with very good soil, can live for several years, and every year produce bunches of excellent Chasselas that a city dweller is always happy to be able to harvest in the heart of a city where ordinary gardening is impossible. On a terrace, in the same conditions, you can also grow in pots or crates a few pear trees grafted on quince and apple trees grafted on paradise; these trees give some very beautiful fruit every year, especially the paradise apple trees, whose roots don't spread very far. We sometimes see pear trees on the dessert table, only 1.5 meters high, loaded with the most beautiful pears possible; these pear trees are in pots, but you wouldn't expect them to have reached such a degree of vigor and fruitfulness with the little soil contained in the pot, even if this soil were of the highest fertility. At the start of winter, these plants are placed in large pots with holes in them, in the most favorable conditions, on a garden bed. The roots, emerging freely from the bottom of the pot, lived off the soil of the bed, which provided them with the means to feed the potted tree amply, and to make it bear a full load of magnificent fruit. These trees make a very pleasing effect on a dessert table, where they appear after having been uprooted; they are left with only the few roots that remain inside the pot: they very rarely survive such an amputation. But, without claiming to obtain results of this kind, you can keep Madeleine, Savings, Rousselet de Reims and other pear trees in pots for several years, and have them produce a small number of very good pears every year. Fruit trees to be placed in groves. - A number of fruit trees belong more to the flora of woodlands than to that of gardens, but they nevertheless produce products that are well suited to the dessert, and which should not be overlooked by anyone with a large garden, even though these trees cannot be conveniently placed in the fruit garden. These include medlar, corm, hazelnut and even chestnut; in a grove of sufficient size, these trees, interspersed with ornamental trees, in no way detract from them; they add to the pleasure the lady of the house takes in visiting the grove at the start of autumn. These trees don't need pruning; they don't require any special cultivation. This concludes all the useful information we have given on fruit trees and the various procedures for multiplying them, raising them and managing them during all the phases of their existence. At the end of this volume, you'll find a list of the best species of each seric. of fruit trees and shrubs with edible fruit. Fruit harvesting. - Fruit trees are cared for all year round, but their precious produce is harvested only once a year. It is therefore of the utmost importance that fruit be harvested in the best possible conditions, so as to get the most out of them. 19. Cherries, the first ripe fruit of the season, should only be picked when they have reached the precise degree of ripeness appropriate to each species. The professional gardener who picks his cherries a little before they are perfectly ripe, to please his clientele who are willing to give a good price for cherries when, without being completely ripe, they are only ripe enough to be eatable, cannot be severely blamed. If they are ripe enough, the health of those who eat them will not be compromised. However, the true connoisseur must impose upon himself the law of picking cherries, like other fruits, only when they are precisely at their peak, i.e. when they have acquired to the highest degree the edible properties of the species to which they belong. Apricots and peaches should be picked only when, by gently turning them on their support, they come off easily. Plums, for the most part, can be safely waited for until they fall of their own accord; simply lay a bed of clean straw under the trees at the presumed time of natural plum fall. In general, we pick plums with very watery flesh, such as Claude cherries and mirabelle plums, and wait for drier plums to fall, especially those that are to be dried in the oven to be made into prunes. The most important fruit harvest is the stone fruit, peaches, which are often worth a great deal near the big cities. Before being taken to market or served on the table, peaches of all varieties must be brushed with a very soft brush. Women, who are usually in charge of this work because their fingers, lighter than those of gardeners, don't wrinkle ripe peaches, must take care to place themselves in a current of air strong enough to carry away, as it detaches, the down that covers the skin of the peach. This down is a poison which it would be dangerous to breathe in, and from which it is very useful to rid the peach skin. So it's not just to make them look better that peaches need to be brushed. Apples and pears, especially those that can be kept from one year to the next and which form the basis of desserts throughout the bad season, should be picked with every precaution to ensure their good preservation. Nothing is less rational than the all-too-common practice of harvesting all pome fruits on the same day, even though they are at very different stages of ripeness. You shouldn't even pick all the fruit from the same tree at the same time, because it can happen that the inner fruits, in a pyramid-grown tree for example, are 15 days or 3 weeks later in ripening than the fruits on the outer branches. As for the best time to start harvesting, there's a precise indication that's never wrong. If, on a calm morning, you find perfectly healthy fruit on the ground at the foot of a pear or apple tree, free from any insect bites that might have caused them to fall prematurely, it's time to harvest most of the fruit. We choose a fine autumn day with bright sunshine for this operation, and don't start until the heat of the day has fully evaporated the night's dew. As the fruit is harvested in medium-sized baskets, before being taken to the room where it will be stored, it is laid out on the dry, well-cleaned floor of a room where it will remain for at least two or three days. The doors and windows of this room are kept open to ensure good ventilation, so that the fruit loses some of its excess water through evaporation. They are then in the best possible condition to be stored in the fruit-box, where they will keep as well and as long as each species requires. Fruit box. - In any dwelling with a fruit garden of any size, a room on the ground floor must be dedicated to fruit storage: this is called the fruit room. When built specifically for this purpose, the fruit room should be a vaulted chamber, cool but perfectly free from humidity, and much longer than it is wide. The walls, on the right and left, are lined with horizontal trays, supported by cleats and fitted with a rim one or two centimeters high. Fruit is distributed over the surfaces of these trays, avoiding mixing species, which should, as far as possible, be classified according to their order of ripeness. Dessert fruit is carefully separated from fruit that cannot be eaten raw. Many people believe that they are doing the right thing by wiping pears and apples with a dry cloth as they are placed on the fruit stand; this is more harmful than helpful to the preservation of the fruit; it removes the very light ceramic coating on the skin of the fruit; this coating certainly slows down the action of the air on the fruit, and it is important not to strip it. In homes where fruit harvesting is not so important as to require a separate room, the fruit tree itself can be replaced by the following process, developed by the famous agronomist Matthieu de Dombasle. The carpenter makes inexpensive square white wooden crates, about 1 meter long by 80 centimeters wide and only 8 to 10 centimeters deep. These drawer-like boxes have no lids. The first is laid flat on the floor, with the fruit arranged as it would be on a fruit stand. The second, which must have been adjusted by the carpenter to fit without leaving a gap around the edges of the first, is filled in the same way and covered with the third crate, and so on. A stack is usually made up of 12 similar crates, leaving the last crate empty. Stacks of crates take up little space; their number is proportionate to the quantity of fruit you intend to preserve; they are perfectly protected from contact with air and dust; from time to time, you dismantle the stacks to rebuild them immediately after inspecting their contents, either to remove fruit that is beginning to spoil, or to deliver for consumption fruit that is ripening successively. It's a very misguided economy to only ever deliver for consumption fruit that's beginning to spoil; all fruit must end up that way: there's no such thing as fruit that lasts forever. Many housewives consider it a kind of sacrilege to eat healthy fruit; the result of this parsimonious mania is that, in many good houses where there is an ample supply of very good fruit, only very bad fruit is ever eaten. It is a real deception not to eat each fruit at its precise point of ripeness, when it reaches the degree of perfection proper to its species. It's at this point that the fruit should be placed on the dessert table. Harvesting and storing grapes. - Table grapes should be harvested as late as possible. When the grapes have taken on a beautiful color on the trellis, and are fully ripe, they can be twisted off the stems and placed in bags made of horsehair, canvas or simply unglued paper, to protect them from the stings of flies and the beaks of birds. When the temperature no longer allows the grapes to remain on the cane, they are harvested in fine, dry weather, and hung from the edge of the fruit tree's shelves, fitted with hooked nails for this purpose. The bunches should be attached to these nails with thick wire ties, in the opposite position to their natural position. No matter how much care is taken to remove all spoiled grapes, and no matter how often the grapes are visited to ensure that they are well preserved, grapes hanging in the orchard can never be kept for very long. After a certain length of time, either rot takes hold of the skin of the grapes, or they dry out to the point of having only an excessively arid skin, stuck to the pips; in this state, they are not spoiled, but they are no longer edible. When you want to keep a small quantity of beautiful table grapes fresh until well into the bad season, you can use the following procedure: The shoots are cut with their load of ripe bunches of grapes; their lower end is plunged into a vase filled with water, placed in a cool place where frost cannot penetrate. As long as the vine shoot retains its vitality in the water, the grapes remain in very good condition; they can stand comparison with the best grapes harvested from forced vines, and are far superior to grapes preserved by any other method. Hollow tin cylinders, placed on a trestle of the same shape as those used by wood sawyers, but lower and more elongated, are used to create this excellent means of preserving grapes. Each cylinder has a tap at one end and a funnel at the other, so that the water can be renewed at will. From distance to distance, thumb-sized tin tubes are welded to the outer surface of the cylinder; the vines are passed through these tubes, which support them with their load of bunches; they thus receive all the moisture they need to keep the grapes fresh for as long as possible. PART FOUR OUTDOOR ORNAMENTAL PLANTS. CHAPTER XXXIX The Parterre. The parterre. - Soil amendment. - Compartment layout. - Borders. - Boxwood. - Bellis. - Carnation. - Edging for large beds. - Grass. - Irish ivy. - Its advantages. - Second row borders. - Flower distribution in the parterre. - Mixing shades. - Size classification. - Multiplication of outdoor ornamental plants. - Sowing. - Transplanting. - Growing plants in nurseries. - Cuttings. - Marcottes. - Separation of offspring. - Cloves of bulbous plants. - Bulbils. - Cuttings from plants that do not overwinter in the open air. The most attractive part of gardening is undoubtedly the cultivation of ornamental plants, a source of elegant pleasure that can be enjoyed at any age and in all conditions. The harmless passion for flowers is at the forefront of those that an honest man can confess to; it precedes all the others, it outlives them, and the better half of the human race can take its share without fear of becoming satiated; for, in the practice of floriculture, something new is constantly being produced, and each season brings its quota of flowers, all the more precious for having taken the trouble to make them bloom which is a pleasure. In order to bring the necessary order and clarity to our instructions on the cultivation of ornamental plants, we will deal first with those which grow in the open air in the average climate of Central Europe, and which are used from spring to autumn to decorate our gardens. The space devoted to this branch of gardening is, as we know, known as a parterre. Parterre. - A well-kept parterre is always a delightful thing, even when it consists simply of one or two flowerbeds close to the house. For the parterre, like the fruit garden, is not always distinct from the rest of the garden. Many gardening enthusiasts, placed in an intermediate condition as far from hardship as it is from opulence, are obliged to devote most of their garden to the production of vegetables and fruit. The flowerbeds closest to the house, and part of those surrounding the squares, are, in this case, the only ones devoted to growing flowers: they act as parterre. In the most favorable hypothesis, the idea is to create a new, suitably exposed parterre. There are no precise rules for the design of a parterre; if it comprises several flowerbeds, anyone can give them the most graceful shape to suit his or her taste, according to the shape of the land; each has its own center. If the soil in the parterre needs to be amended, you should add whatever amendments you deem useful, in sufficient quantity to ensure that you never have to come back to it. In general, good ordinary garden soil, provided it is not too compact, is suitable for almost all the ornamental plants that are to decorate the parterre. When it is too strong, i.e. when there is too much clay, a little lime and a large dose of sifted wood ash, mixed with an equal quantity of potting soil, should be added. All that's left to do then is to maintain the fertility of the bed's soil by adding a sufficient amount of manure every year, either very early in the spring, or in late autumn. Edging. - Before filling the compartments of the parterre with ornamental plants, once the design has been determined, the contours of the paths should be marked with borders. For centuries, dwarf boxwood was the only border used in the parterre; it is still one of the most commonly used. Boxwood has a number of serious drawbacks, however, in addition to its sad appearance and bad odor. It is a haven for slugs, snails and a multitude of harmful insects, whose multiplication it encourages. To compensate for its shortcomings, it has only one advantage: it supports the soil very well, taking up very little space, because it can be mowed with scissors once or twice a year, and thus kept very close to the ground, without its vegetation having to suffer. For small flowerbeds, the choice of plants that can be used as borders is fairly limited. After dwarf boxwood, we frequently use large-flowered brunnelle, perennial bellis or double-flowered daisy in various shades, and dwarf carnation, better known by its vulgar name of mignardise. The most beautiful variety of mignardise carnation is white with a purple spot at the base of each petal, giving it the name crowned mignardise. As borders, perennial bellis and carnation mignardise have one major drawback: they recede from place to place, spread wide at other points, and consequently form very uneven borders. For this reason, carnation borders must be cut every two years. Several species of oxalis can also be used to form attractive borders around the compartments of a small parterre, especially Deppe's oxalis, a charming, very floriferous little plant. When the parterre includes a bed of heather, after surrounding it with boxwood, a border of alternate clumps of cuphea and blue-flowered lobelia can be planted in the second row (fig. 79). These two pretty plants are naturally maintained at small sizes, and their flowering season is virtually inexhaustible. Fig. 79. Blue winged lobelia. Borders for large flowerbeds - The borders of the compartments of very large flowerbeds are usually made of either turf or ivy. The best variety of ivy, which has become very popular in recent years, is what gardeners call Irish ivy. Ivy is preferable to turf as a border, because of its firmness and the ease with which it can be kept constantly covered with young shoots of a very beautiful green: its leaves only turn a rather sad dark green when they have aged. Grass, on the other hand, due to the mixture of wild plants whose seeds are continually transported by wind and birds, never forms, around the compartments of a large parterre, green bands as uniform as the ivy borders, which perfectly bring out the brilliance of the varied groups of flowers they frame When the compartments of the parterre have a large lar8 L Fig. 80. In addition to their perennial border of dwarf box, turf or ivy, these are edged with small bulbous plants, such as crocuses of various colors, and with annuals sown every spring in the second row. The plants most commonly used for this purpose are semi-double dwarf larkspur and Mahon julienne. The latter plant, cut back to ground level after it has flowered once, without giving it time to ripen its seed, comes up again and flowers abundantly a second time. One of the most graceful borders, of fairly recent introduction, is a creeping verbena, very floriferous, with corollas striped in light purple and pure white (fig. 80). Flower distribution in the parterre. - Once the compartments of the parterre have been designed, suitably amended if necessary, and edged in accordance with their dimensions, the gardener must make the best possible use of the resources at his disposal, so that there will be flowers all year round, even in the middle of winter. As they approach flowering time, seeded plants, cuttings and nursery cuttings follow one another into the flowerbed. For these plants, as well as for the annuals that must be sown in situ, because they cannot be transplanted, the gardener must first take care to choose the right colors. Without this care, at a given moment, the flowerbed will be all red, all blue, all yellow, or all white, instead of being, as we say, enamelled with flowers of mixed shades matched with discernment. The gardener also needs to be aware of the size of ornamental plants to be planted in the ground, so as to stagger them by placing the largest in the center, the medium-sized in the second row, and the smallest in front, immediately after the border. There's a charming little saxifrage with exceptionally elegant foliage and white corollas regularly punctuated with bright red, which the peasants of northern France have nicknamed : The more I see you, the more I love you. Many small flowering plants are in the same situation as this saxifrage; the gardener must assign them a place in the flowerbed where they can be seen from close enough, so that we can fully enjoy all the charms of their bloom. Many flowers of different seasons, such as pansy and heliotrope, for example, follow the apparent march of the sun over the horizon by a movement of their own. When poorly placed, these flowers can only be seen upside down by the walker in the parterre's alleys, which causes them to lose much of their ornamental value; this is a fault that a careful gardener must never commit. Multiplying outdoor ornamental plants. - The most important aspect of good flowerbed maintenance is to organize the propagation of the most beautiful ornamental plants, in accordance with the local climate and available space. If this space is limited, it's even better to sacrifice part of it for propagation, so as never to run out of good plants to replace those whose flowering is exhausted, than to leave the flowerbed compartments empty or sparsely stocked. Seedlings, cuttings and marcottes are the main means of propagation used for plants destined to feature in the parterre. Seedlings of hardy plants such as mathioles, campanulas, foxgloves and a host of others are best sown in well-tilled and, above all, well-smoked soil. Enough space should be set aside for this type of nursery, so that biennial plants such as poet's carnations and many campanulas can be transplanted and, as they strengthen, wait for the time to take their place in the flowerbed. Seedlings of more delicate plants or Fig. 81. Pink petunia. Fig. 82. Coréopsis. demanding plants, such as balsamines, margueles, petunias (fig. 81), corćopsis (fig. 82), can only be sown on a muted layer of potting soil. The fibrous roots of these plants, stimulated to branch out by the penetrable nature of the potting soil that feeds them, form a great abundance of hair. When they need to be put in place, we carefully pull them out; they take a good handful of the potting soil from the layer adhering to their roots, and, with a lot of wetting, they take up again immediately, which ensures the beauty of their flowering. Cuttings can be made partly in the open air, partly under a bell or under a frame, under the same conditions as seedlings on a deaf layer. Layers of cuttings are made in place, around the mother plant, in the bed where it has flowered. However, if the marcots - those of garden carnations, for example - need to be cultivated for some time after being weaned, before being transplanted to the place where they are to flower, they should be pricked out in a nursery. Many ornamental plants are not propagated by any of these three means; they provide more rooted offshoots each year than are needed to renew old clumps. These offshoots are detached either in spring or autumn, to be planted immediately if they are strong enough, or to be transplanted to the nursery if the gardener feels they need to develop further. Flowering bulbous plants must also be multiplied very carefully by sowing their seeds: these sowings are used only in the hope of obtaining new varieties superior to the old ones. Every year, after they have flowered, onions are lifted to remove the young bulbs or cloves, which are transplanted to a nursery and cultivated as young seedlings would be, until they are ready to contribute to the decoration of the flowerbed. Many of the most beautiful bulbous ornamental plants produce eyelets called bulbils in the leaf axils of their flowering stems, which take root as they fall to the ground and become perfect plants in time. This is a supplementary means of propagation that can be used mainly to propagate some very fine species of lily. The gardener can also propagate a wide variety of ornamental plants during the summer months, at no cost other than a layer of soil, one or two glass frames and a few glass cloches. Although these plants are not grown in the open air because they do not overwinter in the Paris climate, they nevertheless add variety to the decoration of the flowerbed from spring to autumn. These include several species of calceolaria, fuchsia and petargonium. All you need to do is overwinter a few strong vines of each of these plants in a cold greenhouse or orangery, and in spring they will produce numerous shoots suitable for making cuttings, which will root quickly and flower throughout the summer. With all these resources at his disposal, the professional gardener in charge of maintaining a flowerbed is never at a loss to decorate it with the most beautiful flowers according to the season. As for the amateur gardener, if he wants his parterre to be irreproachable, he must look after it all year round without interruption. CHAPTER XL Ornamental plants for various purposes. Plants and shrubs with climbing stems. - Irish ivy. - Its uses - Its cultivation - Cissus or Virginia creeper - Its use as a wall covering. - Glycine from China. - Vigorous vegetation. - How to moderate it. - Bignone, Virginia jasmine. - White jasmine. - Italian honeysuckle. - Evergreen honeysuckle. - Clematis. - Henderson clematis. - Aristoloches. - Ample foliage. - Annual climbers. - Saxatile plants for rock gardens. - Spring barberry. - Yellow-flowered Corydalis. - Alyssum corbeille d'or. - Evening primrose with large fruit. - California Zauchsneria. - Its little-known merit. - Heather. - Saxifrages. - Sedums. - A curious experiment on the vegetation of acrid sedums and Rhodiola. In the advanced state of modern horticulture, the gardener in charge of a complete parterre must have at his disposal a wide variety of plants, each with its own special merit and purpose. The most useful to know are arranged in six main divisions, including climbing plants and shrubs, for covering trellises and cradles; saxatile plants, for decorating rocks and rockeries; aquatic plants, suitable for decorating the edges of ponds and water features; forest plants, to decorate areas shaded by tall trees or buildings; fragrant plants, with the special function of perfuming the flowerbed; and evergreen or evergreen plants, whose presence conceals the nudity of the flowerbed during the bad season. Plants and shrubs with climbing stems. - There is almost always a section of wall in sight of the parterre, either enclosing it or belonging to a neighbouring building, which cannot be left uncovered and must be concealed under a mantle of greenery and flowers, also essential for lining the cradles often built behind the parterre's compartments, on a point from which you can see all the groups of flowers that make up its finery. The most common climbing plants used for this purpose are: ivy, cissus or Virginia creeper, Chinese wisteria, bignone, Virginia jasmine, white jasmine, honeysuckle, clematis and aristoloches. Ivy. - We have already mentioned the value of Irish ivy as a plant that can form very good borders around the compartments of large flowerbeds. It is no less useful for covering walls and trellises completely and in a very short time. However, as this plant does not flower and its greenish flowers are insignificant, it should only be planted on its own in a northern exposure, or in such a shady situation that you cannot hope to successfully grow other flowering climbers with a rich ornamental effect. Irish ivy can be propagated either by sowing its seeds, or by taking cuttings; the latter is the more common method. Cuttings are made from young shoots, almost always more or less covered with hooks, which become roots; they can be rooted in any season, as ivy's vegetation never slumbers; but they are most successful in spring and autumn. Cissus or Virginia creeper. - This plant, also known as five-leaf ampelopsis and Virginia creeper, blooms as little as ivy; it grows in the same conditions and at the same exposure as ivy. Towards the end of autumn, Virginia creeper leaves turn from green to wine-red, producing a rather picturesque effect, especially when the plant hangs in graceful festoons from tall trees or high walls. It is rarely necessary to worry about propagating Virginia creeper. The seeds that escape from its ripe berries propagate it sufficiently by natural sowing, and give abundant seedlings 20 that can be planted immediately, or raised for a year in a nursery. The numerous offshoots growing at the foot of each older plant are also used as a means of propagation; whether or not they are rooted, these offshoots take root with extreme ease. Chinese wisteria. - Chinese wisteria, acFig. 83. Chinese wisteria, commonly called visteria by botanists, is one of the prettiest, most floriferous and most useful of ornamental climbers. It can be planted in all exposures and in all types of soil; it flowers most abundantly in fertile, light soil, with a southern exposure; in less favorable exposures, it flowers a little less and much later, but it nevertheless produces very beautiful clusters of papilionaceous flowers, of a very delicate amethyst shade, with a most pleasant fragrance. Although not precisely a remontant plant, Chinese wisteria always produces, one or two months after its first flowering, which precedes the leaves in spring, a second flowering that is just as beautiful and fragrant, although less abundant; the clusters of flowers then stand out against its elegant foliage (fig. 83). In European climates, wisteria very rarely produces fertile seeds, so it is almost never propagated by sowing; cuttings taken from the current year's twigs, and marcottes taken from the previous year's twigs, root very easily. In its use as an ornamental climber, wisteria has only one drawback, which is its excessively vigorous vegetation. On the island of Hong Kong, when the English took possession of the island, they found wisteria spreading from tree to tree in the woods, over a width of 8 to 10 meters and a length of more than 300 meters. In Europe, wisteria doesn't grow so fast or so far, but it does invade very large areas in a short space of time; fortunately, the flexibility of its branches, when they're still young, means that they can be folded in on themselves and contained within a limited space. This is what needs to be done when a strong wisteria plant, after having sufficiently lined a cradle, is trained along a trellis of limited extent. The main stem, first extended to the very bottom of the trellis, is brought back on itself to its starting point, then led in successive strings up and down, until the whole trellis is covered. Using the same method, it can be led over wire to completely cover the surface of a wall. The life of this plant is indefinite; Fig. 84. Virginia jasmine. combined with ivy, it produces a most graceful effect, with its bright flowers and pale green foliage contrasting with the dark green of the ivy leaves. Bignone, Virginia jasmine - Virginia jasmine (fig. 84), remarkable for the brilliance of its terminal tufts of large, beautifully red flowers, as well as for its cut foliage of a very beautiful green, does not flower well in northern exposures; all other exposures are suitable. All this beautiful plant lacks is a little perfume: its flowers are completely odorless. Virginia jasmine, classified by botanists in the tecoma genus, multiplies by cuttings and the separation of rooted offshoots; its life span, like that of wisteria, is indefinite. White jasmine. - In the climate of Paris, white jasmine should only be planted in a southern exposure; it combines graceful foliage with the sweetest fragrance; but its flowers, small in relation to the size of the plant, are never very abundant, except in a southern climate. It is propagated either by cuttings or marcottes, in spring and autumn. White jasmine flowers are always born at the ends of the twigs; after the leaves have fallen, the clumps should be clipped with scissors, to bring out as many young flowering shoots as possible. Honeysuckle. - Honeysuckle is one of the hardiest climbers in the European climate, and should be treated accordingly. When you plan to plant it in a cradle, you can plant strong, old plants, provided their sap is not moving at the time of planting. If you take care to raise the plant in a clod with as much soil as possible, and to thoroughly wet the soil in the hole dug to receive it, recovery is assured. Italian honeysuckle, a variety cultivated in preference to all others in gardens, can be combined with evergreen honeysuckle, whose fragrance-free blossoms are yellow inside and bright red outside; mixing the flowers of these two honeysuckles produces a very pleasing effect on a cradle or a wall covered with trellis. Honeysuckle is propagated like jasmine, but with even greater ease. Clematis. - Horticulture has a large number of species and varieties of clematis, all more or less climbing, very floriferous, and many of which can be grown outdoors in the Paris climate. The two species most commonly used to cover trellises and cradles are the fragrant clematis, which flowers from late July to September, and the Henderson clematis, which doesn't begin to bloom until autumn. Through cultivation, the fragrant clematis has given rise to a very pretty sub-variety, slightly tinged with pink, which is less widespread in gardens than it deserves to be; it is as fragrant as the pure white common species. All clematis are propagated by cuttings and the separation of rooted offshoots. Aristoloches. - Several species of Aristoloches are cultivated for their extensive foliage and bizarre flower shapes, most of which give off an unpleasant odor. Aristolochia siphon is the only one that can overwinter in the open air in the climate of Paris; its powerful vegetation provides impenetrable shade from the sun for very large cradles, where the thickness of its ample heart-shaped foliage produces a very pleasant coolness in summer. Although Aristolochia siphon produces ripe seeds in our gardens, we generally prefer to propagate it from two-year-old wood. For this purpose, we select a twig with two knots, cut it in half and cover it with soil, leaving a good eye out. These marcottes, made in spring, can be weaned in autumn. Aristolochia is one of the hardiest and most durable of ornamental climbers. Annual climbers. - Annual climbers, such as volubilis, nasturtiums, sweet peas and runner beans, are among the most common; sown at the end of March or in April, they grow almost everywhere. However common these plants may be, they are no less worthy of propagation, especially the sweet pea which, as its name suggests, has a very strong fragrance, similar to that of the orange blossom; it is particularly suitable for lining the bottom of trellises and cradles in the parterre, and for forming very floriferous 20. clumps around the bare stems of roses grafted onto high-stemmed rosehips. Saxatile plants. - Although this kind of ornamental planting is not always in the best taste, many amateurs like to build an artificial rock in a corner of the flowerbed, with hollows to accommodate various types of plants suited to this special purpose and therefore known as saxatile plants. The list of plants that can be grown in the open air in the Paris climate is long, but not all the plants it includes are ornamental to the same degree. The best for maintaining an artificial rock lined with flowers or greenery all year round are : arabette, yellow-flowered corydalis, alyssum corbeille d'or, aubrietia, large-fruited oenothera, California zauchsneria, several heathers, three or four saxifrages, and a dozen sedums. SPRING CRESS. - The flower of the Arabica is simple and undistinguished; its merit lies in its earliness combined with an extreme hardiness that enables it to be grown in the most ungrateful soils. A handful of soil mixed with an equal amount of sand, thrown into a crevice of the artificial rock, is enough to make a large clump of cattail grow and flower abundantly. Although this plant can also be propagated by sowing and by separating its rooted offspring, it should not be sown in place when used to decorate rock gardens; it is better to place fully-formed clumps in autumn, to obtain a more beautiful bloom. Similarly, clumps of cottongrass should be raised in a nursery, and should bloom in flowerbeds from the first days of March, when other flowers are not common. CORVDALE WITH YELLOW FLOWERS. - Corydalis, also known as bulbous fumitory, flowers abundantly and for a long time, and forms clumps of rare elegance, due to the fine indentations in its foliage, which is similar to that of officinal fumitory. Seeds can be sown in the field, but lose their germinative properties immediately and must be sown at the same time as they are harvested. When given a place in flowerbeds, it's a good idea to mix a few fragments of broken stone with the soil in which their bulbous roots should grow; clumps can be split every three years in late autumn. ALYSSUM CORBEILLE D'OR. - This is the saxatile plant par excellence; its half-woody stems brave drought and flower well only in dry, slightly stony soil; it flowers best in rock crevices, but should not be sown there. Seeds sown in May, as soon as they are ripe, produce seedlings which are transplanted in the autumn and not planted until the spring of the following year. However, if they are vigorous enough, they can be planted immediately before the first cold weather arrives. AUBRIETIA. - This plant, of a very similar genus to the previous one, has become very popular in recent years, due to the brilliance and duration of its abundant blooms, of a charming amethyst hue. There are three varieties, including one with pink blossoms; their cultivation is very similar to that of the alyssum corbeille d'or. ÆNOTHÉRA A GROS FRUIT, ONAGRE A GROS FRUIT. - This plant is only suited to fairly large rock gardens, on which it spreads its stems laden with yellow flowers of unusual brilliance and size. The best way to propagate it is to take cuttings in summer, using young shoots that are covered with a glass cloche and planted as soon as they have taken root. CALIFORNIA IAUCHSNERIA. - This pretty plant, which at the time of its introduction into Europe was greeted with unsustained favor, is now almost nowhere to be found. The neglect into which it has fallen is in no way justified; it forms elegant little bushes between rockeries, which withstand the winters of the Paris climate very well in the open air, and produce a profusion of pretty red flowers throughout the summer. California Zauchsneria is easy to propagate; its seeds, which are abundant, should be sown in May; the seedling flowers in its first year; all soils and all exposures, except due north, are equally suitable. HEAVEN. - Most heathers in horticulture belong to the temperate greenhouse. Those grown in the open, i.e. those that can overwinter in the open air in European climates, are ideal for rock gardens. The hardiest species are: common heather, ash heather, multiflora heather and broom heather, which, despite its less than poetic usage, is no less elegant. They are easily propagated by cuttings, marcottes or sowing their seeds. These plants thrive only in light, sandy soil, known in gardens as "terre de bruyère". This is the soil with which to fill the crevices of artificial rocks where heathers are to be grown in the open air. SAXIFRAGES. - The name saxifrage, which means "breaker", indicates that it thrives in rock gardens. Among the many varieties of saxifrage cultivated in gardens, those that best decorate rock gardens are the ombreuse saxifrage, also known as amourette, and the sarmenteuse saxifrage, whose loose stems run over rocks in all directions, and emit, from distance to distance, bouquets of leaves and flowers, making them eminently suitable for decorating hanging vases in inhabited apartments. The shady saxifrage, whose small flowers are regularly punctuated with bright red, is what we call, in northern France, plus je vous vois, plus je vous aime (the more I see you, the more I love you). Saxifrages are propagated by sowing their seeds in spring. SEDUMS. - The sedum genus is rich in very rustic, very floriferous species, which, living mainly on air which they decompose by means of their fleshy leaves, need very little soil, very little water, and are particularly happy on rock gardens; some even flower with difficulty in any other position. They can be propagated by dividing clumps early in the spring. The most attractive species for rock gardens are: acrid sedum, with star-shaped yellow flowers, very numerous; poplar-leaved sedum, with white flowers washed with pink, with a pleasant fragrance; rhodiola sedum, and houseleaved sedum; this last species is more sensitive to cold than the others; it should only be planted on rock gardens with a midday exposure. All these sedums, but especially the acrid and rhodiola sedums, can be used in a curious experiment of interest to sedentary people, or those deprived of the means to indulge their taste for flower cultivation. These plants, picked a month or so before flowering and suspended by a thread from a nail in the wall of an inhabited room, vegetate there without soil or water, and flower as if in the open ground. CHAPTER XLI Ornamental plants for various purposes. Aquatic plants. - White water lily. - Yellow water lily. - Sagittaria or water arrowhead. - Flowering rush. - Flowering willowherb. - Fireweed. - Purple loosestrife. - Austrian loosestrife. - Round-leaved mint. - Forget-me-not. - Virginia lobelia. - Virginia ponteideria. - Forest plants. - Suitable for decorating shady areas of the flowerbed. - Foxglove. - Large-flowered Hypericum. - Mimulus. - Nemophilous. - Lily of the valley. - Violet. - Gentian. - Periwinkle. - Anemones. - Hepathic. - Hallelujah. - Hoteya. - Tiarella. - Fragrant plants. - Reseda. - Musk mimulus. - Sage. - Thyme. - Lavender. - Hyssop. - Growing them. - Reseda tree management. - Wallflower. - Mathiole. - Evergreen ornamental plants. - Advantages of growing them in the flowerbed in winter. Aquatic flantes. - A pond or water feature often accompanies a large parterre; this pond is not always enclosed in a lining of cut stone or marble, a condition that is de rigueur only for ponds in public promenades or very large parks. If it's only surrounded by a gently sloping grass belt, its edges look much more pleasant when lined with clumps of ornamental aquatic plants chosen from those that have nothing to fear from our cold winters. Some of these plants are perennial only in their roots, which spend the time they are dormant in the mud at the bottom of the water; others, with equally annual stems, live at the water's edge; all are extremely easy to grow. The former spread their leaves and flowers over the surface of the water; the latter erect their flowering stems, most often ending in spikes, on the very edge of the water where they seem to be reflected. The native flora provides 2 S - 9 Thorticulture with white water lily, yellow-flowered water lily, arrowhead, flowering rush, purple loosestrife, round-leaved mint and the humble forget-me-not. When the water in the pond is deep enough that frost can never reach the bottom, you can add to all these native plants Virginia lobelia, which blooms abundantly throughout the summer, and ponteideria from the same country, which blooms for an equally long time. WHITE NYMPHEA. - This plant is one of the most beautiful adornments of still waters, on whose surface come

It requires no special cultivation care, and is propagated by dividing its long, fleshy rhizomes or false tubers. If there is reason to fear that the shallow water in the pond will freeze over in winter, remove the rhizomes from the bottom of the water after flowering, store them all winter in damp, frost-free mud, and replace them in the pond when summer returns. YELLOW WATER LILY OR NUPHAR. - This plant is associated with the white water lily, whose large, buttercup-like flowers create a graceful effect. The foliage of these two plants is the same; they are propagated by the same method. WATER ARROWHEAD. - The brown, gnarled rhizomes of the water arrowhead are found everywhere in still waters, its leaves taking on the shape of an arrowhead as they rise above the water level, while those that remain underwater are simple, very long green strips; the three-petaled white flowers, grouped in spikes three by three, are not lacking in grace; but it is above all through the singular shape of its leaves that the water arrowhead contributes to the ornament of water features. Same cultivation as the water lily. BUTOME OR FLOWERING RUSH. - The umbellate arrangement of the butome's very pink flowers, borne on a single, straight, very high stem, makes this plant one of the most ornamental of Europe's aquatic flora. Butoma is propagated by dividing clumps pulled up towards the end of autumn, separating each into three or four and replanting immediately in the mud. Butoma seeds can also be sown at the bottom of the water as soon as they reach maturity. However, this type of sowing is not practicable in ponds or bodies of water where pairs of swans live. These birds, with their long necks, search the bottom of the water for butoma seeds and those of a host of other aquatic plants, just as the act of germination develops the sweet principle that makes them particularly agreeable to swans. This, incidentally, is the reason why no wild aquatic plant spreads naturally on the surface of a pond frequented by a pair of swans. LARGE-FLOWERED WILLOWHERB. - Two varieties of willowherb are used to decorate the edges of water features, both of them very long-flowering; the larger of the two is also known as flowering willowherb; it is a tracer and is quick to invade more space than it is given; the smaller willowherb, known as narrow-leaved willowherb, is non-tracking; we have a very good sub-variety with wider corollas than those of the two preceding varieties, which we prefer to plant; the root sinks into the mud, right at the water's edge. Willowherb is propagated by dividing clumps in autumn. SALICARIA - Although it blooms abundantly and for a long time, purple loosestrife, with its long spikes of purplish-red flowers, is rarely planted in beds on the edge of a pond. Loosestrife, like willowherb, is planted with its roots in the water at the very edge of ponds; it is perennial and, once it has taken possession of the land, will remain there in perpetuity. ROUND-LEAVED MINT. - Although its small but very numerous flowers, of a very pale purplish hue, lack grace and brilliance, the round-leaf mint, with its sweet fragrance, deserves a place among the ornamental aquatic plants, all of which are odorless. It is a tracer and spreads by itself wherever it has been planted under the same conditions as fireweed and purple loosestrife. MVOSOTIS. - The forget-me-not plant, unrivalled in the flora of European waters for the grace of its form and the purity of its azure blue hue, cannot be overemphasized at the water's edge. Like the round-leaved mint, the forget-me-not propagates itself by its offspring, and quickly forms large clumps, provided that in summer the water level doesn't drop and leave it dry; for, if it ceases to have its foot in the water, it yellows and dies; but, when water is not lacking in any season, it is virtually indestructible. VIRGINIA LOBELIA. - The surest way to grow this pretty plant, which produces beautiful spikes of elegant blue flowers, is to plant it in pots filled with peaty soil, sunk into the mud a short distance from the edge of the pond. In this way, as winter approaches, the pots can be removed from the pond and the lobelia can be overwintered in a frost-free location; it requires no further cultivation care and can be multiplied by dividing the clumps at the start of winter. VIRGINIA PONTEDERIA. - This aquatic plant, equally remarkable for the singular shape of its thick leaves and the elegance of its pretty blue flowers, should be treated in exactly the same way as the Virginia lobelia. Forest plants. - The parterre is often close enough to the buildings or groups of tall trees that make up the groves, so that at least part of its surface receives very little sunlight, or is even completely deprived of it. Compartments in this situation cannot be decorated with the same flowers as the others; the gardener, in anticipation of this necessity, must cultivate a certain number of plants that grow naturally in the shade of forests, so 21 that not one part of his parterre is devoid of flowers. In the Paris climate, the most beautiful and hardy plants for this purpose are foxglove, large-flowered hypericum, several species of mimulus, nemophilia, lily of the valley, violet, periwinkle, gentian and several anemones; If a certain amount of heather soil is available, these plants can be joined by Japanese hotteya and tiarella, two charming plants that grow and flower perfectly in the shade. PIGITALE. - If you're content with foxglove, which grows wild in all woods, transplant young burrs into shady flowerbeds in the parterre; they stay there in perpetuity, with the sole proviso of splitting them when they become too large. If you wish to add the large-flowered foxglove, which is not very different from the foxglove but flowers more profusely, sow the seed in spring; the plant, transplanted in a nursery, flowers in summer the following year. HYPERICUM. - This plant, which traces and spreads rapidly in all directions, is covered from June to September with large, golden-yellow flowers. It should only be planted in situations where it can form fairly large clumps, otherwise it has no effect. The large-flowered Hypericum is propagated exclusively by the separation of rooted suckers, which each clump always produces in overabundant quantities. MIMULUS. - The mimulus genus is very rich in beautiful species with abundant and prolonged flowering, which grow very well in the shade. The cardinal mimulus, with its bright red flowers, and the variegated mimulus, with its purple spots on a yellow background, are the two species that do best in this situation. They are propagated mainly by dividing clumps in spring; seedlings do not always reproduce the variety from which the seed was harvested. NEMOPHILES. - Nothing is more graceful than this pretty plant with its finely cut foliage, pale blue corollas and rare elegance of form. The two or three varieties Fig. 85. Nemophila. cultivated in gardens are propagated exclusively from seed. Nemophilus seed is sown in spring, in the most shady locations. As its name suggests, this woodland plant blooms abundantly in the shade of tall trees without needing direct sunlight. LILY OF THE VALLEY. Because of its fragrance and the graceful shape of its bell-shaped corollas, the lily of the valley cannot be grown too much in shady areas of the flowerbed. If you wish to plant large areas, sow the seed in the garden, either in autumn or spring. If you wish to have only a few clumps, plant the roots removed after flowering; the plants flower the following spring. In the parterre, you can combine wild lily of the valley from the woods with pink-flowered lily of the valley and the double-flowered variety; all are equally fragrant. LILY OF THE VALLEY. - As hardy as quackgrass, the fragrant violet, with single or double flowers of various shades, should have a large place in the flowerbed. A few clumps are planted at the foot of a wall facing south, so that the violet can be picked very early in March; the majority is planted in the shade, where it blooms from April to September, when the remontant, four-season varieties and the very long-blooming, pale-blue double Parma violet are adopted. GENTIANE. - The common species of gentian, widespread in the wild on uncultivated heaths throughout northern Europe, adorns very well the compartments of the shadiest flowerbeds, where its goblet-shaped, dark-blue flowers produce a very beautiful effect; it is multiplied by dividing clumps in spring; it is content with the least fertile soils. PERVENCH. - The two species of native periwinkle, the large and the small, grow and flower in the shade without any cultivation care; they are no more difficult than acaule gentian, as far as soil quality is concerned. The clumps must be contained by frequent splitting, otherwise they will quickly invade a large area. Periwinkle is invaluable in shady areas of the flowerbed, because of its early flowering. ANEMONES. - The little white wood anemone, the false buttercup anemone and the blue-flowered Alpine anemone can all be planted in the shade of a flowerbed; all are equally hardy and will perpetuate themselves in the soil they have once taken over. They can be multiplied by splitting clumps every three years; but the detached roots, with a good eye, should be put in place immediately: the less time they remain out of the ground, the more assured their recovery. These native anemones can be joined by the hepatic anemone, also known as alleluia, because it blooms at the time when the Catholic Church begins to sing Alleluia. We have two simple varieties, one pink, the other blue, and two others that correspond to them, with very double flowers. All these anemones have the same fault: they bloom very early for a very short time, and occupy the ground uselessly for the rest of the year. They should not, therefore, be lavished on; but, as soon as the first fine days arrive, we like to see their graceful flowers, which precede all others, blooming in the shady compartments of the flowerbed. JAPANESE HOTEYA. - Japanese hoteya, also remarkable for its elegant foliage and beautiful, long-lasting white flowers, can be grown in beds of little space, where one shaded compartment can be broken up and filled with heather soil. The clumps of this plant grow large enough every year to be propagated by splitting them before spring vegetation resumes. TIARELLA. - Like its predecessor, tiarella thrives in shade and heathery soil, but if the soil is not naturally damp, it needs frequent and ample watering. It can be propagated like the hoteya, by sowing its seeds. Fragrant plants. - The two most fragrant, musk mimulus and reseda, produce flowers that are barely visible, but their presence is revealed by their sweet smell, and the gardener must not forget to associate them in sufficient numbers with plants with brighter flowers, but no scent. In addition to the two main ones just mentioned, sage, thyme, lavender, hyssop, yellow wallflower, single and double, and mathiola are also grown in the parterre, mainly because of their pleasant scent. Sage, thyme, lavender and hyssop belong to the Labiatae family; all plants in this family require dry soil and southern exposure; they multiply by dividing clumps. Reseda and musk mimulus are annuals; they are propagated by sowing their seeds in spring. Gardeners know a variety known as English reseda, with broader leaves and more developed flowers than the common species. If a single plant of reseda from seed is transplanted into a pot filled with good garden soil, half-mixed with potting compost from broken layers, and instead of forming a clump, it is trained on a single stem, using a straight stick as a support, it can be made hardy and extend its life indefinitely, provided it is not allowed to go to seed. To achieve this, start by pinching the top of the stem when it is ready to flower. This pinching causes lateral shoots to develop, three or four of which are retained. When these shoots are close to flowering, they are pinched off again to give each one two flowering shoots. The lower part of the stem has become woody; the reseda has taken on the form of a small shrub, with a head made up of eight branches held evenly apart by a thin wicker rod bent into a circle. Once the shoots have flowered, they are cut off before the seeds are formed; they thus follow one another without interruption. Keeping the reseda perennial in an inhabited room at a mild temperature during the winter is enough to keep it in perpetual flower for an indeterminate number of years. The pots containing the reseda plants, grown in this way, can be buried in the flowerbed in spring, helping to perfume it throughout the summer. The simple yellow wallflower is propagated by sowing its seeds; the plant often freezes in winter; it should only overwinter in a well-sheltered position, to be placed in the flowerbed in spring, where its flowers spread a scent similar to that of violets. The double-flowered mathiole, improperly named white, red and violet wallflower, can only be propagated from cuttings, as can the double-flowered yellow wallflower. These clove-scented plants become perennials when potted at the start of winter, to be overwintered in a frost-free location, and put back into the flowerbeds in spring. Evergreen ornamental plants - In winter, you can hide the nudity of the flowerbed by temporarily placing a few evergreen plants and shrubs, some in pots, others in the ground. We bury large pots containing a few plants of variegated holly, cotoneaster, aucuba and Japanese medlar. These shrubs are removed in spring to make way for a first assortment of flowering plants, which would not be possible if they were planted permanently. Clumps of thick-leaved saxifrage, pansies, snapdragons and a few other plants whose foliage only freezes in exceptionally harsh winters are planted in the ground. Thanks to this resource, the appearance of the parterre is still brightened up by a little greenery during the rare fine days of the worst months of the year. One of the most valuable evergreen shrubs for decorating the parterre in winter is Forlythia viridissuca, now common and inexpensive. This very cheerful green shrub, as its name suggests, is also adorned, from the first bearable days of February, with a profusion of golden-yellow flowers, reminiscent in shape of the flowers of the Spanish jasmine. These flowers seem all the more pleasing in the parterre, as they even precede those of the Japanese coignassier and other precoee flowering ornamental plants and shrubs. CHAPTER XLII Collectible ornamental plants. Collector's ornamental plants. - Tulips. - Forming beds. - Soil renewal. - Onion planting. - Spacing. - Requirements for a beautiful amateur tulip. - Cultivation care. - Multiplication by cloves. - By sowing the seed. - Hyacinths. - Soil preparation. - Onion planting. - Winter cover. - Stakes. - Dutch hyacinths. - Parisian hyacinths. - Forced cultivation. - Cultivation in water on the chimney. - Ranunculus. - Seedlings. - Transplanting claws. - Soil preparation. - Cultivation care. - Watering. - Resting claws. - Harvesting and storing ranunculus seeds. Among the ornamental plants that can be grown in the open air, there are some that belong to genera rich enough in species, varieties and sub-varieties to form numerous groups. For this reason, they are referred to by the special name of collector's plants; these are the ornamental plants whose cultivation is of most interest to the true amateur. Each of these plants, in order to combine all the properties that make them worthy of the connoisseur's attention, must possess a certain number of very special qualities, which the horticulturist strives to preserve by developing them more and more. As with all things of taste and elegance, fashion has an influence on ornamental plants; many ornamental plants have had their periods of favor, before being abandoned and forgotten. We feel it is our duty here to describe the cultivation of all those ornamental plants that possess unquestionable merit, even if some of them are temporarily and unjustly disdained by a whim of fashion. The main ornamental collection plants that can be grown without the help of a greenhouse in the Paris climate are: tulips, hyacinths, buttercups, anemones, carnations, auriculas, pansies, glayeulas, peonies, dahlias, chrysanthemums, phlox, petunias and, among flowering shrubs, roses. TULIP. - Of all collector's plants, the tulip is the one that has been the object of the most passionate favor, a favor that is very much appreciated, but which nonetheless persists among a fairly large number of enthusiasts. To form a fine collection of tulips, instead of acquiring all the s0o varieties of which complete collections are made up, an expense that few enthusiasts can afford, we are content with a hundred or even fifty first-choice onions; we must choose them that are smooth, firm, well-conformed and, if possible, of a volume that slightly exceeds the movenne of their species. Every year, these carefully cultivated onions produce a certain number of cloves which can be raised separately in a nursery, and which, as their blossoms reach perfection, can be used for exchanges to complete the collection, without incurring excessive expense. Tulip beds should be set up in an open, well-ventilated position; the tulip is originally from the East, and grows wild in meadows near the sea; shade from trees and buildings can only be harmful. Its best exposure is west or south-west. The tulip onion thrives in clean garden soil mixed with a third of potting soil from broken layers; if the soil is stronger than light, half the potting soil can be added. Manure, even when very advanced in decomposition, is fatal to tulip onions as long as it has not been turned into potting soil. The soil quickly tires of this type of cultivation; the soil in which tulip collections are grown must be renewed in its entirety every two years, or every three years at the latest, otherwise the beauty of the flowers is considerably impaired. Tulip onions are planted in the first fortnight of November, taking advantage of the last few days of what gardeners call St. Martin's summer, a period of mild, bearable weather which, in the Paris climate, rarely fails to precede the bad days of early winter. The soil in which the tulip onions are to be planted is removed to a depth of 40 centimetres, placed on a rake, amended if necessary with potting soil mixed in very thoroughly, and immediately put back into place. The surface is carefully levelled with a fine-toothed rake, then the onions are placed in rows spaced 20 centimetres apart, and 12 centimetres apart within the rows. If the tulip bed were given a greater width, the result would be that, at flowering time, the last rows, too far from the edge of the row, could not be seen from close enough to admire the beauty of detail that is this flower's greatest merit. When all the onions have been placed, the rest of the soil held in reserve is spread over them, taking the necessary precautions not to disturb them; then the surface of the bed is levelled with a rake. This surface should not be completely horizontal, but slightly inclined forwards, so that the tulips, arranged in an amphitheatrical fashion, with the tallest at the back, present themselves with all their advantages. The main requirements for a good amateur tulip are : regularity of form, purity of shade (at least two shades on a very pure white or light yellow background), height of stem (no less than 50 centimetres), with a diameter in proportion to the volume of the flower, and finally, a goblet-shaped corolla, perfectly upright on its stem; those whose stems are flexuous, or lean forward or sideways, even if perfect in other respects, are excluded from collections. Once planted in good conditions, with care taken to match colors for the fullest possible ornamental effect, onions require little attention to cultivation. Although they originate from a much warmer climate than ours, tulips can withstand the cold of our unprotected winters in the open air. The leaves emerge very early in the spring, and the tulip beds can be lightly hoeed, taking care not to injure the onions, after which the weeds can be removed if they accidentally appear in the bed. It sometimes happens that icy rains and gusts of wind accompanied by snow and sleet, known as March sleet, fill the cone formed by the tulip's leaves, at the bottom of which is the bud, with very cold water; this water, which is very slow to evaporate, more or less harms the bud by its prolonged stay. Enthusiasts who want their tulips to flower in the best possible conditions erect a very light, green-painted iron frame over the beds, over which a canvas is thrown in case of bad weather. During flowering, this tent prolongs the blooming period, protecting the flowers from direct sunlight. The fruits that follow the flowers must be removed as soon as the divisions of the colored calyx, which replaces the corolla in the tulip, have fallen; only a few are reserved from the most perfect flowers, whose seeds are left to ripen when they are to be used for propagation by sowing; usually, tulips are propagated exclusively by chockers, who reproduce the sub-varieties without any alteration. It always takes several years of nursery cultivation to obtain flowers worthy of a place in the collection, so anyone wishing to maintain a complete collection of tulips, or to increase it by exchange, must raise a fairly large number of cloves every year, planted at the same time, in the same soil and cultivated under the same conditions as the fully-formed onions. Once the fruit has been removed, wait until the leaves have begun to wilt and the flower stalks have lost their rigidity, then lift the onions from the ground, allowing them to lose some of their vegetative water by exposing them to a brisk draught in a place where the sun cannot penetrate. As soon as they are considered sufficiently dry, they are placed in numbered crates, so that when the time comes to plant them, the colors can be matched at will. The cloves reserved for propagation must be treated in the same way, and classified with the same care. Seedlings do not reproduce sub-varieties identically. You need a great deal of patience to propagate tulips in this way; you can only expect to see the final result of sowing after 10, 12 and sometimes 15 years of cultivation, and after this long wait, the flowers obtained are more often than not inferior to those you already have. Tulip onions sometimes produce nothing but leaves for a year; in this case, they are said to be resting, and will flower all the more beautifully in subsequent years. From time to time, without any regular periodicity, the most beautiful onions in a collection give imperfect flowers, entirely different from their ordinary bloom; but by continuing to cultivate them under the conditions described above, we can count with certainty that their flowers will become again as perfect as they could have been before. JACINTHES. - Although the hyacinth originates from the same countries as the tulip, it is of a slightly different temperament, and much more sensitive to the effects of the cold; it does not overwinter without a blanket in the Paris climate; this is why many amateurs only plant their hyacinth onions in spring, when the most severe cold has entirely passed. However, hyacinths treated in this way do not flower as well as those planted in September or, at the latest, in the first fortnight of October. Hyacinth onions that are not planted in autumn are exhausted in their efforts to vegetate in the drawer where they are kept; by the time they are planted in spring, they have already lost some of their vigour and can only give mediocre flowering. Hyacinth onions fear contact with manure even more than tulip onions; they need light, soft, slightly sandy soil, mixed with a third of heather soil, or an equal quantity of potting soil; leaf compost is much preferable for this crop to layer compost, unless the latter is completely decomposed. The bed does not need to be broken up to the same depth as for tulip planting; it is sufficient to remove the soil to a depth of two decimetres, and to replace it after having passed it through a rack and amended it with the prescribed dose of potting soil or heather soil; the same soil can be used for cultivation several years in succession; the breaking up and amendment of the bed need only be renewed after 3 or 4 years. Onions are planted 16 centimetres apart in all directions and, like tulip onions, are covered with one decimetre of good soil reserved for this purpose. Hyacinth onions don't all flower at the same time; if you want to get the most out of your hyacinth collection, plant the singles and semi-doubles, which flower together from the first half of March, and the doubles, which continue to flower until the end of April, side by side. To protect hyacinth onions from frost, they should not be covered with manure or litter soaked in cattle urine, as this would result in the loss of most of the onions. Only perfectly dry litter or, better still, a thick layer of leaves, held in place by slats or poles to prevent the wind from blowing them away, should be used as a covering. The most beautiful hyacinths, with their very double, very numerous flowers, do not have strong enough stems to support themselves; they are staked with small green-painted rods, fitted with two or three horizontal rings of thin wire; the stems, passed through these rings, cannot be blown over by the strong winds of the spring equinox, and the violent rains that are always frequent when hyacinths are in bloom. Hyacinth collections are made up of two series: Dutch and Parisian; the former are unquestionably superior to the latter, but they degenerate, and after a few generations, their cloves give only unrecognizable flowers; collections of Dutch hyacinths can only be maintained by continual acquisitions of onions bought in their country of origin, which necessarily ends up being very expensive. Parisian collections of hyacinths, though less beautiful and less developed in flower, are hardier and less prone to degeneration. They are very easily maintained in their entirety, with their cloves cultivated like fully-formed onions. After flowering, when the leaves begin to fade and turn yellow, it's time to remove the hyacinth onions from the ground, leaving them to dry out in the open air for a day or two, weather permitting. They are then placed in drawers and wrapped in numbered paper, so that they can be mixed at planting time. Collection hyacinths produce single, semi-double and double flowers; the single flowers are the only ones that produce seeds; they are broadcast in September in soil prepared in the same way as onions. Very small seedling onions are not lifted from the ground until their third year; for the first two years, cultivation is limited to protecting the young plant from frost in winter, by covering it with litter or dry leaves, and cutting back the leaves to ground level as soon as they begin to wilt. Hyacinth onions from seed only flower perfectly after ten to twelve years; this method of propagation is only used in the hope of obtaining new sub-varieties of merit, a hope that is not very often realized. 3 Hyacinth onions lend themselves extremely well to forced cultivation. From late autumn onwards, and successively throughout the winter, hyacinth onions are planted in pots filled with potting soil, kept in a constant state of moderate humidity, and brought into a temperate greenhouse; they immediately come into vegetation and show their flowers in the dead of winter. Everyone can enjoy forcing a few beautiful potted hyacinths onto the mantelpiece of an inhabited apartment. You can also place the onions in the opening of a suitably shaped carafe, in white or blue glass, filled with pure water. You'll soon see the roots forming, sinking to the bottom of the vase, and the plant developing and flowering. The vigorous vegetation of the hyacinth makes it possible to carry out a curious experiment with this plant. Two onions are planted in a glass vase full of potting soil, one with the top down, near the bottom of the vase pierced for the purpose, the other, in its natural position, near the vase opening. With these arrangements in place, the first vase is fitted over a second, filled with pure water. The upper onion follows its ordinary course of vegetation; the lower onion does the same, but in reverse; the leaves, stem and flowers grow from top to bottom, in the middle of the water, and the bloom is no less beautiful or colorful than that of the onion that vegetates in contact with the air. BUTTERCUP. - Buttercups are the simplest and easiest of all collector plants to grow. It is easy and inexpensive to multiply by sowing its seeds, so that you can create fairly large beds in your flowerbeds which, when they bloom, are a delight to look at, thanks to the graceful shape of the flowers and the variety of their colors. Very numerous sub-varieties cannot be reproduced by sowing without modification; they lack fixity. But if you take the precaution of sowing only seeds harvested from plants with dark flowers or bright shades, you can count on a rich mixture, where light and dark colors will be in just the right proportions, because some of the dark-flowered seeds only produce flowers of light shades. Ranunculus seed can be sown in the open ground, either in spring or autumn; but it is much preferable to sow only in terrines, which allows sowing to take place virtually all year round, as the terrines can easily be moved into a frost-free place in winter. To obtain a vigorous plant ready to flower very early, fill the terrines, not with soil, but with dried cow dung, pulverized, then moistened to a suitable degree and kept fresh by moderate but frequent watering. When the leaves of the young ranunculus plant begin to turn yellow, watering is stopped; the contents of the terrines, having become sufficiently dry, are crumbled and passed through a wire sieve. Very small tubers, or buttercups, remain on the sieve, each consisting of just two or three fingers. From the first fine days of spring, these young clumps can be planted in good, soft, substantial garden soil, rather light than strong, amended with good loam. When first transplanted, the young claws can be spaced a decimetre apart in all directions; if you take care to water them twice a day, except when it rains heavily, almost all show their flowers in the first year. Once you've obtained an ample supply of fully-formed claws from seedlings, plant them at the distance and under the conditions indicated above, twice, once at the beginning of spring and again in summer. In this way, the flowerbed is decorated twice during the summer season, with two beautiful clumps of flowering ranunculus. Once they've bloomed, when their leaves turn from green to yellow, we lift them from the ground. Those whose seed is to be harvested remain on the ground a little longer; the ripe seed is not detached immediately, but adheres to the scales in rounded tufts that follow the flower; these tufts are tied into bundles and hung in a dry place until the time comes to use the seed for sowing. Like tulip and hyacinth onions, griffez do not have a natural tendency to vegetate when they are not planted in spring. They can be kept for a year in the drawer; gardeners then call them griffes reposéts; they give a more beautiful bloom and wear out less quickly than griffes that are planted every year. Watering is the most important part of growing collector's ranunculus. To avoid compacting the soil too much on the claws, water only with a watering can with a sheaf pierced with very fine holes, and, especially during flowering, give little water at a time, unless you renew the watering several times a day. CHAPTER XLIII Collection plants (continued). Anemones. - Harvesting the seed. - Cultivation care. - Flemish carnation. - Requirements. - Carnation soil. - Incised cuttings. - Marcottes. - Plant rejuvenation. - Auricle. - Conditions for admission to collections. - Cultivation in pots. - Multiplication. - Pansy. - Sowing seeds. - Seedling wintering. - Seed harvesting. - Gladiolus. - Onion planting. - Uprooting. - Clove separation. - Peony. - Montan peony. - Cultivation. - Seedling propagation. - Root grafting. - Dahlia. - Qualities of a beautiful dahlia. - Tuber germination. - Tuber planting, uprooting and storage. - Chrysanthemums. - Main series. - Late flowering. - Cutting propagation. - Phlox. - Drummond phlox. - Petunia. ANEMONE. - After many years as the most sought-after collector's flower in France, Germany and England, the anemone is now only cultivated by a small number of enthusiasts. During the plant's heyday, connoisseurs invented a whole vocabulary of special terms to designate its various parts: pampers, fane, baguette to designate the leaves, collar and stem, mantle, breeches, cordon, beguillons and plush, various parts of the flower, each of which must satisfy the conditions of a very demanding program. Today, any truly beautiful flower, even if it lacks some of the qualities once considered indispensable, is accepted in collections; the most important point is that the shades are vivid and the shape regular, with the center rounded in the shape of a bud, and the outer petals well developed, the flower being double, or semi-double. A few single-flowered anemones should always be allowed in, in order to harvest seed for sowing; semi-double flowers don't provide any. As anemone seed is very light and can be blown away by the wind, you need to keep an eye on its maturity to harvest it in good time. Seedlings can be sown under the same conditions as buttercup seeds, and cultivation care is the same for both plants. Anemone claws can be stored in the same way as buttercup claws, but they are somewhat sensitive to excessive drought during the winter. To obtain a beautiful bloom, they must be planted regularly every year in spring; almost all of them would be lost if left to rest from one year to the next; this is the only point on which their temperament differs from that of ranunculus. CARNATION. - The carnation has been cultivated to produce a large number of varieties, with flowers that are as beautiful as they are fragrant; only the Flemish carnation is considered to be a collector's item, its main distinguishing features being a perfectly round flower, evenly rounded at the center, full petals with no cut edges, and one or two very sharp longitudinal stripes of color on a pure white background. The Flemish carnation, which combines all these qualities, is quite expensive; in Belgium and the Nord department, where it has been cultivated since time immemorial, fully-formed plants obtained from cuttings or marcots fetch a very high price; the seeds themselves, harvested from prime double-flowered plants, are sold for a franc a seed; it's true that very beautiful double carnations yield very few. Nevertheless, the less fortunate amateur can, with care and patience, build up a fine collection of Flemish carnations, starting with a few marcots of 5 or 6 of the finest species, which he can then propagate, either by cuttings and marcots, or by sowing their seeds; This inexpensive method will give him ample opportunity to make exchanges with carnation enthusiasts, completing his collection in just a few years, and maintaining it in its entirety by the same process. Collector's carnations should only be grown in pots, so that the plant can easily be sheltered from the weather, should the need arise. It's not that the carnation is extremely sensitive to cold; it tolerates very well a dry cold of 10 to 12 degrees; but, in spring, when light frosts follow rainy thaws, and frost or ice attaches itself to its leaves, it can't resist these alternatives, which are much easier to preserve when it's not in the ground. Various gardening treatises give more or less complicated recipes for composts, known as carnation soil; these recipes are perfectly superfluous; good ordinary garden soil, mixed with a small amount of compost when it seems a little too compact, is the best carnation soil. Flemish carnations are staked with a thin stick, as the stems are too delicate to support themselves; they are watered moderately during the summer, and if the pots containing the carnations are sheltered during the winter, they are given just enough water to prevent them from dying of thirst. The Flemish carnation is propagated mainly by cuttings and slips. Cuttings don't root easily, unless you make incisions in the buried nodes that penetrate to half their thickness and encourage root formation. Young shoots suitable for marcotting are usually born along the stem, at various heights, so that marcotting at the foot of the plant, by the ordinary method, is not possible. Small pots with side slits are used, or zinc cones attached to the carnation's stake at the height of the marcotte. After removing the lower leaves and cutting the nodes of the part to be buried, fill the pot or cone into which the lower part of the shoot is to be placed with good soil. Take care to keep the soil fresh, but not excessively damp, and do not dry out the marcotte until you are sure it has formed good roots. Elite carnation plants can live for a very long time, but as they age, they are prone to degeneration. In this case, the flowers become deformed, diminishing in volume, and the petals lose the purity of their white background, which becomes washed with pink or light violet. The plant in this state is not lost; it should be de-potted in spring and planted in the garden; there, during the summer, it forms a vigorous clump of lower shoots, which are used to multiply it with cuttings or marcottes; at the same time, the flower regains its normal volume, its rounded, domed shape, and the purity of its coloring; it can then be potted again and resume its place in the collection. Among insects, the Flemish or collector's carnation has a bitter enemy in the forficula or earwig, which devours the buds as they are about to open. To destroy this insect, freshly slaughtered sheep's hooves, commonly known as sheep's dewclaws, are hung from the top of the stakes supporting the carnation flower stems. During the night, forficulas attracted by the particular odor of these ergots retreat there in droves; they are caught early in the morning, and the carnations are freed from them. AURICULA. - The auricula, better known by its common name of BEAR'S EAR, has, like the anemone, fallen from favor, having long been the flower of choice for a very large class of connoisseurs. The cultivation of the auricle has given rise to a particular vocabulary; connoisseurs distinguish between the following parts of the flower: the nail (pistil), which occupies the center; the spangles (stamens), which must graze the corolla without rising above it; the eye, or central part, of a light yellow or pure white, which must contrast sharply, forming a regular circle, with the rest of the corolla's limb, whose hue must be very dark with velvety reflections. In general, people are less demanding nowadays than they used to be, as regards the perfections required of a collector's auricula; even double-flowered yellows are accepted, although their merit is disputed by many connoisseurs. The auricula is no more sensitive to the cold than the Flemish carnation, but it is even more prone than the latter to perish from rotting of the fleshy stump that bears the leaves and flowering stems; this is why its cultivation is only successful in pots filled with the same soil in which carnations are grown. It's especially important in late autumn and spring, during the March sleet season, to place auriculas in pots, either under a cold frame, or in some other place where the cold humidity that this plant fears above all else cannot reach it. When we're not trying to create new varieties, which is only possible by sowing, we're content to multiply auriculas by detaching, in autumn, the eyelets or rooted offshoots that grow at the foot of the old clumps; these eyelets, grown in the same conditions as fully-formed plants, grow very quickly and flower as early as their first summer. Although auriculas are not remontant, in the strictest sense of the term, plants properly cared for during the winter and watered not excessively, but every day, morning and evening, during the heat of the summer, usually give a second flowering at the beginning of autumn. BENSEE. - This plant is the easiest of all collector's plants to grow. Simply sow the seed in August, in a bed with a southern exposure, so that the seedling can overwinter in the open air without suffering from the cold, which the pansy fears very little, unless it is exceptionally severe; In this case, the slightest shelter of straw mats or dry litter thrown over the plants during heavy frosts and removed as soon as the weather eases, ensures the pansies' preservation. Plants from seedlings sown in August always show some flowers before winter; we take advantage of this circumstance to keep only the best flowers in our collections, eliminating the others (fig. 86). In a beautiful collector's pansy, connoisseurs demand: a well-spread corolla, free of folds, well rounded in shape, a dark cenFig. 86. Pansy. from which equally dark stripes emerge on a yellow or white background, and a symmetrical distribution of spots over the five divisions of the flower. Seed harvested from plants whose flowers satisfy all these conditions does not constantly reproduce similar flowers; but if a good choice of pansy seed has been sown, all the sub-varieties of any value are found, without exception, in the seedling, which renders useless the propagation by cuttings indicated as a means of propagating the most distinguished varieties. This method is defective in that it only produces delicate seedlings, which are difficult to overwinter, so that in the spring, collections of pansies grown from cuttings are incomplete and bare, which is not the case with seed multiplication. It is important that seedlings that develop during the hot August weather are watered often enough to ensure that their growth is not slowed down by drought. Pansy seed is rather difficult to harvest, due to a peculiarity of the plant's vegetation. 1 As long as the seed has not formed, the stem supporting the pansy flower bends at the very point of insection of the corolla, so that the latter is in an upright position; if this were not the case, with rain or just dew falling on the reproductive organs, fertilization could not take place, and the pansy would not produce seeds. But once fertilization has taken place, the curvature of the flowering stem gradually disappears; the stem becomes completely straight, so that when the seeds ripen, the capsule enclosing them points upwards, without tilting to either side, and suddenly opens, letting the ripe seeds escape in all directions. If the capsule had retained the position occupied by the flower during blooming, it would have the tip pointing sideways; all the seeds would fall to the ground, in a bundle, one on top of the other, and the pansy would be almost impossible to reproduce by natural sowing. It is important to keep an eye on the maturity of the seeds, and to pick the capsules with their full-length stems, leaving them to mature on a sheet of paper in a well-ventilated room. Otherwise, it would be difficult to obtain a sufficient quantity of pansy seeds to maintain collections. The seedlings, well cared for during the winter, are transplanted in groups into the flowerbed, where they flower abundantly throughout the summer. GLAIEUL. - The gladiolus (fig. 87) is one of the most recent of the collector's plants. It is not difficult to grow, but its flattened onions, which are very voluminous in some species, only flower well in pure heather soil. In a pinch, this soil can be replaced by a mixture of light sandy soil and leaf compost; but then, gladioli are not as perfect as they can be when planted in heather soil. Onions should only be planted in the open air in April, when the last of the late frosts no longer seem to be a threat; they should be lifted in November when the weather is dry, and the cloves removed, as they only ever produce a small number of cloves. Gladioli make up numerous collections, the main series of which, with their magnificent, very long flowering period, include: the parrot gladioli, the cardinal gladioli, and the Grand gladioli, with several subdivisions, all rich in Gladioli. Fig. 87. in sub-varieties of great beauty of form and color. PEOPLE. - Peony collections consist of three distinct series, comprising: tree or woody-stemmed peonies; herbaceous-stemmed peonies with hairy fruit, and herbaceous-stemmed peonies with smooth fruit. The tree peony or Montan peony is the basis of our collections, the true amateur peony. We have some forty very fine species, all remarkable for the size, abundance and brilliant color of their flowers, which bloom very early in the spring. The number of species or varieties of Montan peony is increasing slowly, because we can only hope for beautiful new varieties by multiplying this plant by sowing its seeds. On the one hand, it produces few, and on the other, the seedling only says its last word after twelve or fifteen long years, and the final result rarely meets the gardener's expectations. Nevertheless, there are always persevering sowers, and a few new Montan peonies of real merit are put on the horticultural market from time to time. The Montan peony is hardy; it overwinters very well in the open air in the climate of Paris, where it forms clumps of bushes one to two meters high; although the icy north and north-west winds sometimes roast its first leaves in spring, it is very rare for late cold to seriously damage its buds. All peonies can be grown in a mixture of garden soil and heather; seedlings do best in unmixed heather. Peonies are mainly propagated by dividing the clumps in spring or autumn, splitting the more or less tuberous roots. To obtain earlier flowering, choice varieties can also be grafted onto the roots of more common species. DAHLIA - When the dahlia was imported from Mexico to Europe at the beginning of this century, its brilliant destiny was not foreseen. It is said that Mexicans eat it; what is certain is that those who first tried to eat it in Europe were not tempted to try again. As a collector's plant, the dahlia (fig. 88) has been one of the most sought-after ornamental plants for large flowerbeds. Its popularity was sustained for as long as the old varieties were succeeded by ever more beautiful ones, thanks to successful sowings; at that time, dahlia cultivation alone made the fortunes of several horticulturists in France, Germany, Belgium and England, who worked exclusively with it. Today, the popularity of this plant has passed; the number of beautiful varieties is so great that it seems superfluous to try to create new ones; the ease with which they can be multiplied by dividing tubers and grafting onto roots is such that their price has become extremely modest. The dahlia remains what it should be: the king of autumn, as the English say, and indeed it's hard to imagine what could replace its beautiful clumps of brilliant flowers in the most varied shades, if it were to disappear from our flowerbeds; but it is no longer, so to speak, an amateur plant, in the true sense of the term. A beautiful dahlia should have a regular globular shape, symmetrically arranged horn-shaped ligules or florets, and a stem long enough to overflow the foliage, strong enough to ensure that the flower does not fall back and show itself upside down. Fig. 88. Dahlia. Dahlias thrive in free-flowing garden soil, which should be a little strong rather than too light. Tubers should not be planted in the open ground before the first fortnight of May, as young shoots can be killed without remedy by a few hours of morning frost of just one degree. At the end of March, however, the tubers are placed close together in a cold frame at the foot of a south-facing wall. There, immersed up to the root collar in soft soil mixed with loam and kept very slightly moist, they slowly come into vegetation, with nothing to fear from the late cold. By the time they are placed in the open air, each tuber, which is also planted with a sturdy support, already has a good shoot that consolidates on contact with the air and flowers by late summer. Without this precaution, the dahlia would bloom too late, and the first frosts of late autumn would kill the plant, still full of buds ready to open. For some years now, it has been customary to leave a single stem in each clump, which becomes very solid and almost woody at its base. This single stem branches regularly, producing clumps that are strong, full of flowers and without excessive foliage. Not all dahlia varieties develop in the same way; when forming clumps without combining them with other plants, care should be taken to match them by color, and to place in the center of the clumps those varieties whose stems should exceed those of the other dahlias in height. Tubers should be removed before frost and stored in a cool place. INDIAN CHRYSANTHEMUM. - Although the Indian Chrysanthemum Fig. 89. Chrysanthemum. has, like the dahlia, pretty much said its last word, and because of the ease with which it can be propagated, either by sowing or cutting, or by splitting clumps, its price has become very moderate, the plant's popularity has not waned; it is still at the top of the list of collector's plants. Chrysanthemum collections are made up of four series, including buttercup-flowered, daisy-flowered, acorn-flowered and dwarf chrysanthemums (fig. 89). All these plants are equally hardy and easy to grow; any good garden soil is suitable for them; they ~ flower abundantly and form strong clumps in a short time; but they all have the same fault, that of flowering very late, in November and December, so that the first serious frosts destroy them in full bloom. This is why the most beautiful species of the first and fourth series are most often grown in pots, which are brought into the orangery or cold greenhouse when the cold season approaches; these pretty plants flower there for part of the winter. More than any other plant, the collector's chrysanthemum has the ability to take cuttings at any time in its vegetation. If you cut branches with well-formed buds, these branches will root and flower at the usual time, but they will no longer grow. This simple procedure can be used to form very small clumps of Chrysanthemums from cuttings, suitable for decorating small flowerbeds and for wintering in apartment window boxes. 9 PHLOX. - Today, phloxes have produced so many beautiful varieties that they have become collector's items. Strictly speaking, they are sub-shrubs with woody annual stems, perennial roots and abundant, prolonged flowering; the collection comprises some forty distinct species, each of which continues to produce beautiful sub-varieties from seed. One of the most interesting species is Drummond phlox (fig. 90), which reproduces every year from seed and produces low but very floriferous clumps. Drummond phlox thrives in a mixture of free soil and heather; Fig. 90. Phlox of a good ordinary garden soil is sufficient Drummond. to other species. PETUNIA. - The number of varieties of this charming 2, 2 plant, whose abundant, essentially remontant flowers have a very pleasant, sweet fragrance, is increasing daily; we now have enough to form collections that remain in constant bloom throughout the summer. The most remarkable species are the white-flowered petunia, the first to be introduced from its native South America; the plain pink petunia, with sub-varieties ranging to the darkest velvety purple; the central black-eyed petunia, and the purple-veined petunia on a pink background, one of the most sought-after by lovers of this beautiful genus. Petunia seeds can be sown in trays or in the open ground on potting soil, in a south-facing position, giving early seedlings that can be planted at a very young age, and which vegetate vigorously, provided they are well watered, in good ordinary garden soil. At the end of this volume, you will find lists of the most beautiful species, varieties and sub-varieties of all ornamental plants grown in open ground. Roses. 391 Classification of roses. - Hundred leaves. - Provins or damas. - Ile Bourbon. - Portland or perpetual. - Hazelnut. - Bengal roses. - China. - Tea roses. - Sarematious roses. - Uses of various roses in horticulture. - Propagation. - Sowing. - Hybridization. - Grafting. - Choice of rosehips. - Side slit grafting. - In escutcheon. - Pruning. - Its purpose. - Direction of buds. - Growing roses in the open air. - Moving them to force them to flower. - Forced cultivation. The multiplication, cultivation and pruning of the rose should be studied separately from that of other ornamental plants in open-ground collections, not only because the rose has not ceased to be the queen of flowers from biblical times to the present day, but also because rose collections contain no less than 3,000 species, varieties and sub-varieties. It's true that many of these are more or less questionable, and can only be distinguished by characteristics that can only be appreciated by consummate connoisseurs; but the number of roses that are indisputably distinct and cannot be mistaken for one another can be increased from 1,800 to 2,000. Classification of roses. - To recognize each other and establish a regular order among so many shrubs all belonging to the same genus, various classifications based on botanical characteristics have been proposed; the most widely used is that of the famous English botanist Lindley. For the gardener, it's enough to distinguish clear-cut series of roses, classified according to their most remarkable properties from a horticultural point of view. Considering them in this light, we find that roses naturally fall into eight series, comprising : 1° The hundred-leaves, the oldest type of rose perfected by cultivation; all with very fragrant, very double flowers, but which do not ascend; 2° provins, with semi-double flowers, a very strong fragrance and generally very vivid shades, which should be called Damascus roses, as they were brought back from the Orontes valley at the time of the Crusades by a Count of Champagne who propagated them in the gardens of his Provins castle; 3° bourbon or Bourbon Island roses, which have produced the largest number of the most sought-after varieties by sowing their seeds; 4° portland or perpetual roses, the most remontant of all cultivated roses; 5° hazelnut roses, which flower abundantly in autumn, but are odorless; 6° Indian roses, which include Bengal and Chinese roses, which are very remontant, have a double, but faint odor, and only semi-double flowers, and are more sensitive to cold than any of the above; 7° tea roses, sufficiently distinct by the particular fragrance of their roses and the delicacy of their shades; 8° climbing roses, suitable for decorating trellises and cradles in the company of ornamental shrubs with climbing stems (Voy. ch. XL). Uses. - In horticulture, roses lend themselves to a host of different uses. Species which, like most hundred-leaf roses, grow naturally and form thick bushes from the numerous offshoots their stumps produce, are perfectly at home at the entrance to groves, at the edge of clumps of tall ornamental trees. This situation is particularly suitable for the painter's rose, the York rose, white at the heart and flesh-colored, and the charming little pompon rose, which, despite its small size, blooms on very large bushes. The smaller provins make a very attractive addition to the shrubbery that forms the transition from grove to parterre in landscape gardens. The portland, ile Bourbon and hazelnut series are especially suitable for grafting onto tall rosehips; they form the basis of amateur collections; their flowers offer the richest variety of shades, including pure yellow, of rare freshness in the yellow Persian rose; pure blue is lacking, although ancient Arab authors speak of the blue rose, without possible equivocation, as a common flower in gardens at the time of Moorish domination in Spain and Portugal. Bengal and Chinese roses, perennial only by their roots, are suitable for gardens where there is little space to spare; they must be pulled back on the stump at the onset of winter, and covered with leaf-covered soil to protect the stump from the effects of frost; their annual shoots flower profusely all summer long; in the Midi, they are large evergreen bushes, forming flowering hedges of the most pleasing effect. This quick overview shows just how much horticulture can gain from roses in the most diverse conditions. Propagation. - Rose propagation, especially that of collectors' roses grafted onto wild roses, is an important branch of horticulture in its own right; those who take special care of it are referred to in gardening parlance as rose growers. All solid-wood roses, especially those in the hundred-leaf series, produce a profusion of rooted offshoots every year. These are separated in spring or at the onset of winter, before the leaves have fallen; they are raised in a nursery and trained into the desired form. There is no need to use any other means of propagation for these roses. The Bengal and Chinese rose series, with their soft, pith-filled wood, are very easy to root from cuttings, and are best grown in a greenhouse, under a frame, rather than in the open air. Roses taken from cuttings flower very young and grow very fast; this method, for this series of roses, is used in conjunction with the separation of offshoots which, placed in favorable conditions, provide good plants, even when they have few or no roots at the time they are detached from the stock. Seedlings are the most interesting way of propagating roses; all varieties in all series, even the most double varieties, give a few fruits or rose hips containing fertile seeds every year; the stamens are so numerous in the rose that they never all turn into petals, and there are always enough left for fertilization. The seeds enclosed in the rose hips should only be removed and sown when the fruit is a little past full maturity, after the first frosts. Seedlings should be sown in spring, in heather soil, to encourage root development as much as possible. Young seedlings are then transplanted to more substantial soil, where they are raised in nurseries. They sometimes have to wait a long time for their first flowering; this is why those whose behaviour and foliage give reason to hope for a good novelty, are grafted onto rosehips in their second year; they flower immediately there, which makes it possible to judge whether they should be eliminated or kept in the collection. Hybridization. - It was at the beginning of this century that the Marquis de Villarési, in Italy, realized the possibility of creating new rose varieties by hybridization. The process he used was primitive. The roses he wished to cross were trellised closely together at the bottom of an espalier trellis. At flowering time, M. de Villarési intertwined their branches, leaving it to the winds and insects to carry pollen from one flower to the other. The seedlings from the rose hips produced by these roses gave him some very fine novelties among a multitude of insignificant flowers. This success had a resounding effect, and M. de Villarési had a large number of imitators. Numerous crosses, practiced with greater care and method, gave more frequently successful results. Today, without directly hybridizing one sub-variety with another, it is possible to sow the seeds contained in rose hips harvested from roses in a collection of well-chosen varieties; wind and insects will inevitably have produced accidental crosses; many of today's most famous roses have no other origin. When you intend to artificially fertilize two roses of very different species, in the hope of creating an intermediate sub-variety, you should shake one of the roses over the other at the moment of full bloom, and then wrap the rose with gauze, so that the hybridized rose cannot accidentally receive pollen from another species, which would cause the operation to fail. The hybridization of roses sometimes gives expected but highly unusual results; for example, the hybrid cross between a very red rose and another of pure white has created the Prince Albert rose, each petal of which is white on one side and red on the other. Grafting the rose. - The majority of roses propagated by grafting are grafted onto tall rosehips. This type of rose grafting is so widely used that, in a large radius around Paris, Lyon and other major cities, the breed of rosehips suitable for grafting the most sought-after species has been completely exhausted. Several growers have already made substantial profits simply by raising rosehips from seed, which they sell when they have developed to the point where they are suitable for grafting. When wild rosehips are purchased for grafting, the portion of the stump that usually adheres to the bottom of the stem must be cut off at the time of planting. The stem must be straight, free of knots, wounds and branches. If rosehips were to retain a portion of their stump, they would produce a multitude of offshoots, which would exhaust the shrub to the detriment of the beauty of its flowering. Rosehips require at least a year's nursery cultivation before they are ready for grafting; a certain number must always be planted in excess of the precise quantity needed; some are always missing when they are taken up again, and grafts never succeed in their entirety. Grafting takes place in spring, when the sap is most active, either on two or three branches at the top of the rosehip, each of which receives a shield graft, or on the main stem, stripped of all its branches. In this case, grafting is done sideways, using Fig. 91. Rose split grafting Fig. 92. Grafting with a rose escutcheon. for grafting, a branch from the previous year with two good wills (fig. 91); or, two escutcheons are placed close to the top of the stem, facing each other (fig. 92). This last method, the most widely used of the two, is the one which, when each of the two escutcheons has given a good shoot, offers the easiest way of forming a regular, elegant and floriferous head for the grafted rose in a short space of time. Pruning the rose. - When the rose, grafted or not, belongs to a hardy, vigorous species, as are all leafy and climbing species with sar mente stems, they are pruned with scissors, just as if a hedge were being mown. But more delicate species, especially those grafted onto wild roses, need to be pruned more carefully and methodically. After removing dead wood, accidentally broken branches and those that cause confusion, these roses are pruned with the dual aim of obtaining abundant flowering and keeping them in good shape. In terms of flowering, each variety has its own particular way of vegetating, depending on whether it is remontant or not, or only biferous. As each well-conformed eye should produce a more or less floriferous branch, the gardener, who must know perfectly well the temperament of the roses in the collection he manages, adjusts his pruning accordingly, leaving each branch with one, two or three eyes, which will be as many branches. As for preserving the shape, this is easy for the gardener who, when pruning, pays sufficient attention to the place occupied by the eyes of the rose's branches. These eyes produce buds which, as they grow, always elongate at a very open angle, usually at right angles to the branch bearing them. Thus, when the gardener needs to fill a gap in the inner part of the head of a grafted rose, he prunes on an eye whose point is directed inwards, and even, if it is necessary for the bud that will be born from this eye to grow with great vigor, he removes the eye inferior to the one on which he has pruned, by disbudding it, before it has begun to elongate. If, on the other hand, he needs a good outer branch to give the rose a harmonious shape, he prunes on an eye with the tip outwards, and knows in advance what place the branch he is pruning on will occupy. In order to avoid the mistakes that can result from miscalculated bud direction, many rose bushes, whose eyes are naturally not very visible, are not pruned until spring, when vegetation is sufficiently advanced for the gardener to clearly distinguish in which direction the buds born from each of the eyes reserved for pruning will elongate to complete or maintain the regularity of the head of these shrubs. Growing roses in the open air - When roses raised, grafted and pruned as indicated above, have been planted in 23 good conditions, those grafted on rosehips in soil that is stronger than light, those from India, raised as bushes, in heather soil mixed in equal parts with free garden soil, they require little further cultivation care. If it is not possible to move them periodically for lack of space, every three or four years part of the soil in which their roots grow should be removed, and replaced with new soil of the same type as that removed. The soil of roses grown in pots should, by virtue of the same principle, be renewed every two years. When aphids invade roses in summer, following a long period of drought, tobacco smoke is used to rid them. For this purpose, a glass bell (melon bell) is hung over the head of the rose, so that the tobacco smoke dissipates only after the aphids have been asphyxiated, without harming the rose's vegetation. It sometimes happens that roses grafted on rosehips, which are apparently healthy, hardly flower at all. In such cases, when they start to bloom again, they must be pulled out and immediately replanted close to their previous position; this move is enough to persuade them to bloom. However, the success of the operation is more assured when the lay of the land allows the roses to be transported some distance from their first location. Forced cultivation of roses. - All roses, potted and moved into a temperate or hot greenhouse, can be forced into rich bloom long before their natural flowering time; but only remontant roses are usually forced. Professional gardeners, whose customers demand large numbers of ball bouquets, force bushes of Tea roses, Bengal and China roses, and Portland or Perpetual roses into the open ground under frames heated by manure heaters or a thermosiphon; they thus have roses to pick all winter long. Rose lovers who do not need such a large quantity of roses in winter, simply pot up a certain number of roses of the same species a year in advance and bring them successively into the temperate or hot greenhouse, so as to have a certain number of roses to pick from late autumn to early summer of the following year. CHAPTER XLV Growing annuals, biennials and perennials in the open ground. Growing annual ornamental plants. - Sowing. - Plants to be sown in clumps. - Annuals to be transplanted. - Herbaceous perennials. - Turfgrasses. - English ryegrass. - Seed mixes for dry soils. - Quantity of seed per acre. - Weeding lawns. - Isolated plants. - Palma-christi. - Acanthus. - Siberian heracleum. - Yucca gloriosa. - Shrub groups. - Lilacs. - Spiries. - Buddleyas. - Summer pruning of Persian lilac. - Grafting josikœa onto ash, and lilac onto josikœa. - Ornamental trees. - Landscape gardens. - Isolated trees. - Catalpa. - Tulip tree. - Suitable situations. - Fruit trees used as ornamental trees. After describing in particular the cultivation of ornamental ground plants and shrubs suited to various special purposes, and that of collector's plants, it remains to indicate the general cultivation care required by annuals, biennials and perennials, in the climate of central France, to contribute all year round to the decoration of the parterre. Annual plants. - Sowing. - The seeds of most outdoor annual plants should be sown in the spring; many of them vegetate quickly enough that, after a first flowering, sowing can be repeated with the certainty of seeing the same plants flower a second time before the bad season. There are a few important rules to be observed when sowing seeds of annual plants. The smaller the seeds, the less they are buried; the smaller seeds, such as double coguelicot, are not buried at all. After scattering them on the surface of the soil, they are mixed into the surface layer with a close-toothed rake, and then a very thin layer of dry, powdered loam is spread on top. The young plant born from a very small seed is too weak to lift the soil with which it is loaded, when the seed has been buried too deeply. Those of these plants which are individually poorly developed and not very floriferous only appear to their advantage when they are grouped together in large enough groups. Clarkia, for example, produces no effect in the parterre and seems a 2 - Fig. 93. Graham's schizante. small, insignificant flower when two or three isolated strands are seen; on the contrary, it offers the most graceful appearance when the seed is sown in a circular space 35 to 40 centimetres in diameter, ¿ either when the two varieties, one white, the other pink, are sown separately, or when they are mixed to form very long-flowering clumps: the same applies to eutoca, schizantes (fig. 93), brachycomes and a host of others of more or less recent introduction, all valuable additions to our garden flora. At the time of the main annual plant sowings, in March and April, the flowerbed still has only a small number of plants in bloom. The gardener needs to know exactly how much space he or she has, so as not to give too much to seedlings in situ, and to avoid running out later on when transplanting nursery-raised plants. Although most of these plants are biennial, such as marigolds and most campanulas, several annuals, such as marigolds and balsam ferns, do not flower well when sown in situ. As their presence is essential in the flowerbed for most of the summer, it is important to note in advance the place they should occupy, either in the intervals between seedlings of annual plants, which must not be transplanted, or to succeed the plan Fig. 94. Large-flowered Brunelle. Fig. 95. Pentstemons. with very early flowering, such as thick-leaved saxifrage, arabette and abyssum or golden basket, which leave early gaps to be filled in the flowerbed compartments. Among annuals grown in the open ground, there are many, such as clarkia, eucharidium, gillia, nemophilæ, silenes, coreopsis, large-flowered brunelle (fig. 94), Chinese carnation and several beautiful species of delphinium. These can be treated as biennial plants by sowing them in autumn, so that they germinate during the last fine days of the year, and the young plants born from these seedlings can withstand the cold winters of the Paris climate very well. It is Fig. 96. Cosmos. Fig. 97. Cantua. It is always wise to sow the seeds of these plants fairly lightly, in a sheltered position, with a southern exposure, so as to be sure of finding them in good condition in spring, when they are to be transplanted into the flowerbed compartments. For truly biennial plants, such as carnations, pentstemons (fig. 95), cosmos (fig. 96), cantua (fig. 97) and rudbeckia (fig. 98), if you want them to flower well, sow their seeds not in autumn, but in spring, in March and April, and nurture them throughout the year so that they flower the following year. Herbaceous perennials - Many of these plants, such as irises, white and yellow lilies, Phlox, aconites and dielytra (fig. 99), need to be split quite frequently, otherwise their clumps, which have become too voluminous, recede in the center and give only degenerate flowers. Fig. 98. Rudbeckia. By splitting the clumps in spring or autumn, you renew the soil in which they have grown, or, before putting them back in place, you give this soil Fig. 99. Dielytra. N with a well-consumed fertilizer. With this care, and by not letting them run out of water during hot spells, these plants, with their robust temperament, will remain in the flowerbed in perpetuity. Lawns. - Thanks to the humid climate of their island, the English were the first to achieve the highest degree of ornamental value with these admirable lawns, real carpets of green velvet that gardens all over Europe have adopted as their example. Today, carefully tended lawns no longer belong exclusively, as they once did, to large landscape gardens; they have been introduced with great success into medium-sized gardens, especially those that are both fruit-growing and landscape, where groups of fruit trees are arranged in compartments designed in the picturesque style, separated from one another by lawns. In good soils, English ryegrass is the basis of the most beautiful lawns; provided it is sufficiently watered, and mowed often enough not to let it flower, it does not recede from the base and remains in very good condition for a long time. For dry soils that are difficult to water abundantly, we sow mixtures in varying proportions of several grasses combined with a few forage plants from the legume family. The most commonly used proportion is 600 seeds of ryegrass per are; mixtures of grasses and leguminous forages can be sown in a slightly lower proportion; 500 grams per are is sufficient. After the grass seed has been lightly mixed into the soil by shallow harrowing with a rake, a roller is used to firm up the soil; if rain is not forthcoming after the grass has emerged, water moderately, and mow as soon as the grass is tall enough for the scythe to work. Whatever care is taken to maintain a lawn, it will always end up being more or less infested with weeds, whose seeds are carried by the wind and birds; for this reason, it is necessary to weed the lawn once or twice every 23. year, to prevent the multiplication of weeds, especially those whose seeds have a tassel, such as dandelions, which must be removed before they flower. In spring, if the turf seems to have been lifted by alternating frosts and thaws, spread a good dose of well-consumed compost mixed with dried and pulverized pond silt over the entire lawn, then roll it in; roll it in a second time after mowing. Isolated plants. -- In patches of lawn of mediocre size, nothing produces a better effect than an isolated tuft of one of those plants with ample leaves like those of the large rhubarb species, or elegantly cut, like castor-oil or palma-christi, soft acanthus and Siberian heracleum. A few vines of yucca gloriosa can also be used for the same purpose: its clumps of evergreen leaves, similar to those of agaves, and its flowering stems laden with a multitude of greenish-white bell-shaped flowers, stand out most picturesquely against the uniform green of the lawn. These plants are perennial, with the exception of the castor bean, whose seeds are sown every year in situ, when the last late spring frosts are no longer to be feared; their elegant or bizarre forms and the power of their vegetation serve to break up the monotony of lawns; in small and medium-sized picturesque gardens, they create the same effect as clumps of shrubs and isolated ornamental trees in landscape gardens of the greatest style. Shrub groups. - It wasn't until quite recently that the English began planting groups of shrubs in large gardens. These were called schrubbery, a word for which we would have to introduce the equivalent term arbusterie, which is missing from our language. These groups, contained in compartments designed like those of a parterre, but on a larger scale, now include a very rich variety of shrubs, among which lilacs, spireas and buddleyas rank first. Lilacs have given rise to a fairly large number of beautiful varieties, the most widespread of which are Macly lilac, the most beautiful of all, white lilac and Persian lilac. If you don't intend to use lilac seeds by sowing them in the hope of obtaining new sub-varieties, you must remove all spent flowers immediately after flowering, without allowing them to be replaced by seeds. The production of seeds exhausts the lilac and makes it almost impossible to flower in the year following that in which the seeds matured in too great abundance. This care, and that of ridding lilac bushes of the multitude of offshoots they produce each year, which are their main means of multiplication, is enough to obtain a splendid bloom every year. For some years now, Persian lilacs have been treated in a very special way, with the aim of regulating flowering. As soon as the flowers have wilted, we immediately remove not only the flowers, but everything on this shrub that gives the appearance of greenery; we give it a summer pruning as severe as winter pruning is for grafted roses. The gardener, in giving this pruning to Persian lilac, is counting on the vigor of the second sap in this shrub. In just a few days, Persian lilac pruned in this way starts to produce buds that, before the leaves fall, give it an elegant head, with all the terminal shoots giving their bouquet of fragrant flowers the following year. This method of pruning the Persian lilac was devised by M. Hardy, head gardener at the Luxembourg Gardens. A very similar shrub to the lilac, syringa josihœa, whose flowers are less spread out and a little darker than those of the lilac, blooming a fortnight later, can give rise to a curious experiment that can easily be repeated at very little cost. After a year or two, when the vegetation of the graft seems vigorous enough, a fine species of lilac can be grafted onto the josikœa. In a few years, the lilac forms a clump as floriferous as if it were free-standing; the result is flowering shrubs at a fairly high elevation above the ground which, in an avenue of very tall trees, where lilacs grafted in this way alternate with elms, beeches, lime trees or horse chestnuts, produce a most picturesque effect in spring. Spirea arborescens, of which a charming pink-flowered variety contrasts with other species with satin-white flowers, are ornamental both for their flowers and for their foliage, which is quite similar to that of Virginia sumac. Most spireas produce flowers exclusively at the end of the current year's twigs; the shrub must be pruned every year after leaf fall, in order to obtain as many young flowering shoots as possible for the following spring; spireas grow in all types of soil and exposure. Lindley's Buddleya (fig. 100), less well known and less Fig. 100. Lindley's Buddleya, less cultivated than it deserves to be, stands up well to the ordinary winters of the Paris climate; if the shrub freezes during very harsh winters, it is quickly replanted by offshoots from the stump that does not freeze. The slender, gracefully drooping stems end in long spikes of dark purple flowers. Lindley's buddleya grows well in a box on a balcony, providing pleasant, fragrant shade all summer long. Some of the most graceful shrubs, whose beauty lies in the abundance of their dark-red berries (cotoneaster), blood-red berries (various species of holly) and fiery berries (crotaegus pyracantha), can be combined with flowering shrubs in the formation of flowerbeds. All are equally hardy and undemanding in terms of soil quality. Ornamental trees. - Ornamental trees complete the series of outdoor perennials. Some are prized for their flowers, such as the catalpa, the tulip tree, the numerous varieties of robinia or false acacia, and the paulownia imperialis, or Ki-Ri from Japan, a modern introduction; others, such as the plane tree, the virgil tree, the maples and the sycamore, owe their place in groves to the shade provided by their abundant foliage. Still others are cultivated for the quirkiness of their foliage, with its unusual shapes in the case of Gingko bilobo, and its strange color in the case of black beech. Two other series, that of coniferous trees, whose leaves are replaced by needles, and that of weeping trees, with naturally drooping branches, also deserve a place in landscape gardens. The art of designing and creating parks or landscaped gardens, the practice of which constitutes the profession of the garden architect, includes the construction of terraces, kiosks, bridges and fountains; the placement of vases, statues and monumental columns; and the digging of lakes, basins, water features and artificial rivers. - In medium-sized gardens, where the picturesque style is adapted to a small space, a variety of ornamental trees are frequently planted in isolated situations for specific purposes. Trees with drooping branches, such as the weeping ash and saphora, are planted on the highest points of the site, where they offer a view of the landscape, as are trees with dense foliage that can act as cradles, such as the thornless locust and the umbrella medlar. Just one of these fully-grown trees covers a large enough space to accommodate a table and chairs. At the water's edge, the weeping willow is virtually indispensable. Depending on the layout of the land and the size of the garden, flowering trees such as catalpa, paulonia, tulip tree, cercis (Judas tree), and other trees remarkable for their shape and the elegance of their foliage, are planted on the edges of large lawns. These trees are usually given over to the natural course of their vegetation; they therefore grow in their natural form, which makes them particularly suitable as models for painters, especially when they are framed in massifs composed in such a way as to highlight their advantages. The tulip tree only grows and flowers abundantly when it is surrounded by other trees as tall or taller than it, which protect it from violent gales; of all the inclemencies of the seasons, this is the one it fears most. With this precaution, tulip trees can be successfully planted even north of the Seine valley. The catalpa should only be planted in situations as well sheltered as those suitable for the tulip tree. It's not that the catalpa fears the cold; but its wood is excessively brittle; the slightest gust of wind causes it to split from top to bottom, and frequently strips it of its most beautiful branches, all the more easily because its broad leaves give the wind a lot of grip, and contribute to making its wood more fragile. The paulownia and the Judas tree can be planted in all types of soil and exposure; their wood is as strong as that of the catalpa is fragile. A few large fruit trees, especially apples and apricots, can also be planted in isolation in positions where their shape can contribute to the picturesque effect of the garden as a whole. PART FIVE ORANGE AND GREENHOUSE PLANTS CHAPTER XLVI Orangery plants. Orangery. - Orangery plants. - Orange trees. - Growing in the open air in the South of France. - For its fruit. - For its flowers. - Multiplication. - Sowing lemon tree seeds. - Raising the seedling. - Slot grafting à la Pontoise. - Twig cuttings. - Leaf cuttings. - Marcottage. - Growing orange trees in pots. - In crates. - Renewing the soil. - Exposure to the open air. - The great Frederick's orange trees in Potsdam. - Orange tree products. - Flower harvesting. - Pruning. - Pinching. - Species and varieties. - Growing small orange trees in the apartment. - Pomegranate. - Layering. - Grafting. - Species and varieties. - Cultivation care. The orangery is a type of construction that has been all but abandoned in modern horticulture. It no longer meets the needs of modern gardening as completely as the cold greenhouse does, which is why the cold greenhouse is constantly preferred (see part one, chap. Vl). Nonetheless, many old country homes still have orangeries that can't be put to any other use. It is therefore essential to take a look at orangery plants, i.e. those which, in the Paris climate, can overwinter in an orangery and remain there in good condition. The list is not very long; it includes orange, pomegranate, myrtle, oleander, kalmia and the varieties of azalea and rhododendron that cannot overwinter in the open air. ORANGE. - The cultivation of

In France, open-air orange growing is only possible in a fairly narrow area, parallel to the Mediterranean coast, particularly in the Var department. Vast plantations are found around Hyères, where the fruit is abundant but of mediocre quality, and around Grasse, where the flowers are harvested for distillation. Most of the orange blossom water consumed in France is distilled in the Var department. In the happy climate of Provence, all the orange tree needs is light rather than strong soil, and sufficient irrigation to prevent it from suffering from drought. In exceptionally harsh winters, Provençal orange trees sometimes freeze, but never so completely that they can't be pulled back onto their main branches and restored in a few years by the natural vigor of their vegetation. In the rest of France, orange trees need an orangery to spend the winter safely, which can be replaced by a fairly spacious room on the first floor, with large windows facing south. Multiplication. - Only professional horticulturists in Paris and the major cities of the départements that do not belong to the southern region are regularly involved in propagating orange trees. This branch of gardening is highly advantageous, because the orange tree is one of those shrubs that everyone loves, and that everyone can obtain at a moderate price by buying it young to give themselves the pleasure of watching it grow. We have varieties which, while flowering abundantly, grow very little, and are suitable for amateurs with little space to spare. Nevertheless, sedentary people with enough patience, ease and leisure can propagate the orange tree themselves, to enjoy watching it go through all the phases of its growth under their guidance. The orange tree is propagated by sowing its seedlings, grafting, cuttings and marcottes; sowing and grafting are the two most common means of propagating the orange tree. In Paris, several of the horticultural establishments that specialize in the cultivation of orange trees bring in seedlings ready for grafting, or already grafted a year ago, from the vicinity of Genoa and Nice, in the Kingdom of Sardinia; they are also beginning to receive seedlings from several parts of the Var department. The others mainly sow lemon seeds. The reasons for this preference are based on the considerable quantity of lemons used every year by Paris confectioners, which makes it very easy for gardeners to obtain the pepins they need for their seedlings. Lemon seedlings can be grafted onto any variety of orange or lemon tree. For growing orange trees in pots or crates, they perform better when grafted onto lemon trees than when free-standing. Only three or four varieties of orange can be propagated free-standing by sowing their fruit pips; all the others, especially the most sought-after in the horticultural trade, must be grafted. Lemon or orange seeds are sown, but lemon seeds are preferred, in very light soil, composed of half leaf compost and half heather. Many gardeners sow immediately in orange potting soil, but this is too strong for the young seedling, and it is difficult for it to form good roots. The pots in which the seedlings are sown, either singly in small pots, or two or three in each medium-sized pot, are buried in potting soil in a warm layer; they spend their first and second winters there; they are given air only during fine weather; they are not fully exposed to the open air, from spring to autumn, until their third and sometimes fourth years. Grafting. - Some orange trees can be grafted as early as the end of their first year; others can be successively grafted from the second to the fifth year, depending on the height at which you intend to start forming a regular head. Those belonging to dwarf or underdeveloped species can be grafted at a very young age, with the head starting at a height of 25 to 30 centimetres above the soil of the pot; those which are to become first-generation orange trees can only be grafted much later, with the head only being established at a height of 1.5 to 2 metres. Orange trees can be grafted in slits; the most common grafting method is known as Pontoise grafting. This is a side-slit graft, in which the subject, inserted in the axil of a leaf in place of an eye, is a branch of roughly the same diameter as the subject. This branch, detached from a fully-formed tree, can be chosen with a full complement of flowering buds; the graft is no less successful. This is how we obtain these charming little orange trees covered with flowers, in very small sizes. The ease with which they can be propagated by grafting à la Pontoise means that professional gardeners can supply them at very reasonable prices. Young grafted orange trees should be tied only slightly tightly, and loosened as soon as the graft is well attached to the tree. Since the sap is never completely stationary in orange trees, especially in young plants raised from seed and kept constantly under a warm frame, they can be grafted in any season, but the most favorable time is when the sap is most active, in spring. Horticultural enthusiasts who do not have an orangery and are forced to live in a large city, and to make do with a portable greenhouse, either cold or heated by a spirit-of-wine lamp, can, according to the preceding indications, sow pepins of lemons or oranges bigurrades, graft the subjects at Pontoise, at two years at the latest, and see them flower abundantly in relation to their small size, the year following that in which they were grafted. Cuttings. - Orange trees can be cuttings in the same soil used for seedlings, using as cuttings not only young twigs, but even simple leaves whose stalks are buried and which eventually root and give rise to a young tree. This method is not suitable for professional horticulturists, as young orange trees grown from cuttings are slow-growing and generally lack vigor. However, amateur horticulturists can use cuttings to build up a whole collection of orange trees, which remain small for a long time; for those who only have a small room to use as an orangery, this is an advantage rather than a drawback. Layering. - By attaching a side-split pot filled with heather soil to a sufficiently sturdy stake, you can use it to marcott an orange branch placed in such a way that it can be removed without destroying the harmonious shape of the tree. This method of propagating the orange tree is even less common than cuttings, although a few enthusiasts use it from time to time, as they have had strong enough plants for one year, which flower immediately and do not need to be grafted. Growing orange trees in crates. - Small dwarf orange trees, or species that are slow to grow and need to be kept small for a long time, thrive just as well in pots as in crates, provided their roots are not buried too deeply, they are watered generously in summer and very sparingly in winter, and the soil in the pots is changed when the condition of the shrub indicates that it is exhausted. Larger orange trees need crates with a capacity proportionate to the volume of the tree's roots. These crates are built in such a way that their sides can be removed at will, one after the other, so that, without moving the tree or removing all its roots at the same time, the soil can be partially renewed as often as necessary to keep it in good vegetative condition. In large orangeries, the date on which the soil was renewed is marked on one side of the box, so that the gardener cannot lose track of it. In Paris, orange trees are put out in the open on May 15th, and put back in the orangery on October 15th. These dates are not the same south or north of the Seine valley; each gardener must act according to the local climate. We know that in Potsdam, in 1755, the great Frederick lost all his orange trees to a late frost, having forced his gardener to put them out, against his advice, a little earlier than usual. So whenever the king gave his gardener an order that the latter didn't think was reasonable in terms of his competence, the gardener simply replied: "Sire, we had some beautiful orange trees in Potsdam in 1755! Cleanliness is the orange tree's first need at any age; the leaves of young orange trees must be frequently washed on top and underneath, one by one, with a wet sponge to loosen the dust; large orange trees receive frequent basins given from bottom to top, so that the underside of the leaves is washed like the top. Produce. - Well-cared-for orange trees produce a fairly valuable product through the sale of their flowering branches for bouquets, and of their detached flowers, which confectioners and distillers pay a fairly high price for. When in bloom, the flowers must be harvested every day, and even twice a day. In the south of France, this harvest is virtually uninterrupted; orange trees here bear ripe fruit, green fruit and blossoms almost all year round. Orange trees whose main product is flowers for distillation are not allowed to bear fruit. Pruning. - An orange tree that is not pruned, simply because it is in a box and its roots cannot extend more on one side than the other, naturally takes on a symmetrical shape; for it, as for all possible trees, the roots make the branches, and conversely, the branches make the roots. Unless the small size of the orangery or of the premises in which it is located makes it imperative to do so, the young orange tree should be left to grow on its own, merely removing the languid or superfluous branches that needlessly clutter up the inside of its head and prevent air and light from penetrating freely. Once the orange trees have grown, it becomes necessary to prune them moderately every year, to keep them in the desired shape, and to obtain a reasonable quantity of young flowering shoots. This general pruning of orange trees should only be carried out a month or so before they are due to be returned to the orangery; this time, in the Paris climate, coincides fairly regularly with the middle of September. However, regardless of the September pruning, if there are important gaps to be filled in the head of the orange tree, and it would be useful to have some of its outer branches branched for this purpose, these branches should be pinched off as soon as the tree is brought out into the open air, around the middle of May, as this is the time when the tree's vegetation is most active. The above applies only to large, fully-formed orange trees; small orange trees, it cannot be stressed too strongly, must not be pruned. Species and varieties. - In countries where oranges and lemons are widely grown as major fruit trees, there are a multitude of varieties. The gardener to His Majesty the King of Naples has drawn up a monograph containing over two hundred and fifty perfectly distinct varieties. In France, orange groves admit some twenty species, divided into the two main series of orange trees, the most widespread of which are: the orange tree proper, the myrtle-leaved Chinese orange tree, the grapefruit orange tree and the sour orange tree; and the lemon trees, to which the lime and citron trees belong. All should be propagated, managed and pruned according to the principles set out above. For small orangeries, the two most pleasant species to grow are the bigaradier, which flowers abundantly and whose fruit ripens quite often in orangeries, and the small myrtle-leaf orange, whose green oranges, when half their size, are candied in sugar and brandy, and highly esteemed by a large class of consumers, under the name of chinois. If you wish to keep a few small orange trees in an apartment, keep them close to a window during the winter and turn them over frequently, so that they successively receive light from all sides, the deprivation of which makes them suffer greatly. Avoid leaving them in a room where there is a fire; in general, it's always warm enough in an orangery or similar, as long as the frost doesn't penetrate. Otherwise, if the temperature is too mild, the orange tree's sap is set in motion, and in spring it produces only weak shoots and aborted flowering. During the summer, orange trees that have overwintered in an apartment are placed in the open air on a balcony; if they are in pots, it is important that the outside walls of the pots do not come into direct contact with the sun's rays, otherwise the roots that touch the inside wall of the pot will be exposed to too much heat, which could cause the death of the young orange trees. A piece of board, placed between the pot and the balcony, prevents this excessive heat from occurring. GRENADIER. - In our southern departments, the pomegranate is a very hardy shrub, growing naturally as a bush and producing a multitude of offshoots from the foot, which serve to multiply the plant. In the climate of Paris, it is an orangery shrub cultivated for its abundant flowering. The pomegranate tree can be propagated by sowing pomegranate seeds, or by separating offshoots from the stump; but these two methods are seldom used, as the offshoots do not vegetate vigorously enough. Pomegranates lend themselves better than any other shrub to this method of propagation; the formation of roots on the marcotte branch should be encouraged by binding with brass wire, which forms a strangled marcotte. The marcotte can be placed in pots in spring and weaned at the end of summer, so that the young plants can overwinter in suitable pots or crates in the orangery. Three species of pomegranate are grown in orangeries: the single-flowered red, whose small, very acid fruits sometimes ripen in the Paris climate; the double-flowered red, the most widely grown; and the double-flowered white, less common than the other two. Among professional gardeners, the single-flowered pomegranate is multiplied by layering, to provide a large number of plants for grafting the other two. The pomegranate is grafted in slits, but not in the Pontoise style, a type of graft to which its mode of vegetation does not lend itself. It grows perfectly well in orange soil, and requires the same cultivation care and winter temperature as the orange tree; it is pruned only to remove dead wood; no attempt should be made to give it a symmetrical shape; it naturally forms an irregular, but graceful and very flowering head. Its life span, like that of the orange tree, is indefinite. CHAPTER XLVII Orangery plants (continued). Myrtle. - Its temperament in the wild. - Modifications it undergoes in the orangery. - Multiplication from seed. - Second flowering in winter. - Watering. - Ponding. - Repotting. - Oleander. - Vegetation in its natural climate. - Winter sleep. - Multiplication. - Sowing. - Cuttings in soil. - Cuttings in water. - Wine lees mixed with oleander box soil. - Grafting choice species onto common species - Kalmia. - Multiplication - Cuttings. - From seedlings. - Seedlings. - Forced cultivation. - Open-ground azaleas. - Indian azaleas. - Summer cultivation in the open air. - Rhododendrums. - Seedling propagation. - Transplant at two years. - Four years old. - Suitable soil. - Repotting. MYRTE. - Myrtle, the common species of which grows wild on the uncultivated hills of our departments bordering the Mediterranean, is classified as an orangery plant, although some of the most beautiful species, notably the small-leaved myrtle and the cottony myrtle, belong to the temperate greenhouse. Single-flowered varieties can be propagated by sowing their seeds, which must be brought in from the south of France, because in the Paris climate, myrtle hedges rarely produce fertile seeds. The double-flowered species are propagated from marcottes and cuttings, both of which are slow to root. In the orangery, the myrtle never reaches large dimensions; but it flowers abundantly and for a long time, and when it is not in flower, it stands out for the elegance and very pleasant resinous scent of its glossy foliage. In its native country, myrtle grows on stony slopes where it can withstand very high temperatures and continuous droughts lasting several months. In the orangery, however, its temperament seems to change completely. It thrives only in a mixture of equal parts of heather soil and good 24-garden soil; in summer, it needs an open position and full southern exposure, so that it never gets too hot. It requires frequent watering, even in winter, and when its roots are imprisoned in a box, it cannot withstand the deprivation of water that it tolerates so well between the cracks in the rocks of its native land. This anomaly is due to the fact that on the shores of the Mediterranean, if the heat is excessive during the day, the dew at night is very abundant and compensates to some extent for the persistent drought. In orangeries where it lacks this resource, myrtle needs to be watered more often during the winter than other plants, whose sap must more or less slumber from autumn to spring. Often, after the first flowering in summer, myrtle produces a large number of young shoots which are covered with buds, so that it is ready to give a second flowering as beautiful as the first, when the arrival of the first cold weather means it can no longer be left in the open air. In the orangery, the buds usually fall off before they have had a chance to bloom; but if the myrtle is ready to bloom again and has been placed in a temperate greenhouse, or simply in an inhabited apartment where a good fire is kept burning, it will give its second bloom at the beginning of winter, provided it is not allowed to suffer from thirst. When a gentle rain falls, it can be left to receive it for a quarter of an hour to clean its foliage of the dust that clings to it. From time to time, it's a good idea to place the pot or crate at an angle above the washing stone, and give it a drenching with a watering can with a sheaf pierced with very fine holes. This removes the dust clinging to the foliage without over-wetting the soil in the pot or crate, which would necessarily happen if, while the gardener was giving the myrtle this drenching, the shrub remained in its natural position. As a young myrtle grows, it should be given a larger pot, and finally placed in a crate proportionate to its size, with the soil renewed every two years at the latest. It is all the more necessary to place the myrtle in the best conditions for it to vegetate energetically, as the more young shoots it produces, the more it flowers. When the soil in its box is exhausted and not renewed in good time, it doesn't die, but it stops flowering. Myrtle does not want to be pruned; if, in order to add one of its flowering branches to a bouquet, or to regularize its shape, we deem it necessary to cut off a branch at its head, this procedure should only be used with the greatest care, as it is slow to repair the losses of this kind that we have caused it during its flowering period. ROSE LAUREL. - This shrub, one of the most graceful of all those growing wild in southern countries, has given rise by sowing and cultivation under various conditions to a fairly large number of beautiful varieties with single, semi-double, full flowers in various shades of pink and purple, pure white, light yellow and orange-yellow. In all hot climates, starting with the south of France, the oleander, known to botanists as nerium, grows abundantly by the water's edge, where it flowers for several months at a time; its roots, which are almost as long as its stems, plunge into dry stream beds throughout the summer, seeking the abundant moisture it cannot do without at great depths. In winter, the roots and lower part of the stems are in the water, and do all the better for it. These indications are useful to the gardener for the prosperity of nerium collections in orangeries. The oleander needs the same soil as the orange tree, and very abundant watering throughout the time it spends in the open air. In winter, on the other hand, it's in the gardener's interest to give the oleander in the orangery the most complete plant sleep possible, because in its native country, its vegetation doesn't suffer any downtime. To this end, once the plant has returned home, watering is gradually reduced, and eventually water is given only once a week, just enough to prevent it from drying out. When the time comes for the outside temperature to allow it to be put back in the open air, the oleander needs to be watered a little less infrequently; it then seems to come back to life as it emerges from the orangery, and its young shoots from the previous year flower abundantly. Oleander is easily propagated by sowing its seeds, taking cuttings from its young shoots and grafting. Seedlings used only in the hope of conquering new varieties should be made with seeds from our southern departments; several white and yellow-flowered varieties reproduce fairly constantly by sowing their seeds. Sow in spring, in heather soil; the plant should be pricked out very young, singly, in pots deeper than they are wide, filled with orange-tree soil. Cuttings taken in spring, under a frame in a northern exposure, or at least in a shady spot, are always successful; they are potted as soon as their renewed growth indicates that they have taken root. In towns and cities, if you only have one or two oleanders to keep on your balcony during the summer months, you can propagate them by cuttings using the following highly successful procedure. Around mid-April, the shoots which do not interfere with the shape of the shrub are cut off at the level of the main stem; each of these shoots is immersed in a bottle full of water, so that the tip of the cutting does not touch the bottom of the bottle. Water being, as we have seen, the indispensable element in the vegetation of the oleander in the wild, the cuttings are quick to form roots, especially if the bottles are placed on a windowsill facing south. As soon as they have sufficient roots, the cuttings are planted in pots deeper than they are wide, filled with soil mixed with compost; they should be watered generously throughout the summer, and placed in larger pots as soon as their development indicates the need. In Paris, at the wine warehouse and at the door of several wine merchants, passers-by admire magnificent bushes of oleanders; the vigor of these shrubs and the truly extraordinary abundance of their blooms are due to a small quantity of wine lees mixed with the soil where their roots grow. Wherever this type of amendment can be obtained and mixed, in moderate doses, with the soil in which oleanders grow, it gives them remarkable strength and abundance of bloom. Grafting is mainly used to propagate the more sought-after varieties on the common species. Oleander is successfully grafted with herbaceous split grafts in spring, when vegetation is most active. In the south of France, enthusiasts whose gardens border on a stream, which is often lined with a wide border of wild oleanders, graft semi-double and double oleanders, as well as yellow, white and orange-flowered varieties, onto these shrubs in this way, creating clumps of mixed shades with the richest ornamental effect. KALMIA - It's a mistake for the most popular gardening treatises to list the kalmia as being very hardy and able to overwinter in the open air in the Paris climate. This beautiful shrub, so remarkable for the profusion of its white flowers washed with pink, should be considered as belonging to the orangery. Those that are planted in the open air in heathery soil don't always freeze; but the first harsh winter takes them away when, after a great deal of effort and care, you've succeeded in obtaining elegant, highly-flowering bushes. Kalmia can only be left outside until late autumn, and then brought back into the open early in the spring. Kalmia can be propagated by both marcots and seedlings. Marcots are rarely used, as they take two long years to root. Sowing, which is almost the only method in use, is done in summer, as soon as the seed is ripe, as it immediately loses its germinative properties and must be sown as soon as it has reached maturity. As the seed is 24. very fine, it is only mixed with the surface of the soil, which should be made up of equal parts of sand and heather. It is much more sensitive to the cold than fully-formed shrubs, so its first winter is spent in a frame, and it is gradually acclimatized to air contact by lifting the frames. The three distinct species of kalmia - the broad-leafed kalmia (latifolia), the most commonly cultivated, the narrow-leafed kalmia (augustifolia), and the glaucous or rosemary-leaved kalmia - multiply in the same way; these shrubs are cultivated in the same way as the orange tree; they naturally take on a good shape and need no pruning. The last two species, brought into a temperate or warm greenhouse in late autumn, lend themselves easily to forced cultivation and are in flower before the end of winter. AZALEAS. - The azalea genus comprises two clear-cut divisions, the first of which contains only ground-hugging shrubs, with flowers that usually appear before the leaves, and in which we find all shades of pink and red, from pink-washed white to bright red, and all shades of yellow, from straw-yellow to orange-yellow. These shrubs require pure heather soil and a northern or very shady exposure; their cultivation is the same as that of all outdoor shrubs; they produce a beautiful effect in spring with their abundant, early flowering, especially when combined with later-flowering evergreen shrubs. The second division includes all azaleas that do not overwinter in the open air. In a pinch, these shrubs belong in the cold greenhouse; but when you have an orangery large enough to give azaleas a place near the windows, so that they are never deprived for too long of the light they need, they overwinter well in the orangery. Those who have only a small number of azaleas can also winter them in a well-lit room, where the temperature should not fall below zero, nor rise above 3 or 4 degrees. Indian azaleas are easy to grow if you have land where they can spend the whole of the summer season, from the beginning of May to the end of September, in the open air in heather soil. In this case, you don't need to take any more care of them than you do of the other shrubs in the open ground, until you put them back in pots or crates of the right size, to bring them into the orangery. When, for lack of space in the garden, you have to keep Indian azaleas constantly in pots, the soil in the pots must be changed every year. The soil in which they thrive best is made up of equal parts of heather soil and leaf compost. Each time they are repotted, the bottom of the pots is lined with a layer of broken pot fragments, to ensure rapid drainage of excess water from watering. Although Indian azaleas need to be watered frequently, prolonged root growth in an excessively humid environment causes them serious damage; this is one of the reasons why these shrubs are much more vigorous and give a much more beautiful bloom when planted in summer in the open air. The flowers of Indian azaleas are so abundant that, during the blooming period, which lasts no less than a month, the foliage is completely masked. White, brick-red, bright red and light violet are the dominant shades of Indian azalea flowers. These well-cared-for shrubs can live for a very long time, and can be pruned into all sorts of shapes, without becoming less floriferous. RHODODENDRUM. - The rhododendrum genus, like the azalea genus, is rich in species and varieties that are perfectly suited to overwintering in the open air in the Paris climate; but it also contains a large number of the most sought-after, which cannot do without shelter during the winter. Professional horticulturists who grow large numbers of rhododendrons devote a cold greenhouse to them; those who have only a small number can treat them as orangery shrubs. These shrubs produce such a beautiful effect in gardens, especially those belonging to the species known as Rhododendrum arboreum, which has produced a multitude of sub-varieties through cultivation, that their multiplication and breeding form a distinct branch of horticulture. Many large horticultural establishments are devoted exclusively to rhododendrons. This shrub is propagated by sowing its seeds, which often produce beautiful new plants; the seed of the hardiest of the rhododendrums grown in the open ground, rhododendrum ponticum, is also sown, and can be grafted onto all the other varieties, so that those that rarely produce fertile seeds, and those whose flowers we fear will not reproduce unaltered by sowing, can be propagated at will. Successfully propagating rhododendrons from seed requires a great deal of perseverance. Seedlings are sown in terrines filled with finely sifted heather soil. As the terra cotta in the terrines is always more or less porous, they are immersed in a tub full of water, so that the water in the tub is constantly flush with the level of the heather soil in the terrines. The humidity that seeps through the thickness of the terrines is enough to ensure that the heather soil, on whose surface the rhododendron seeds are spread without being covered, is always at the degree of freshness needed to determine germination. The seeds must be sown lightly, as young plants of any variety cannot be transplanted before their second year, when they are still small and very delicate. They are transplanted for the first time, in rows only a few centimetres apart, in beds laid out to receive boxes covered with glass frames at the start of winter. The young rhododendrums spend a further two years in this situation, after which they are transplanted a second time, either in pots, to be returned to the orangery in winter, or in heather soil, 30 centimetres apart in all directions. Those that don't overwinter in the orangery need a shelter of glass frames in winter, which are removed in spring. They only begin to grow rapidly after this second transplanting, after which they show their first flowers in their fifth or sixth year. Rhododendrons need good, loosely-packed but substantial heather soil, renewed at least every two years for those grown in pots. The orangery, in addition to the shrubs whose cultivation has just been described, can in a pinch house in winter the less delicate species of fuchsia, pelargonium and several other plants destined to appear in the parterre in summer; but these plants are really only at home in the cold greenhouse. CHAPTER XLVIII Cold greenhouse plants. - The Camellia. The cold greenhouse. - Plants it can accommodate. - Its superiority over the orangery. - Camellia. - Its introduction into Europe. - First camellia introduced in France. - Climate in which camellia grows in the ground. - Propagation. - Sowing. - Conditions for success. - Their results. - Cutting. - How to do it. - Cutting in the greenhouse. - Faucheux graft, the only one used for camellia. - Favourable time for this graft. - Camellia soil. - Repotting. - Watering. - Water temperature for watering camellias. Pruning. - Not necessary for camellias in pots. - Growing care. - Ponding. - Thorough cleaning. - Aeration of camellias. - Need for a humid atmosphere in summer. - Growing conditions in their native country. The cold greenhouse. - Nothing proves better the progress made by modern horticulture in the cultivation of exotic ornamental plants, than the incessant increase in the number of cold greenhouses in Europe, wherever gardening is in honor, both among amateurs and professional gardeners. As the temperament and mode of vegetation of the most beautiful plants borrowed from the flora of warm countries have been better studied, we have come to recognize this long-unnoticed truth, that most plants raised in temperate greenhouses can overwinter in the cold greenhouse, and that to see them flourish and bloom, it is sufficient to place them out of the reach of frost in winter and sunburn in summer. As a result of this important advance in gardening practice, a whole assortment of the most beautiful ornamental plants have been able to migrate from the temperate greenhouse to the cold greenhouse. This revolution in one of the most interesting branches of horticulture led to another, which we have already I 2 - 2 2 had occasion to mention. Thanks to the fall in the price of iron and glass, the building blocks of the cold greenhouse, the number of plants that could be accommodated during the winter months more than doubled, at the same cost, by substituting the cold greenhouse for the orangery. In addition to the assortment plants, each of which has its own special purpose, the cold greenhouse admits, as the essential base of its plant population, a certain number of collection plants which not only contribute to its decoration, but some of which, from spring to autumn, increase the gardener's resources for ornamenting the parterre; these are: camellia, fuchsia, calceolaria, pelargonium and cineraria. CAMELLIA. - When Father Kamel, a German missionary, introduced the shrub that bears his name to Europe in 1739, no one foresaw the future of the camellia or the role it was destined to play in European greenhouses. It was a fairly pretty shrub, with a simple, attractive red flower that was not in itself much superior to that of the Japanese quince. It was not until much later, first in England, then in France, Belgium and the rest of Europe, that the camellia, so long relegated to the category of plants cultivated solely for the study of botany, rose to the forefront of collector's shrubs. This is due to the graceful shape it assumes naturally and without pruning, to the beauty of its lustrous evergreen foliage, and to the length of its flowering period, which can be enjoyed from late November to late April. Except for the fragrance, which the camellia flower completely lacks, it would be worthy of rivaling the rose. The first camellia imported into France was sent from England to Madame Bonaparte, wife of the First Consul, at the time of the Peace of Amiens. Tamponnet, gardener at Malmaison, received a small branch from the hands of the future Empress Josephine, and took a cutting from it. It was a double-flowered white camellia (alba flore pleno), the ancestor of countless posterity. This camellia is still admired today, preserved as a precious souvenir in the establishment of Mr. H. Courtois, Tamponnet's successor. The camellia belongs to the cold greenhouse only in departments outside what is known as the olive limit; between this limit and the sea, it lives and flowers in the open ground in places sheltered from the north winds, particularly in the Var. Southern Italy returns it to the climate of its native land, where it can grow to a height of seven or eight meters; trees of this size can be seen in the gardens of the palace of the King of Naples at Caserta. In Italy in particular, the primitive camellia with its single red flower and several semi-double varieties bear fruits the size of small apricots, filled with fertile seeds. The eight hundred camellia varieties in our collections have been conquered by the persistent sowing of these seeds. Botanists consider some of these varieties, including Camellia reticulato, to be distinct species. Seedlings are not the most common method of propagation, even in the south of France; they are only sown in the hope, often realized, of increasing the number of varieties of merit. Cuttings, marcottes and grafting are the most widely adopted methods of propagation. Camellia seeds are sown in heather soil, which must be kept constantly moist, otherwise the seed will not germinate. When a large quantity of seeds is available, there's no risk of wasting effort by multiplying seedlings. Once the young plants have produced their first flower, even if it has no particular merit, they can still be used by grafting onto the most sought-after varieties. Camellia cuttings. - Camellia can only be successfully cut from the previous year's shoots. These branches rarely belong to the choice varieties that we generally prefer to propagate by grafting; only grafted camellias are to be found in amateur collections or those of professional gardeners. The sole purpose of cuttings is therefore to propagate plants suitable for grafting. Nevertheless, some old varieties whose merit has not been diminished by the passage of time, including Camellia fimbriata and Camellia alba flore pleno, multiply very well from cuttings. Horticulturists and hobbyists who have large collections of camellias to maintain in their entirety cultivate single-flowered camellias for this special purpose, pruning them to produce a large number of young shoots which are cut off each spring and used as cuttings. To save space, these cuttings are planted close together in terrines filled with good heather soil; if this soil seems too compact, fine silica sand is mixed in, in the proportion of a quarter or even a third. The terrines, filled with Camellia cuttings, are covered with a glass cloche and placed either under a shaded frame, or in the best-shaded part of the cold greenhouse, as the slightest sunburn, or even prolonged contact with bright light, would compromise the success of the operation. Ladies who take pleasure in cultivating a few pretty exotic plants in a small portable cold greenhouse, a charming piece of furniture that can be placed on a pedestal table or console in a living room, can cut out shoots from the previous year from a single camellia with assured success; after forty to forty-five days, they will be rooted and begin to grow. As soon as the camellia cuttings show signs of good root development, they are transplanted individually into small-diameter pots, where they grow until they are ready for grafting. When there is no particular reason to hurry, it's best to wait to graft Camellia cuttings until they have reached a certain stage of development; they feed their graft better and form better shrubs than those that have been grafted too young. Grafting. - The various grafting methods used to graft 25 camellia have been successively abandoned in favor of side grafting, known to gardeners as Faucheux grafting. A notch is made in the axil of a leaf so that a branch can be inserted, wedge-shaped at the base, leaving the upper part of the plant until after grafting. Only then is the head removed and used as a cutting. The Faucheux graft differs from the Pontoise graft in only one respect. In Pontoise grafting, the subject and the graft are of the same size; the graft is loaded with flowers and buds; in Faucheux grafting, the subject is much stronger than the graft, which consists of a shoot from the previous year, still a long way from the time when it is due to start flowering; moreover, there is no difference between these two methods of grafting. Camellias are only grafted in spring, when the sap is most active; the grafted plants are placed under cloches, either in a cold greenhouse or under a frame, until the graft begins to grow; the young camellias are then repotted into pots larger than those in which they were grown. In general gardening treatises and in special treatises on camellia cultivation, we find various recipes for camellia soil, including all kinds of ingredients. All these recipes prescribe that the mixtures should be allowed to age before use, with the result that they revert to a simple mixture of soil and potting compost, because after a certain length of time, any fertilizer will inevitably reduce to potting compost. It's quicker to mix a third of leaf compost directly with a third of powdered charcoal and a third of good garden soil. Camellia exhausts soil very quickly, and imperiously requires rich, very substantial soil. The best way to satisfy this requirement is to incorporate a high dose of non-disinfected human fertilizer into the compost prepared for potting camellias. The usual proportion is one tenth to one eighth of the total mass. When this fertilizer has been properly incorporated into the compost and reworked several times over a three-month interval, it no longer gives off any bad odors; it imparts extraordinary vigor to the camellias. Compost fertilized with human manure must be renewed every two years; this means of maintaining camellia vegetation is preferable to manure broths prepared with cow dung, sheep dung, or a small quantity of guano diluted in water; waterings of this nature are very fertilizing, but too short-lived. June is the best time of year for repotting fully-formed camellias, which are awaiting flowering. Watering with plain water, which the camellia needs more or less all year round, should be given with water at the temperature of the soil in the pots. If too cold water is used to water camellias in autumn, while the flowering buds are forming, the buds will detach and fall off; the frequent bud drop of apartment-grown camellias often has no other cause. Over-abundant flowering is very tiring for the camellia; it often happens that in a group of three or four buds attached to the same branch, not a single one is able to open. In such cases, we must not be afraid to remove part of the buds to save the rest. But, as the camellia stalk is extremely delicate, it would be dangerous to detach any of them; they would almost all fall off. What remains after this removal dries out and falls off, without compromising the buds that are due to flower. Pruning. - When camellias are raised in pots or crates, they can be left to do as they please, as long as they are well-managed; their natural shape, which they take on of their own accord, is as good as any that can be made to take on artificially. Those planted in full heather soil in the Winter Garden can be pruned into any shape you wish; their generous vegetation lends itself to pruning with perfect docility (see Winter Garden, chap. XLIX). Camellias, grown in large crates, are usually trained in a pyramid shape according to the principles described for pruning trees with seeded fruit. Cultivation care. - The Camellia's highly active vegetation is sustained almost as much by its foliage, which decomposes atmospheric air in order to appropriate its principles, as by its roots themselves. It is therefore of the utmost importance for successful cultivation that both leaf surfaces be kept in a constant state of cleanliness, so that they can freely perform their functions. As long as camellias remain in the greenhouse, dust causes them little damage; but as soon as they leave the cold greenhouse to spend part of the summer in the open air, if the drought continues, they are infallibly invaded by dust. Watering with a fine-holed watering can only half-cleans camellia foliage; every now and then, all the leaves must be wiped off one by one with a fine, slightly damp sponge. Several treatises on camellia cultivation recommend thorough cleaning once a year. It's understandable that the gardener in charge of looking after a very large collection of camellias doesn't have the time to repeat such an operation often; however, if he keeps to a single cleaning a year, this work won't be of much use. But the amateur who has only a limited number, or who doesn't care about the well-being of his shrubs, even when he has a large number, must clean them thoroughly, leaf by leaf, as often as he deems necessary. Those living in an inhabited apartment, where the need to clean the rooms every day inevitably raises more or less dust, cannot be wiped less often than once a week, and not once a year. In the Paris climate, the Camellia, which is not much more sensitive to the cold than the orange tree, is not taken out of the greenhouse to be exposed to the open air until mid-July, when the annual shoots are almost fully grown. It has been observed, or thought to have been observed, that in the cold greenhouse, the young wood can acquire greater vigor, which contributes to making camellias more floriferous. If you have a well-sheltered area for airing your camellias, you can take them out in the first days of June, and they'll grow all the better for it. But amateurs with a collection of several hundred camellias, and professional growers with several thousand, are rightly afraid of exposing them to the open air during the stormy season, because a few minutes' hail can destroy everything. So they leave their camellias in the greenhouse all year round, limiting themselves to removing the glass panes during the summer months, which can be put back in place and covered with straw mats in no time at all when a violent storm approaches. According to the reports of botanical travellers, camellia in its native country forms coppice woods in cool, fertile soils; care is taken to prune it to make it suitable for its special purpose, which is to serve as broomsticks. This shows that a more or less humid atmosphere is favorable to it; for the more a foreign plant, whatever it may be, finds outside its home country the vegetation conditions of its native land, the more the success of its cultivation is assured. This is why, as long as the camellias live in the open air, either outside the cold greenhouse, or in the greenhouse with its panels removed, water must very often be sprinkled on the soil, in the spaces between the pots and crates, independently of the watering and bedding given to the shrubs themselves. Placed in this way in an atmosphere that is both warm and moist, they benefit visibly and prepare to flower profusely. CHAPTER XLVIX Cold greenhouse plants. - Fuchsia. - Pelargonlum. - Calceolar. - Cinerea. Fuchsia. - Their origin. - Hybrid varieties. - Edible fuchsia globosa berries. - Growing fuchsia in a cold greenhouse. - Its place in the flowerbed in summer. - Growing in a temperate greenhouse. - How to propagate. - Seedlings. - Cuttings. - Suitable soil. - Wintering temperature for fuchsias. - Pelargoniums. - Species that take their place in the parterre in summer. - In hanging vases. - Wintering in the cold greenhouse. - Calceolaria. - Multiplication. - Sowing. - Clump division. - Cineraria. - Separation of offspring. - Sowing. - Care to harvest the seed. - Nursery in the cold greenhouse. - Lantanas. - Verbena. - Mexican agerat. - Remarkable speedwell. - Henderson speedwell. FUCHSIA. - This pretty plant is one of the most remarkable examples of the power of hybridization to modify plants cultivated by man. For almost a century, its flower, which in shape resembles no other, remained stationary and very sparsely distributed in collections, never leaving the temperate greenhouse. Then, when species with very elongated flowers and large, woody stems were introduced, horticulturists and amateurs began to make hybrid crosses between these fuchsias and the old ones with short, rounded flowers, with the greatest success, especially nowadays; for the introduction of the most beautiful hybrid fuchsias goes back no further than 1837. The number of varieties, apart from the distinct species accepted by botanists, is several hundred, of which only two belong to the New Zealand flora; all the others come directly from South America, or have been obtained by hybridization (fig. 101). A curious and unexpected development in fuchsia cultivation The berries that follow the elegant flowers of Fig. 101. Fuchsia, Venus victrix. this shrub are bland in flavor and small in volume; they are not considered edible in either America or New Zealand. Twenty years ago, an English gardener emigrated to New Zealand; having settled near one of the emerging towns of this colony, whose climate corresponds fairly closely to that of the south of France, he was astonished to see a fuchsia globosa he had brought from Europe, and planted in an espalier in the open air, cover itself with red berries the size of a cerisc. He found the berries excellent, consulted the colony's doctor to make sure they were free of any harmful properties, and, on the doctor's word, began selling them to his neighbors. Today, fuchsia fruit is sold by the pound, like cherries, in markets all over New Zealand. It is highly probable that the same result could easily be achieved by growing fuchsia in the open air in Italy, Spain, southern France and Algeria. Although in special treatises and most horticultural works, fuchsia is classed as a temperate greenhouse plant, it is essentially a cold greenhouse plant which, like camellia, can be grown in the winter garden (see Winter Garden, chap. L). Passionate fans of the fuchsia genus never allow collections of these shrubs to leave the temperate greenhouse, where they are content to leave the panels open day and night during the summer to aerate the fuchsias. They believe, quite wrongly, that the shades of the corolla and colored calyx are darker and less delicate when the flowers bloom in the open air; our own observations have not confirmed this remark. Throughout the summer, in public gardens and in the most beautiful private gardens, groups of fuchsias globosa, serratifolia, fulgens and a few others can be seen, their pots buried in the flowerbeds of the parterre; these shrubs grow in strength and flower no less well there than in the cold greenhouse or the temperate greenhouse. It's not that, from a cultivation point of view, the custom of never putting fuchsias in the open air is to be blamed; it saves their very loose flowers from the danger of being blown off by strong winds, and the plants from being chopped up by hail during thunderstorms; it makes flowering, if not more beautiful, at least longer-lasting; it saves the trouble of moving the many shrubs that make up complete collections in and out of the garden; it is also very favorable for fuchsias when they have just been repotted. But it's worth warning the general public that, on the one hand, the cold greenhouse is sufficient for fuchsias, and that, on the other, it would be a mistake to deprive the flowerbed of one of its most decorative features in summer, by not burying potted fuchsias, which are perfectly at home in the open air throughout the summer. Fuchsia thrives in the soil we've indicated for camellia; however, you can remove the powdered charcoal from this compost and replace it with an equal proportion of good garden soil, when the latter is light rather than strong. Human fertilizer is no less useful for all varieties of fuchsia than it is for camellias; above all, it makes them flower abundantly and continuously until the end of summer. Propagation. - Seedlings and cuttings are the two most common methods for propagating fuchsias. The very fine fuchsia seed is sown just above ground, with the sole aim of conquering new varieties. As the young plant is very sensitive to the slightest cold, when sown in late autumn, when the berries containing the seed are fully ripe, it can only be sown in trays filled with heather soil mixed with sand, and placed in a warm, or at least temperate, greenhouse. This is how it's done by professional horticulturists, whose establishments contain all types of serrc. Amateurs who don't have a warm or temperate greenhouse at their disposal can only sow in spring, at the end of April, on a muted layer of sandy heather and covered with a glass frame. The plant can be transplanted very early, and will flower the following year. Subjects with insignificant flowering are immediately sacrificed; they can be of no use because fuchsia is not grafted; not that this shrub does not lend itself very well to this method of propagation, but because grafting offers no real advantage for fuchsia, as all varieties can be propagated from cuttings with equal ease. Fuchsia cuttings. - Among cold or temperate greenhouse plants and shrubs, none is more easily rooted by cutting than fuchsia. One- or two-year-old shoots are used as cuttings, and annual pruning provides an ample supply. They can be cut immediately in the same soil that is suitable for 25. fully-formed plants, in a shady spot in a cold greenhouse. Some are so perennial that they can be cut, like chrysanthemums, at any age, in any season, and in any type of soil, except those that are too compact. Once sufficiently elongated shoots have been cut, they are held in place by a perfectly straight stake, and all side shoots are removed as they grow, except for the three or four closest to the top. These serve as the base for a graceful, drooping head, the natural form of the fuchsia. Pruning consists in cutting back the newly-flowering branches every year, just a few centimetres from the main stem, when the plants are taken into the cold greenhouse for wintering. This pruning will encourage the emergence of young, highly-flowering branches the following spring. Once the fuchsias have been brought in and pruned, we gradually reduce the amount of watering, eventually giving them only enough to prevent their death from drying out. In spring, as soon as the buds lengthen and vegetation starts to grow again, watering becomes more frequent and abundant. The best temperature for overwintering fuchsias is between two and five degrees centigrade; below two degrees, they suffer more or less from the cold. This temperature is easily maintained in the cold greenhouse by means of a stove placed outside and lit only during the most rigorous cold; a few degrees too much heat, provoking the movement of the fuchsia sap at the wrong time, will harm them as much or more than a temperature of one or two degrees too low. Fuchsia collections, regardless of botanical differences, are classified into three series, according to calyx coloration: white or meaty fuchsias, pink fuchsias and red fuchsias. (See the lists of fuchsias at the end of this volume.) PELARGONIUMS - Collector pelargoniums, almost as rich in varieties as fuchsias, belong to the temperate greenhouse; many of the horticultural public refer to them as geraniums, as they were originally known. (See temperate greenhouse, chap. LII.). However, in addition to the collection Pelargoniums, there are still a number that belong to the cold greenhouse and whose dazzling flowering produces a very beautiful effect in the parterre in summer. The most remarkable of this series are Pelargonium inquinans and Pelargonium zonale, of which we have varieties with scarlet flowers, pink flowers and pure white flowers. All can be propagated from cuttings taken in spring, in heather soil, under a bell or in a frame, and planted out in May as soon as they are ready to bloom. As long as these Pelargoniums are in the open air, they are treated in the same way as annuals grown in the ground. They require abundant watering throughout the summer, so that their flowers follow one another uninterruptedly until autumn. They form elegant belts along the edges of ornamental shrub and tree beds in the landscape garden; in large gardens, they are used to line marble or cast-iron vases with white or pink petunias; finally, the drooping-stemmed varieties, mixed with Chinese saxifrage, create a pleasing effect in vases hung as ornaments from windows or apartment ceilings, or from the glazing of a cold greenhouse. At the start of winter, if the garden is large enough, the gardener must have such a mass of pelargoniums in the ground that it would be impossible to overwinter them all. He chooses a number of beautiful plants proportionate to the presumed needs of the cuttings for the following year, and sacrifices all the rest. The reserved plants are placed in pots and returned to the cold greenhouse, where they overwinter by keeping them close to the windows and watering them sparingly. CALCEOLARIAS - The calceolaria genus is made up of two distinct series, one of which includes several pretty species that spend the winter in the cold greenhouse and the summer in the parterre, and the other the innumerable sub-varieties of which enthusiasts form rich collections. The cultivation of all these plants is very similar to that of fuchsia. Soil that is suitable for fuchsia is also suitable for calceolaria; the time of repotting is the same for both plants. Fig. 102. Calceolaria with rough leaves. Calceolaria is propagated by sowing its seeds, under the same conditions and with the same precautions as for fuchsia seedlings. Seedlings are only used to obtain new varieties, which have become so numerous that, if a few of the old ones were not eliminated every year to make way for the most beautiful, calceolaria collections would include thousands of sub-varieties, each distinct by the color of its flowers. These sub-varieties are so fleeting that not a single one reproduces by sowing its seeds. Calceolaria almost all produce a multitude of rooted shoots, which are separated in autumn and potted separately, as if they were young plants from seed, to overwinter in the cold greenhouse. Many growers cultivate calceolaria in a temperate greenhouse without letting them out, in order to prolong their flowering; the cold greenhouse is perfectly sufficient for them, provided that in winter the temperature never drops below two or three degrees centigrade above zero. The cold greenhouse, dedicated exclusively to a collection of calceolaria, must be carefully shaded as soon as the sun begins to produce a high temperature inside; this care must be continued throughout the summer. Calceolaria need frequent and abundant watering, especially those such as the rough-leaved calceolaria, which should be placed early in the bed and flower until autumn (fig. 102). CINERARIES. - Cineraria, which botanists refer to the genus senecon, have several important advantages over a host of other cold greenhouse plants that deserve to be mentioned. Their flowers offer the most beautiful shades of blue and purple to be found in the entire plant kingdom; they bloom very early and continue without interruption for three months; they adapt very well to the concentrated atmosphere of an apartment, where they are completely at home, their flowers being totally odorless. Like calceolaria, cineraria are propagated by dividing clumps and separating the offspring, which are usually not rooted. They are placed singly in pots filled with a mixture of heather soil and potting compost in equal parts; they are then treated as cuttings. Provided they are watered abundantly, the offspring quickly become strong plants ready to flower immediately in the cold greenhouse they adorn at a time of year when most other cold greenhouse plants are not in flower. Those with white rays, edged with purple-purple, and those of a plain but very bright shade are particularly sought-after. Once the cineraria have finished flowering, a few precautions need to be taken with regard to those whose seed you intend to harvest. The seeds of cineraria are provided with aigrettes and arranged like those of the common dandelion, which children have fun scattering by blowing on them. If seed-bearing cineraria were left in the open air, the slightest gust of wind would blow their seeds away as they matured. So we bring them into the cold greenhouse and harvest the seed-laden corymbs without waiting for them to reach full maturity. These corymbs, or deflowered tops, are tied in bundles and hung in a dry, draught-free place; the seed completes its ripening and can then be easily collected without loss. Cineraria seedlings are sown in the same soil given to offshoots detached from clumps; they germinate quickly; the seedling is transplanted at a very young age, and later treated like the offshoots. Seedlings of cineraria do not always reproduce the color of the flowers from which the seed was harvested; but sowing the seed of first-choice cineraria produces a very fine mixture, often giving rise to remarkable novelties. To bring out the merits of the cineraria, they are arranged on tiers, assorted in shades from the lightest to the darkest; for three months, they offer a rich appearance and such vivid tones that the palette of the best painter cannot reproduce them. Cineraria are perennials; but, in order to always have a complete collection in very fine specimens, plants must be renewed by sowing or separating offspring, and never be more than two or three years old. Nursery in the cold greenhouse. - The amateur, who must attach equal importance to the upkeep of the flowerbed and that of the cold greenhouse, should always reserve a place in the latter, without detracting from the beauty of the view, for the propagation of a few plants which must be nursed in the cold greenhouse to be placed in the flowerbed when they are ready to flower. These include lantanas, verbenas, Mexican ageratum or celestine, remarkable speedwell and Henderson's speedwell. Lantanas (fig. 103) multiply by sowing seeds supplied in abundance by plants placed in the ground Fig. 103. Lantana camara. Fig. 104. Mexican bergamot. where they flower profusely from mid-May to the end of September, and into October if there are no early white frosts in the autumn. Seedlings can be sown in trays on a deaf layer, or in heather soil in terrines placed in the cold greenhouse. Care of the young plant, which starts flowering immediately, is the same as for calceolaria and cineraria. At the end of September, a few clumps of lantana are returned to the cold greenhouse; they continue to flower and provide cuttings for propagation in the spring of the following year. Lantana cuttings flower immediately like seedlings. Varieties with yellow, fire-colored, pink, lilac and white flowers are mixed in beds. Verbenas, whose scarlet, pink, violet and white flower varieties are almost collector's items, are propagated from cuttings taken under glass in the cold greenhouse in spring; they are placed in Fig. 105. Remarkable speedwell. in the open air in the flowerbed when they begin to bloom. A few plants of each variety are potted in late autumn to overwinter in the cold greenhouse; they provide cuttings for propagation. Mexican ageratum, or blue celestine (fig. 104), very fashionable these days, can also be propagated from cuttings in the cold greenhouse, and then placed in the parterre, where it flowers uninterruptedly until the first frosts; it overwinters in the cold greenhouse. The remarkable speedwell (fig. 105) can also be cut in the cold greenhouse and flowers in the flowerbed in the open air for as long as the celestine. When kept constantly in a cold greenhouse, in suitably large pots or crates filled with heather soil, it can be raised on a single stem and form large, very flowering shrubs in a few years. Henderson's speedwell is treated in the same way as the preceding one, differing only in that its long flower spikes are a beautiful light lilac at the top and white at the base, whereas the spikes of the remarkable speedwell are of a single color. The assortment of other cold greenhouse plants and the benefits that can be derived from them are described in the next chapter, devoted to the winter garden, the most pleasing form of the cold greenhouse. CHAPTER L The Winter Garden. The winter garden. - Its origin. - Interior layout. - Orangery trees and shrubs in the ground. - Camellia espaliers. - Pruning and management. - Cultivation care. - Mustang peony. - Yucca. - Bengal and Chinese roses. - Trees and shrubs with ornamental foliage. - Arancaria. - Norfolk pine. - Sicilian palm. - Flowering climbing shrubs. - Clianthus. - Grafting on baguenaudier. - Passiflora. - Passion flower. - Blue passion flower. - Grafting other species onto blue passionflower. - Its place in the winter garden - Fragrant flowering plants. - Wood carnation. - Remontant violet. - Reseda tree. - Fragrant Chimonant. - Madeira clethra. - Its multiplication of marcottes - Brazilian Lycopod. -Cyclamen -Lobelia. Origin of the winter garden - The English call the cold greenhouse the green house, or the conservatory. This last expression is the most accurate of all, and would have deserved to be adopted in all languages if it wasn't already accepted there, as it is in French, under a different meaning. In the two previous chapters, we considered the cold greenhouse from the point of view of winter preservation of ornamental plants which, in the European climate, cannot overwinter in the open air. It remains for us to highlight its advantages as a winter garden. The first winter garden was established in Paris some forty years ago, by a skilled horticulturist, Mr. Fion, who cultivated a small walled garden. He had the bright idea of erecting rows of pillars supporting iron arches, which enabled him to cover the entire garden with glass, and to grow the finest orangery and cold greenhouse plants in the open ground, without using any heating equipment. Since that time, the number of winter gardens has increased year by year; Berlin and several other major German cities have extensive winter gardens that serve as public promenades. Interior layout. - The interior of a cold greenhouse intended for use as a conservatory should be designed as a miniature pleasure garden, with winding paths, seats at intervals, a basin for watering, vases hanging from the arches and lined with hanging plants, completing the layout and interior decoration of the conservatory. Orangery shrubs in the ground. - Orange, pomegranate, myrtle and oleander blossom in the open ground and take on great proportions; each is given the soil best suited to it in the flowerbed or bed of which it forms a part, and the composition of which has been indicated. Since their roots can spread freely, there's no need to periodically replenish their soil, as is the case for the same shrubs in boxes. There's also no need to prune them, except to remove dead, diseased or confusing branches. In the winter garden, it's much more pleasant to see an orange tree, which never stops growing as long as it's sufficiently watered, cover itself with flowers and fruit almost all year round, and take on its natural shape, than to prune it into a symmetrical form. In the orangery, this shape is a necessity, because on the one hand space is at a premium, and on the other, a tree whose roots are imprisoned in a box, cannot retain its natural habit; in the conservatory, on the other hand, a grove of exotic trees and shrubs is all the more pleasing because these plants are less hindered and deformed by pruning. The same applies to all other orangery and cold greenhouse trees and shrubs that may be included in the winter garden decor. CAMELLIA in the ground in espalier. - Of all these shrubs, the Camellia is the most beautiful, in terms of variety, abundance and duration of flowering. Planted in the winter garden, the camellia looks only remotely like it does when its roots are cramped in the soil of a pot or crate. Brought up in espaliers in the form of a simple palmette with horizontal cords, along the windows, in just a few years it becomes the rival for pruning of the most beautiful pear trees grown in espaliers in the open air. Its framework is established by the same pruning and according to the same principles as those of the pear tree. It is in this form that old camellias are most floriferous, and are quickest to repair the losses that gardeners inflict on them in order to use the flowers and flowering branches for ornaments and ball bouquets. Care must be taken not to plant winter garden camellias too close to other shrubs which, like laurel, for example, require very abundant watering; the camellia's roots, which need much more moderate humidity, could suffer as a result. Throughout the summer, from around June 15th to the end of August, the windows of the conservatory, behind which the espalier camellias are planted, should remain open day and night; they should only be closed when thunderstorms are approaching. It is useful, for ease of service, if the espaliered camellias in the conservatory are trellised, not directly on the glazing, but on a coarse wire mesh that is independent of it. Open-ground plants for the conservatory. - A number of plants that can withstand wintering in the open air are an essential part of the winter garden ornamental scheme, such as mustang peonies and vuccas. The latter plant in particular, with its foliage similar to that of American agaves, produces a very picturesque effect, even when not in flower. It is in its temperament to emit its flower stalk without a fixed period, very often at the onset of winter, so that the first frosts, without compromising the existence of the plant itself, kill the budding flower without giving it time to bloom. In the winter garden, at whatever time they decide to bloom, yuccas bloom completely, and their flowering v is much more prolonged than it would be in the open air during the most favorable season. In the winter garden, beds of Bengal and Chinese roses, which have to be replanted every year when they overwinter in the open air, produce roses all year round; verbenas hardly interrupt their brilliantly hued bloom; Lantanas, yellow calceolaria, Henderson veronicas and Mexican agerats bloom all winter long, and collections of Indian chrysanthemums display the luxury of their richly varied shades, while ice and snow have wiped out all traces of plant life outside. Ornamental shrubs. - In addition to flowering shrubberies, the winter garden, where the diversity of shapes and foliage must contribute to the overall effect, includes other tree clumps whose foliage alone is ornamental, especially arancarias, Norfolk pine and chamgrops humilis or Sicilian palm, whose presence gives an African aspect to the vegetation of the beds, while the host of flowering plants and shrubs, which never leave the winter garden devoid of flowers, preserve the character of the European grove and parterre. Climbing plants. - The pillars, usually made of cast iron, which support the arcades of the conservatory, need to be concealed by clumps of climbing plants, the most beautiful of which deserve special mention. Yellow-flowered jasmine and Spanish jasmine, with their equally fragrant flowers, can be grown there without any care other than directing and shortening their flowering branches as needed; they don't require any particular cultivation procedure; they are easily propagated from cuttings. Clianthus and passiflora can be combined with them for the same purpose, chosen from species of these two genera that do not urgently need a temperate greenhouse. CLIANTRUS. - The Dampierre and purple-flowered clianthus, both remarkable for the beauty and singularity of their flowering, do not need a temperate greenhouse, even though they are listed as belonging to it in most treatises and catalogs. The temperate greenhouse is so unnecessary that we can take pleasure in growing and flowering them in the open air in espaliers, aumidi, in the climate of Paris, with the only precaution of bundling their flexible branches at the onset of winter, and wrapping them in a straw blanket which is sufficient to protect them from the effects of frost; All the more so, clianthus can overwinter without difficulty in the conservatory, in open heather soil, where they belong at the foot of pillars to which they are attached as their stems lengthen. Clianthus can be propagated from cuttings, but those wishing to have robust, abundantly flowering plants very soon should plant in the winter garden strong plants of baguenaudier (colutea), an extremely hardy shrub that is readily available everywhere. The following year, in spring, the branches of the baguenaudier are cut back onto the main stem; each receives a cleft graft of purple-flowered clianthus or Dampierre clianthus; the two species can even be grafted onto different branches of the same plant. The grafts flower immediately and abundantly. Pruning consists in removing old, exhausted wood and replacing it with young, vigorous, flowering branches. PASSIFLORES. - Passionflowers, better known by their vulgar name of passion flowers because, with a little good will, you can find the instruments of passion in their flowers, are all plants of great vegetative energy. The blue passionflower and the stalked passionflower alone belong to the cold greenhouse, and therefore to the winter garden; the other species or varieties, numbering around twenty, belong to the temperate or warm greenhouse, where many of them ripen their large, edible fruits. Leu passionflower, the hardiest of them all, is planted at the foot of pillars, in a mixture of heather soil and 455 good garden soil; no other plant less vigorous than itself should be planted within reach of its roots, as it would suffer from its proximity. The best way to get blue passionflower to bloom abundantly in the winter garden is to let its stems grow up the pillars to half their height, and then lead it from that point on wires stretched horizontally from pillar to post. All other species with red and purple flowers of the most brilliant color are grafted onto this passiflora. Passionflowers cannot overwinter in the winter garden; but if you graft them early, in spring, onto the blue passionflower, they grow vigorously and flower all summer long. In autumn, they should be cut back on the subject, which can then be left to grow and flower, or grafted a second time with a branch of a more sought-after species. All passionflowers propagate equally well from cuttings; but cuttings of the most delicate species vegetate painfully and never flower well in the winter garden, where they are never warm enough, and where, moreover, they cannot overwinter; whereas when grafted onto blue passionflower, they flower satisfactorily, if treated as annuals. Plants with fragrant flowers. - In the winter garden, we shouldn't forget a few clumps of very fragrant flowering plants, particularly the wood carnation, which blooms during the worst season, reseda tree, remontant violet, and a few shrubs whose blossoms are not at all brilliant, but which spread a very sweet perfume, which, like that of orange blossom, cannot bother people of a nervous disposition. Two cold-greenhouse ornamental shrubs, fragrant chimonanthe and Madeira clethra, are ideal for this purpose in the winter garden. The fragrant chimonanthe should not be planted alone, as it has the disadvantage, like many azaleas and rhododendrums, of not taking its leaves until after it has deuriated. The fragrant chimonanthe doesn't bloom brightly, but it does bloom for a very long time, lasting more than two months, starting in December and ending only in February, when the shrub begins to put on its foliage. It therefore belongs in the winter ¡garden, among the evergreen shrubs with brilliant but odorless blossoms, and is propagated by cuttings. Madeira clethra is less widespread than it deserves to be, because it is very difficult to propagate from cuttings and, as it rarely produces fertile seeds in European greenhouses, it cannot be propagated from seed. However, Madeira clethra marcots can only be weaned after two years. Those who have the patience not to shy away from this slow process are rewarded by the flowering of this graceful shrub, which blooms abundantly in late summer and part of autumn and spreads a most delicate fragrance in the winter garden. Borders. - The compartments of the conservatory, like those of the open-air parterre, absolutely need to be bordered. The more or less concentrated atmosphere inside a conservatory makes it impossible to use as borders the same plants that are successful in the open air; grass borders in particular are difficult to maintain in a satisfactory state. This is why, for some years now, all winter gardens have generally adopted Brazilian lycopods as borders. This pretty little plant never gets carried away and, with a few waterings, remains incomparably fresh and green all year round. The Brazilian Iycopod is propagated by dividing clumps; its use has become so widespread that its cultivation constitutes a distinct branch of horticulture, so to speak, and many gardeners in the vicinity of large cities make the propagation and sale of the Brazilian Iycopod, for borders in winter jardius, the mainstay of their industry. There are several varieties, all suitable for the same purpose. 9 2 9 4 8 9 CYCLAMENS - In a well-designed winter garden, light areas should always be set aside, far enough from the clumps of trees and shrubs to receive as much light as if they were uncovered in the open air; these areas are devoted to growing small and medium-sized plants in the ground. The number of plants that can be grown in this part of the conservatory is considerable; among the smallest, which are planted at the edge of the paths immediately behind the border, special mention must be made of cyclamen, which has been elevated to the rank of collector's flower by the large number of pretty varieties that have been conquered from seed in recent years in France and Belgium, where cyclamen cultivation is very popular. Cyclamen is propagated exclusively by sowing its seeds, which ripen quite easily, both those of spring-flowering varieties and those that flower only in autumn. Seeds sown as soon as they are harvested produce seedlings that only need to be transplanted in the spring of the following year, whatever the time of sowing. In the winter garden, if there's enough space, cyclamen seed can be sown in a corner and immediately transplanted into the ground to form clumps or beds, planted at a distance of only 5 or 6 centimetres for the smaller species, and 8 to 10 centimetres for the larger ones. Although the fleshy root is perennial, it's best not to keep cyclamen too long, and to renew the collection frequently with seedlings. If you take care to include spring-flowering and autumn-flowering species in your collection in equal numbers, you can enjoy cyclamen flowers twice a year in the winter garden. LOBELIAS. - Among the medium-sized plants that can be used to advantage in winter garden compartments, lobelias hold a distinguished place thanks to the lively shades of their flowers, in which red, violet and blue dominate. When grown in the open air, lobelia, most of which are perennial only by their roots, flower well, but the roots must overwinter in the orangery or cold greenhouse (26). In the conservatory, they can remain in place all year round. Lobelia can be kept for a long time and form very attractive clumps, but their blooming loses some of its brilliance if they are allowed to age too much. They are easily propagated by dividing clumps; those that produce fertile seeds should preferably be propagated by sowing in heather soil at the very moment when the seeds mature. When choosing between the profusion of beautiful ornamental plants that can contribute to the decoration of the winter garden, the amateur should be particularly careful to multiply, in preference to others, those plants that flower late in autumn, in the middle of winter and early in spring. The presence of flowering plants in the ground, when the flowerbed is devoid of flowers, is what gives the most value to the cold greenhouse set up as a winter garden. CHAPTER LI Temperate greenhouse plants. Temperate greenhouse plants. - Pelargoniums for collectors. - French. - English or fancy. - Their conditions of perfection. - Multiplication. - Sowing. - Cutting. - Cultivation care. - Pruning. - Exposure to open air. - Repotting. - Removal of spoiled leaves. - Ericas. - Growing difficulties. - Multiplication. - Sowing. - Seeds harvested in Europe. - Seeds from the Cape of Good Hope. - Time taken for seed to germinate. - Transplanting the seedling. - Cuttings. - Cultivation care. - Aeration. - Repotting. -Epacris - How they differ from ericas. Fortunate is the amateur who is fortunate enough to be able to afford the luxury of a temperate greenhouse, where he can house a multitude of plants far more varied than in the orangery or the cold greenhouse. He has, so to speak, all the flora of the tropics at his disposal, minus the plants that imperiously require the hot greenhouse. In addition, during the few months that temperate greenhouse plants can spend in the open air, the temperate greenhouse becomes the infirmary for more or less ailing orangery and cold greenhouse plants, especially cenes that are too seriously ill to be expected to recover outside under the influence of the summer sun. Temperate greenhouse ornamental plants include a number of collectors' plants, the most sought-after of which are pelargoniums, ericas, cacti and amaryllis. Each of these series is rich in species, varieties and sub-varieties, all of which are very similar in temperament, and require much the same care in cultivation. PELARGONIUNS. - Pelargonium species have been described as cold greenhouse plants. They overwinter in the greenhouse and adorn the flowerbed with their brilliantly hued flowers all summer long. True collector's Pelargoniums are all temperate-greenhouse plants; they rarely leave the greenhouse, even in summer, unless it's to decorate a window box in an apartment; the extreme delicacy of their flowers, whose petals can be scattered or torn by a strong gust of wind or a heavy rainstorm, means that they can scarcely be exposed to the open air while in flower. They are divided into two series, both of which have a corolla similar in shape to that of the pansy, in terms of the arrangement of the petals. The first series includes French Pelargoniums, with very wide corollas, regularly spotted with more or less dark spots on a light background; the second is made up of English or fancy Pelargoniums, whose character is to have the two upper petals of a plain, very dark purple, framed by a very thin white border. Multiplication. - Almost all collector's Pelargoniums produce fertile seeds, which are used to propagate them from seed in the hope of obtaining good new varieties. Only the most beautiful plants are allowed to go to seed, either because they have been hybridized with other choice species, or because the grower has left it to accidental crosses. Pelargoniums that have matured their seed do not go back up, and therefore only flower once a year; those whose seed is not to be harvested are treated differently: as the flowers wilt, they are removed, without giving the seed time to form; with this precaution, pelargoniums are essentially remontant; the best species flower with little interruption, from mid-May to the end of August. Seeds are sown just as they reach maturity, in terrines filled with heather soil which is kept constantly moist; the young seedling is transplanted singly into small pots; it overwinters in the temperate greenhouse and shows its first flower in May of the following year. Cutting is the most common method of propagating Pelargoniums for collections; cuttings are young shoots detached from clumps that have stopped flowering at the end of July and during August. When growing large numbers of Pelargoniums for sale, lay out a thick bed of good, well-compacted potting soil in a temperate greenhouse or under a stretcher in a south-facing position. The cuttings are placed close together and covered with a glass frame; those taken in the greenhouse are covered with a glass cloche or glass jar, which is removed only when the vegetation of the cuttings shows that they are well rooted. When working on a smaller scale, Pelargonium cuttings intended solely for the upkeep of a collection can be taken in a terrine or a large pot wider than it is deep, filled with well-tilled potting soil and covered with a bell or glass jar. As soon as the cuttings have started to grow, it's time to transplant them separately, like seedlings, into pots kept in the brightest part of the temperate greenhouse throughout the winter, at a temperature of at least 5 to 6 degrees during the coldest weather, and 10 to 12 degrees after hard frosts, without exceeding the latter temperature until the flower buds start to appear, which usually happens in April. From this time onwards, Pelargoniums are occasionally given a little air in the greenhouse, taking care to protect the young plants ready to flower from direct sunlight. To this end, whitewash the inside surface of the greenhouse windows, or lay a very light canvas over the outside. It would be dangerous to shade pelargoniums with a covering of straw mats; too complete an exclusion of light would cause them to wither; the flowering shoots would overextend and their bloom would abort. care of cultivation. - Pelargoniums should be repotted every year in spring, when their vegetation 26. starts up again, but is never completely interrupted. Larger pots are given to those whose size seems to require it; for the others, simply remove about half the clod of soil adhering to the roots and replace it with new soil, putting each plant back into the pot from which it has just been momentarily removed. The best soil for Pelargoniums is made up of half good light garden soil and half broken potting soil. Many growers give their pelargoniums heather soil, either on its own or mixed with potting soil; the plants grow quite well in this, but they are neither as robust nor as floriferous as in the mixture we have indicated. Pelargonium's generous vegetation allows it to be pruned into a regular shape that it would not take naturally, and without which its ornamental effect is incomplete. After wintering, Pelargoniums of the most robust species are established on four branches, each of which is pruned in turn to give it two more, so that the head is made up of eight symmetrically spaced branches, all of equal strength and equally flowering. Those of the more delicate species are established only on three branches, each of which is pruned to two, to form a regular head of six branches. After flowering, Pelargoniums can spend some time in the open air; their pots are buried in a flowerbed with good exposure; the plants are then placed in the soil.

consolidate their wood and gain the strength they need to withstand the winter from which they always suffer to a greater or lesser extent. They should be returned to the temperate greenhouse as soon as the nights start to get cooler, in the course of September. During overwintering, Pelargoniums should be watered moderately and gradually brought up to the temperature indicated for seedlings or cuttings. It's important to give them as much light as possible in the greenhouse, from autumn to spring. Collector Pelargoniums lose some of their leaves, especially in winter, due to lack of light. No matter how they are treated, they always lose part of their leaves; as soon as a leaf begins to yellow, it must be removed without delay by lowering its stalk, which is not very attached to the branch; without this care, which must be taken assiduously by inspecting the Pelargoniums every day, the leaf which dies completely and falls off by itself leaves a scar on the branch which may eventually lead to its own death. ERICAS. - For true connoisseurs, the merit of ericas, better known by their vulgar name of heathers, lies largely in the obstacles that must be overcome in order to multiply them, raise them and form good plants with brilliant and prolonged flowering; those who are completely successful in this cultivation enjoy above all the pleasure of overcoming difficulties. The species and varieties of the Erica genus are very numerous; it is generally believed, on the strength of the most accredited horticultural treatises, that the most beautiful and delicate of temperate greenhouse heathers cannot be successfully cultivated in the average French climate; this error has been mainly propagated among the horticultural public by professional horticulturists. They have in fact eliminated from their heather crops the most beautiful species grown in England, Belgium and Holland, and we can't blame them. The cultivation of these species requires too much meticulous care; it makes people wait too long for results, and, in the final analysis, the number of amateurs willing to pay a suitable price for the most beautiful heathers is not large enough in France for the gardener who cultivates for sale to benefit from propagating them. These considerations, quite right in themselves, should not stop the simple amateur who seeks in the cultivation of temperate greenhouse plants, and in that of ericas in particular, the most pleasant of pleasures. The same applies to the gardener of an opulent home: with a little care, he can maintain a complete collection of heathers in the temperate greenhouse, without excluding those known as English heathers, which in England are the object of a predilection justified by their beauty, and which can succeed in our climate as well as in that of Great Britain. Propagation. - The best way to propagate Ericas is to sow their seeds, which the most beautiful species always produce in sufficient quantities. These seeds are always preferable to commercial seeds shipped from the Cape of Good Hope. Most of the heathers in our collections belong not to simple sub-varieties, but to botanically distinct species, and reproduce unchanged by sowing their seeds; the gardener who sows seeds collected from the heathers in his own collection therefore knows in advance the result of his sowing; if he sows seed from the Cape, he may well, after long and meticulous care, only see seedlings of the least sought-after species grow. Professional horticulturists sow in well-sieved heather soil, in terrines which they bury on a deaf layer under a frame. This procedure is good for them, because they need all the space available in the temperate greenhouse for other purposes; but seedlings are much more successful in the temperate greenhouse, where the terrines are subjected to the influence of an atmosphere that is more even and less variable than that which can prevail under a warm frame, which can never be the equivalent of a temperate greenhouse. The heather seed should be spread over the surface of the terrines, and a little sandy heather soil, not more than one or two millimeters thick, should be sifted over it. The amateur who knows perfectly well the species from which he has collected the seed for his seedlings, should only sow together the seed of those which germinate in roughly the same space of time; this time is very variable: some heathers germinate after five to six weeks, others after five to six months, others after one or two years. Throughout this period, the soil in which the seeds are sown must not be allowed to dry out for a single day. Once the plant has reached a height of 5 or 6 centimetres, it is ready to be transplanted. Its roots are so delicate that young plants are always very tired from transplanting; the pots must be ready in advance and filled with heather soil mixed with a third of leaf compost. The entire contents of the pots are then removed, and the soil carefully crumbled, so as to cause as little damage as possible to the excessively delicate roots, which suffer much less than if they were pulled out one by one. The plant must be transplanted very quickly, so that the roots are exposed to the air for as little time as possible. Cuttings are taken under conditions similar to those for seedlings; one-year old shoots are used, from which the lower leaves are removed, leaving only those at the top; they are planted close together and maintained in moderate humidity, either under a warm frame or in a temperate greenhouse. They are slow to root, but they always end up forming good roots, which can be recognized by the lengthening of their terminal shoots. Transplanting is carried out under the same conditions as for seedlings. A little heat and a lot of light, excluding contact with the summer sun, and assiduous but moderate watering ensure the success of Erica cuttings. Cultivation care. - Ericas should not be put outdoors before the end of May; cold nights are very harmful to them. From April 15th onwards, the panels of the temperate greenhouse occupied by the heathers should be opened all day and then at night, so that the heathers can become accustomed by degrees to the open air before being placed there permanently. Instead of giving each plant all the water it needs at once, it's better to water them three or four times a day in summer, and twice in the off-season. Re-potting also requires a great deal of attention; slow-growing plants don't often need to be given larger and larger pots, but once or twice a year they do need a little new heather soil mixed with leaf compost. When it's time to repot, stop watering for a day or two, so that the rootball can be easily detached from the pot. Remove 1 or 2 centimetres of the old soil, and replace it with new soil, inserted and lightly trodden between the rootball and the sides of the pot. Although heathers don't die under the influence of moderate cold, and the temperature of the cold greenhouse may be sufficient for them in rigorous conditions, they can only be overwintered in good condition and flower well in the temperate greenhouse. In all cases, they should be kept indoors for two or three weeks after repotting. Flowering Ericas withstand the effects of wind and heavy rain better than many other temperate greenhouse ornamentals, because the single-petaled corollas are very adherent and the foliage, which is tiliform so to speak, is not easily damaged by rainwater, which it allows to drip off easily; this is why large collections risk little when they are allowed to flower in the open air. But enthusiasts of this beautiful genus, especially those whose collections contain many delicate species, should not hesitate to keep them in the temperate greenhouse for as long as flowering lasts, except for opening the panels day and night and closing them only in the event of bad weather. Flowering heathers can also be kept in an apartment window box, where they are perfectly at home, flowering as long as they do in the temperate greenhouse. Like ericas, we grow the many varieties of the epacris genus, confused with ericas under the common name of heather, but easily distinguishable by the constant arrangement of their flowers in unilateral spikes, with flowers on only one row and always on the same side. The foliage of epacris is the same as that of heathers; the flowers are generally more elongated, with a slightly curved tube, of a very bright color in which dark red is the dominant shade. Heather and epacryis should not be pruned, as this would spoil them; they naturally take on a good bushy shape; the most delicate, with grey stems, only need to be supported by one or more stakes, which should be chosen thin and painted light green, so that they are as inconspicuous as possible. Sturdy species with very hard wood can do without stakes. CHAPTER LII Temperate greenhouse plants (continued). Cacti. - Singularity of their vegetation. - Cereus or candles. - Peruvian candle. - Mode of growth. - Multiplication. - Seedlings. - Accidental hybridization. - Cutting. - Conditions for success. - Wintering. - Cultivation care. - Species and varieties. - Melocacti - Echinocacti. - Mammillaries. - Epiphylls. - Opuntias. - Nopal - Fig tree. - Fat plants. - Agave. - Rare flowering in the greenhouse. - Aloes. - Abundant flowering. - Crussulan. - Rochea. - Stapelia. - Oddity and particular odor of their flowers. - Proof of flies' sense of smell. - Ficoïdes or mesembrianthemums. -Sowing. - Cuttings. - Dwarf species for living-room shelves. CACTICIES. - The vegetation of cacti is so bizarre, so different from that of all other cultivated or wild plants, that cacti are rightly sought after by a large number of enthusiasts and considered to be one of the most beautiful, if not the most beautiful, adornments of the temperate greenhouse; only a few species belong to the hot greenhouse. Cacti give a very special physiognomy to the flora of South America, from which they originate; the main genera, all rich in species and varieties, of which the collections are composed, are the cereus, melocactus, echinocactus, mammilla, epiphyllum and opuntia. In all these genera, with the exception of epiphylls, leaves do not exist, but are replaced by the stem, which performs the functions of both stem and leaves; in epiphylls, it's the same thing in reverse, with only fleshy leaves, more or less thick, emerging from each other and acting as both leaves and stems. CEREUS or CIERGES. - Cereus are, strictly speaking, the type of the cactus family. Some of the most remarkable are endowed with an astonishing energy of vegetation. In its native country, the Peruvian candle, which grows between rock crevices, leaning against perpendicular bare rock, with a midday exposure, endures alternately prolonged dry heat for several months without interruption and torrential rain for almost as long. Its growth, almost completely stationary during the dry season, takes on extraordinary vigor when the rainy season returns. A very fine specimen has long been preserved at the Museum of Natural History, and a greenhouse - or, to put it more accurately, a glass cage - had been built for it, which had to be raised periodically; it was impossible to foresee where it would end up when it accidentally died. All candles, and generally all cacti, have more or less the same temperament; they all have the ability to remain immersed for a long time in a complete vegetal sleep, to wake up to grow and flower, and then to fall back into the same sleep. Multiplication. - Cierges can be propagated by sowing their seeds, but not all produce ripe fruit in the climate of Paris, in the best-operated temperate greenhouses. The seeds are sown in heather soil in terrines kept in temperate greenhouses. The seedling, transplanted at a very young age into a mixture of equal parts of free-range garden soil and heather soil, does not constantly reproduce the flowers of the species from which the seed was harvested; this is at least what has happened several times in seedlings made with candle seeds harvested in Europe. As pollen is abundant in all cacti, and in candles in particular, the variations observed in the flowers of plants obtained from seed can be considered as due to hybridization by accidental crossing. The most common method of propagation for 27 all cactus species is cuttings. Since these eccentrically-shaped plants have no young branches to detach to make cuttings without damaging the mother plant, a portion of the stem is sacrificed and divided into sections only a few centimetres long. The wound produced by this cutting on the mother plant is quickly healed, and the candle quickly repairs losses of this kind by the energy of its vegetation. Sections destined to serve as a means of propagation must not be cut immediately; if they were placed in the ground at the very moment when they have just been cut, while the cut wound is still fresh, they would rot and not form roots. They are placed on a shelf in a dry place, where they remain for two or three days until the cut wounds have healed. Each cutting is then planted separately in a pot filled with the same mixture used to transplant the seedling. Cactus, like all cacti, can be cut at just about any time of year, but cuttings are most successful in spring and late summer. When the young shoots they produce, as soon as they are rooted, have reached a certain length, which varies from one species to another, their upper extremity is cut off, leaving the wound to dry in contact with the air. This amputation helps them to flower well the following year. Young cuttings rooted in spring spend the summer in the open air, and are returned to the temperate greenhouse by mid-September. The watering they must have received sparingly, but without interruption, throughout their period of vegetative activity, is then gradually reduced, then eliminated altogether during the winter. Stored on shelves in a corner of the temperate greenhouse, they overwinter dry, at an average temperature of 6 to 8 degrees, rising to 12 and even 15 degrees when their growth resumes; most of them flower in their second year. Cultivation care. - To grow well and flower abundantly, fully-formed plants only need to be treated in the same way as cuttings. Water them again in spring only when they show the first signs of regrowth. They should be given very little water at first, and the dose gradually increased until they have bloomed. In most species, flowers last only a few hours and fall without producing fruit; plants that do bear fruit, and whose seed is to be used for seedling propagation, are watered and kept outdoors until the fruit matures, then returned in September to the temperate greenhouse, where they overwinter under the same conditions as the young cuttings. Species and varieties. - The most sought-after species of the Cereus genus in our collections are the Cereus speciosissimus, or magnificent candle, with its vase-shaped flowers and inner petals glistening with a brilliance that no paintbrush can capture, and its hybrids, the Cereus de Quillardet and Cereus toujours en fleur; Then there's the large-flowered cereus, whose flowers, 12 to 15 centimeters in diameter, bloom only at night, wither in the morning, and spread a penetrating fragrance similar to that of heliotrope and vanilla; Passionate amateurs watch for the blossoming of this candle, admiring its beauty and breathing in its truly delicious scent; then the serpentine cereus, whose flower, of the same shape as that of the magnificent cereus, spreads the scent of the rose; and finally the whip cereus, whose long, flexible, cylindrical stems are covered with a profusion of flowers of the brightest pink. The latter is the hardiest of them all, requiring only occasional watering as it approaches flowering and throughout its blooming period. In a pinch, it can overwinter in a cold greenhouse or an inhabited apartment, just as well as in a temperate greenhouse. MELOCACTS. - Cacti of the Melocaceae genus are only accepted in collections because of their unique ball shape, criss-crossed by protruding ribs with tufts of hairs or spines along the edge. Very large species rarely bloom; small and medium-sized species bloom a little more often, but without any regular periodicity, their satin-finished flowers in various shades of red, pink and yellow, arranged in a circle at the top of the plant, with no stems, leaves or anything resembling them. In terms of cultivation care, soil, watering and overwintering temperature, melocacti are grown in exactly the same way as candles. Their propagation is rather difficult; their shape does not lend itself to cuttings; the seed taken from the countries of origin of these singular plants is sown under the same conditions as that of candles, as they rarely bear fruit in European greenhouses. MAMMILLAIRES. - Cacti of this genus resemble melocacti, with the difference that their protruding edges are formed by fleshy nipples, from which their name derives. They flower in the same shades as melocacti, but no more frequently; their cultivation methods are the same from point to point as those of candles. ECHINOCACTS. - The resemblance of these plants to melocacti is striking; most plants of this genus are armed with strong spines that are very hard, but not very adherent. In Jamaica, where echinocactus grows abundantly wild in the mountains, goats detach it with their horns and roll it around as if they were playing with it, until there are no thorns left, after which they can eat it without hurting their lips. Their cultivation is the same as that of the three preceding genera. EPIPHYLLES. - Plants of this genus are similar in appearance to other plants in that their leaves are indented and interlocked; the flowers, which offer the most beautiful shades of red and pink, are born in the indentations at the edges of the leaves, giving the flowering plant an original physiognomy. Epiphylls are easily propagated by cuttings, by taking a whole leaf or a fragment of leaf as a cutting, leaving the wound to heal well before planting it in the ground, in the same conditions as candle branches. Epiphylls are less sensitive to cold than most other cacti; they can be grown in the cold greenhouse, but it is always in the temperate greenhouse that they vegetate best and flower most beautifully. OPUNTIAS. - The opuntia genus is one of the most remarkable of the cactus family; one species of this genus, the nopal, feeds the cochineal, an insect which supplies the most beautiful red for the arts, known as carmine; another, of very large dimensions, known as the Indian fig, because its very sweet fruits are eaten like figs, is used as a fence for inheritances in Algeria and Sicily. A large number of opuntia species are included in collections, all remarkable for their snowshoe-like shape, set one above the other and regularly covered with staggered tufts of hairs or prickles. They propagate like epiphylls, and are grown in the same way as candles. Opuntias produce a good effect in the greenhouse because of the eccentricity of their shape; most species rarely flower; their dull pink flowers are not in keeping with the size of the plants, and amateurs do not take their ornamental effect into account. Succulents. - In horticulture, this name covers a large number of plants that are very different from one another, but which have in common the thickness of their fleshy leaves, and the fact that they live much more from the air, which they decompose and whose substance they appropriate, than from the earth in which their roots live. These plants form a sort of transition between cacti and the rest of the world's vegetation. The most remarkable genera of succulents in the temperate greenhouse are: agaves, aloes, crassulas, stapelias and ficoides. Most of these plants can survive in the cold greenhouse; a few, in a pinch, could even overwinter in an orangery; but their cultivation only gives good results when they can overwinter in the temperate greenhouse, even those indicated as belonging to the warm greenhouse. AGAVE. - Like the rare-flowering cacti, American agaves are grown in greenhouses in France only for the beauty of their elegantly tufted foliage, which in some species is striped with yellow on a green background. As for flowering, it occurs only at very rare intervals; some only bloom every fifty years. In Spain, Italy and Sicily, they form impassable hedges; in the climate of southern Europe, agaves often display their flowers elegantly arranged in a candelabrum on a very high, straight stem. They are propagated by detaching the eyelets from the root collar, and by sowing their seeds, which the trade gets from Mexico or southern Europe. These seeds are sown in a terrine, in pure heather soil, and kept in a temperate greenhouse. Seedlings are treated in the same way as cactus cuttings; like all succulents, they require moderate watering in summer and no water in winter. Agaves leave the temperate greenhouse towards the end of May, and should return in September. ALOES - The appearance of aloes is so similar to that of agaves that the public generally confuses these two types of succulent plant. Their cultivation and propagation methods are the same, with the essential horticultural difference that aloes flower abundantly and regularly in temperate greenhouses. Although their flowers are not very bright, they are very elegant and produce a very pleasing ornamental effect in collections where flowering aloes are combined with agaves, which almost never flower. CRASSULAS. - The crassula genus is rich in species that flower abundantly and over a long period, in brilliant shades in which bright red is the dominant color. All these plants can be grown in heather soil in a temperate greenhouse, and propagated by sowing their seeds. You can also take cuttings from their young shoots, or even from their leaves, taking care to let the wound heal before planting. The cultivation of crassulas is in every respect the same as that of cacti. One of the most beautiful species botanically forms a separate genus under the name of rochéa; it produces clumps of small scarlet flowers that are associated with non-flowering succulents; they brighten up the somewhat severe appearance of the vegetation in temperate greenhouses devoted to cacti and other succulents. STAPELIA. - This plant, whose star-shaped, fleshy, dark-hued flower, bristling with coarse hairs, is one of the most bizarre in the plant kingdom, can flower perfectly well in the temperate greenhouse, although it is indicated everywhere as a hot-greenhouse plant; it requires no special cultivation care, and should be treated like other temperate-greenhouse succulents. Too many stapelia should not be grown in a small greenhouse; their flowers give off a nauseous odor, similar to that of tainted meat. This peculiarity has given rise to a very curious experiment, by which naturalists have been able to confirm the fact that stapelias are endowed with a sense of smell, even though we don't know where it comes from. If you enclose a stapelia flowering plant in a chamber containing large flies, known as blowflies, these insects deposit their eggs in the corolla of the stapelia flowers. They can't be attracted there by the sense of sight, as the flower bears no resemblance, even remotely, to an advanced piece of meat, where blowflies usually lay their eggs; it must therefore be the sense of smell that gives rise to their misapprehension. FICOIDS. - These pretty plants, called mezembrianthemums by botanists, are grown in heathland, and multiply, either by sowing or cutting, with the greatest ease. Only those perennial species that can be collected in large numbers are considered to belong to the temperate greenhouse. Seedlings are sown in spring in heather soil; cuttings are taken in June and July, with the same precautions indicated for cactus cuttings; the seedling or cutting is transplanted into pots in September and returned to the temperate greenhouse; it must overwinter almost dry; it flowers the following year. Ficoids produce a profusion of elegant flowers, some of which are fragrant; they come in all shades of pink, light violet and tan; their place is next to the crassulas in the succulent greenhouse; they can spend part of the summer in the open air, but should be brought in early in September. The dwarf species, planted in small pots of red earth, are the main adornment of living-room shelves, where they appear alongside the equally dwarf species of cactus, agave and aloe, requiring no cultivation care other than a very small amount of water every morning, from April onwards, when they come into vegetation. CHAPTER LIII Temperate greenhouse plants (continued). Amaryllis. - Composition of collections. - Causes of their scarcity in cultivation. - Striped amaryllis. - Multiplication. - Sowing. - Seedling rearing. - Separation of buds. - Cultivation care. - Queen Amaryllis. - Time of flowering. - Amaryllis lis de saint Jacques - China golden. - Equestrian. - Cross-linked. - Various uses of the temperate greenhouse. - Its single-sided construction. - Plants to decorate it. - Living-room greenhouse. - Its distribution. - Suitable plants. - Ixias. - Sparaxis. - Achimenès picta. - Temperate greenhouse converted into winter garden. - Basin for aquatic plants. - Nelumbiums. - Growing them. - Various temperate greenhouse plants. - Growing them. - Maintenance and repairs. AMARVLLIS. - The amaryllis genus is rich in distinct botanical species, all of rare beauty; some belong to the cold greenhouse, others to the warm greenhouse, the greatest number to the temperate greenhouse. Among the latter, two very fine species, the amaryllis vittata or striped amaryllis, and the queen's amaryllis, have nowadays produced a multitude of sub-varieties through seedlings and hybrid crosses, which have elevated them to the rank of collector's plants. Collections of amaryllis are quite rare in greenhouses in France, because of the difficulties involved in growing them, and also because of the high price of fine varieties; this price cannot be reduced much, because most bulbs give few cal̈eux, cloves only flower well with care, and seedling onions only give flowers after a variable time depending on the species, but always a very long time. It's not surprising, then, that few horticulturists are involved in amaryllis propagation, a branch of gardening whose products have little outlet. On the contrary, it's a very attractive crop for any amateur with a temperate greenhouse. Multiplication. - Striped amaryllis, the most widely 27. cultivated, is propagated mainly by sowing its seeds, which ripen perfectly in the Paris climate, since the plant flowers in mid-June, giving the seed a long period of good weather and hot temperatures to complete its ripening. Sow as soon as the seeds are ripe, in pots filled with a mixture of free-range garden soil and leaf compost. The same mixture is suitable for fully-formed plants; however, if the garden soil is poor in calcareous principles, a small quantity of lime compost and turf can be added; cold soil, where lime exists only in too small a dose, is not suitable for amaryllis. By keeping the soil in the terrines at a moderate level of humidity, the seeds germinate fairly quickly; the young plants are left in the terrines until the end of autumn; at this time, the soil in the terrines is left to dry out completely, so that the young amaryllis bulbs can be removed and allowed to air-dry in a well-ventilated room, where they are kept away from the cold, like other flowering onions which should not be planted until spring. Towards the end of winter, as soon as the young onions are ready to start growing, they are planted singly in pots filled with the same soil as for fully-formed amaryllis. These pots remain in the temperate greenhouse until the end of May, and spend the rest of the summer outdoors. When their leaves turn yellow in autumn, it's time to stop watering the amaryllis and treat it as if for its first wintering; this cultivation must be continued with perseverance, giving new soil and larger pots each year as the onions grow; they eventually flower, and good new varieties are often obtained by sowing. The striped amaryllis is listed in most treatises as an orangery or cold greenhouse plant; the seedling can, in fact, be raised in the cold greenhouse; but it does not grow well there, it makes you wait a long time for its first flowering, and its flowering is never as beautiful as when it is treated as a temperate greenhouse plant. The chocks removed from old onions are treated in the same way as onions grown from seed. Cultivation care. - As soon as the striped amaryillis onions have become large enough, and start to flower, they should be given large pots where their fibrous roots can plunge at ease into the soil indicated above. The times for lifting onions from the ground, replanting them and exposing them to the open air are the same for ready-made plants as for young seedlings or cloves. Water moderately at first, then more generously as the amaryllis prepares to flower. When it's time to bloom, bring the flowering plants into the temperate greenhouse to protect them from the heavy rainstorms that are common in June in Paris. Only those plants whose seeds are to be harvested are left in the open air. The others are returned to the open air after flowering, where they remain until the onions are ready to be lifted and dried for wintering. By following this procedure and giving their amaryllis plants a temperature of 8 to 10 degrees from the start of vegetation, gradually raised to 12 or 15 degrees until they are placed outdoors, Dutch and Belgian growers are able to obtain plants whose flowering stems, nearly a metre high, bear six to eight flowers of extraordinary size and vivacity of color; with the same care, they can aspire to the same success everywhere. AMARVLLIS DE LA REINE. - The cultivation of this species does not essentially differ from that of the striped amaryllis, in terms of soil composition and general cultivation care; but, as it only flowers in mid-winter, the onions lifted at the end of summer, and freed of their cloves, are planted in spacious pots before the end of autumn, and placed in the temperate greenhouse, in the best-lit locations. Although amaryllis in this series are listed in many treatises as warm greenhouse plants, they flower very well in the temperate greenhouse. The queen's varieties of amaryllis, all very beautiful and brilliantly colored, rarely produce fertile seeds; the time of flowering does not often allow the flower to produce seeds and for these seeds to ripen; the only means of multiplication in use for these amaryllis is the rearing of the cloves which are detached when the onions are lifted from the ground, and which are treated in the same way as plants made to bring them into flower after several years of assiduous care. As you can see, amaryllis collections, made up of the species and varieties whose cultivation has just been described, flower twice a year: the striped amaryllis in midsummer, and the queen amaryllis in midwinter. The collections also include the amaryllis lis de Saint-Jacques, with its magnificent red flowers, one of the most beautiful of its kind, the Chinese golden amaryllis, the equestrian or scarlet amaryllis, the reticulated amaryllis and a dozen other species. By taking advantage of the coincidence of their flowering periods, these species can be hybridized with each other and with those used as the basis for collections, and their seeds can be sown to give rise to very beautiful sub-varieties, all the more precious to the true amateur as they have cost him more trouble and meticulous care. Various uses of the temperate greenhouse. - When a temperate greenhouse is run by a professional horticulturist, with the aim of selling the ornamental plants he can raise there, everything is sacrificed to utility; temperate greenhouse collection plants, then those most sought-after by amateurs in each locality, are naturally those that the gardener multiplies there in preference. The amateur, on the other hand, seeks above all to make his temperate greenhouse as pleasant as possible, both by the right choice and by the happy arrangement of the plants he takes care to furnish it with. If the greenhouse is built on a single slope, as is often the case in gardens where a south-facing enclosing wall is used to build the temperate greenhouse, this wall, which forms the back of the greenhouse, is lined with ferns at the bottom, and trimmed at the top with strings of Frankentot and grosse perle de Hollande vines, combined with various climbing plants such as mandevillea suaveolens and grenadilla, or red-flowered passionflowers with edible fruit. A few vines of the same type, planted in rows along the windows and in arches across the temperate greenhouse, take no space away from the ornamental plants, and give very early forced grapes of excellent quality. Living-room greenhouse. - If the temperate greenhouse is built on the same level as a ground-floor salon, the advantages of which have already been mentioned (see Ch. VI), an empty space is left in the middle along its longest side, wide enough to accommodate a carpet for a reception. Places are reserved for seats in the center and at either end; chandeliers are hung from the top of the windows, and the amphitheatrical tiers to the right and left of the central aisle are loaded with the prettiest flowering plants, with those, such as the ixias, sparaxis and achimenes, that stand out for their beauty of detail and want to be admired at close quarters. This is particularly true of the achimenès picta, whose tubular corolla, of rare elegance of form, is internally marbled with purple spots on a light yellow background, to the most graceful effect (fig. 106). The Achimenes genus, by the number and variety of its species, the duration of its inexhaustible flowering and the ease with which it can be propagated by cuttings, is one of the most precious for the ornament of the greenhouse. Temperate greenhouse converted into winter garden. - In describing the distribution and stocking of a conservatory, we have had to take the most commonly realized assumption, and represent the conservatory under the conditions of a cold greenhouse. But when the amateur agrees to pay for a good thermosiphon and continuous heating from the onset of the bad season to maintain the temperature of the conservatory day and night between s and 12 degrees, then it's a little corner of Africa or India under glass; the temperate greenhouse, converted into a conservatory, has the spring temperature of the tropical climate in winter without Fig. 106. Achimenès picta. in summer; it's up to the amateur to bring together the rarest and most precious ornamental plants, with the exception only of those that need an exaggerated amount of humid heat and can only thrive in the warm greenhouse. Basin for aquatic plants. - A great deal of water is needed for watering in the temperate greenhouse, and this water can only be distributed to the plants once it has reached the temperature of the greenhouse atmosphere; for this purpose, it must remain for a sufficiently long time in a shallow basin to which it is brought from outside. If the basin is located in the center of the conservatory, away from the large plants, so that it receives direct sunlight, it can be filled with the most beautiful aquatic plants, adding a welcome variety to the appearance of this part of the temperate greenhouse. One of the most remarkable of these plants is the nelumbium, whose flowering is unrivalled for beauty in all water flora; it yields only to the victoria regia, the queen of tropical waters, and outshines all other aquatic plants. Cultivation of the nelumbium, of which we have two species, one with pink-tinted white flowers, the other a golden yellow, is extremely simple. The bottom of the pond is lined with pond vase, with no fertilizer or other soil mixed in; the rhizomes or false tubers of the nelumbiums are planted at the bottom of the water in spring; The plant blooms towards the end of summer and sheds its leaves as winter sets in; the roots overwinter in the mud, returning to vegetation the following spring. Ponteiderias, lobelias and a host of other aquatic plants suitable for decorating basins in cold greenhouses or in the open air, thrive and flower even better in the temperate greenhouse basin, where they can be associated with the charming aquatic sensitive, whose roots float between two waters and whose graceful stems are covered with foliage that is retractable to the touch like that of the ordinary sensitive. Various temperate greenhouse plants. - The myrtles, orange trees, pomegranates and oleanders that all those who have traveled to the South have seen in the open air, like the apple trees in the orchards of the North, are replaced here by beds of browallia, brugmansia and other flowering shrubs totally foreign to the flora of Europe. Over these clumps rise clumps of slender bamboo, then, here and there, some of the fruit trees of our West Indian colonies, such as the persea, whose fruit is the avocado pear; the eugenia, with myrtle leaves; the eucalyptus and the metrosidéros, all three representing the flora of Australia, and to crown it all, some of the most beautiful tree ferns of New Zealand and the Sunda Islands. Some beautiful, oddly-shaped plants from the cactus family, especially the large opuntia, complete the foreign look of this collection of precious plants, which can easily be grown in the temperate greenhouse in soil and temperature conditions little different from those of their native land. In front of the clumps of shrubs and large plants, separated by lawns of Brazilian lycopod, compartments forming the parterre of the winter garden, receive, still in the open ground, collections of amaryllis, ixias, sparaxis and alstræmerias with abundant flowers, The vases hanging from the hangers in the temperate greenhouse are filled with the elegant, velvety-blue flowers of torrenia asiatica, along with a host of charming gesneriaceae. The cultivation of all these plants is similar to that of the plants described in detail above; they all thrive in heather soil, either pure or mixed with leaf compost; Those that do not produce fertile seeds are easily propagated by cutting, marcotting or grafting, and the amateur, who always finds ample material for all types of propagation in his temperate greenhouse, can, by making use of these inexhaustible resources, obtain the means to enrich his collections by exchange, not only at no cost, but also with the added pleasure of obliging fellow horticulturists; The exchange of a few rare plants is often all that's needed to foster friendship between people who might otherwise have been hostile or indifferent all their lives. When the temperate greenhouse has not been converted into a winter garden, and does not contain any plants in the ground, the time of year when the greatest number of plants are temporarily in the open air is chosen to carry out the essential maintenance work. Otherwise, if painters and glaziers are to be introduced into the temperate greenhouse winter garden, the owner must personally supervise their operations to ensure that they do as little damage as possible, as it cannot be hoped that they will do none at all. CHAPTER LIV Warm greenhouse plants. Hot greenhouse plants. - Orchids. - Causes of their high cost. - Difficulty of propagation. - Epiphytic orchids. - Terrestrial orchids. - Oncidium. - Oncidium papilio flower. - Oncidium carthaginense. - Aerids. - Vegetation conditions. - Dendrobiums - Cultivation similar to that of aeridia - Lælias - Ornamental plants for wilderness huts. - Miltonias - Stanhopeas - Fragrance and oddity of their flowers. - Cattleyas. - Phalenopsis. - Uropedium. - Vanilla. - Vegetation in pots. - Parasitic on wood or wall. - Artificial fertilization of its flowers. - Nepenthes. - Its urns or Ascidians. - Æschinantes. - Their propagation by cuttings. - Abundance and beauty of their flowers. Hot greenhouses are not very common in France; you need to have both a very pronounced taste for the rarest plants of the intertropical flora, and a considerable fortune, to be able to afford the very expensive luxury of a hot greenhouse, which is very costly to build and maintain, and can only be filled with very expensive plants, due to the difficulty of propagating them. What's more, the hot house cannot be transformed into a winter garden like the cold and temperate hothouses; the lover of exotic plants cannot spend the most pleasant hours of the day there; the temperature is so high all year round that it's unhealthy to stay there too long. All these considerations sufficiently explain why, among horticultural enthusiasts, we find fewer hot greenhouses than cold or temperate greenhouses. Nevertheless, for the wealthy amateur who knows how to weigh up the advantages against the disadvantages, the hot house offers a continual source of pleasure; it's the place to grow plants that could not be given the hospitality they deserve anywhere else; it's the place where you can savour at every moment the lively satisfaction that results from a successful struggle against an obstacle, from a victory won over difficulty. The various series of plants grown in the greenhouse are all difficult to cultivate to more or less the same degree. The amateur who wants to succeed in their cultivation must make it his or her main occupation. Orchids, bromeliads and palms can be considered as collection plants for the greenhouse. ORCHIDS. - Orchids are unquestionably the most eccentric creatures in the entire plant kingdom; their flowers bear virtually no relation to those of other plants; bulbs and tubers are replaced by rhizomes or pseudo-bulbs of bizarre shapes; the roots themselves, instead of plunging into the soil and drawing nourishment from the plant of which they are a part, implant themselves as parasites in the cracks in the bark of tall trees, or, swaying in the air and terminating in green-surfaced nipples, they sustain many orchids exclusively at the expense of the atmosphere, and for this reason take the name of aerial roots. In the interior of the flower, the reproductive organs are no less different from the usual form and function of the stamens and pistils of regular flowers. In general, the functions of these organs are accomplished very slowly in orchids; the presence of the corolla, the most visible part of the flower, is precisely intended to protect these organs during the mysterious act of fertilization. Until this act is accomplished, the corolla persists, which is what sufficiently accounts for the extraordinary duration of flowering in many orchids, some of which have corollas that last for over a month. This persistence, in the eyes of the orchid lover, compensates to a certain extent for the infrequency of flowering of most of these plants, which almost never bloom with a periodicity that can be counted on to return. Orchids are, after palms and almost on a par with them in this respect, the most expensive of all ornamental plants. We have already had occasion to point out that the price of any ornamental plant cannot rise much when, either by cuttings or marcots, or by sowing its seeds, it can be multiplied quickly and easily. Nor can a plant drop significantly in price, when none of these methods can be used to propagate it on a large scale. Orchids give neither stems nor branches that can be cut or marcotted; they almost never produce fertile seeds in European greenhouses, and can only be propagated by dividing pseudobulbs, a method that is not always successful. Moreover, it is impossible to bring orchid seeds from their country of origin; orchids grow naturally only in the shade of forests in the hottest and wettest countries on earth. As soon as the seeds, all of which are excessively small and resemble a highly-divided dust, reach maturity, they disperse in all directions; those that encounter favourable conditions germinate and perpetuate the species; the others lose their germinative properties in a very short time; it would therefore be pointless to try to collect them to send them to the horticulturists of Europe, who would be unable to make use of them. These facts show how and why the cultivation of orchids remains, and should remain, the preserve of a very limited number of wealthy amateurs who can devote to them a greenhouse particularly suited to the requirements of their vegetation. Orchid greenhouses - Orchid greenhouses are usually single-sided, domed and face east or west; they must be abundantly supplied with water for the frequent watering and basking that orchids continually require; they are preceded by a vestibule large enough to ensure that, under no circumstances, can outside air be suddenly introduced before it has reached the temperature of the greenhouse's interior atmosphere. In terms of cultivation, orchids are divided into epiphytes and terrestrials. Epiphytic orchids grow wild on the branches of trees in tropical regions, like mistletoe on our apple and oak trees. They are grown in hot greenhouses either in small hanging wire baskets, where the base of their rhizomes is surrounded by damp moss in which they spread their roots, or on pieces of cork or rough-barked wood, lined with moss; the orchids are held in place by lead wire, until they have attached themselves by their roots. Terrestrial orchids are grown in pots, like all other plants; they are given more or less peaty heather soil, either crumbled or cut into fragments between which air can circulate. The most sought-after orchid genera are the oncidiums, aérides and deudrobiums, followed by lælia, miltonia, cattleya, stanhopea, phalænopsis and uropédium. ONCIDIUM. - The flowers of orchids in the Oncidium genus are most remarkable for their resemblance to various insects. This can be seen by inspecting the flower of Oncidium papilio, which perfectly resembles a butterfly (fig. 107). What completes the illusion in this respect is the fact that the flower stem, 80 centimetres to 1 metre long, almost straight and dark green, looks like a stick at the top of which the flower appears, like a butterfly that has come to rest on it. Oncidiums are partly epiphytic, partly terrestrial; the epiphytic species are grown on pieces of wood suspended from the iron arches of the hot greenhouse, at a temperature of 20 to 25 degrees. As long as their vegetation remains stationary, it's enough to keep them moderately moist; they take their share of the lukewarm humidity that must always prevail in the orchid greenhouse. As soon as they are ready to flower, place them as close as possible to the air vents Fig. 107. After flowering, they are returned to their original position. Terrestrial species are planted in pots in fragments of peaty heather soil, each with a volume of a few cubic centimeters; as far as temperature and watering are concerned, they are cultivated under the same conditions as epiphytic species. The Oncidium genus includes species of incomparable beauty, such as Oncidium papilio and Oncidium roseum; others, without being as brilliant, are commended, such as Oncidium carthaginense, by the pleasant scent and profusion of their countless small yellow flowers with brown streaks, resembling graceful insects. AERIDS. - Aeridia are all considered epiphytes, and indeed they are in the sense that, fixed to the bark of a piece of wood, they flower perfectly there; but this support is not even essential to them. They can be suspended from a lead wire in the best heated part of the greenhouse, and the base of their rhizomes can simply be surrounded with damp moss; their roots will extend into the air on all sides; aerialids require no other means of existence. Contrary to the general tendency of the flowers of almost all plants, whose flower stems rise above their foliage so that flowering takes place in the open air and in full sun, acrids let their flower stems hang from top to bottom, which adds to the singularity of their ornamental effect. We have quite a large number of species, all very pretty, but capricious bloomers which, although very healthy in appearance and in good vegetation, remain stationary for a long time without deciding to bloom. DENDROBIUMS. - Like the Aeridae, Dendrobiums let their flower stems hang downwards in a graceful curve and are covered with flowers of incomparable freshness of color; each plant always produces several flower stems, whose flowers do not bloom all at once, so that they contribute for a long time to the ornament of the warm greenhouse. Dendrobiums can be tied to pieces of wood by surrounding them with moist moss at the base of the rhizomes; but their vegetation works best when planted in wire baskets filled with fragments of peaty heather soil similar to those used to grow terrestrial oncidiums. The way in which dendrobiums throw their long clusters of hanging flowers, coupled two by two, from different sides, makes their appearance much more pleasing when grown in hanging baskets, where nothing hinders the expansion of their stems in the air, which seems to be their element, as it is that of aerialids. LÆLIAS. - The orchids of the Lælia genus are generally terrestrial. In the interior of South America, local people, struck by the beauty of the flowers of lælias and several other orchids of related genera, cover the tops of their huts with them, just as in many of our départements, country dwellers like to cover the outside of their ovens with tufts of iris. Lælias flower for a long time and quite regularly; they provide a fairly large number of young rhizomes which are used to multiply them. Their cultivation is similar to that of other terrestrial orchids; young rhizomes should only be separated from old clumps at a time when their vegetation is at rest; otherwise, the flowering of fully-formed plants would be compromised. MILTONIA. - Most of the plants in this beautiful genus are epiphytic and are grown on pieces of hanging wood; their flowers are as beautiful as they are fragrant, but they bloom less frequently than the lælias. CATTLEVAS. - The orchids of the cattleya genus lack the oddity of form and the strangeness of color of the oncidiums; but they outshine other orchids in the breadth of their corollas, which are dominated by shades of pink, lilac and dark purple. With care and patience, treating them like terrestrial orchids and giving them a mixture of heather soil and moss in sufficiently spacious pots, they eventually form voluminous clumps with brilliant, prolonged flowering. In general, they shy away from the excess heat that is suitable for other orchids, and should be kept in the less heated areas of a warm greenhouse. STANHOPEAS. - The flowers of orchids of the stanhopea genus are more bizarre than beautiful; their coloring is anything but brilliant; the thickness of their fleshy corollas makes them look like flowers imitated in wax or sugar. Nevertheless, they can be found in every orchid collection, where they are considered indispensable for their unmistakable fragrance, reminiscent of both a perfumer's and a confectioner's store. This kind of fragrance is particularly well developed in a stanhopea, nicknamed odoratissima for this reason. All stanhopeas are epiphytes; they flower quite easily in the warmest parts of the orchid greenhouse; they are fixed with lead wire to the bark of hanging pieces of wood, surrounding the base of the rhizomes with damp moss. We have a dozen species with fragrant flowers that last a very long time. PHALENOPSIS. - This genus is not rich in species; but its flowering, instead of being merely strange like that of the stanhopeas, is as graceful as it is singular; it justifies the nickname of amabilis, given by botanists to the species most widely found in collections. It is cultivated as an epiphytic orchid, flowering well only with the help of plenty of humidity and sustained heat. UROPEDIUM. - The few species of the uropedium genus deserve mention only as a sample of the excess of quirkiness in orchid flowering; the one we drew in the greenhouses of Messrs. Thibaut and Ketteleer, borne on a stem about 40 centimetres long, is greenish-yellow, with blackish-brown lines; the corolla appendages reach to the ground. Uropediums are less difficult to grow than many other 48 orchids; instead of peaty heather soil, they can be given good ordinary garden soil, which is lighter Fig. 108. Uropedium. than strong; keep them in the least heated places until they flower, and move them closer to the heat pipes when they are ready to bloom (fig. 108). Apart from collectible orchids, a number of other plants in this family are indispensable additions to the warm greenhouse, due to the different types of merit they possess; the most worthy of the grower's care in every respect is undoubtedly the vanilla plant. VANILLA. - In its native Mexico, the vanilla plant is one of those vines of immense development, which swing from tree to tree and often end up suffocating the tree at whose expense with their powerful parasitic vegetation, implanting in its bark the suckers of their long aerial roots. In the orchid greenhouse, young vanilla plants, obtained from cuttings, are planted in pots in peaty heather soil, where they grow quite rapidly. As soon as these roots appear, the plant can no longer live exclusively on the soil of the pot through its terrestrial roots; it tends to start living as an epiphytic orchid. A tree trunk is then placed within reach, and the plant clings to it; from then on, all it needs is frequent sprinkling and sustained warmth to flower abundantly and grow to its full potential. In the absence of a tree trunk, if the interior layout of the orchid greenhouse makes its use difficult, young vanilla plants can be placed in pots at the foot of the back wall of the greenhouse; they will soon climb the trunk and cover the surface, as an ivy plant would do in the open air. The vanilla plant does not flower brilliantly; its flowers, which are quite large, are greenish-white and have nothing remarkable to offer as an ornament. In 1836, the late Mr. Neumann, then head gardener of the greenhouses at the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, had the bright idea of using a brush to take pollen and apply it directly to the female organs of the flowers, which immediately became fertile and produced long vanilla pods whose scent was second to none to that of vanilla harvested in the New World. Today, anyone can use this easy-to-implement procedure with the same success. Vanilla flowers should only be artificially fertilized in this way when they are fully open and their reproductive organs well developed; the most favourable time for this operation is between eleven o'clock and midday. Among the multitude of rare plants that can only thrive in the orchid greenhouse, we can especially recommend nepenthes and æschynanths, some for the singularity of their vegetation, others for the beauty of their flowering and the richness of their color. NEPENTHES. - The nepenthes flower is greenish and has no ornamental value. However, due to its rarity and the difficulties of propagation, it is one of the most expensive of all greenhouse plants. What we try to develop in the nepenthe are not the very inconspicuous flowers, which in any case are of no use, because they do not produce fertile seeds in European greenhouses; they are the ascidians or vases in the shape of an antique urn which terminate the tendrils or spiral filaments with which the plant is equipped. The ends of the tendrils begin by flattening out and folding in on themselves to form a cup; their development is most curious, eventually resulting in a sort of water pot with a lid, sometimes of fairly large capacity. Nepenthes, native to Ceylon and Indo-China, grow in marshy soils; their urn or ascidian is constantly filled with very clear water; the same phenomenon is obtained in the orchid greenhouse, provided that the soil of the pots in which the nepenthes live is abundantly watered. These plants require a very warm but shady location; they can be propagated by separating offspring, which are rather difficult to raise; plants with one or two ascidians, even when they don't flower, are as expensive as the most brilliant orchids. ÆSCHYNANTES. - The tendency of æschynanths to let their long, grey stems hang down in all directions, ending in brilliantly colored flowers in bunches or umbels, makes them one of the most graceful adornments of the warm greenhouse; they are all the more appropriate among orchids in that their cultivation is on a par with that of aérides and dendrobiums. All orchids are known to flower capriciously, and it is always more or less difficult to multiply them; æschynanths, on the other hand, take cuttings as easily as achimenes, and brighten up the orchid greenhouse with their inexhaustible flowering. CHAPTER LV Hot greenhouse plants (continued). Palm trees. - Genus admitted to the greenhouse. - Coconut palms. - germination conditions for coconuts. - Difficulty of raising young coconut palms. - Sowing date seeds. - Date forest in Egypt. - Cutting date suckers. - Latanier. - Rare flowering in Europe. - Areca. - Caryota. - Bromeliads. - Singularity of their colors. - Genus admitted to the greenhouse. - Banana trees. - Cultivation in hot greenhouses. - Food value of their fruits. - Gloxinias. - How to grow them in a greenhouse. - Amhertia nobilis. - The most beautiful plant on earth. - Conclusion. PALM TREES. - The father of botany, Linnaeus, called palms the princes of plants (principes vegetantium); gardeners rightly call them the plants of princes. It takes a princely fortune to properly house a collection of palms in a warm greenhouse no less than 4 to 5 meters high, to heat such a high greenhouse to a temperature of 15 to 25 degrees, and to stock it with plants, the smallest of which, in fine specimens, cost fabulous sums. The palms of the old and new continents are very numerous, all with a rare elegance of form, almost all commendable in their native climate for the sum of useful products they provide for food or industry. The palms most commonly found in European greenhouses belong to the genera cocos, phænix, latania, areca and caryota. All these palms rarely flower and never ripen their fruit in our greenhouses; they are only cultivated there because of the magnificence of their foliage, regarded as the emblem of triumph from the earliest times. COCOTIER. - (cocos-nucifera). This tree is one of the most useful to mankind in the intertropical regions; its half-ripe fruit gives a healthy, nourishing drink known as cocos milk; its flesh is a very healthy food when ripe; The oil of its kernels is suitable for a host of domestic and industrial uses; the fibers of its husk make excellent brooms; the shell of its nut serves as a bowl, and for part of the year, its shade is used as a dwelling. The books of the ancient sages of India all have as their frontispiece a man reading a manuscript, reclining in the shade of a coconut tree laden with fruit, an emblem which signifies that with the coconut tree able to provide for most of his needs, man has the leisure to indulge in speculative studies. In European greenhouses, the coconut palm, despite the most attentive care, never lives for many years, and consequently cannot grow very large. It is propagated by sowing; the coconuts from which we wish to obtain young plants, are placed in heather soil kept constantly moist. To get them to germinate, expose them to very high temperatures, close to the thermosiphon pipes in the orchid greenhouse, and only bring them back to the warm palm greenhouse when their first leaves are well developed. Young coconut palms always need plenty of heat and frequent watering; they are grown in spacious crates filled with a mixture of heather soil and well-consumed potting compost. Those that can be kept long enough to form a nice clump of leaves sell for very high prices. DATTIER - (phœnix dactylifera). The products of the date palm hold a very important place in the diet of the peoples of Africa; the ease with which dates can be preserved, and their very nourishing properties in a small volume, make them particularly suitable for supplying travelers crossing the deserts of this part of the world in caravans. In Darfur and the other states of East Africa, where currency is virtually unknown, boxes of dates of a specific weight, with a value accepted by everyone, are used as a means of exchange for sales and purchases of some importance. In European greenhouses, the date palm doesn't bear fruit, but it flowers quite often, lives a long time and grows to very large proportions as it ages. The date palm is propagated mainly by sowing date seeds, whose envelope is as hard as horn, but which nevertheless sprout easily, even under apparently unfavorable conditions. It was by taking advantage of this peculiarity that the Viceroy of Egypt, Mehemet Ali, succeeded in stopping the shifting sands of the deserts on the limits of cultivable land in his country, by planting several rows of date palms. The fruits of these date palms form a considerable source of income; the seeds of those that fall to the ground, i.e. onto the sand, have sprouted and formed a forest that fulfils its purpose all the better as it expands every year, encroaching on the desert. Date palms are grown in the same mixture as coconut palms. When they reach a certain age, they produce buds at their base, which can be detached and used for propagation, treating them like cuttings. LATANIER. - (latania rubra). The latanier differs from other palms in the shape of its leaves, which form a vast fan, giving it a most picturesque appearance. It is propagated by sowing seeds, mainly from its native island of Bourbon, and is grown in the same way as the coconut palm. It grows almost as tall there as in the tropics, but flowers very rarely. A very large latanier, after half a century's existence in the hot greenhouse of the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, flowered there for the first time in 1857; there are few other examples of latanier flowering in Europe. ARECA. - Palms of the areca genus do not have the same importance in their country of origin as their predecessors, and do not provide the same amount of useful products. However, for the decoration of hot greenhouses, preference is given to them, justified by the beauty of their forms and the elegance of their very beautiful green foliage, and even more so by their ease of cultivation. At a pinch, palms of this beautiful type would be content with the temperate greenhouse; but they grow faster and better in the hot greenhouse, where they must be treated like coconuts. CARVOTA. - Palms of the Caryota genus are propagated by sowing seeds from the Moluccan islands, their country of origin; only one species produces rooted suckers which are used for propagation, earning them the nickname sobolifera. The cultivation of all these palms, remarkable for the prickles on the ribs of their leaves, is similar to that of the coconut palm. BROMELIACEES. - The ornamental plants of the Bromeliaceae family all bear a strong resemblance to the pineapple, the type of this family, in the way their fleshy, thick, sharp leaves are grouped like those of the pineapple. They thrive in peaty heather soil, either coarsely crumbled or divided into fragments mixed with damp moss. However, as they don't require the same degree of humidity as orchids, they are reserved to decorate the hot-house dedicated either to palms, or to plants with hot-house facilities other than orchids, grown, as we saw earlier, in a separate greenhouse. The bromeliads most commonly grown in the greenhouse are aechmea, bilbergia, tillandsia and gusmannia. The ornamental effect of these plants is due to a particular feature of their vegetation. The brightly coloured flowers are borne on an equally coloured stem, accompanied by golden bracts of the brightest colors, like the stem and flowers. In bromeliads, neither the stem, bracts nor flowers are of the same color, resulting in a striking contrast of shades. Ornamental bromeliads are propagated by separating the eyelets they often produce at their base, like pineapples. Some also produce fertile seeds, and can be propagated from seed. They need plenty of water, especially at flowering time, and should never be taken out of the warm greenhouse. BANANIERS. (Musa sapientium). - Banana trees are as useful to people in tropical regions as coconut palms and date palms; bananas are the staple diet of entire populations, and only cost them the trouble of picking them. The most productive and easiest to grow of all banana trees is the Chinese dwarf banana, which bears fruit abundantly in the hot greenhouses of Europe. Some years ago, an English missionary wishing to save the inhabitants of one of the archipelagos of Oceania from periodic famines, brought them banana plants, the cultivation of which he had studied in the greenhouses of the late Duke of Devonshire at Chastworth; the introduction of this single plant, which soon spread to all the islands in the vicinity, saved the poor islanders forever from the recurrence of a famine unknown to them since that time. In the hot greenhouse, the banana tree is both an ornamental plant, with its unrivalled, velvety-green foliage, and its hanging bunches of bizarre flowers called "régimes", followed by slightly bland but very nutritious fruit, which can be eaten raw or cooked on the grill. The banana tree cannot be called a tree, as it has no stem in the true sense of the term; what constitutes a trunk in the banana tree is the union of the leaf stalks, which are nested and welded together. The true stem is a simple spike that rises above the tuft of leaves and bends towards the ground before flowering; thus the largest banana trees are, in the final analysis, nothing more than herbaceous plants of extraordinary proportions. Because of the sheer size of its foliage and the activity of its vegetation, the banana tree is a very voracious plant, so it should be planted in a tarpaulin or pit set up in the hot greenhouse and filled with very substantial garden soil, good loam from broken layers and heather soil, in equal parts. This mixture can only be used 'once; when it has nourished a single generation of banana plants and that generation has borne fruit, before renewing the plantation, the compost from which the exhausted banana plants are uprooted must be replaced with entirely new compost. In hot greenhouses, one compartment of which is devoted to banana cultivation, the plant is placed two meters apart in a tarpaulin one meter deep and one meter 50 wide. Banana plants produce offshoots which are used to propagate them; they require abundant and frequent watering throughout their growth. Cultivated solely as ornamental plants and combined with palm trees in the hot greenhouse, banana trees produce the most picturesque effect. The series of ornamental plants for the greenhouse is extremely large, and includes flowering plants of all sizes, which provide flowers all year round in the greenhouse. One of the most precious of the small, highly floriferous plants is the gloxinia genus, so rich in beautiful species and varieties that it has almost become a collector's item. Gloxinias are grown in heather soil in the best heated parts of the greenhouse; they need very frequent watering. The best varieties of gloxinias often produce fertile seeds which, when sown, frequently give rise to new sub-varieties. Older varieties can be preserved by separating the young tubers, or propagated by leaf cuttings, which root quite easily under a cloche, in a smothered environment. We can do no better than end our description of the most beautiful greenhouse plants and their cultivation methods, by paying tribute to the plant to which botanists and horticulturists have unanimously awarded the prize for beauty among all the most brilliant productions of the plant kingdom; it is dedicated to Lord Amherst, former British ambassador to China; it has been named amherstia nobilis in his honor. To get an idea, imagine a tree with a graceful head, from the leguminous family, whose foliage offers the elegant, regular arrangement of that of the locust tree, with the fullness of that of the most beautiful palms. From the base of the branches spring clusters of flowers no less than a meter to a meter and a half long; each of these flowers in particular is adorned with dazzlingly vivid colors. Introduced only a few years ago to the greenhouses of Europe, amherstia nobilis has already bloomed several times in England, so the pleasure of watching it grow and bloom can only be reserved for a very small number of opulent amateurs. It is usually planted in the open ground in the tarpaulin of a warm greenhouse, where it thrives better than in even a sufficiently spacious crate. We have now come to the end of this work, in which we have assembled all the data to justify its title; We can promise that, depending on local conditions and the type of cultivation he adopts, he will have the most beautiful vegetables, the best fruit and the most beautiful flowers in the flowerbed and in the greenhouse. He will enjoy the most innocuous of satisfactions, that of success in work that is both pleasant and useful, and we are happy to think that many people who are strangers to the art of gardening will owe this satisfaction to THE GARDENER OF THE WHOLE WORLD. ON GARDENING WITHOUT A GARDEN. 505 In the course of this work, we have not neglected to give, whenever the opportunity has arisen, a few instructions on the care that certain ornamental plants require to grow and flower in an inhabited room, or on a window sill. Nevertheless, there are so many people in cities whose business keeps them there all year round, and for whom it is a cruel privation to do without a garden, that the Jarbinier de tour le Monde believes it owes them more complete and detailed advice: such is the purpose of this note. In principle, you shouldn't think of brightening up an apartment by growing a few ornamental plants, if you haven't resolved in advance to give them assiduous care. The most necessary of these are watering, always with water at the temperature of the apartment, never with ice-cold water such as that coming from a well or fountain. From time to time, you should also wipe the plant's leaves with a fine cloth or a very slightly damp piece of sponge; In the case of plants like heathers, which have needles instead of leaves that you don't need to think about cleaning one by one, you should take every opportunity to expose them to a good shower of soft, soothing rain, or water them at an angle, so that only their foliage is drenched, without over-wetting the soil in the pots where their roots grow. In the middle of winter, it's a great pleasure for sedentary people to see beautiful bulbous ornamental plants vegetate, some in potting soil kept 29 constantly moist, others in pure water. Tholl's crocuses and tulips, with their red flowers edged in yellow, only flower well in potting soil; on the other hand, hyacinths, daffodils and even the admirable St. James's lily (amaryllis), one of the most beautiful of all ornamental bulbous plants, can be made to flower in pure water. A very important care for these last plants is to keep the vases containing them constantly filled with water, so that the crown, i.e. the bead that surrounds the tray, is in continuous contact with the water, and the rest of the onion is uncovered. If, through carelessness, the tops of the roots are left in contact with the air for only a day or two, forgetting to refill the decanters in good time, vegetation suffers a setback, which is all it takes to cause flowering to fail. Dwarf cacti are perfectly at home on an elegant shelf hung between two windows, or on the wall of a living room or bedroom. The prettiest live and flower in the company of a wide variety of other dwarf succulents, in pots no larger than the diameter of an egg cup. These pots, made of red earth, are placed on shelf dressers, each in a very small saucer of the same earth; in winter, they should be watered just enough to prevent them from drying out completely, and given a spoonful of water per pot every morning, only when they are ready to flower. If the space available allows for the addition of an apartment planter, this elegant piece of furniture, containing a zinc capsule filled with soil, will be the main winter decoration for camellias, heathers, pimelias and other long-blooming, odorless flowering plants, which are followed without interruption by the most beautiful ornamental plants of each season. For those who have neither a garden nor a greenhouse at their disposal, and who don't want to be obliged to visit flower markets all the time, the best way to maintain an apartment window box is to take out a subscription with a horticulturist who, for a moderate monthly fee, will take back plants that have run out of flowers and replace them with others that are ready to bloom. It's enough for a flower lover without a garden to have to look after bulbous plants on his mantelpiece, dwarf succulents on his bookshelf, and an assortment of various plants in his apartment window box. Horticultural pleasures are even more varied if you can afford the luxury of a portable greenhouse, either cold or heated by a spirit-devin lamp. Under this shelter, placed on the pedestal table in the center of the living room, he will be able, in pots similar to those for dwarf succulents filled with heather soil, to multiply by sowing, cutting, marcotting and grafting, almost every series of ornamental, orangery, cold greenhouse and temperate greenhouse plants. The sphere of gardening, practicable for the amateur without leaving his or her home, widens more and more when the apartment he or she occupies is adorned with balconies facing south, east or west; that facing north admits of no other decoration than a frame of ivy, which is not lacking in charm by the perpetuity of its greenery; but no flowering plant can thrive there. If the exposure of the windows is favorable and they open onto a sufficiently spacious street, where air and light are not lacking, they can first be surrounded by an arcade of trellis in the center of which hangs a terracotta vase lined with drooping plants: the trellis is hidden under volubilis, cobéas, runner beans and other annual or perennial climbers. The window sill, like the window box in an apartment, is home to a whole assortment of flowering plants that can be planted from spring to autumn: this is, strictly speaking, the real garden in miniature for city dwellers, the window garden. All the full-ground ornamental plants indicated in this book as suitable for the parterre are available to the window-garden amateur; he can, understandably, adopt only a very limited number, but at least he has the satisfaction of seeing them grow from beginning to end, of seeing them go through all the phases of their vegetation. If, in the corners of balconies, he places Persian lilacs, high-stemmed grafted roses or a few other flowering shrubs in boxes, chosen from among those that can withstand the winters of the Paris climate well in the open air, he can keep them there for an indefinite number of years, especially if he takes the precaution of renewing the soil in the boxes from time to time, and turning them over at least once a week, so that all parts of the shrub heads are equally exposed to air and light. The periodic return of lilacs, roses and jasmine, on shrubs that you've grown and that have kept you faithful company for many years, is one of the most precious compensations for the city dweller that can make him regret less the deprivation of a real garden. This deprivation disappears, so to speak, when, instead of one or more narrow balconies, the city dweller can have at his disposal a terrace on the same level as his apartment, especially when this terrace is not dominated by other constructions that exclude air and light: it's then a real parterre in miniature. The trellis that can be used to cover a terrace in these conditions can accommodate honeysuckle, clematis, sarmentose roses, Virginia jasmine and Chinese wisteria, with the help of a few large enough boxes filled with good soil. Finally, the amateur can choose from all the plants in this series that we have already indicated, and which, in the Paris climate, belong neither to the cold greenhouse nor the temperate greenhouse. In order to indulge his preferred taste, the horticultural enthusiast must take every precaution to ensure that his window and terrace gardening does not contravene any regulations or inconvenience his neighbors or passers-by. This recommendation applies especially to watering: it happens all too often that a clumsy city gardener, in giving water to thirsty plants on his balcony, waters passers-by who don't need it, and even exposes himself to more or less damaging the outside of the house he lives in. Each individual pot should be placed in an earthen bowl designed to catch any superfluous water used for watering; the boxes on the terrace, which serve as flowerbeds, should be lined with zinc, as should the inside of the apartment planter, so as never to be damaged by the dripping of water from watering and basking. The gastronomic side of horticulture is not completely excluded from terrace gardening; a few vines grown in pots, and dwarf cherry trees prepared as indicated for those that have to be forced, can live for a long time on a well-exposed terrace and provide its annual quota of grapes and cherries. Even if the amateur who tends them, in conjunction with the ornamental plants, only obtains one dessert a year, this dessert would certainly be sufficient reward for his care; it would be, in his opinion, the best dessert of the whole year. Such, in short, is the very considerable sum of varied pleasures that gardening in the apartment, on the window and on the terrace can bring to those who have a passion for horticulture and yet are forced to do without a real garden. END. LIST OF PLANTS AND SHRUBS DESCRIBED IN THIS VOLUME. Melons. Embroidered melons. - market gardener. - from Honfleur. - Cavaillon. sucrin de Tours. white-fleshed. - from Cyprus. - American pineapple. Beechwood. Early green from Japan. - Arkhangel. - Malta summer. - Winter. - Persian. Cantalus orange. - Carmelite black. - 28-day Cantalou Prescott with frame. - Prescott white background, 1st season. - gray background, 2nd season. - gall-black background, 3rd season. - green-fleshed. - Alger. - Dutch black. - Portugal. Strawberry bushes. Threadless bush with red fruit. - White-fruited. Gaillon or Four Seasons. Threadless, red-fruited. Montreuil. White-fruited. Petite hâtive de Fontenay. Carolina pineapple. Adair. Dill. Athlete. Australia. Alphonsine. Barne's large white. Bostock. Baron Salomon. Bristish Queen. Plack Prince. Belle de Paris. Raspberry Capron - royal. Comte de Paris. Comtesse de Marnes Captain Cook. Crystal Palace Cook's hybrid. Cook's du Mogol. Carolinea superba. Cremona. De Bath. Chilean. Downton. Deptford's pine. American scarlet. - Elton. Virginia. Eleonore. Fill Basket. Goliath. Globe. Hooper's seedling. Imperial. Jucunda. Keen's seedling. Lady's Finger. Baron La merveille. Mammoth. Marie-Amélie. Marquise de la Tour-Maubourg. Mount Vésuvins. Nec plus ultra. Old pine. Prémices de Bagnolet or Napoléon. Prince Albert. Princess Alice. royal. Prince Arthur. - of Wales. - Alfred. Queen Victoria. Royal-Pine. Swainstone's seedling. Surprise. Sir Charles Napier. - Walter Scott. - Harry. Turner's Pine. Triumph. Vicomtesse Héricart de Thury. Willmott's superb. Fruit trees. PEAR TREES. Alexandre Bivort. Pineapple. Angelique de Berdeaux. Archduke Charles. Belle de Berry. Belle épine. Bellissime d'Automne. Bergamotte Crassane. de Bruxelles. d'Angleterre. de Pâques. Esperen. Beurré Amiral. - - - Capiaumont. de Rance, Clairgeau. d'Amanlis. - d'Angleterre. - d'Aremberg. - Passe Colmar. - Superfin. Bon chrétien Napoléon. de Bruxelles. Williams. Bonissime de la Sarthe. Summer calabash. Colmar d'Aremberg. Summer deanery. - Winter deanery. - Sieulle. Duchess of Angouleme. Fondante de Malines. Héricart de Thury. Marie-Louise. Nectarine. l'asse tardive. Pater noster. Rousselet de Reims. Jamin. Saint-Germain d'été. d'hiver. Sainte-Dorothée. Simon Bouvier. Sucrin vert. Vergaline musquée. Verte-longue. Virgouleuse. Washington. Willermoz. Summer Api. POMMIERS. Belle d'Esquerme. - de Rome. - de Saumur. - fille normande. Calville white. - rouge d'été. rouge d'Anjou. Court-pendu. Pomme d'Eve. - imperial. - pearl. Postophe d'hiver. American Ramburg. Reinette d'Angleterre. - Canada. Rouen. Portugal. Winter Vermeille. Violet. Beaugé. ABRICOTIERS. - Holland. - Portugal. - from Nancy. - from Versailles. PÉ̂CHERS. Belle de Vitry. - de Paris. Grosse mignonne. LE JARLINIER De Saint-Laurent de Liège. Teton of Venus. Vineuse. From Egypt. BRUGNONIERS. Large violet. White. Yellow. Empress. Newington. Stanwick. CHERRY. Admirable de Soissons. Early English. - tardive. Belle Audigeoise. - de Choisy. - de Sceaux. Magnificent. Morello cherry from Portugal. Montmorency. Episcopal. Queen Hortense. Bigarreau Napoleon. - - from Florence. gros (œuret. from Holland. PRUNIERS. Golden cloth from Esperen. Twice a year. Damask from Tours. Favorite hâtive. de Monsieur. Mirabelle de Metz. Ottoman. Surpasses Monsieur. Reine-Claude green. red. violet. Queen Victoria. NOISETIERS. Aveline rouge longue. d'Alger. Purple. - round. White fruit. CURRANT BUSHES. Gooseberry. - white from Holland. fertile from Berlin. - Paluau. Gonduin. Flesh color. Victoria. Abraham. Champagne. Commodore. Companion. Queen Charlotte. Rob-Roy. Wellington. White bear. Outdoor climbers. Akebia quinnata. Arristolochia sipho, sempervirens. Apios tuberosa. Bignonia capreolata. - - grandiflora. radicans. thumbergii. Boussingaultia baseloïdes. Calystegia Dahurica. pubescens. Celastrus punctatus. Cissus heterophyllus var. quinquetolius. - Reylii. Clematis azurea grandis. - - - bicolor. Héléna. indica pl. monstruosa. lanuginosa. Sophia. Decumaria sarmentosa. Glycine fratescens. - sinensis. Hedera aurea. - argentea. - - - alba. Algeriensis. hibernica. Regnauriana. taurica. Humulus lupulus. Lathyrus latifolius. Lonicera brachypoda. Lonicera fragrantissima. - Ledebouri. sinensis. standishii. Polygonum sieboldii. sinenses. Aquatic plants. SUBMERGED. Alisma plantago. Aponogeton distachyon. Butomus umbellatus. Calla Æthiopica. - palustris. Cyperus. Iris pseudo-acorus. Limnocaris Humboldtii. Limnanthemum Humboldtia. Nymphea alba. cœrula. lutea. rubra. Polygonum amphybium. Pontederia cordata. Ranunculus fluitans. Sagittaria sagittæfolia. fl. pleno. sinensis. Sium latifolium. Stratiotes aloïdes. Sparganium ramosum. Tipha. Valisneria spiralis. Villarsia nymphoïdes. EMERGENCIES. Acorus calamus. Arundo donax. - Mauritanica. phragmites. Caltha monstruosa. - palustris. Epilobium hirsictum. Jussieua grandiflora. Houtwinia cordata. Marsilea quadrifolia. Mentha aquatica. - gentilis var. 29. 513 Myosotis palustris. Orchis. Osmonda regalis. Parnassia palustris. Phalaris picta. Pinguicula vulgaris. Rumex hydrolapatum. Saururus cernuus. Spirea venusta. Scirpus sylvaticus. Talipes LE JARDINIER SIMPLES HATIVES. Beautiful alliance. Candor. Duc de Thol. Favorite. Standart. Candor. DOUBLES. Nec plus ultra. Rex rubrorum. Reine Hortense. Voltaire. Gladioli. OLD VARIETIES. Aglaé. Amabilis. Comtesse de Bresson. Courantii carneus. Fulgens. Doctor Andry. Don Juan. Hector. Léon le Guay. Madame Couder. - Hérincq. Mademoiselle Fanny Rouget. Mr Corbay. - Blouct. - Gorgeon. Triomphe d'Enghien. DWARF VARIETIES. Anna. Circe. Esope. Eugène Verdier. Isabelle. Laure. The chamois. Rosalie. Zoé. 1855 VARIETIES. Adonis. Adrien de Mérinville. Atalante. Aristide. Aristotle. Archimedes. Aurantia. Berenice. Charles Michel. Danae. Daphne. Docteur Marjolin. Edith. Egeria. Endymion. Eveline Bryère. Galathée. Goliath. Hébé. Hélène. Empress. Janire. Jenny Lebas. Madame Furtado. - - - Paillet. Pelé. Souchet. Victor Verdi Mademoiselle Quetel. Monsieur Keteleër. Pallas. Pellonia. Pégase. Vinchon. Penelope. Vesta. VARIETIES OF 1856. Berthe Rabourdin. Calendulaceus. Madame Thibaut. Nemesis. Neptune. Ninon de l'Enclos. Oracle. Osiris. Rebekah. Sulphureus. OF ALL THE WORLD. NOVELTIES OF 1857. Antiope. Claire Courant. Bicolor. Clémence. Florian. Keteleeril. Madame Binder. - Haquin. Marc Caillard. - Place. - Vilmorin. Mathilde de Landevoisin. Mazeppa. Miniatus. Vulcan. Antinous. Dahlias. Antoinette. Baroness de Mousin. Charles Perry. Circe. Comte de Morny. Coquette de Marly. Dnc de Malakoff. Etoile du Nord. Galathée. Joséphine Salembier. J. Walner. Le défi. Lucile. Miss Marie Dumas. Margaret. Mathilde Bourdin. Monsieur Albert Gaudry. - Chaix. - Jérôme LéonMr Lebel. Pindare. Paul Labbé. Robert aîné. Polyphemus. Prince imperial. Protée. Triumph of Le Pecq. Annibal. Tournau's aureole. Sebastopol bomb. Blumauer. Céline. Cockatoo. Cossach. Gold Coast. Déjanire. Duke Maximilian of Este. Emperor Napoleon. Espartero. Fanny Keynes. General Bosquet. Invincible. Joan of Arc. Jaune de Passy. Jules Biarne. Kaiserin von Asterich. Poidevin's mother. The pirate. Lord Palmerston. Madame Alfred Pérignon. - Bauduin. Gonzalve. Magician. Monsieur Brimeur. - Gaudry. Gérard. Black and white. Othello. Pandora. Preeminent. Rose d'amour. Sister Anne-Marie. Chrysanthemums. 1A. D. Durville. Argentina. Autumna. Asmodeus. Golden Age. Andronède. Golden eagle. Rainbow. Alexandre Pelé. Albin Goudareau. Astrolabe. Berthile. Count Vigier. - de Morny. Comtesse de La Chastre. Cedo Nulli. Coquette. Doctor Bois-Duval. Delphine. Eugénie. Shepherd's star. Eole. Flora. François Ier. Favorite. Frédéric Pelle. General Canrobert. Hendersoni. Héloïse Chevallier. Hardy. Jeanne d'Arc. The Prophet. La Sultane. La Vogue. La Neige.

La Provençale. Mont-Blanc. Madame Maillard. - Gaudareau. - Guillaume. Mignonette. Madame Loise. Monsieur Ménière. Madame Vilmorin. - Fould. Marshal Magnan. Marabout. LE JARDINIER Marseaux. Ninon. Pluie d'or. P. Decaisne. Persane. Rolé. Surp.ise. Sicily. Sesostris. Trilby. Trophy. Thaïs. Steam. Phlox. Admirabilis. Atropurpurea. Comte de Sainte-Croix. Crépuscule. Docteur Drouot. - Parnot. Hendersonii. Henri de Saint-Cyr. Empress Eugenie. Jacques Duval. James Weitch. The cross of Saint-Louis. The comet. Laurence Lecerf. Louis Van-Houtte. Madame Andry. - Aubin. Choplin Donnaud. Drouot. Durdan. Eug. Verdier. Lecerf. Pescatore. Piquetté. Prial. Mademoiselle Berthe. Magnificens. 1Marie Gros. Judith. Maria. Marie Carteron. Minerva. Monsieur Bienvenu. OF EVERYONE. Chaix d'Est-Ange. Chaperon. Duboulet. Guezon-Duval. Gros. Orientalis. President Morel. Purpurea nova. Purpurea superba. Spectabilis. Souvenir du 29 octobre. Saint-Arnauld. Triumph of Twickel. Viscount Albert de Beaumont. Zoé Baron. Roses. DAMAR. Madame Hardy. Perfect carnation. Ghent tricolor. CENT-FEUILLES. Comtesse de Ségur. Pompon de Bourgogne. Unique de Provence. CENT-FEUILLES MOUSSEUX Aïxa. Cœlina. Carné. Duchesse d'Abrantès. Gloire des mousseuses. Jeanne de Montfort. Purple of Luxembourg. Sister Marthe. Precocious. Vandael. Zoë. Adam. ROSIERS-THÉ. Belle Marguerite. Clara Sylvain. Gigantic. Hymenaeus. Narcissus. Solitaire. Sombreuil, Triomphe du Luxembourg. Walter Scott. BENGALE. Five colors. Archduke Charles. Upper crimson. Soft aurora. Regular. Victorious. Marjolin. Prince Eugene. White queen. NOISETTES. Aimé Vibert. Chromatella. Jacques Amyot. Lamarque. Solfatarre Desprez. ILE-BOURBON. Acidalie. Anne Beluze. Blanche Lafitte. Rambuteau. Etoile du Nord. Hermoza. Hyppolyte Jamain. Reine de l'île Rourbon. Madame Angélina. Charlet. Marquis of Balbiano. Milton. Paul-Joseph. Pharaoh. Prince Albert. Dumont d'Urville. Virgin of Lemnos. Voracious. REMONTANT HYBRIDS. Elisa Miellez. Thérèse Appert. (Pauline Bonaparte. 517 Alphonse Lamartine. Bacchus. Béranger. Cérès. Chateaubriand. Clémentine Séringe. Cleopatra. Count Cavour. Coquette de Bellevue. Duke of Malakoff. Emperor Napoleon. Marengo standard. Genius of Chateaubriand. La Bouquetière. L'Elégante. La Noblesse. Lion of battle. Louise Aimé. Madame Lassay. Alice Leroy. Louise de Vitry. Maxime. Mignonette. Garden ornament. Pauliska. Pius IX. Prince of Moskowa. Raphaël. Rebekah. Queen of Castile. Robin Hood. Sidonie. Triumph of Montrouge. THE GARDENER PERPETUAL ROSES. Abbé de l'Epée. Bernard. Cœlina Dubois. Georges d'Amboise. Julie de Krudner. Portland white. Ground cover perennials. Yarrow. Aconite. pink. Baneberry. Agrotemme. Hollyhock. Alstræmeria. Anemone hepatica. of Japan. Antirrhynum snapdragon. Columbine. Astrantia. Asphodel. Asters. Buphtalme. Campanula. Centaurea. Coreopsis. Delphinium. Carnations. Dictamus. Doronic. Echinops. Ferule. Gentian. Guaphalium immortelle. Winter pink hellebore. Hemerocallis. Hybiscus. Hyperic. Siberian perennial flax. Lysimachia. Lychnis. Heterophyllous mallow. Mimulus. Monarde. Evening primrose. Orobe. Tournefort poppy. Pentstemons. Phlomis. Potentilla. Podalyre. Pyrethrum. Rudbeckia. Silver sage. - Dazzling sage. Double Saxifrage. Thick-leaved. Spigelia. Swertia. OF ALL THE WORLD. Ephemeral Tradescanthus. Vanilla coltsfoot. Pyrenean valerian. Mollenas. Veronica. California zanschneria. Orangery shrubs. Abelia floribunda. - rupestris. Abutilon Mexicanum. - vanhoutti. Akania malvaviscus. Anthyllis hermania. Aster cabulucus. - moschatus. Azara crassifolia. Benthamia fragifera. Brugmansia arborea. - Knightui double. Campunala vidali. Cassia grandiflora. Capparis spinosa. Cariophyllus myrtifolius. Ceanotus azureus. - californicus. - lobianus. - papillosus. - roseus grandiflorus. Cestrum Warcewicksii. Chrysanthemum frutescens. alba. Chamerops humilis. Cistus ladaniferus. Clerodendrum Bungeii. sinensis. Coronilla glauca. Cosbea coccinea. Dictamnus creticus. Edworthia chrysantha. microphylla. Erythrina bidweeliana. - caffra. - crista galli. Erythrina coothiana. Escalonia densa. - floribunda. macrantha. Eugenia apiculata. - Ugni. Eurybia Gunneii. Fabiana imbricata. Guaphalium orientale. rosmarinifolium. Gordonia Javanica. Griselinia littoralis. Grevilea lavendulace. Habrotamnus amantiacus. Bondouxii. Iypocalyptus obcordatus. IIypericum grandiflorum. Indigofera cytisoïdes. Iochroma coccinea. Laurus indica. regalis. Lavathera maritima. Lagerstrœmia indica. Lemonias laureola. Leptospermum scoparium. Leonitis leonorus. Metrosideros albicans. florida. Melaleuca hypericifolia. Mitraria coccinea. Myoporum parviflorum. Myrtus apiculatus. Olea Europea. - fragrans. Pittospermum Mahy. floribundum. Pomaderis buxifolia. Poinciana Gillesii. Solanum Amazonicum. Spleimania Africana. Sparmania Africana. Tasmania aromatica. Vaccinium caracasanum. Veronica decussata. - Devoniana. Davies. Delicatissima. Derbyana. Dride. Duchess of Etruria. - of Kent. of Northumberland. of Orleans. Eclipse de Preston. Egeria. - Campioni. - Gandiflora. Emperor. Etna. Eva. Evenite. Exquisita. Fabroniana. Feastü. - striata. Fimbriata alba. Fornarina. General Marescottii. Georges Washington. Gillesii. Gloria del Verbano. - Isola Boromeo. Grandiflora maculata. Grunellii. Guillaume-Tell. Hallayi. Hampsteadii. Hendersoni. Hudsonii. Imbricata alba. - rubra. Empress of Russia. Imperialis. Incarnata. Innocenza. Winter garden. Juliana. Kelwingtoniana. Kelwingtoniana. King. Lady Broughton. - Grafton. Camellias. Abate Bianchi. - Branzini. Adrien Lebrun. Alba Boldina. - Casoretti. - splendens. Alexina Low. Altheiflora. Amélie. Annetta. Archduchess Augusta. Arnoldii. Aulica Loddige. Aurora. Ayez. Baltimoriana. Bealli rosea. Bellina major. Berenice. Billoti. Brozzoni. Bruceana. Buniana. Calypso. Queen's Camellia. Candidissima. Carbonara. Carlo Magno. Caroline Smith. Centifolia. Chandlerii. - elegans. Climax superba. Colletti. Colvilii. Commensa. . Comte Fose. - de Paris. Countess Bethelem. - de Bouterlin. Coquettii. Coronata crispata rosea. Crétri. Cruciata. Daniel Vebster. Principessa Maria Pia. Procrastinans. Punctata. major. Quéen of Great Britain. Radiata. England. Regina d'Inghiltera. nova. Queen of Denmark. - of France. - des Fleurs. Reticulata. Robertsonii. Sarra Frost. Siccardii. Sovereign. Spectabilis maculata. Spiralis rosea. Squamosa. Sweetii. Teutonia. Tornielli. alba. Tricolor de Siebold. Triomphans alba. Variegata. rubra. alba. Werschaffeltii. Vespuzio. Vexilo di flora. Victor Hugo. Victoria manosa magnisi. Villageoise (Agenorca). Vittata. Cold greenhouse rhododendrums. Ærriginosum. Albo-nigrum. Album. Alstræmerioïdes. Aukland. Aureum superbum. Barbatum. Lady Henriette Sefton. La Favorite. Landrethii. Latifolia rosea. macrantha. Leana superba. Lineata. Lombardi. Lowii. Madoni. Maestosa nova. Magdalena. Manetti. Marchioness of Excter. Mathotiana. Mazeppa. Micans. Theresa. Miniata de Low. striata. Minerva. Monarch Hallay. Montblanc. Mulleriï. de Casoretti. Mutabilis violacea. Néron. Nobilissima. Ochroleuca. Opizina. Optima. Orientalis. Palagie. Palade. Palmer's perfection. Pictorum coccinea. rosea. Picturata. Pius IX. Pluton. Prattii. Preniland. Prince Albert. Princess Baciocchi. - de Joinville. - Mathilde. 521 Blandus. Calophyllum. Campbell. Carneum. Ciliatum. Cinnabarinum. Cordatum ferrugineum. Diamond. Duchess of Brabant. Freshness. Globosum. Jasminiflorum. Snow and cherry. Ochraceum. Ornatum. Retusum. Robustum. Torlonianum. Victor Jacquemont. Yellow perfection. Azaleas. Alba perfecta. Amæna (from China). Auriculæflora. Barkleyana. Beauty of Europe. Broughtonii. Caryophylloides. Chelsoni. Coccinea major. - superba. Flanders coquette. Criterion. Colorans. Delecta. Distincta. Docteur Augustin. Duke oi Devonshire. Duke Adolphe de Nassau. THE GARDENER Duchess Adélaïde de Nassau. Eulalie van Geert. Exquisita. Extranei. Flora superba. Formosa. Frostii. Iveryana. Juliana. Lateritia. - - - - - alba. alba lutescens. - suprema. ardens. illustris. superba. variegata. Magnificens. Marie-Louise. Multiflora perfecta. Nivea fl. plena. Optima. Perryana. Præstantissima. Prince Albert (sau. Princess Bathilde of Anhalt Des- Frédéric Hilda Queen of the Belgians. Relulgens. Rosea elegans. Rosea magna. Rosea punctata. Rubra plena. Ruckeri. Semi Duplex maculata. Striata formosissima. Symmetry. Tenella. Trotteriana. Vesta. Vittata (from China). - Fortunei. - punctata. rosea. Admiration. Baroness de Rothschild. Cleopatra. Empress Eugenie. Leeana. Louise Margottin. Louis Napoléon. - Madame de Lagallisserie. Optima nova. Petuniæ flora. OF ALL THE WORLD. Princess Marie of Cambridge. Souvenir de l'Exposition. The Bride. Greenhouse climbers. Aranja albens. Arristolochia triloba. Bignonia capensis. - jasminoides. - speciosa. - sempervirens. Cissus discolor. Clematis Hendorsonii. - indivisa lobata. - smilacifolia. Convolvulus altheifolius. brionæfolius. Delairea scandens. Dioclea glycinoïdes. Eccremocarpus scaber. Echites suaveolens. Ficus repens. Hexacentris coccinea. Myosorensis. Illairea Cansrinoïdea. Ipomea dignita. - grandis alba. - Horsphaelii. - Leari. Kennedya andomariensis. - - - bytuminosa. intermedia. ovata. alba. Lophospermum Henders. Maurandia alba - cœrula. - rosea. Passiflora albo nigra. - Bellotiï. - cærulea. - grandiflora. Passiflora Decaisneana. edulis. Gontierii. - Hartwiziana. - Loudonii. racemosa. Phaseolus Caracalla. Plumbago capensis. Polygonum cordifolium. Rhincospermum jasmin. Solanum jasminifolium. Stauntonia latifolia. Stephanotis floribunda. Timpananthe suberosa. Tropeolum majus. - auvine. Louise Koehl. - Massiliensis. Cactus. Céréus Acifer. - Akermanis. Bonplandi. - Cavendishi. - Cinnabarinus. - Cocrineus. Cærulescum. Colubrinus. - Crenatus. - - - - Formosissimus. Grandiflorus. Marginatus. Pertiniferus. Polyacanthus. - Rhoducanthus. - Speciosissimus. - Variabilis. Anfractuous echinocactus. - Bicolor. Capricorne. ferocious. de Schlumberger Common melocast. - Mammillaria pulchelia. - elephant tooth. - dwarf. multi-headed. Cels' opuntia. - Brazilian. - diadem-shaped. - with large flowers. Bromeliads. Æchmea caerula with blue fruits - - - fulgens. discolor. glomerata. Melinonii. miniata. Bromelia bractenta. - - carnea. Joinvillei. Species. Bilbergia amæna. - - - - - - - Croyana. fasciata. granulosa (rosea). Leopoldi. Liboniana. Morelliana. porteana. pyramidalis. rhodocyanea. thyrsoidea. vittata. Caragunta. Disteganthus basilateralis. Echinostachys Pinelianus. Guzmannia tricolor. Hohenbergia strobilacea. Nidularium fulgens. - spleudens. Pitcairnia muscosa. - splendens. Portea Kermesina. Pourretia frigida. Puya Altensteinii. Tiflandsia zonata fol. brunneis. Vriesia psittacina. - splendens. Orchids. Acineta Humboldtii. - pallida. - longiscapa. Aerides affine. - crispum. - odoratum. Angræcum bilobum. - Brongniartianum. Anguloa Clasesii. - purpurea. - Ruckeri. Ansellia Africana. Arpophyllum giganteum. Arundina bambusæfolia. Barkeria Lindleyana. - skinneri. - spectabilis. Bifrenaria atropurpurea. - Harrisoniana. alba. - thyrianthina. Bletia Shepherdii. Bolbophyllum barbigerum. Brassavola glauca. - grandiflora. Brassia brachiata (vera). - caudata. - Jostiana. Broughtonia sanguinea. Burlingtonia candida. decora. Calanthe vestita. rosca. Camaratis obtusa. purpurea. Cattleya Acklandiæ. - amethystina. - bicolor. - Skinneri. Chysis bractescens. Cœlogyne asperata. maculata. Cymbidium aloifolium. - giganteum. madidum. GARDENER superbum. Cyrtopodium punctatum. Dendrobium albo sanguineum. - aggregatum. Cambridgeanum. chrysanthum. Epidendrum aciculare. aromaticum. ciliare. fucatum. Gongora atropurpurea speciosa. - bufonia. - quinquenervis. Grammatophyllum multiflorum. Huntleya violacea. speciosum. Houtuetia brocklehurstiana. Lælia anceps. - Barkeri. - autumnalis. - aurantiaca. Leptotes bicolor. Lycaste balsamea. - cruenta. Deppei. Luddemannia Pescatorei. Maxillaria inteo alba. - nigrescens. leptosepala. picta. Miltonia candida. - clowesii. - flavescens. Odontoglossum bictoniense. citrosmum. cordatum. Oncidium albo-violaceum. - - altissimum. ampliatum majus. ascendens. Batemani. Peristeria elata. l'hajus grandifolius. - maculatus. - Wallichii. Phalænopsis amabilis. Phalænopsis grandiflora. Renanthera coccinea. matutina. Saccolobium Blumei. - guttatum. retusum. Schumburgkia rosea. - tibicinis. undulata. Scuticaria Steelii. Sobralia dichotoma. - liliastrum. macrantha. Stanhopea bucephalus. - guttata. Devoniensis. eburnea. tigrina. Stanhopeastrum ecornutum. Thunia alba. Uropedium Lindenii. Vanda cærulea. - suavis. - tricolor. Zigopetalum crinitum. Mackayii. Palm trees. Acrocomia Guyanensis - - iasiospatha. sclerocarpa. Arenga sæcharifera. - obtusifolia. Areca clatechu. - lutescens. - oleracea. - rubra. Astrocaryum Airi. Chichon. album. minus. pallidum Mexicanum. Attalea compta. - speciosa. Bactris flavispina. - major. 325 - spinosa. Calamus ciliaris. - - flabellatus. micranthus. Rotang. - viminalis. Carludovica acaulis. - plicata. palmata. Caryota excelsa. - sobolifera. urens. Ceroxylon andicola. - ferrugineum. niveum. THE GARDEN Chamædorea Arembergii. concolor. desmoncoïdes. élegans. geonomæformis. Lindenii. Martiana. lunata. Chamærops excelsa. - gracilis. histrix. humilis. Martiana. Palmetto. Cocos amara. - comosa. - flexuosa. Copernicia Miraguana. Corypha gebanga. Cyclanthus cristatus. Dæmonorops melanochætes. Dæmonorops latispinus. spectabilis (calamus flabellatus). Desmoneus horridus. Elate Sylvestris. Elais Guineensis. Geonoma latifrons. - interrupta. Porteana. verdugo. Iriartea altissima. Jubæaspectabilis (cocoschilensis). Latania borbonica. - Jenkinsonii. Martinezia caryotæfolia. Lindenii. Moremia Lindenii. OEnocarpus pulchellus. Orcodoxia regia. Phœnix dactylifera. - Leonensis. Pinenga latisecta. Nenga. Rhapis flabelliformis. - sierotsik. Sabal Andansoni. - glaucescens. - Hlavanensis. - umbraculifera. Saribus olivæformis. Seafortia Dicksonii. - elegans. Thrinax argentæa. - parviflora. radiata. - stellata. (Thrithrinax mauritiæfolius. 527 A Abricotier (Branches diver. de l') 295 - en espalier.............294 - en eventail.............. 295 - en plein vent............ 294 - (Taille et conduite de l')... 294 Abris..................... 37 Absinthe.................. 247 Acanthe................... 406 Achiménès picta............. 481 Aérides................... 491 Æschynanthus.............. 497 Affranchissement des greffes enterrées............... . 282 Agave.................... 474 Agérat du Mexique.......... 448 Ail...................... 163 Alleluia...................364 Aloès..................... 474 Altise..................... 102 Alyssum corbeille d'or........ 355 Amaryllis à bandes.......... 477 - (Collections d').......... 477 - dorée de la Chine........ 480 - équestre................ 480 - lis de saint Jacques....... 480 - de la reine..............478 - reticulated............... 480 Amendments.............. 22 - (Preparation of)......... 23 Amherstia nobilis........... 500 Pineapple (Root amputation)................... 327 - (Cultivation of)........... 326 - (Multiplication of)...... 329 - (Sowing of)...... 329 - Suitable temperature 327 Anemone.................. 364 - (Cultivation of)........... 379 Garden pests... 97 Anis.................... 249 Aquarium.................. 51 - d'appartement........... 60 Arabette printannière........ 354 Araucaria...... 453 Arbres fruitiers (Arrosage des). 315 - Advantages of growing them. 251 - (Bassinage des). 315 - in groves......... 333 - (Choice of)............. 263 - (Classification of)........ 252 - grown in pots.......... 330 - (Cultivation of)............ 253 - (Forced cultivation of)....... 321 - (Fertilizer for)........ 313 - forced on site.......... 321 - (Multiplication of)....... 253 - dwarf forced............. 325 - (Cleaning of).......... 315 - stone (Pruning and management of) 284 - (Planting of).......... 264 - (Rejuvenation of)...... 318 - (Cultivation care for). 31 3 Trees for both fruit and ornament.................. 412 Shrubs with edible fruit... 304 - for living hedges....... 9 Areca..................... 500 Clay............ 22 - Its proportions in strong soils................ 12 Aristoloches............... 353 Watering................. 65 - in the greenhouse............ 66 Flat-sided watering can......... 30 - long-necked............ 30 Artichoke (Buttage de l')...... 129 - (Culture de l')........... 126 - (Culture annuelle de l').... 130 Angelica.................. 2491 - (Species and varieties d')..... 126 Artichoke gros camus........ 127 ] Buddleya.................. 408 - gros vert de Laon........ 127 - (Plantation des).......... 128 - de Frovence............. 126 - (Soins de culture enhiver à l') 129 Asperge commune........... 119 - cultivée................ 119 - (culture forcée de l')...... 124 - de Gand...............119 - de Hollande............. 119 - sauvage................119 - d'Ulm................. 119 - de Vendôme............ 119 Aubergine à fruit blanc....... 227 - purple-fruited............ 227 Azaleas of India............ 426 - outdoor........... 426 B Banana trees................. 502 Barometer indications.... 113 Roman cement basins..... 67 Basins for espaliered trees 315 Bèche commune............. 26 - flamande............... 26 - à lame courbe........... 26 Bellis.................... 341 Beetroot (garden species) 152 Binages................... 65 Binettes...................28 Parterre compartment borders................ 341 - of dwarf boxwood............ 341 - of turf............... 342 - of Irish ivy....... 342 - in second line......... 343 Bosquet................... 7 Borage................. 200 Bourses des poiriers........270 Brindilles................. 270 Brise-vent.................. 38 Broccoli................... 199 Broméliacées............... 501 Brossage des pêches......... 331 Brouette à claire-voie........ 31 - commune............... 31 - garnie de tôle........... 31 Brouillards................ 115 Bruche des pois............. 136 Buis dain.................. 341 Butôme................... 359 Cactées (Végétation des)....... 411 Cages..................... 41 Calcéolaires................ 443 Camellia (Culture du)...... 452 - (Bouturage du).......... 432 - en espalier.............. 451 - (Greffe du).............. 432 - (Introduction en Europe du). 431 - (Multiplication of)........ 432 - (Pruning and management of)..... 452 Roman chamomile.......... 248 Ducks (Destruction of slugs by)................. 99 Cantharides................ 104 Nasturtium.................. 200 - tuberose............... 240 Golden locust............... 105 Carrots (Uprooting of)...... 145 - (Conservation of)... 146 - (Forced cultivation of). 145 - (Grains of)............. 142 - Sowing of seeds of)...... 143 Carpocapsa................ 110 Caryota................... 501 Cassement................. 275 Catalpa................... 410 Cattleya................... 492 - (Species and varieties of).... 177 - rave...................177 Sieved ashes............ 23 Céréus.................... 468 Cerfeuil commun............ 182 - bulbous........ 242 Cerisier en espalier.......... 297 - (Pruning and management of)..... 297 Chaleur (Effet de la)......... 115 Champignons comestibles...... 229 - (Couches à)............. 232 - (Culture du)............. 229 - (Fumier pour le)......... 231 - (Végétation du).......... 229 Chaperon des murs de jardin... 8 Green vine weevil.... 104 Bruyères.................. 356 1 Châssis vitré............... 42 Châssis économique......... 43 Clématite odorante......... 353 - froid.................. 53 Chauffage des serres.......... 53 Chaux.................... 10 - ses proportions dans le sol. 15 Chenilles........... 108 Chèvrefeuille d'Italie......... 352 - toujours vert............ 352 Chicorée barbe de Capucin.... 192 - (Forced cultivation of)...... 191 - (Species and varieties of).... 191 - wild................ 192 Wool rags............ 21 Chimonante odorant.......... 455 White cabbage................ 168 - (Conservation of)........ 170 - (Cultivation of)... 170 - (Species and varieties of).... 168 - with blistered leaves........ 169 - with smooth leaves.......... 168 - with conical head. 169 - round-headed.......... 168 - (Health properties of).... 166 - red................. 168 - Brussels sprouts....... 169 - green................... 169 Cauliflower (preservation of).... 197 - (Open-air cultivation of)... 198 - (Forced cultivation of)........ 198 - (Species and varieties of).... 198 - (Planting of)........... 196 - (Edible properties of). 194 - suitable soils. 194 Chrysanthemums (Cutting). 389 - (Late flowering of)..... 389 Ciboule................... 164 Cierges (Cultivation of)......... 468 - Hybridisation accidentelle des) 469 - du Pérou............... 468 Ciguë (petite)............... 182 Cinéraires................. 145 Cissus.................... 349 Citrouille boule de Siam...... 221 - (Cultivation of).......... 222 - (Species and varieties of).... 224 - Hungarian green......... 224 Civet.................... 164 Stretchers................... 34 Claies.................... 35 Madeira clethra........... 456 Clianthus.................. 453 Local climate................ 112 Bells................... 40 Fences................... 10 Coconut palm...................498 Coffers.................... 42 Columbine................. 21 Cucumber......... 220 Composts.................. 16 Contre-plantation............ 168 Contre-sols................. 41 Coriander................. 249 Cornes (Râpure de).......... 22 Gherkins.......... 221 Yellow-flowered Corydalis....... 354 Mushroom layers....... 232 - hot................ 44 - how to mount them..... 45 - deaf................ 45 - lukewarm................. 45 Coulinage.................108 Gourds................... 222 Pineapple crowns......... 326 Vineyard Coursons........ 299 Cricket.. 106 Crassula.................. 474 Cresson Alénois............. 180 - de fontaine............. 179 Cressonnière............... 179 Croissant............. 34 Cuir (Rognures de).......... 22 Culture maraîchère.......... 116 - plantes de son domaine.... 118 Cyclamens................. 475 Cylindre pour la conservation du raisin................... 339 D Dahlia (Qualités d'un besu).... 386 Dattiers........ 499 - (Forêts de).............. 500 Défoncement............... 64 Dendrobiums............... 491 Digitale................... 362 Dioscorée................ 239 Dolique................... 243 Douce-amere............... 249 Cématite d'Henderson........ 353 l Dracocéphale............... 247 30 Drainage necessary for strong soils...................13 Drainage in gardens..... 14 Duvet de la pèche, -ses propriétés nuisibles............. 334 E Eau courante............... - its useful effects in gardening 17 17 - de pluie................ 17 - de puits................ 17 - de source.............. 17 - stagnante............... 17 Eaux pour l'arrosage des jardins 11 Ébourgeonnement........ 275,302 Echalottes................. 164 Echenillage................ 108 Echenilloir................. 34 Echinocactes............... 472 Eglantiers pour la greffe des rosiers................... 395 Electricité................. 115 Engrais...................19 - pulvérulent.............. 21 Epacris................... 466 Epamprement de la vigne..... 317 Epilobe à grandes fleurs...... 360 Epinards, moyen de les faire dégeler...................173 - (espèces et variétés d')..... 174 Epiphylle.................. 472 Equilibre de la séve.......... 268 Ericas.................... 463 Escargots.................. 100 Espaliers.................. 258 Estragon.................. 182 Etagères.................. 50 Eté pluvieux (présages d'un)... 113 - dry (omens of a)....... 113 Eumolpe de la vigne......... 103 Fenouil................... 183 Fève julienne............... 141 - de marais............... 141 - de Windsor............. 141 Ficoïdes.................. 475 Figuier (Bouturage du)........ 311 - (Espèces et variétés du).... 312 - d'Inde................ 473 Figuier (Multiplication du).... 310 - (Taille et conduite du)..... 311 Fléchière d'eau....... 359 Forficule... 106 Fork with straight tines....... 29 - with curved tines......... 29 Ant................... 105 Ant farms (search for and destruction of)... 105 Strawberry, its properties........ 202 Strawberry, (forced cultivation of)... 206 - (Species and varieties of).... 208 - oboe bifère........... 210 - (Multiplication of)....... 203 - non remontant........... 208 - (Plantation du).......... 204 - remontant. 208 - (Suitable soil for)... 203 Raspberry (Species and varieties).................... 310 - (Pruning and management of)... 309 Froid (Effects of)............ 115 Fruitier commun............ 335 - à la Dombasle........... 336 Fuchsia (Edible berries of)... 439 - (Cultivation of)............. 440 - (Hybrid varieties of)..... 438 Manure................... 19 - of horned animals......... 20 - of sheep. 20 - of horse, its advantages... 20 - how to bury it...... 64 - of pigs................ 20 Sod (Formation of pieces of) 495 White jelly.............. 115 Gentian.................. 364 Germoir for Dahlia tubers.................. 387 Giraumon................. 224 Giroflée................... 365 Glaïeuls................... 382 Gloxinias.................. 503 Glycine de la Chine.......... 350 Goëmon................... 21 Artichoke seed (sowing of)... 128 - of strawberry (seedling of)...... 203 Buried grafts (freeing of).................... 282 Grafting machine................... 33 1 Hygrometer (Indications of the). 113, Grèle..................... 114 Grenadier (Species and varieties of) 420 - (Grafting of).......... 420 - (Multiplication of)........ 419 Asparagus claws (Removal of) 120 - grown in nurseries..... 120 - (Planting of)......... 121 - of rested buttercups.... 377 Cherry currant............. 307 - Gonduin............... 307 Thorny currant.......... 307 - enbuisson.............. 307 - en éventail............. 307 - à maquereau............ 307 - en palmette............ 307 Red currant en contreespalier en candélabre...... 306 - (Species and varieties of)... 307 - (Multiplication of)........ 304 - (Pruning and management of).... 305 - head on a single stem... 306 Guano.................... 21 Guèpe.................... 105 Guépiers (Search for and destruction of)................ 105 Marshmallow................. 244 II Apple hedges.......... 10 - vives.................. 6 - at the bottom of a ditch........ Hannetons (hunting of)....... 101 - (Ravages exerted by the larvae of)................ 100 Beans..................138 - (Forced cultivation of)...... 139 - (Species and varieties of)... 140 - eats everything............. 140 - dwarfs without oars........ 140 - princesses.............. 140 - with oars................ 140 Heracleum of Siberia........ 406 Hortieulture, its relations with agriculture............. 5 Hortillons d'Amiens......... 116 Hotteya................... 365 Hoe with two flat teeth...... 28 - with square blades.......... 28 Hypericum with large flowers... 362 Hyssope.................. 365 Igname de la Chine......... 239 Insectes nuisibles........ 100 - qui attaquent le fraisier... 205 Arboricultural instruments.... 31 - divers................. 34 - d'irrigation............. 29 - de jardinage............ 25 - de labourage............ 25 - de transport............ 25 Irrigations................. 66 Ixias..................... 481 Jacinthes (Culture forcée des)... 375 - (Cultivation in water of).... 375 - hollandaises............ 374 - parisiennes............. 374 Jardin anglais.............. 7 - fruitier.............. 6 258 - d'hiver.............. 52 450 - - en serre tempérée... 481 - (Interior distribution of). 10 - (Exposure of).......... - fruit and landscape....... - landscaping............... - de Sully............... - symmetrical.............. - (Various kinds of)........ o - - -- - é - à la Rivers............. 331 - des sauvages de la NouvelleZélande................. - Semiramis........... O -i 3 Jardinage................. 11 Jasmin de Virginie........... 351 Jauge..................... 64 Jonc fleuri................. 359 Josikea (Grafting of lilac on the)... 407 K Kalmia (Forced cultivation of).... 425 - (Multiplication of)........ 425 Ploughing with a spade.......... 63 - triangular............. 281 - with a hoe............... 64 Ploughing under trees....... 64 ¡ Melocactes................. 471 Lettuce for cutting............. 188 - its cultivation in the open air..... 184 - - à l'étouffee...... 186 - forced......... 186 - (Species and varieties of).... 187 - summer.................. 188 - winter................ 188 - romaine...... 189 - harvest of its seed....... 189 Lambourdes. .............. 270 Lantanas.................. 447 Latanier................ 500 Oleander (Cutting in water of)................ 424 - (Culture of)............. 423 - (Grafting of)....... 425 Lavender. . . 248 365 Edible bulb vegetables. 157 - with edible leaves...... 166 - proper.......... 118 - roots.... 118 - new or little cultivated. 237 Common lentil........... 141 - queen's lentil.............. 141 Ferret.....................98 Irish ivy............ 349 Persian lilac (Summer pruning of)... 407 Slugs............ 99 Slugs..................100 Lobelias.................... 109 Lobélias................... 457 Lælias.................... 492 Loir...................... 98 Lycopode du Brésil.......... 456 M Mâche.................... 192 Mamillaire................. 472 Mammifères nuisibles aux jardins 97 Man, larva du hanneton....... 102 Marais.................... 6 - de Cavaillon............ 117 - de Metz................ 117 - de Nantes.............. 117 - de Paris...........4... 117 - de Pézenas............. 117 Maraichers................. 117 Melon brodé............... 218 - cantalou,............... 217 - (Culture forcée du)....... 217 - (Espèces et variêtés de).... 217 - à écorce lisse........... 218 - (Semis de graine de)...... 212 - (Taille du).............. 214 - (Végétation naturelle du)... 214 Melongene................. 227 Lemon balm................... 247 Peppermint............. 246 - round-leaved......... 246 - pouliot................. 246 Gardeners' meteorology.... 111 Miltonia................... 492 Mimulus................... 362 - musky................ 365 Mouches (Evidence of the sense of smell of) 475 Muguet...................363 Murs de briques............. 38 - de clôture.............. 8 - de pierres.............. 37 - de planches............. 38 - de refend.............. 10 Mycelium.................. 229 Myosotis.................. 361 Myrte (Multiplication du)..... 421 Navets.................... 147 - (Arrachage des)......... 148 - (Espèces et variétés de)... 148 - (Sowing of seeds).... 147 Snow. Its harmful effects in gardens............... 114 Yellow water lilies... 359 Némophiles................ 362 Népenthès................. 496 Noir de raffinerie........... 21 Nopal.................... 473 Normandie.................282 Noyaux (Stratification des).... 255 Nymphéa blanc............. 359 Œillet de bois.............. 455 Œillet flamand (Conditions de perfection de l').......... 379 Mathiole.................. 3651 - (Multiplication de P')..... 380 Œillet mignardise........... 341 ]Parc..................... Œilletons d'ananas.......... 326 - d'artichaut.............. 127 Oignon.................... 157 - (Culture de l').......... 159 - Sa culture par la méthode de Nouvellon. ... 160 - (Species and varieties of)... 161 - (Sowing in place of seed of) 157 Tulip onions (Planting of)................... 370 Large-fruited evening primrose.......... 355 Oncidium Carthaginense...... 491 - papilio................ 480 Gardening operations...... 63 Opuntias................ 473 Orange tree (Cultivation of)...... 413 - (Pontoise grafting of). 415 Orange trees of the great Frederick... 417 - (Species and varieties of).... 418 - (Harvesting the flowers of)... 417 Orangerie................. 47 - (Dispositions intérieures del') 48 - (Plantes d')............. 412 Orchidées épiphytes......... 489 - terrestres.............. 489 Os broyés................. 22 - (Râpure d')............ 22 Osier fleuri................ 360 Ouragan..................112 Oralide crénelée............ 240 Paillassons (Fabrication des)... 33 Mulch. Its useful effect........ 67 Yew trellises.............. 38 - Italian poplar....... 38 - Thuja............... 38 - Jerusalem artichoke.......... 38 Palissage à la baguette...... 260 - à la loque.............. 259 - sur fil de fer........... 261 Palma-christi.............. 406 Palm trees.................. 498 - de Sicile............... 453 Common parsnip............. 149 - (Calture du)............ 148 - de Metz................ 149 Panneaux.................. 42 - Parterre..................339 - (Location du)....... 2 Passerage.................180 Passiflores................ 454 Pastèques...............218 Patate douce (Conservation des tubercules de)............ 238 - (Culture de la).......... 238 - (Espèces et variétés de)... 239 Patience.................. 245 Peach (Various branches of). 286 - single oblique cord... 292 - double oblique cordon... 292 - Demoustier style. 291 - (Ebourgeonnement du).... 288 - d'Égypte en pyramide..... 288 - forcé dans la serre tempérée 321 - (Formes diverses du)..... 288 - sous forme carrée....... 291 - em palmette simple.... 289 - double palmette....... 270 - (Pinching of).......... 288 - (Pruning and management of).... 285 - open V.. 290 - (Natural vegetation of)... 284 Pelargonium............... 442 - auglais de fantaisie..... 460 - de collection............ 459 - (Culture du)............ 461 - français.............. 460 Pensées (Culture des)........ 382 Pépinière d'arbres fruitiers.... 255 Pepins (Seedlings)........... 256 Earwig.............. 106 Parsley. Its value in winter..... 181 Periwinkle................. 364 peach-tsai.................... 242 Phalenopsis................ 493 Drummond phlox......... 389 Woodpecker....................... 27 Dormouse trap........ 98 - rat trap................. 98 Cabbage worm... 109 Pimento (Species and varieties of ) 227 Norfolk pine............. 453 Pince..................... 33 Pincement................. 274 Pioche.................... 27 Paragrèles. Leur inutilité..... 114 l Piquotiane................. 241 Pivoines moutan...... 385 et 452] Pois (Culture forcée des)...... 137 - (Creffe sur racine des).... 386! - chiches.........se.se.. 138 Fruit tree plant (Transplanting of)............... 256 - (Grafting of)............. 256 Cabbage plant. Sa conservation en hiver................. 167 Plant de choufleur (Repiquage du) 195 Plant de filets de fraisier..... 203 Plantation................. 67 Plantes annuelles d'ornement.,. 400 - aquatic.............. 358 - market gardening............... 118 - evergreen..... 367 - forestry.............. 361 - annual climbers...... 353 - perennial climbers....... 348 - succulents................473 - dwarf succulents........... 476 - medicinal............. 244 - (Multiplication of)....... 67 - fragrant............... 365 - ornamental, collectors'... 368 - orangery............. 412 vegetables with edible fruit............. 118 and 202 - open ground.......... 344 - hot greenhouse.......... 430 - cold greenhouse.......... 486 Iron planter............... 35 Platform for peach trees... 265 Pluie..................... 113 Poèle..................... 50 Poirier (Bourgeon annuel du)... 269 - (Conduite du).......... 272 - en cordon horizontal simple 273 - en cordon horizontal double 275 - en colonne......... 278 - en espalier en palmette.... 279 - à la Jamin.............. 273 - en pyramide............276 - en quenouille............ 278 - en vase................ 279 - (Végétation naturelle du)... 268 - (Root pruning).... 278 Peas. Amendments for their cultivation.................. 134 - de Sainte-Catherine....... 133 - (Species and varieties of)... 136 - mange-tout............. 137 - précoces................ 136 - (Sowing of)............. 134 - tardifs................. 137 Pommes de terre (Arrachage des) 155 - (Culture forcée des)...... 154 - (Plantation automnale des). 154 - (Sowing of seeds of).... 155 Half-dwarf apple tree grafted on doucin.................. 282 - dwarf grafted on paradis..... 282 - (Pruning and management of).... 282 Portable pump............ 30 Potager................... 6 Pumpkin................... 222 Poudrette....... 21 Purslane.................. 183 Psorallier................. 241 Woolly adelgid 107 - Black................... 107 - Green................... 107 Fruit moth............ 110 - vine............. 109 Quinoa.................... B Radish (Bedding crop)... 151 - (Spring cultivation of)... 150 - (Species and varieties of).... 151 - black................... 151 Grapes (Conservation of)...... 337 Rapunzel.................. 193 Rejuvenation of fruit trees................... 318 Rat...................... 98 Obtuse-toothed rake....... 29 - pointed-toothed.......... 29 Rakes................. 34 White and pink Chinese rakes.................. 151 Raves (Small).............. 151 Harvesting stone fruit..... 333 - seed fruit....... 335 Rechauds for layers.... 44 - de la Chandeleur......... 133 l Renoncules (Seedlings of seeds of). 375 Renoucnles (Plant. of the claws of) 376 ] Seedlings.................... 67 Repiquages in the nursery... 69 Reseda.................... 365 - in trees............... 455 Rhododendrums (Cultivation of)... 426 Rhubarb (Cultivation of)..... 180 - (Species and varieties of).... 181 Rochea................... 475 Rosée.................... 115 Rosiers du Bengale........... 392 - cent-feuilles. 391 - of China............. 392 - (Classification of). 391 - (Forced cultivation of)....... 398 - Damascus............... 392 - (Use in gardens of) 392 - (Grafting of). 395 - (Multiplication of)..... 392 - Noisette................ 392 - perpétuels....... 392 - Portland............... 392 - de Provins............. 392 - sarmenteux............. 392 - thés................... 392 Rouleau................... 34 Rynchite-Bacchus........... 104 Sable.....................22 - siliceous; - its proportions in light soils... 14, 15 Sagittarius................. 359 Salads............... 118, 184 Purple loosestrife......... 360 - common............... 360 Salsify.................... 151 Saponaria................. 245 Sarclage................. 65 Sage................ 247, 365 Saxifrages................. 356 Scarole................... 191 Seie...................... Scolyme................... 152 Scolyte................... 104 Scorsonère................ 151 Sécateur.................. 32 Sedums................... 356 - iere.................. 357 - Rhodiola............... 357 - de graines d'aspergesen place 128 - en pépinière............ 68 - en place................ 68 Serfouette................. 31 Serpette.................. 31 Serre à Calcéolaires......... - Camellias............. - hot................. - Flemish............... - à forcer................ - cold................. - hollandaise............. 50 50 53 59 57 50 - mobile................. 58 - à Pélargoniums.......... 50 - portative chauffée......... 50 - portative non chauffée..... 50 - salon.................. 481 - tempérée............... 53 - (Divers usages de la)...... 480 - à un seul versant. 480 Greenhouses, -their origin in Europe. 47 Sparaxis.................. 481 Spirées.................. 408 Stanhopeas.. 493 Stapelias.................. 475 - (Odd flowering of).... 475 Pruning fruit trees... 267 - - with seeded fruit. 267 Pruning Camellia........... - des ros ers............. 396 Tangue................... 21 Mole.................... 98 - cricket.......... 106 Cultivable land (Origin of) 12 Clay soil............ 12 - clay-limestone........... 15 - clay-siliceous.......... 15 - wood................ 16 - brick............... 12 - heather............. 16 - calcareous................ 15 - camellia............. 16 - chalky............... 15 - fuchsia............... 440 - hyacinth.............. 17 - light................ 14 Stratified seeds......... 68 1 - carnation............ 17, 381 Orange earth............ - Ranunculus soil............ 1 Soils............... 19 - suitable for gardening...... 11 - added.............. 23 Soil................... 20 Theridion................. 144 Thermosyphon. 63 Thyme................... 365 Tetragona................. 242 Tiarella................... 365 Canvas............. 40 Tomato (Cultivation of)....... 224 - (Pruning of)............ 226 Buried barrels........... 67 Jerusalem artichokes.............. 156 Wooden trellis............ 261 Trowel....... Tubers (Planting).... Tulips (Condition of perfection 36 69 of)............. 370 Tulip (Cultivation of).. 369 Tulip tree of Virginia.......... 410 Ulluco....................241 Vanillier (Fertilization of the flowers of....................495 Vase of pond,.............. - of sea................ 21 Winds (Causes of)........... 112 - (Speed of)............. 112 Ventilation.... 55 Henderson's speedwell....... 440 - remarkable............ 448 Verbena................. 448 Vertical cordon vine.... 303 - forced on site......... 325 - forced in the greenhouse...... 324 (Pruning and management of)... 299 - à la Thomery........... 302 - Vierge.......... 348 Violette commune........... 248 - remontante............. 455 Yucca gloriosa.......... 406,452 Uropédium................ 4931 Zauschueria de Californie..... 352 TIAN DE LA NEME. Paris. - Imn. Viéville et Capiomont, rue des Poitevins, 6. tableaux dichotomiques des plantes qui croent spontanément en France et de celles qu'on y cultive en grand, avec l'indication de leurs propriétés et de leurs usages en médecine, en hygiène vétérinaire, dans les arts et dans l'économie domestique. By M. GILLET, senior army veterinarian, and M. J. H. MaGne, former director of the Alfort school. 1 vol. grand in-18 jésus, decorated with 97 plates comprising over 1,200 figures. 3rd edition. . . . . . . . . 8 fr. Cours élémentaire théorique et pratique d'Arboriculture, by M. A. DU BREUiL, professor of agriculture and forestry, in charge of the arboriculture course at the Conservatoire impérial des arts et métiers, etc. Fifth edition, considerably enlarged. 1 very large volume in-18, illustrated with 811 figures in the text and 5 steel-engraved plates. Published in two parts... . 12 fr. Work approved by the University, crowned by the Horticultural Societies of Paris, Rouen and Versailles. Elementary instruction on the management of fruit trees, - Grafting, pruning, - Restoration of trees badly pruned or worn out by old age. - Cultivation. - Harvesting and preserving fruit; by the same author. - Intended for gardeners, farm school and elementary school students. 1 vol. in-18 jesus, illustrated with numerous figures in the text. 6th edition. 2 fr. 50. Culture perfectionnée et moins coûteuse du Vignoble, by A. DU BREUIL, 1 vol. large in-18 jésus. . . 3 fr. 50 Cours élémentaire d'agriculture, intended for students in agricultural schools and primary teacher-training colleges, landowners and farmers; by Messrs GIRARPIN, correspondent of the Institute, professor, and DU BREUIL, professor of agriculture and forestry. 2 large volumes in-18, illustrated with 842 figures in the text. Third edition ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 16 fr. Cours élémentaire d'Histoire naturelle, à l'usage des Lycées et des maisons d'éducation, rédigé conformément au programme de l'Université. The course includes: ZOOLOGY, by M. MILNE-EDWARDS, member of the Institute, professor at the Jardin des Plantes. BOTANY, by Mr. A. DE JUSSIEU, member of the Institute, professor at the Jardin des Plantes. MINERALOGY AND ZOOLOGY, by Mr. F. S. BEupanT, member of the Institut, Inspector General of Studies. 3 large volumes in-12, with over 2,000 figures interspersed in the text. Each volume sells separately for 6 fr. Éléments de botanique. Part I. ORGANOGRAPHY; by M. PAYER, of the Institute, Professor of Botany at the Faculty of Science and the École normale supérieure. 1 volume large in-18, with 658 fig. interspersed in the text. ... ... ... ... ... . 5 fr. Paris. - Imprimcrie de P.-A. BOURDIER et Ce, rue des Poitevins, 6. - G - - G - - 4 - - 1 GLAIAMRTHIET - na M 4 da I 2 41- B H1 IL IBCIOIHECUE NATIONALE DE FRANCE 7531 05030386 11 hama 4 1 - 8 AEEAEEIMNAA MAMtIRA 4 ATEPITIIIIA PIACII un M