Morel, Francisque (1849-1925). Text author. Le petit jardin potager et fruitier: renfermant les principes essentiels pour l'entretien d'un jardin maraïcher et fruitier...: suivi d'une Notice sur les plantes d'ornement pour la pleine terre... ((3rd editionl)/ 1 by M ce Rivoire.... F. Morel,.... 1872. 1 Most of the content available on the Gallica website is a digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the Bnf collections. Their reuse falls within the scope of the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: Non-commercial reuse of this content, or in the context of an academic or scientific publication, is free of charge, provided that current legislation is respected, and in particular that the source of the content is mentioned as follows: "Source gallica.bnf. fr / Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf.fr / BnF". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates revenue: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article t.2112-1 of the French General Code of Public Property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules: reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. These documents may not be reused, except in the context of private copying, without the prior authorization of the rights holder. reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr/ Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 71 To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation, commercialeobnf.fr. 3rd Edition RNATMARMAAMRRAANVANATMRANAMNTUI LE PETIT - ET FRUITIER RENFERMANT les principes essentiels pour l'entretien d'un Jardin Maralcher el Fruitier CONTENANT Une liste des principaux Légumes et Fruits, l'époque de faire les semis et plantations, la manière de les cultiver, celle de les conserver l'hiver pour en avoir toute l'année. SUIVI D'UNE NOTICE SUR LES PLANTES D'ORHEHENT POUR LA PLEINE TERRE, leur mérite spécial, leurs habitudes, leur culturt Mee RIVOIRE Horticulteur-Grainier. pour te Potager PAR F. MOREL Arboriculteur. pour le Fruitier Membres de la Sociéte d'Horticulture pratique du Rhône, etc., etc. 6 VUeVeU - PRICE : 75 CENT. AVAILABLE FROM MCE RIVOIRE, GRAIN MERCHANT. Ruc d'Algérie, 16, LYON RARATAAMAAAAVARANENMRMMNT MADAMANMMROU VAUUJEE Source galllca.bnt.fr/ Bibliothèque natlonale de France O ULAC MIA MCAUO CINRE TET PE RUITIER Lyon. - Impr. de Ve Fr. Lépagnez, petite rue de Cuire, 10. POTAG ET FRUITIER RENFERMANT les principes essentiels pour l'entretien d'un Jardin Maraîcher et Fruitier CONTENANT Une liste des principaux Légumes et Fruits, l'époque de faire les semis et plantations, la manière de les cultiver, celle de les conserver l'hiver pour en avoir toute l'année, SUIVI D'UNE NOTICE SUR LES PLANTES D'ORHEHERT POUR LA PLEINE TERRE, leur mérite spécial, leurs habitudes, leur culture Mce RIVOIRE Horticulteur-Grainier. pour le Potager PAR F. MOREL Arboriculteur, pour le Fruitier Membres de la Société d'Horticulture pratique du Rhône, etc., etc. There's no need to praise the vegetable garden, it recommends itself enough, and there's no one who doesn't feel the need for it if they don't understand its importance. The first garden to exist was a vegetable garden, and Virgil, inspired by everything, sang of cabbages and lettuces. He didn't foresee the rotation system, he ordered it. How guilty of poor gardening would anyone be today who disregarded this law of nature: that no species should immediately replace at least the same species (vegetables, trees or plants of any kind), as was said two thousand years ago and has been repeated ever since. A well-kept vegetable garden is not only very interesting and pleasant to visit, but the richness of its food production adds a far more powerful interest, and if we add to this the hygienic sum that the health and economy of the household derive from it, we'll be surprised to see such gardens still leaving desires to be formulated. Every family in the country or around town should have its own small vegetable garden, and every amateur, in his or her flower garden, a patch of land for growing a variety of vegetables. Such cultivation would not require a great deal of work, and would bring the grower a certain degree of comfort. Let's try to outline in a few words the most favorable situation for establishing a vegetable garden that is as good as it is easy to care for. It goes without saying that you can't always have it in the right conditions; but everything is relative. Here are the conditions: ° That it be enclosed by walls, which will be planted with pear and apple trees to the north and west, good vines to the south, and peach trees to the east and south if necessary. Early spring seedlings will be planted in the bed along the south wall, while summer seedlings will be planted in the bed along the north wall. The white cedar hedge planted to the north (in the absence of a wall) is better than a partition that lets the wind blow through. Another advantage of a wall is that it closes off plants better than a hedge, and provides better protection against farmyard animals. 2° Water must be plentiful and easy to transport. "The soil of the vegetable garden must be loose, i.e. free earth. If it is clayey and compact, i.e. what we call "strong earth", it is important to make it loose by mixing in coal ash, old mortar that has been grated (not demolition plaster) or sand that has been washed into ditches or reservoirs by rainfall. This is how, little by little and at no cost, you prepare the vegetable garden. It's best if it faces east or south, and is as close as possible to the gardener's or grower's home. For large vegetables such as cabbages, cardoons, etc., it would be advisable to undermine or break up the soil by 50 to 75 centimetres; in areas where the soil layer is shallow, it should be broken up successively and at intervals of several years, so as not to put too much bad soil on it, which would prevent seedlings from succeeding until it has been improved by work and fertilizers. Once this improvement has been achieved, i.e. after three or four years, you can re-drill to a depth 10 or 15 centimetres greater than the first time, and so on until you reach the desired depth. By breaking up the soil in this way, and growing large vegetables such as cabbages, cardoons, beans, etc., etc., in the first year, the benefits will be considerable, while saving a lot of watering and producing much more advantageous produce. The fertilizers to be used in this garden should be bedding manure and compost. The latter is prepared by collecting all the rubbish that can be found in paths and courtyards; put it in a heap, and when it has fermented for a certain length of time, you have an excellent compost which, when mixed with the soil, softens the latter and makes it very fertile. Light or siliceous soils should preferably be fertilized with stable manure. The lines, tables or beds should run from south to north, so that each plant gets its share of light and warmth. It goes without saying that the utmost cleanliness must reign in the garden, whatever the plants grown. Weeding and hoeing are often necessary, especially the day after rainstorms, which compact the soil and make it impermeable to air. If the space reserved for the vegetable garden is large enough to allow fruit growing, you can make good use of the alley beds (see page 52). These beds can even be planted with flowering plants, which will go a long way towards enhancing the garden's appeal. to grow in the Vegetable Garden. The number of good vegetables is much greater than that indicated in this book, the aim being to recommend only the main ones and the ease with which they can be grown and provided with variations of food in rural farms and country houses where the vegetable garden is often too neglected. Garlic. - They are planted from November to March, 15 centimetres apart in all directions. When the plant's leaves begin to turn yellow, the stem is placed on the ground and the onions are pulled out in August, to be hung in groups in a dry place. The onions are detached from the mother plant between April and May. Carefully unthatch the mother plant, and use a spatula to detach the rooted eyelet from the stem. Only two or three of the best-positioned and most vigorous are left on the mother plant. Choose the best-rooted and strongest of those removed, and plant them permanently about 80 centimetres apart. Planted in good conditions, they bear fruit the same year. If you take the precaution of replanting part of them each year, you can harvest fruit in summer from the old plants and in autumn from the new ones. The eyecup must not be set too deep; the upper end of the stem (heart) must be in the open air; if it were covered with soil, it would rot. This observation must be strictly adhered to, as the success of the planting depends on it. Every three or four rows, you should leave the space of a row (where you grow other annual vegetables during the summer) to take the soil needed to cover the artichoke plants in winter; but before buttering them, you should surround the plants with dry leaves, wheat bales or straw, and throw the soil around; the top should have a movable cover that you remove when the temperature is mild to give them air, and put back on when the cold approaches. This precaution prevents them from rotting in wet winters. Asparagus. - Two systems are used to grow asparagus. The first consists of removing all the soil from the space to be planted, to a depth of 20 or 25 centimetres; placing the claws 60 centimetres apart in the shallows, and then bringing back some of the removed soil each year until the soil surface has recovered its level. The other system consists of making pits or trenches in rows 60 centimetres apart. The soil is removed to the width of the spade (about 20 centimetres) and 20 to 30 centimetres deep. Pack the soil well with the spade in the space between the trenches. Then plant the asparagus claws at the bottom of the trench, about 60 centimetres apart and 3 or 4 centimetres deep, spreading the roots well. Weeds are removed as they grow, and asparagus stalks are cut off when dry, and before winter. A layer of good compost or well-consumed manure is placed on each row. These operations are repeated every year. Three years after planting, the soil can be worked and levelled, but the spade should not be deep, to protect the roots. From the spring of the fourth year to the end of June, you can start picking asparagus. They are then left to grow freely. When the stalks are ripe, they are cut: the soil is trimmed with a trident, and covered with manure. January to April on bed. Transplant young plants in full sun, 40 to 60 centimetres apart, depending on the richness of the soil, when frost is no longer a concern. They are given copious watering during hot spells. The best and most widely cultivated variety is the long violet. Capuchin beard (see bitter chicory). Beet. - The cultivation of this plant is too well known for us to go into lengthy details here; beets grown in the vegetable garden differ little from those grown in the garden. Salad varieties include red round or dark red, crapaudine and yellow salad beet. Cardoon. - Cardoon is sown from April 15 to May 15 in small bunches, 80 cm to 1 m apart. It can be sown in a bed of onions or lettuces, or any other short-lived vegetable. With these removed, the soil is given a good ploughing, and the cardoons, as they develop, occupy all the space. - 5 to 6 seeds are planted in each pot to avoid atmospheric or other accidents, but only two of the most vigorous plants are allowed to develop; if necessary, one may suffice. One of cardoon's most formidable enemies is the courtillière. We protect it with sheets of zing or tinplate, about 30 centimetres long and 10 centimetres wide. The two ends of the leaves are joined together in a circle and pressed into the ground, leaving a 3-centimeter edge above the soil. The plant is thus armoured. The most esteemed cardoon varieties are Plein inerme, Puvis, Epineux de Tours (difficult to harvest because of its thorns); Blanc d'Espagne, delicate and hollow-ribbed. When the cardoon is large, in October and November, its leaves are tied together and blanched by wrapping them in straw or litter before winter; they are then torn off and stored in a cellar or dry cellar. You can also leave it in place, surrounded by straw or dry leaves, and cover it with soil, leaving only the tips of the leaves exposed to the air. Finally, after digging a pit 60 to 80 centimetres deep, place them loosely in it. When it's cold, cover them with straw; and when it's not freezing, give them air. Carrots. - Carrots are broadcast from February to July; from February to April, the short, early variety is harvested in May and June; from April to July, the half-long variety is harvested in autumn and winter. Sowing it in spring for winter is a flawed measure, because it splits in the ground, withers in summer and becomes tough. However, the excellent Demi-longue nantaise variety is less prone to these drawbacks than the ordinary variety. Blanche transparente is also a highly recommended quality. Older long varieties are somewhat neglected because of their slowness to ripen and their tough flesh. - To obtain good quality carrots, thin out overgrown seedlings by spacing them 8 to 12 centimetres apart, or even further apart in good soils. To preserve them over winter and protect them from frost, they are placed in silos, i.e. in holes made in the ground, filled with carrots and covered with straw and earth to form an ados, and the earth is beaten with a spade so that rainwater cannot reach them; they can also be covered on the spot with litter, but by the latter means they grow faster in spring. The variety known as Nantaise carrots can be stored easily and without care. Celery. - Celery is sown from February to May, first on a bed, then outdoors. Transplant young plants into beds 30 to 40 centimetres apart. - Soaking the seed in plain water facilitates germination. Preferred varieties are early dwarf celery, full white celery, Turkish celery and Erfurt celeriac. The latter is grown for its fleshy root, as its name suggests. Celery fears frost, so cover it with dry leaves or litter, or put it in the cellar before winter, like cardoons. They are eaten when they have turned white. Chervil. - This plant is sown in summer in a slightly shady spot, and in spring and autumn in full sun. The crisp-leaved variety is more ornamental than the ordinary one as a garnish for a dish served on the table, but it has no other advantages. It is also more delicate, i.e. less hardy. Chicory. - It can be sown from February to March in beds, and from May to July broadcast in the ground and in rows. It is transplanted in beds spaced 20 to 40 centimetres apart, depending on the volume the variety needs to acquire and the richness of the soil. For the first sowings, we prefer to use seeds that are two or three years old, or even four. The older the seeds, the less likely the plants are to bolt. When the plants are large, they are blanched, either by covering them with a mat, tying them up or laying them in the ground in very dry weather. When the frost comes, we take the chicory back to the cellar, taking care to leave the roots with a bit of soil that we squeeze with our hands, and we plant them close together so that they press against each other. The same applies to Ch. Scaroles. NOTE: If air can be brought into the cellar, this should be done whenever the temperature permits, i.e. when it is not freezing; these precautions apply to all closed or covered vegetables. The best varieties are fine Italian chicory, for spring and summer; Germond or Picpus chicory, for summer; Ruffec chicory, the largest and hardiest, for summer, autumn and winter; and Meaux chicory, for autumn and winter. Escarole chicory. - Grows like the above. Wild chicory. - To grow this mild, tender chicory, you need to repeat sowing every month. However, sown in spring, it grows back all summer and even in winter, when it's not too harsh. If you want to make Capuchin Beard, you need to keep the bitter chicory sown the previous spring, which you pull up in November or December; in the cellar, you lay down one or more layers of light soil or well-consumed manure, 6 to 8 centimetres thick and 65 centimetres wide; you lay down the chicory roots, head outwards, and cover them with a bed of soil of the same thickness, on top of which you replace a new row of roots, which you cover in the same way, and so on. The even temperature of the cellar and the lack of light soon lead to the growth of etiolated, colorless leaves, which are harvested as they become sufficiently developed. The improved variety is preferable, sown in August and September for harvesting in winter and early spring. It replaces lettuce and curly endive when these are in short supply. York cabbage. - Four varieties: Gros, Petit, Cœur de bœuf and Pain de sucre. Seeds are sown in August and September, and transplanted in October and November. They bear fruit the following May and June. Generally, cabbages are transplanted 40 to 80 centimetres apart, depending on the volume they are intended to grow, in well-disturbed, well-smoked soil. Cabbage. - Four varieties: Joannet or Nantais, Saint-Denis, Brunswick and Quintal, the latter being the largest. Their earliness is indicated in the order we have just described, starting with Joannet. Sowing takes place from March to May. Cabbage seedlings, in general, like all other crucifers, are prone to being eaten by flea beetles, a small insect that is very fond of them. To preserve young plants, you need to baste them two or three times a day during hot spells. There are various ways of storing cabbages over winter. - It's a good idea to protect part of the harvest from heavy frosts. Cabbages can be uprooted and replanted in a cellar or dry cellar, or they can be hung from the floor. In this way, you should always choose the hardest or best-ripened plants. For the others, simply plant close up with the head facing north and cover with straw during the frosts, taking care to uncover them when the weather is fine, and cover when the frosts approach. Savoy cabbage - Stubby savoy and Gros Milan des vertus can be sown in March for summer, and in May and June for winter; Gros Milan des vertus comes much larger, but is less early. Both are sown in May and June, and are frost-resistant in place; to do this, at the onset of winter, remove a little soil from the north side, tilt the cabbage to that side and place the soil removed on the stalk and the cabbage on the south side. The hardest apples, i.e. the most mature, should always be chosen for immediate consumption, as they are always the most susceptible to frost. Brussels sprouts. - These are shaped like small apples in the leaf axils, and are highly prized by gourmets. Sown from May to June, it is harvested from October to February or March. It is resistant to severe drought and cold. It is not cultivated enough. Kohlrabi. - Although it can be sown as early as March, it is best to wait until May or June. Transplant young plants when they are strong enough. Before the frosts, pull them out and put them in the cellar. Violet and early white are the two most highly regarded old varieties. Two new varieties are announced under the name of violet and blanc géant. May their merits be as giant as their names! Turnip cabbage - Sown in June or July, it overwinters in the ground and is good to eat until April. It's an invaluable asset for housewives at a time when good vegetables are in short supply. Cauliflower. - Sown in March or April, it does not succeed in our climate; the head remains small, greenish, mixed with small leaves. Better to sow in May or June and transplant in July, even August. The best varieties are: Hátif d'Erfurt, Tendre or Petit Salomon, Gros Lenormand, Pied-Court and Dur de Hollande. You can get them in spring by sowing them in trays in October or November, and transplanting them into the ground as soon as frosts are no longer a threat. They are well watered in hot weather. Hâtit d'Erfurt and Petit Salomon are preferred for this early crop. In October or November, when cauliflowers are plentiful, we pick them and, after stripping them of their leaves, put them in a fruit tree or hanging them from the floor of a cellar or storeroom; this way, they keep until April. They wither, but care must be taken to re-cut the stem and return it to its fresh state (1). For those whose apples begin to appear, we pull them out with their root ball and replant them in the winter garden or in tarpaulins covered with a frame, where they complete their development. Broccoli cabbage. - This is an excellent substitute for cauliflower in spring. Sow in June and cultivate like the others. It is protected from frost by lying on the north side and covering the plant with soil up to the leaves. Cucumber. - This family is made up of numerous races or varieties. The most widely cultivated is the green cucumber or gherkin. Its name comes from the curved shape of its long fruit. The snake cucumber is a fancy cucumber. They are grown in much the same way as melons. Squash. - Squash is sown in April on a bed. Young (1) See l'Horticulteur Lyonnais, n° 2, page 19, 1872. plants are planted as soon as they appear on the bed. Four or five seeds at a time are sown indoors on a hood made of warm manure and covered with good potting soil. The hoods are spaced 2 to 4 meters apart, depending on the known vigor of the varieties. Of the four or five plants that emerge from the ground, only the two most vigorous are kept. Pinch off the plants above the third leaf, as well as the most vigorous stems, to make them branch at their base. When fruit size is important, only one or two are left on each plant. The best varieties are: Potiron d'Espagne, Giraumond or Turban, Sucrière du Brésil, Musquée du Canada. These varieties have the merit of being excellent and of keeping very late, as well as the Florida Squash, a new variety highly recommended for its culinary qualities as well as the beauty of its rind. Courge à la Moëlle végétale and C. d'Italie are also good, but before they reach maturity. Patisson or Bonnet de Juge, as well as Grosse romaine reinette, are also recommendable, but the latter must be specially grown for large-scale cultivation. Watercress. - The cultivation of this plant is well known. It prefers spring water. Make a ditch one or two meters wide, plant the cress plants at the bottom and keep moist. After a fortnight, the cress takes root and the ditch is filled with water. The water should not be too running. Watercress can also be sown. Shallots. - The same crop as garlic. Spinach. - Sow from February to September. To have a continuous supply in summer, sow every two weeks. Seedlings sown at the end of July and August can be harvested in autumn and spring. But if you take the trouble to transplant the seedlings 20 to 30 centimetres apart in late September and October in prepared, smoked soil, the harvest is more abundant. Preferred varieties are: Epinard Caudry, Epinard à feuilles de laitue and Epinard d'Angleterre. Broad bean. - Can be sown as early as February in unproductive land. Marsh bean is the best known; Windsor bean is not to be sneezed at. Dwarf beans. - Beans can be sown as early as March in a sheltered spot, but in April in the open field, continuing until the end of July. Place the beans in a furrow S to 10 cm deep at most, covering them lightly as they don't like to be laden with soil. Hoe when they have emerged, and ridge the young plants so that they are in the center of the ados. The rows should be spaced 30 to 50 centimetres apart. The best varieties are: 1° Noir hátif de Belgique; 2° Bagnolet, Gris de tous les jours; 3° Beurre noir nain; 4° Cent pour un et celui d'Aix, very productive; 5° finally Gourmand nain, extra bon. The main advantage of the first is that it doesn't fear humidity; it's best used for first and last sowings. The second (Gris) is very hardy, very fertile, and can be grown with advantage throughout the summer. If you want to harvest the beans for winter, sow the Comtesse de Chambord, which is very fertile and a very good variety when sown in May. Row beans. - Sow in rows about 20 cm apart. After germination, hoe and plant branches for climbing. The best varieties are: Beurre du Mont d'Or (new), highly recommended; Soisson, Haricot d'Alger or Beurre, Coco blanc, Sophie. Curly lettuces. - These are very easy to grow and last throughout the summer. Sowing begins in February. It takes about three months for them to reach perfect growth. When they are strong enough, they are transplanted 20 to 40 centimetres apart, depending on their size. The best varieties are: Gotte, Mousseronne, Frisée, Batavia blonde, Frisée croquante and Frisée à Bord rouge, Chou de Naples and Bossin. The latter is the largest of all lettuces; it is still new. The most recommendable in this category are: Versailles lettuce, Paresseuse, Bellegarde or Blonde trapue (slow to bolt), Palatine, Laitue de Berlin, Laitue de Néris (one of the most beautiful). Almost all these plants can also be sown from August to October for winter and spring. For late sowing, however, we recommend Passion or Hivernaude lettuces, Brune d'hiver, Savoyarde or Batavia brune (very large). Romaine lettuces. - More voluminous than the preceding varieties, they are excellent in autumn and can be kept over winter until spring. Green Romaine or Chicon is best sown late, and blond Romaine for market gardening in spring. Lamb's lettuce, or Blanchette, or Bouvette, etc. - Sow from late July to September. The most popular are: Mâche à feuille ronde, Mâche à grosse graine, and finally Mâche d'Italie, commonly known as Mâche Parisienne. It's late to bolt and seeds in spring. Melon. - Sow in March and April. Young seedlings are then pricked out in the ground on compost. They can also be sown indoors. Make a capo (hole) 30 to 50 centimeters in diameter, 20 to 40 centimeters deep and fill it with litter manure, pressing it down with your foot. Cover it with potting soil or good earth, so that it forms a mound. The young plant is then placed in the center of the hood. When the first leaves - not cotyledons. - are developed, the terminal bud is pinched off. Soon, new buds develop in the axils of the first two leaves (the cotyledons must be considered null, once the buds have been removed). After the third leaf, these two lateral branches are pinched off. After this second operation, the tertiary branches are left alone; only the most vigorous are pinched from time to time. You can also wait until the first two side branches have produced their seventh leaf before pinching off their tips; after this operation, you leave them to their own devices. For bed-sown melons, it's a good idea to place the seeds in cups or matchboxes and bury them with the plant. This makes it easier to transplant to hoods. The best melon varieties are: Cantaloup noir des Carmes, Prescott, Fond blanc or argenté. The small green-fleshed American melon is very fertile and excellent. The hardiest is the maraicher grown in Cavaillon and around Lyon, but its qualities are temperamental. Turnips. - The most recommendable are the early Blanc with pink or white collar, and the Long des vertus. They can be sown in spring, but like all crucifers, they require frequent watering during hot spells. We then sow the Black Turnip, the Long and the Round. A large number of varieties are sown from July to August for field cultivation. Onions. - White is sown in August for transplanting in October, Red from February to April, and Straw or Swiss from March to May. The latter, sown light, comes in a nice size; but sown very thickly, it produces only small bubbles the first year; these are replanted the following March, and become very large onions; large or small, they keep easily from one year to the next. All onion varieties are transplanted 10 to 20 centimetres apart. As soon as the stems start to turn yellow, they are placed on the soil. This operation, performed with the back of a rake to save time, helps the onion to develop. If you grow the above varieties at the right time, you'll be able to supply them all year round. To ensure good harvests, it is important to fertilize the land where the seeds or young plants will be planted a year in advance. Sorrel. - It's easy to grow in the border, especially virgin sorrel, which only multiplies by splinters. Belleville sorrel is easy to propagate from seed, but it is preferable to propagate from seedlings, since they degenerate a lot. Parsnip - Parsnip is considered more of a condiment than a food. It is grown in the same way as carrots. Parsley. - Parsley is sown in a small corner of the garden where nothing else could be grown. Pimento- - Same as eggplant. Dandelion or Lyon's tooth with a full heart, improved by cultivation. Although this plant grows spontaneously almost everywhere, it is still advantageous to sow it from May to July in rows and rows; it can be transplanted 15 centimetres apart. In October, to whiten them, cover them with sand or compost, even with leaves, from 12 to 15 centimeters apart, and in the first fine days, when they have grown, you can pick them, which are much more tender than those from meadows. Leek. - Sow from February to May in rows spaced 15 to 25 centimeters apart, and plant 5 to 10 centimeters apart, depending on the desired size. If you want the part in the ground to be long and white, make a furrow next to the lines some time before digging, and lay the leeks in it, covering them with soil but leaving some air for the plant. Nîmes leeks are the largest and earliest. The Rouen leek is also very large, but hardier and more resistant to frost. Poirée à carde or Bette. - It is sown from March to July; the first plants for summer and autumn, the last for the following spring. Like artichokes, the last ones are guaranteed to survive the winter. Poirées are planted in rows 30 to 60 centimetres apart. Poirée à tondre is grown like bitter chicory, but only for the assortment of small herbs. De-grain peas. - The first seedlings can be sown as early as November. Like all other varieties, it is sown in rows 15 to 20 centimeters apart, with the seeds 2 to 3 centimeters apart. This method is preferable to sowing with flyswatters. These attract mice, which are very fond of them. When the peas start to rise, hoe them and rake out those that are climbing. The best varieties are: Michaux peas, Caractacus, Ringleader, Daniel O'Rouk, Serpette, Gourmand and Knight's Ridé, the best of all. The latter should only be sown from May to July. It is the hardiest in hot weather; although large and almost ripe, it is still tender and very sweet. Some varieties can do without oars, including the very early and fertile dwarf Bijou wrinkled pea, and the dwarf Gontier pea, which reach no more than 30 centimeters. Although very early, they rival all the others for abundance. Potatoes - There's no need to go into the details of this crop, which is generally well known. Let's just mention the garden variety Marjolin. Planted against a wall facing south, it produces its first crop in May, which can be harvested by digging the soil without pulling up the plant. We recommend the Confederate potato and the White Queen, although new, for large-scale cultivation, in order to experiment with them; they promise much. Pumpkin. - (See Squash). Radishes. - Radishes can be sown every fortnight to avoid running out. Given their early vegetation and the fact that they don't take up space on purpose, they can be sown with advantage alongside all kinds of vegetables. The best are: the white-tipped radish, the early round radish, the scarlet half-long radish, the dark red or purple round radish preferable in hot weather, and finally the long or Chinese radish. The black winter radish is much sought-after in the north. White radishes are fancy, but good. Scolyme d'Espagne (compound). - This edible plant, already an old cultivar, is not as widespread as it deserves to be, either because of its good culinary qualities, or because it is so easy to grow that everyone can afford it. It grows well in all soils, but better in slightly light, deep soil than in strong or too compact soils. Resemblance. - The leaf and stem resemble a thistle, which has sometimes been mistaken for the latter. So don't be mistaken, especially when newly sown, and don't pull it out for this weed (thistle). Sowing. - The quality of bark beetle depends on the time of sowing. If sown in March or April, the woody part of the plant develops too much and becomes more difficult to remove, which is why cooks have almost always rejected it as a way of increasing their workload. To overcome this disadvantage, sow only from May 15th to the end of June; the plant has all the time it needs to develop without becoming too hard, and can be eaten from the following October. The result is a similar vegetable in four to five months, but better than scorsonera, which takes twice as long to produce. Care. - Although it does not fear heavy frosts during winter, a return frost in spring, when it has already started to grow, can tire the collar that feeds the young buds. It's a good idea to protect them with a light layer of dry leaves or long manure. To avoid running out during heavy winter frosts, they can be brought into the winter garden, where they simply need to be buried in either soft earth or sand; this applies to all root vegetables. How to cook them. - After lightly scraping them with the back of a knife to remove the first skin, which is otherwise very thin, they are cut into pieces of the desired length and cooked in water, which can be recognized by the separation of the woody part, i.e. the middle of the root. Scorsonera. - Sow in rows or broadcast from March to May, or in July for the following year, in less fertile soils. Tetragon. - This plant is a good and abundant vegetable; from June to November, it is a good substitute for spinach, which rises quickly in this season. Soak the seed for 24 hours before sowing, 50 to 70 centimetres apart. Tomatoes. - Same crop as eggplant. It differs only in that the plant needs to be supported by a stake; it can be trained against a wall or trellis. Strawberry. - Strawberry plants are ideal for vegetable gardens, either as borders or in beds, with a preference for tracing species. Four-season strawberries, commonly known as all-month or remontant, are a must in any garden. To grow them in abundance, you mustn't renew them all at once. You can divide this crop into three parts, renewing one every September or March; this way, you'll have abundant harvests throughout the summer. Large-fruited strawberry plants are also very advantageous; but to obtain beautiful, abundant strawberries, care must be taken to cut the runners as they develop. Don't forget that during hot spells, there's a huge advantage to mulching crops, i.e. covering the soil with straw-like manure. This keeps the soil cool and prevents it from hardening in the sun and strong winds; it encourages vegetation and saves on watering, which should not be neglected in gardens, especially for seedlings. Water that has been exposed to the sun for a few hours should be used whenever possible. The best time to water small plants is in the morning in spring and autumn, and in the evening, especially in summer. As a general rule, every time you transplant a plant, you should water it with the neck of the watering can immediately afterwards. After sowing fine seeds and mulching, flatten the soil with a shovel, or rather a board with a handle suitable for this purpose, which converts it into a beater. This operation greatly enhances germination. 20-0- INFLUENCE OF THE MOON ON CULTIVATION The influence of the moon on plants is still much disputed, although experiments carried out with scrupulous care have given us negative results. But what is infinitely better is first to sow in favourable weather, i.e. fine weather; in this case, it is better to look at the sun than the moon, and for the soil to be crumbly, and above all to choose good seeds and good types in plants with many varieties, such as potatoes, beans, lettuces, melons, turnips, etc. But to arrive at this choice, the grower must be aware of the moon's influence. But to make this choice, the best way is to plant or sow as many varieties as possible, or at least the best and most esteemed varieties. For example, suppose you plant twenty varieties of the same kind of vegetable; towards the end of the year, you choose the ten best and cull the other ten; in the second year, the ten can be reduced to five. To reduce the number still further, which could happen, we would have to cultivate them for a few years, in order to get a good idea of their merit; and only those that were always successful, that fulfilled all the desirable conditions, would be kept. In this way, you always get good results from your crops, whatever the quarter of the moon. However, the acquired reputation of certain vegetable varieties cannot always guide us; for a species that does very well in one grower does not always do well in another, and just the opposite can be true of other species that are often rejected for lack of serious study. It goes without saying that in the case of novelties, cultivation experiments must be carried out with even greater reserve. from the farm As a wise man once said, "He who has planted one tree has deserved more from mankind than he who has won twenty battles". The cultivation of fruit trees has become as indispensable as that of vegetables, and everyone wants to grow and pick fruit for their own use; nothing is more reasonable or healthier. First of all, you can be sure of eating good fruit; good fruit, because you've planted trees of good quality, which is doubled by the pleasure of enjoying your own produce, picked and eaten on time. And then, aren't the pleasures of planting, cultivating and harvesting the sweetest satisfactions of life, to which health is impregnated? The emperor Lucullus felt this so well, that his joy at having brought the cherry tree from Asia and planted it with his own hands, forced his exclamation as he picked and offered his favorites the first fruits, its products, with these words full of praiseworthy pride: It was I who planted it! Planting and pruning fruit trees is not as difficult as some people imagine; all you need to do is stir the soil to a depth of 60 centimetres, if it's good and deep enough, and 80 to 90 centimetres if it's not; for nothing is more reasonable than to understand that bad soil needs more work than good soil. Good work improves it; by giving it enough en- grais, it becomes good: under these conditions there are no more bad soils, they all become suitable for such and such crops that accommodate more or less humidity or more or less drought. Many people plant trees, but few plant them well. It's better to plant less and plant well. As the earth is improved by work, it can be improved by fertilizer; fertilizer is the richness of the earth. The best fertilizer is always stable manure, whether from horses or cattle; failing that, it can be replaced by corncob, pelais, woollen rags, glue, rapeseed cake, guano and chemical fertilizers. Of all fertilizers, liquid manure and faeces are the most active and powerful; they should therefore be used judiciously when the weather is damp and cool, while adding about a third of water if they are pure. Cooking swill is very good for watering trees to stimulate their development, and, like all liquid fertilizers, is favorable to fruit development. We have slurry and faeces on hand; knowing their value, let's lose only what we can't prevent; they are a powerful aid to trees, vegetables and flowers. As a soil improver in clay soils, fused lime and ash serve to divide the soil, and by opening its pores, warm and fertilize it. Consumed leaves and grasses form humus, the most powerful agent for activating recovery by placing it immediately in contact with the roots at the time of planting. Once the soil has been broken up and smoked, we proceed with planting, which must be carried out according to the form we want the trees to take, whatever their species or variety. The various shapes in which trees are di- riged are roughly as follows: Pyramid or cattail, candelabra and palmette-Verrier, oblique cordon and horizontal cordon for open-air pear trees, plus plein vent. Apple trees can take all these forms, except pyramid, palmette-Verrier and candelabra, to which they are more resistant if not grafted onto franc or doucin. The apple tree on paradise does very well in horizontal and oblique cordons; the bush or conical form replaces the pyramid. Pecher espalier, which should be planted against the wall, facing east and south, or even west for lack of a better location, performs quite well against a trellis and in a half-wind position, especially for the early varieties, which always have enough heat to ripen their fruit properly. Apricot and plum trees are only planted in espaliers or in the open air, although they perform well in all forms and would greatly enhance the ornamentation of a fruit garden. Bigarreaux, cherry, guigne and morello cherry trees all do very well in espalier, counter-espalier and full-wind plantings; cherry and morello cherry, whose branches are close together, form beautiful pyramids, columns, oblique cordons and horizon- rates to very graceful effect. The almond tree, which is always planted in the open air, would easily form beautiful pyramids and other shapes. We won't mention quince and medlar, whose shapes are left to their own devices. Vines can be trained with equal success in horizontal, single, double, superimposed, oblique or vertical cordons, leaning against a wall or as counter-trellises; they submit to all shapes without the slightest constraint. Currants and thorny gooseberries can be trained on espaliers, counter-trellises, conical bushes and balls on stems. Raspberry bushes, whose fruit-bearing stems are renewed every year, don't belong here. The distances to be observed vary according to the shape and development you wish to give the trees, especially if espalier or counter-espalier is involved; it is therefore hardly possible to indicate more than an average term, assuming average soil quality. A distance of three to four meters is suitable for training peach, apricot, cherry, plum and pear trees in espalier or counter-espalier. For simple oblique cordons, 55 centimeters are sufficient to distance pear, apple, cherry and plum trees; 70 to 80 centimeters are needed for peach and apricot trees, which are all the more leafy for growing more vigorously; 2 meters are sufficient for a single horizontal cordon, while 1 meter is enough for a double horizontal cordon. The pyramid itself, planted in a bed, is set back 2 meters 50 centimeters, while planted in an isolated line, it can be given 3 meters. For mixed gardens, a line of pear trees can be planted in the beds. But the cattail, which is often confused with the pyramid, and which is more often than not a mixed form of column and pyramid, will suffice with a 2-meter spacing, especially for pear trees on quince. As for open-air pear, apple, cherry and currant trees, a distance of 6 meters is more or less necessary, while 4 to 5 meters is sufficient for apricot, plum, almond and quince trees, as well as cherry and cherry trees, which are more upright in shape. Planting. Once the soil has been prepared and smoked, we open the holes to the width and depth of the roots, so that they can penetrate deeply; The roots of the tree are cooled down with a hand rake, removing any mutilated parts. The tree is then lowered into the hole, the roots are spread out in their direction, and covered with fine soil or compost to encourage the development of the rootlets, spread a layer of prepared fertilizer over the entire surface, fill with soil up to half the height of the hole, then lift the tree with short, sharp jerks, so that the fine soil can penetrate between the roots and leave no gaps; To help the soil adhere to the roots, it should be watered as soon as the tree is planted, unless a heavy rainfall dispenses with this operation. The same planting care is applicable to all tree species without distinction, taking care to leave the graft 2 or 3 centimetres above ground level. The planting of oblique and hori- zontal cordons, in our regions, is almost always done by inclining the subjects, because for this form we generally use subjects that have been grafted for two or even three years, and only cut them back a little, in order to hasten fruiting; but if this last goal is always achieved, it is far from being achieved for a long time. As the roots of such trees are already strong, it follows that those below are hampered in developing in their new position, for which they have not been prepared, and that those above are no less hampered by being too close to the surface of the soil, which makes them too accessible to the influences of droughts, which cause them to suffer greatly; it doesn't take long to realize that going too fast overruns the goal, as these plantations don't last long. These types of plantations can only be sustainable if the trees are planted vertically, with a height of 25 to 30 centimetres above the ground from which the oblique line they are to run begins; one-year-old grafted trees are best suited to forming these cords. We've gone into great detail on the subject of planting, within the limited framework we've set ourselves, because good planting is the key to the results we're aiming for: tree strength and production. Our approach to pruning and pinching is based on this motto: Plant well, prune little. Well-planted trees grow a lot; you need to prune them long if you want to obtain fruit quickly, and prune them short if you want to obtain a lot of wood. Great vigor is opposed to fruiting, just as great fruiting is opposed to vigor. A trivial comparison: to weary a vigorous horse, a good rider puts it on a high road; letting go of the bridle and jabbing at it while steering it to keep it from going over the precipice, he is sure that his mount will stop of its own accord. To weary a vigorous tree, a good gardener lets his tree grow, directing the sap from the branches to obtain the shape he wants to achieve, and before long it's covered with flower buds and fruit, and to help with this function, he overloads it by lowering the branches (this is the arqure) which the sap then abandons a little in favor of fruiting, while continuing to direct the branches to establish the shape he has proposed. Once planting is complete, the trees are pruned in March, with the stems cut back 4 or 5 eyes from the trunk, on the 3 or 4 strongest and best-spaced branches, to form a rounded head on full-grown trees of any species; all the others are removed. The following year, they are followed by the removal of new shoots in the wrong position, in order to encourage those which should give the head a conical shape, by pruning those which are developing too strongly; and so on each year, to prevent confusion which would be harmful to the fruit-bearing branches as much as to the fruit which, lacking light, would not acquire its full flavour. Trees intended to form pyramids or cattails should be cut back to 50 or 55 cm above the graft, whatever the species or variety. Espalier peach trees should be trained to the same height, so that the spurs (fruit-bearing branches) can be trained onto the supporting branches at the base, and so that the fruit is far enough from the ground to acquire its quality. Pear, apple, apricot, plum and cherry trees, which are espaliered or counter-espaliered, and whose fruit-bearing branches are not palisaded, should be turned down to around 35 centimeters, so that the base branches are close enough to the ground, and no wall space is lost between the ground and said branches. Spindles planted straight, with stems two or three years old from grafting and sufficiently branched, with lateral branches, will be cut back to the first or second eye of the last shoot of the extension stem. Lateral branches are pruned, small ones on 4 to 5 eyes, large ones on 2 or 3, in order to delay the latter in favor of the former; a strong branch is strengthened by pruning it long, a strong branch is weakened by pruning it short. If all the branches of a tree were weak and we pruned them long, we would weaken them by strengthening the tree. Pyramids or cattails are formed by selecting and arranging new branches, taking the strongest and most perpendicular to continue the tree's development, with the other 3 or 4 best-spaced and strongest radiating around it; if this first branch is strong, all branches should be pruned to 25 centimetres long, taking care to let the arrow dominate the others. The following year, we dispense with a second series of lateral branches, to give the first one time to strengthen, as well as the spire. It's only the following year, the third year of planting, that a second series of 4 or 5 branches can be taken with impunity, that the tree will be strong and will then develop vigorous wood that will not harm the first series. A space of 35 to 40 centimetres is needed between the structural branches, so that air and light can penetrate well into the interior. To form espalier or counter-espalier trees, we take the two best-placed branches, one on the right, the other on the left, and the most vigorous; we then choose the best-placed branch in the middle to continue the development of what we call the mother branch, which is nothing other than the tree's extension in height; If the mother branch takes on too much sap - which happens eleven times out of twelve, especially with peach trees - it should be pinched off during the course of vegetation. At the following year's pruning, if the trees have developed vigorous wood, we dispense with pruning, or at least shorten them very little, to about a quarter of the developed length, with the exception of the mother branch, which we prune over two eyes, to give the first two lateral branches time to strengthen, and at this pruning, we don't take any other series of supporting branches; it's only at the third pruning, when the base is strong enough, that we take the second series of branches. Since this framework does not allow us to dwell any further on tree training and care, those wishing to learn more about arboriculture should obtain special treatises in which they will find the technical terms, their value and their application. Apart from exceptions due to excess or lack of vigor, pear trees are pruned into pyramid, cattail or espalier shapes at two-thirds of the length of the last shoot, although for the first two shapes, the arrow that continues the tree should be pruned shorter. This is done until fruiting has become abundant, at which point 2 to 4 eyes are pruned short, depending on strength, to ensure that the tree will produce good fruit for a long time to come. With the exception of the peach tree, other fruit trees are treated in the same way, although this one requires a short pruning when it grows little and fructifies a lot. Fruit-bearing branches are pruned 6 to 8 centimetres from the wood branch, except for those stronger than a pencil, which should be cut off at the crown or impasto; and to ensure that the fruit acquires beauty and quality, no confusion should be allowed to arise which might prevent the free circulation of air and light, by removing branches that are too close together. As soon as the tree is well established, we shorten the fruit-bearing branches to avoid exhausting the tree by producing too much fruit. The operations are more or less the same: the balancing pinch, which consists in pinching, as soon as they have acquired 3 to 6 centimetres, the branches placed on the framework branches and which live to their detriment, and those badly placed which cause confusion, which it's a good idea not to let develop in order to remove them at the next pruning. In this case, pinching regulates sap flow. Fruit pinching can be carried out from June 20th to 30th; its aim is to stop the development of fruit-bearing branches by breaking them off 6 or 8 centimetres from their base, in order to force the sap back onto the eyes of the part holding the woody branch, and force some of them to turn into fruit. The arrow is only pinched in the exceptional circumstances of overgrowth. The more we prune trees, the less fruit they produce; the more we pinch them, the more we weaken them. They need to be pinched and pruned to make them produce beautiful fruit and to shape them; apart from the results to be obtained, the repetition of these operations can only be harmful to the trees. Our scope is too limited to discuss the insects and diseases that attack fruit trees. However, we cannot refrain from saying a few words about cochineal(t), which is spreading in a worrying way in our regions, as it seriously threatens plantations if it is not remedied. To prevent the disease, simply lime the trees annually after leaf fall, adding soot, ash and black or green soap to the lime, one kilogram per ten liters of water. To cure them, add 100 grams of turpentine to the quantity of water and soap, dilute well and brush strongly over the bark to impregnate it with the liquid. PEARS The best pears to plant are those for the first and last seasons, (1) Gall-insect. when other good table fruits are in short supply. The following list gives the names of the ripening varieties, from the first good ripe ones to the last ones which reach May. The varieties listed for each species are not only the best, but also the ones that produce the most and regularly, as well as being robust and vigorous. The less vigorous varieties that should be planted on free-standing are marked with an asterisk. Citron des Carmes or StJean vert. Doyennée de juillet. Beurrée Giffard. Favorite de Clapp. August Gros Rousselet. Bonne d'Ezée. Boussoch deanery. Souvenir du Congrès. Good Christian William. Lord Esperen. Louise bonne d'Avranche Fondante des bois. Duchess of Angouleme. Beurrée gris. Doyennée roux. Beurrée Bachellier. Zéphirin Grégoire. Secrée de Montluçon. Beurrée d'Hardempont. Beurrée Diel. Passe-Colmar. Pas-e-Crassanne. Doyennée d'hiver. Bergamotte Esperen. Beurrée Perreault. Léon Lecler de Laval. And a hundred other varieties for connoisseurs. Here are the top varieties for all seasons. Barowski. Postophe d'été. Fenouillet le gros. Ribston pip. Calville red. white. Reinette d'Angleterre. - Canada. Reinette franche. de Caux. Reine des reinettes. Cusset. Champ-Gaillard. And countless other varieties for apple lovers. PÈCHES The following varieties are the best for the whole season: Grosse Mignonne hâtive. Grosse Mignonne. Belle Beausse. Willermoz. Reine des vergers. Pêche lisse. Teissier. From Syria, very robust for full wind. Velvety Nivette. Tardive d'Oullins. And other varieties just as good for amateurs. ABRICOTS Good apricots don't form a very extensive list; the early varieties are the most sought-after, as they ripen before the first peaches; once these have arrived, the early ones are rarely sought-after. Early peach apricot. - Alexandrin. - de Collonges. common. Desfarges (early). - early violet - from Oullins. golden. Ste-Catherine for prunes. Bigarreau Jaboulais. Cerise belle de Soisson. May-Duke cherry. late, very good. Balmont or Luizet. White for compote. Quetsche d'Allemagne, for prunes. Jefferson. De Pontbriant. Darp d'or d'Esperen Goutte d'or. Reine-Claude de Bavay. CERISES gros rouge. Napoléon. Esperen. Peach. EARLY white Reine-Claude plums. - Montmorency cherry. - Donna Maria cherry. Griotte du nord (for brandy.) Guigne La Garcine. And many others. RAISINS The list of grapes is very long, but the choice of good table grapes is easy to make, since the basis of such a plantation is generally Chasselas de Fainebleau and Frenkenthal proper. Chasselas de Fontaine- bleau. de Florence, (early). rose (good ageing potential). - de Falloux. musqué. Madeleine blanc (early). Malingre (early). Muscat blanc. Caillaba. - red. - Alexandria. Frenkenthal, black. Fintindo. Tokai. And a large number of beautiful varieties for amateurs. FOR THE OUTDOOR, their special meridian, their habits, their culture. Decorate your home, if you want to enjoy it. A large number of plants are suitable for decorating a garden and the surroundings of a country house; but to use them, it's important to know how to make a choice, the habits of each one, when they flower, and the means that practice indicates, to bring them to produce the full effect of which they are susceptible. Some can be used to make up flowerbeds; others to form borders; some to delight the eye with the brilliance of their flowers; others to charm the eye with their rich, varied foliage; others, with climbing stems, can be used to conceal trellises and form light, graceful cradles. Some plants have bulbs or claws, such as Crocus, Hyacinths, Tulips, Anemones and Ranunculus, which should preferably be planted from October to November, so that they flower earlier and more beautifully. Some perennials, such as dolphinelles, penstemons, Phlox decussates, garden primroses and Indian chrysanthemums, can be treated like biennials, or propagated by root bursts. The most suitable time to divide strains is after flowering. Biennials such as Violets, Yellow Wallflowers, Daffodils and Poets' Carnations can be sown in spring, transplanted in nurseries and placed in beds in winter, where they will flower the following spring. Some annuals, or those considered as annuals in cultivation, such as Forget-me-nots, Pansies, Silenas and Calabrian Saponaria, require sowing and transplanting; Colinsie bicolore, Julienne de Mahon, Cynoglosse à feuilles de lin, Miroir de Vénus, Pied-d'Alouette d'Ajax, Némophiles, on the other hand, benefit from being sown in place in autumn; they then occupy bare soil, and transplanting would have been unfavorable to them. Some plants, such as Curacao Milkweed, Lantana, Slender Niérembergie and Madagascar Periwinkle, can be made suitable for cultivation in the open ground, by treating them as annuals, even though they are greenhouse plants. (A) To do this, they are sown in February or March, on a bed or under a frame; when the plants are strong enough, they are transplanted into cups of Om04; In May or June, they are acclimatized to garden temperatures, making them suitable for summer bedding, replacing the plants listed above that flowered in the first season, such as Forget-me-nots, Silenas, Colinsia, etc., etc. Finally, there are some cold greenhouse or orangery plants, such as Fuchsias, Pelargonium zonal and Verbena, which can be used to great advantage by taking cuttings in autumn. In general, for plants that are to be transplanted, it's best to sow them in the ground or in pots in March-April, either under a frame or in the open air, but in the best exposed part of the garden; transplanting potted plants is much easier, and their vegetation is not interrupted. For potted seedlings, it's important to avoid shrinkage caused either by overcrowding, or by excessive heat in an atmosphere that isn't sufficiently renewed. A plant in a bed or border does not live indefinitely; it may not die but stop flowering, or its exhaustion may cause it to produce only a few thin, lacklustre flowers. In principle, there are two ways of replacing it and perpetuating the flowering of the bed. The first is to sow the same species at different dates, so that the blooms of some follow those of others. The plants we'll be listing for beds can be grown in this way: Petunias, Phlox de Drummond, Julienne de Mahon, etc. The second method involves replacing one species with another. For this, Balsamines, Matricaires du Cap, Reines-Marguerites, Chrysanthemums of India, Dahlias, Fuchsias, Pentstémons, Véroniques, Sauge resplendissante, etc., are of great help. These should be grown in beds or nurseries, in a part of the kitchen garden, until flowering approaches; they are then lifted in clumps and placed in the beds they are to decorate. It's difficult to pinpoint the time when plants produce their full effect. The year's temperature, exposure and various cultivation operations can all affect it. In the following list, we indicate in the second column the time of sowing. In the third column, we give the approximate height of the plants to facilitate their placement, so that the lower plants can be placed at the edges of alleys, beds or flowerbeds, in gradation, with the higher plants moving away from the alleys. In this way, instead of obstructing each other's view, they contribute to each other's beauty, as the shorter ones hide the stems of the taller ones, forming a carpet of flowers. The fourth is the time of flowering. For those that merit particular observation, they are indicated at the bottom of each page. SPECIES NAMES. AGERATUM (1). AGROSTEMA COLI ROSA (2). ALYSSUM BENTHAMI (3). COCKSCOMB AMARANTH. ANTIRINUM MUFLIER (4). ANCHUSA (5). ASCLEPIAS DE CURAÇAO (6). BALSAMINES various. BASILIC (7). BRACHYCOME (8). BROWALIA (9). NIGHT BEAUTIES JALAPES. - DE JOUR CONVOLVULUS. BLEUET or BARBEAU. CACALIA. Dwarf CAPUCINES (10). Month to sow! Hauil faut semer. mars-mai mars-mai févr. aout mars-mai févr.-août mars-mai févr.-mars mars-mai avril mars-mai mars-mai mars-juin mars-mai avril-mai avril-juin CHRYSANTHÈME à carène (IIl avril mai teur. 40c 30 20 50 60 50 50 60 30 30 60 60 40 50 40 40 70 Flowering time july-nov. june-july june-nov. june-nov. july-oct. june-sept. july-oct. june-octob. june-octob. june-octob. june-octob. july-sept. june-octob. july-octob. (1) Cultivation (see page 70, A). (2) Transplant young plants. (3) Successive sowings; attractive white garnish for bouquets. (4) Biennial; blooms in May in second year. (5) Often overwinters; very pretty blue flowers for bouquets. 16) Cultivation. See page 70. A. (7) More for the smell of its leaves than for its flowers. (8) Pretty border plant. (9) For beds and bouquets. (410) Does not mind light exposure. (di) Very hardy. GLARKIA 14 COLINSIA (1). CONVOLVULUS (See belle de jour. POPPY (2). COREOPSIS.  COREOPSIS DRUMOND (3). CYNOGLOSSE a f. de lin (4). DIGITALE (5). DRACOCEPHAL MOLDAVI. ESCHOLTZIA (6). ELICRYSUM BRACTEACTUN(T GAILLARDIA PICTA. GENTIANA. GOMPHRÈNE GLOBOSA (8). GILLIA (9). GLAYEUL (10). GIROFLÉE quarantaine. GIROFLÉE biennial (11). GIROTLÉE yellow (12). GYPSOPHILA (13). HÉBIANTHUS (Sun). Month in which to sow! Hauil faut semer. mars-mai févr.-mai mars-avril mars à mai mars à mai oct.-fév.-juin mai-oût mars-avril mars-avril mars à juin mars à juin mars à mai mars à mai févr. à juin mars à juin mars à juil. mars-mai teur. 40c 30 70 40 30 m 60 30 70 40 30 m 40 50 60 40 Flowering time. july-sept. june-july may to june june-sept. june-sept. may-july june-july july-sept. june-octob. july to nov. june to nov. june to nov. may to aug. july-oct. june to nov. march to may march-may june to aug. 1 feb. to may (I-3el aug. to oct. (1) Can also be sown in october, but always in situ. (2) Does not transplant, can also be sown in September. (3) Very suitable for bedding. (4) Does not transplant, pretty white flower for bouquets. (5) Blooms only the second year. (6) Very hardy, can be dried in place. (7) The flower, picked before the seed is mature, can be preserved and used to make bouquets in winter. (8) Same observ. as Elicrysums. Soak seeds in advance. (9) Can also be sown as a biennial, from August to October. (10) Glayeuls can be planted as onions. (11) Transplant in nursery, overwinter in pots in a sheltered spot or covered with dry leaves. (12) Very hardy, double-flowered variety. (13) Very advantageous for bouquets, given the lightness of its flowers and stems. Month in which] Hauil should be sown. teur. Time of flowering. BERIS THLASPI variegated (1). JULIENNE DE MAHON (2). LINARIA BIPARTITA (3). LINSEED (4). march to july feb. to aug. march to june march to may LOBELIA ERINUS (5). april-may LUPIN. LYCHNIS CROIX DE MALTE (6 MALOPE. it. MATRICARIA. MIRABILIS JALAPA. MUFLIER. MYOSOTIS (7).  NEMOPHILE (8). ŒNOTHERA. CHINESE CARNATION (9). FLEMISH CARNATION (10). PAVOT (11). April-May June-July March-June March-April v. B. de nuit v. Antirinum May to August Feb. to June March to April March to June Feb. to April 35c 25 30 30 10 50 60 80 50 25 15 50 25 60 80 PENSÉE à grande fleur (12).) july-aug.) 15 june to oct. june to oct. june-sept. june to sept. may to nov. june-july june-july june to sept. sept. to nov. May June-Aug. July-Oct. June-Oct. June-July June-July March-July (1) Transplant young plants; successively sown white is very advantageous for bouquets. (2) Successively sown, it makes pretty borders; it can also be sown in October (does not transplant). (3) Sow in place. (4) Perennial variety with blue flowers. (5) Does not mind partial shade; little or no burying of seeds. (6) Perennial, flowers only in second year. (7) Myosotis Azorica Cœlestina, new variety. Sow in March on a bed; blooms in first year. (8) Sow in November; blooms in May. (9) Heddwig carnations can be grown in the same way, flowering equally in the first and second years, from May to June; the second flowering is more uniform than the first. (10) Flowering only in the second year; it is advantageous to perpetuate good varieties by marcotting, which takes place in July-August. (11) Does not transplant. (12) Could also be sown in spring, but its flowering is much less beautiful in hot weather. because (1). PETUNIA hybrida (2). PHACELIA (3). PHLOX DRUMONDI (4). LARKSPUR (5). large-flowered POURPIER (6). garden primrose (7). QUEEN DAISY (8). fragrant reseda (9). INDIAN ROSE. HOLLYHOCK (10). SALPIGLOSSIS (11). SALVIA SPLENDENS (12). SCABIOSA (13). SANVITALIA (14). SCHIZANTHUS (15). (1) See page 70, A. Month in which] Hauil must be sown. feb.-March March to June March to May March-June no.-feb.-March April to June March to June March-June March to May March to June March-May March to June March-May teur. 50c 40 50 30 40 10 20 30-60 15 60 2m 60 80 60 10 March-April ! 80 Flowering time. august-sept. june-nov. july to sept. june-nov. may-june-july. june-sept. march april august-nov. june-octob. july-august june-octob. sept. to nov. june-octob. june-octob. july to sept. (2) To keep them uniform, lay down stems that rise too much or prune them. (3) Sow them in place. (4) Transplant young, before they start to climb. (5) Do not transplant. (6) Likes hot, dry places; double-flowered variety, little or no seed covering. (7) Perennial; fears high heat, good border plant, does not flower until the second year. (8) Reproduce several times to obtain plants that are full and easy to form ma sifs at the start of flowering. (9) Mixed with purslane around homes, it provides the greenery they lack and spreads a very pleasant fragrance, even in apartments. (1b) Rarely flowers the first year of sowing. (11) Transplant young plants. (12) Can be propagated by cuttings and overwinters in a lighted greenhouse. (13) New dwarf variety, 40 cm high. (14) Very good for borders; double-flowered variety. (15) See page 70. A. SENEÇON elegant (1). SENSITIVE PUDIQUE (2). SILENE (3). SOLANUN LACINIATUM. STEVIA. TAGETTES (4). THLASPI variegated. hybrid VERBENA (5). VISCARIA, see Agrostema. ZINNIA elegant (6). ZINNIA mexicana (7.) Month of sowing! March to May July-August April March-April April-May see Iberis Feb-April March to May March to May! teur. 60c 30 1230 60 50 20 70 40 Flowering time. august to oct. may following august-octob. august-octob. june-nov. may-nov. june to nov. june to nov. (1) New dwarf variety, 25 cm high. (2) Prefers greenhouses to the open air. (3) Can be transplanted in beds and used as a winter bedding plant. (4) Very hardy. (5) More vigorous when sown than cut; soak seeds for 24 hours before sowing. Care, see page 70. A. (6) Very hardy, double-flowered variety; very pretty plant. (7) Attractive yellow, making very pretty beds and edges to large beds. AMARANTE mélancolique, dark red foliage, very attractive. BALISIER or CANNA, from 1.50 to 2 meters high, can be sown from February to May in beds, but can also be stored in a rice paddy for the following year; simply bring them in before winter, after drying them in the sun for a few days and placing them in a dry cellar or on the shelves of an orangery, and replant them the following spring. To enjoy their full brilliance, they must be fertilized and watered sparingly. MARITIME CINERARY, whitish foliage all summer, brilliant yellow flowers, very pretty plant for edging beds of purple-leaved plants, such as: Coleus, Perilla and Amaranth, etc., etc. It can also be propagated from cuttings or marcottes overwintered in a greenhouse or orangery, and planted out the following spring. COLEUS VERSCHAFFELTII, very rich in color, but very delicate to overwinter (warm greenhouse). GINERIUM ARGENTEUM; to keep them over winter, join the leaves, tie and fold them, and surround the base with dry leaves, sand or wheat bales. HELIANTHUS OR SUN. NANKIN PERILLA, with purple-black leaves, sows from March to May. RICIN or PALMA CHRISTI, green or red; a plant of majestic effect. SAlvia ARGeNTeA, white down-covered foliage; sow in beds. SENEÇON MARITIME, see Cinéraire Maritime. SOLANUM. WIGANDIA, magnificent habit, very ample foliage, overwinters in a warm greenhouse. SOME GRIMPANT PLANTS CAPUCINE wide variety. COBEA SCANDENS; sow in a bed in March, transplant into a pot and plant out in May; grows very quickly. COLOQUINTES, a variety of fruits, a low-care, fast-growing plant that provides very compact shade. VOLUBILIS HIPOMYES, varied, great effect. LOPHOSPERMUM SCANDENS. For cultivation, see Cobea. LOASA ORANTIACA. Cultivation, see Cobea. MAURANDIA SIMPERFLORENS. Cultivation, see Cobea. MOMORDICA BALSAMINA. Various-scented peas. Among climbers, perennials and woody plants, there are some that are very useful for forming cradles or tons; among these, the following stand out: ARISTOLOCHE. BIGNONIA, small and large-flowered. CELASTRE, climbing. CLÉMATITE, many fine varieties. CHESTNUT, many beautiful varieties. GLYCINE from China, covering large areas. JASMIN. VARIETIES, for shaded areas. ROSER BANKS, multiflora, etc. VINE VINE. Moles and toads have found zealous and devoted defenders, who have warmly pleaded the cause of their usefulness in agricultural and gardening forums. Did they convince everyone? We don't think so, especially when it comes to moles. But no sensible agronomist has yet dared to extol the benefits of the courtillière. After all, the mole is the eternal and mortal enemy of the farmer and gardener. It destroys everything in its path, especially seedlings and young herbaceous plants, and as if obeying a secret, diabolical command, it prefers to cut young plants that have the most beautiful appearance, and on which the grower places his greatest hopes. Many means of destroying them have been invented and advocated to date, but none has yet effectively achieved the proposed goal. One such method is to find the insect's vertical hole on the surface of the earth with the finger, and to pour oiled, soapy or tarred water into it, in order to remove or suffocate it. But this method is too meticulous, and fatty substances - oil, soap, tar - are harmful to the fertility of the soil. This other method is a little more practical, but still leaves a lot to be desired. Small piles of manure are placed in isolated areas of the garden, at certain distances, at Om, 05 below ground level, and watered to maintain freshness. Courtillières take refuge there during the day. Careful stirring of the manure piles from time to time uncovers the courtillières and kills them. But not all of them make the rendezvous. Here's another more effective method, but one that also requires a little care: You can line seedbeds or young plants that you want to protect from the ravages of courtillières with small wooden boards or zinc strips about 10 centimetres wide. These should be sunk 7 centimetres into the ground, leaving a 3-centimetre protrusion; a notch should be made at each end, so that an empty pot can be placed between the two without any apparent interruption. This pot should be set one to two centimetres lower than the surface of the soil; as the courtillières trace their galleries, they meet the planks, which they follow naturally, and fall into the pots where they are destroyed. Strips can also be placed across the seedbeds, with pots at the ends. Another more effective method is to use cats. They are bred from father to son to hunt courtillières; they roam the garden in the morning, evening and night, when insects emerge from the ground in search of food. The cats catch and eat them. We've noticed that this game makes them lose weight instead of gaining it. All of the above are good ways of protecting seedlings from damage, while at the same time destroying courtillières. But here's the easiest and surest way to destroy them: it's as simple as it is economical. From September 15th to 30th, make a square hole 60 to 75 centimetres deep and 50 centimetres square in some part of the infested area, then fill it with dry horse manure which has not even been wet; pack it well, and cover the manure with tiles or flat stones, so as to exert pressure while providing shelter. In January or February, remove this manure and you'll find all the courtillières in the area. "I've counted them by the thousands," says M. Lacalm, author of the system. (Extract from Revue Horticole, August 1, 1868).  Choice of plants, in alphabetical order, to grow in the vegetable garden . Strawberry plants . General rule . - . . - . . - Influence of the moon on cultivation ... . Farm fruit garden . Purins ... ... ... . Various shapes . The espalier peach tree . Vines ... . Distances . - . Oblique cordons . Planting . Tree pruning ... ... ... . Pyramid formation . - . . - . - . . . . . - . . . . - - - . . . . . . .. Training of espalier trees . . . . . . . . . Pruning fruit-bearing branches. Pinching . 3 43 44 1 5 56 58 58 31 62 The best fruit varieties . . . from 64 to 67 Ornamental plants for the garden . List of ornamental plants that reproduce easily by sowing. Foliage plants for beds... ... . Some climbing plants. Destruction of courtillières" - - ... ... ... ... ... ... . 68 80 82 ET DE FLEURS, OIGNONS A FLEURS DE HOLLANDE Outils d'agriculture et d'horticulture, Chez Mee RIVOIRE Md Grainier, rue d'Algérie, 16, RVON. FRUIT TREES OF ALL SPECIES From F. MOREL, nurseryman, rue du Souvenir, Lyon (Jaise). He is in charge of plantations, garden layouts and landscapes of all kinds.