Paillieux, Auquste (1812-1898). Author of the text. Le potager d'un curieux: histoire, culture et usages de 250 plantes comestibles peu connues ou inconnues (3rd edition, entirely redone...) I by A. Paillieux.... D. Bois,.... 1899. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is a digital reproduction of works in the public domain from BnF collections. Their reuse is governed by French law no. 78-753 of July 17, 1978: -Non-commercial reuse of this content, or reuse as part of an academic or scientific publication, is free of charge, provided that current legislation is complied with, and in particular that the source of the content is stated as follows: "Source gallica.bnf. fr / Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use is understood to mean the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates revenue: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a service or product for which a fee is charged, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE ETALA LICENCE RATES 2/ Gallica content is the property of BnF, in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the French General Code of Public Property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are: reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. These documents may not be reused, except in the context of private copying, without the prior authorization of the copyright holder. -reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 71 To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation. commercialeobnf. fr. Source gallicabnf.fr ( INRAE ELIEUI ANTIER ~ ~~~ ~~~ ouuttop se LE ENIR PI ANTR 2 4 I ER D'UN CURIEUX D'UN CURIEUX HISTOIRE, CULTURE " USAGES DE 250 PLANTES COMESTIBLES PEU CONNUES OU INCONNUES PAR A. PAILLIEUX Honorary Board Member D. BOIS Assistant de la Chaire de Culture de la Société nationale d'Acclimatation ! au Muséum d'Histoire naturelle de Paris Troisième édition entièrement retaite 80 FIGURES DANS LE TEXTE PARIS LIBRAIRIE AGRICOLE DE LA MAISON RUSTIQUE 26, RUE JACOR, 26 1899 1 It is with a deep sense of sadness that I see published today, without M. Paillieux being here to receive it. Paillieux to receive the first copy, the third edition of this book, whose preparation my late collaborator had followed with such interest, and which he did not have the joy of seeing published before his death. Despite his advanced age, Mr. Paillieux had retained a verve that made me hope, for many more days, for his active and precious collaboration in our common work, pursued for over twenty years. Indeed, it was in 1876 that Mr. Paillieux did me the honor of associating me with his work. Attracted to each other by a similarity of tastes in studies, it wasn't long before we struck up a friendship that has been one of the greatest charms of my life. I shall never forget the joys I experienced in the company of this good man, of keen intelligence, ardent, gifted to the highest degree with the spirit of research, of remarkable uprightness of character and exquisite kindness. Thanks to him, for almost a quarter of a century I have been able to pursue studies that would have been impossible for me to undertake on my own. I am at a loss for words to express the gratitude I owe to this excellent man, who honored me with his trust and friendship. Given my involvement in Mr. Paillieux's work, it is not for me to pass judgment on his achievements. I can only say that he was a passionate and selfless amateur, practicing horticulture at its most useful for mankind - the search for new food plants - and that the greatest joy of his old age was to see the Crosne he had so ardently propagated enter the mainstream. However, to pay due homage to his memory, I reproduce below an article which appeared in the Revue Horticole of April 16 1898, under the signature of its director, Mr. Bourguignon, an article which I am publishing in full, despite the overly eulogistic sentences devoted to me personally. Paris, January 2nd 1899. D. Bois. NICOLAS-AUGUSTE PAILLIEUX! In its February 16th issue, the Revue Horticole announced the death of Mr. A. Paillieux, who died in Paris at the age of 85. But the short notice it was able to insert in its fortnightly chronicle is inadequate in view of the services rendered by this fine man, not only to French horticulture, but to the country itself, for it is in these terms that we feel we should describe the introduction and popularization of a new vegetable. If we look at the new food plants introduced into our gardens over the last century, we'll see that there are only three that can be considered to be of any interest: Chinese yam, which has not spread much for various reasons; chervil bulheux, of excellent quality, but of very uncertain cultivation; and Crosne. Thanks to Mr. Paillieux's patient research and persevering efforts, Crosne is now widespread not only in Frauce, but in all European countries, and every year consumption of this excellent vegetable grows more considerable. In Paris, Crosne now appears all winter not only in fruit shops, but also in the carriages of four-season merchants; and its price has become accessible to all. This is because the Crosne combines first-rate qualities: absolute rusticity in our climate; extremely easy cultivation; very abundant production; simple and rapid culinary preparation; beautiful appearance, pleasant flavor; and lastly, a great wealth of easily-assimilable substances, making it invaluable for delicate stomachs. If the service rendered by Mr. Paillieux is really as great as we say it is, how is it that not only has his name remained virtually unknown to the public, but that he himself has never received encouragement or rewards of any kind from the Societies that must not have been unaware of his work, or from the powers that be? The reason lies in the truly exceptional modesty of this silent worker. Mr. Paillieux himself abhorred noise, abhorred loud advertising; and unfortunately, all that is necessary to attract attention. He would have liked nothing better than for people to talk about Crosne, to say all the good things it deserved, but only on condition that the vegetable be the focus of attention, without mentioning the name of its popularizer. What we were unable to do during Mr. Paillieux's lifetime, we have (1) Revue horticole, 1898, page 176. the right to try now, and we consider it our duty to pay his memory the tribute it deserves, by saying what Mr. Paillieux was, what he did, how he directed his research, and by trying to shed some light on this life of probity and useful work. Mr. Paillieux, born in Paris on September 10, 1812, was destined for commerce and industry as soon as he had completed his classical studies. We don't need to go into the serious qualities he showed in business: intelligent, hard-working and active, he quickly saw the embroidered tulle and embroidery company he managed prosper. We can only say that it was under the trade name of Paillieux-Salats that the lace-like cotton tulle industry, which has become so important since then, was created in Saint-Pierre-lez-Calais around 1840. Having left the business in 1871, Mr. Paillieux, who had always been involved in gardening in his spare time, devoted himself entirely to horticulture. He would spend summers near Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, in the small village of Crosnes, whose name, hitherto unknown, is now popular, since it was precisely this village that Mr. Paillieux chose to give a common name to Stachys affinis. As soon as he settled in Crosnes, Mr. Paillieux wanted to give his passion for gardening a useful purpose, and resolved to devote himself to the experimental cultivation of all plants, rare or little-known, which could be assumed to have food-giving properties. As soon as his crops were established, Mr. Paillieux entrusted their upkeep to Mr. Véniat, an experienced gardener, whose name must be mentioned here, as he remained in his service for twenty-five years, demonstrating real intelligence in the execution of the work entrusted to him. Mr. Paillieux became a member of the Société nationale d'horticulture de France in 1875, and in 1876 presented to the Society the first plants obtained from his garden at Crosnes, notably the edible Souchet (Cyperus esculentus), the tubers of which are used in Spain to make a drink called Chufa. It was at this time that Mr. Paillieux made the acquaintance of Mr. Bois, then a botanical preparator attached to the Muséum's herbarium, who immediately became, and remained until the end, his assiduous collaborator in the research and study of useful plants. The choice of this collaborator would suffice to show the extent to which Mr. Paillieux knew how to judge the value of men. A knowledgeable botanist with a thorough understanding of plant growth and properties, Mr. Bois also possessed the qualities of order and method essential to the successful conduct of experiments... Let me stop here, because our excellent friend and collaborator, Mr. Bois, is also a modest man, and he would not forgive the Revue for saying here all the good it thinks of him. As early as 1876, Messrs Paillieux and Bois began experiments to see whether it would not be possible to increase the number of our all-too-scarce winter vegetables, by subjecting certain plants to etiolation, in order to obtain products similar to those obtained from wild Chicory, and which are so sought-after under the names of Capuchin Beard and Witloof (Endive). Starting from the principle that the parts we look for in vegetables are generally those which are removed from the influence of light, they cultivated in the dark, for two consecutive winters, a large number of plants which seemed to them to be of such a nature as to be able to be made usable in this way. The results of these experiments were recorded in a small book entitled Nouveaux légumes d'hiver, published in 1879. In this work, the authors recommend the culling of various plants to obtain etiolates, which could constitute a new element in the supply of our tables. Mr. Paillieux wasted no time in broadening his experiments by applying them to the study of food plants used in various parts of the globe, but as yet unknown in France. And so began a campaign of correspondence and representations, which you'd really have to have witnessed to believe. Thousands of unanswered letters and unsuccessful approaches could be counted! Nevertheless, he did so much and so well that he ended up attracting the interest of naturalist travellers, botanists, directors of French and foreign colonial gardens, consuls, missionaries and certain large horticultural establishments, who became his suppliers of seeds and living plants (1). (1) To give an idea of the number and quality of the correspondents from whom Mr. Paillieux received shipments of seeds or plants, we publish below a list of the main ones: Europe France. - Natural History Museum. - Societé nationale d'acclimatation. - Maison Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie - Dr Sagot, author of the Manuel des cultures tropicales. - M. Naudin, director of the Villa Thuret, Antibes - M. Blanchard, director of the Jardin Botanique de la Marine, Brest. - Mr. Plauchon, director of the Montpellier botanical garden. - Mr. Ed. André, editor-in-chief of the Revue horticole, Paris. - M. Raoul, explorer. England. - Kew Gardens: Sir J. Hooker. Greece. - Botanical Garden of Athens: M. de Heldreich. Italy. - Botanical Garden of Palermo: M. Todaro. - Horticultural Society of Pallanza (Lake Maggiore.) - Botanical Garden of Turin: Dr Mattirolo Russia. - Société impériale d'acclimatation: Mr. Zolotnitsky. - Jardin botanique de Saint-Péters- bourg: M. Regel and M. Bataline. Asia China. - R. P. Heude, Dr Bretschneider, Mr Ford, Mr Eug. Simon, former consul. Japan. - Dr Hénon, Mr Jarmain, Mr Bernhardt Bing. Persia. - Mr. Pissard. India. - Messrs Cotteau, Ermens and Boulay. Jara. - Dr de la Savinière, Dr Treub, director of the Buitenzorg garden. Cochinchine. - Mr Martin, head gardener of the Saigon botanical garden. Pondicherry. - Mr. Poulain. Tonkin. - Mr Balansa. Turkestan. - Mr. Capus. Bagdad. - Mr. Métaxas. Abyssinic Africa. - Mer Crouzet. Algeria. - Mr Marès, Mr Durando. Congo. - Mr. Pobeguin. Gabon. - Mr Pierre, Director of the Libreville trial garden. Comoros. - Mr. Humblot. Madagascar. - R. P. Camboué. Reunion Island. - M. de Cordemoy. Mauritius. - Mr Daruty de Grandpré. Egypt. - Mr. Delchevalerie. Transvaal. - Messrs Mingard and Creuv. Natal. - Mr Wood. Cape Town. - Mr. Mac Owan. America United States. - Mr Mechan, Dr Haward. Baja California. - Mr Diguet. Costa Rica. - Mr. de Lafon. Venezuela. - Dr Ernst and Mr Hahn. Aroentine Republic. - Mr Barbier and Mr Berthault. Chile. - Mr Philippi. Brazil. - Mr Albuquerque. West Indies. - Mr. Bureau. Oceania Australia. - Baron von Mueller. New Zealand. - Dr Kirk. New Caledonia. - M. Perret. Over 250 plants from all over the world were cultivated at Crosnes. There were many failures, but nothing discouraged Mr. Paillieux, who found indomitable energy in his passion to be useful. The results of these trials, both good and bad, were collected in a volume entitled Le Potager d'un curieux, Histoire, Culture et l'sages de cent plantes comestibles peu connues ou inconnues, published in 1885, in collaboration with Mr. D. Bois. This highly original book was a great success, and a second edition, published in 1892, presented the results of new experiments. In studying all the food plants available to them, the authors were not only aiming to provide continental France with new products. Among the species they had in their possession, there were a good number which, although uncultivable in temperate regions, were of the greatest interest to countries in the inter-tropical zone. In this respect, Le Potager d'un curieux is destined to be of great service to all those involved in colonial cultivation. A number of plants have been propagated by Mr. Paillieux. Among the most important is the Soya (Soja hispida), for which he has published a complete monograph. But, as we said earlier, the real service rendered by Mr. Paillieux was the introduction and popularization of Crosne (Stachys affinis), which has taken such a prominent place among our most precious winter vegetables. Stachys affinis, Bunge (S. tuberifera, Naudin), absolutely unknown outside China and Japan, was sent by Dr. Breitschneider, physician to the Russian legation in Peking; and it was the few tubers that arrived in the most mediocre state of preservation that Mr. Paillieux cultivated, and which were the original source of all those used to spread the plant everywhere. Mr. A. Paillieux died in Paris on February 8, at the age of 85, after a short illness, just as he had begun correcting the proofs of the 3rd edition of Potager d'un curieux. He retained the same zeal for work and passion for horticulture to the very end. Mr. Paillieux was an honorary member of the Council of the Société nationale d'acclimatation, and for many years vice-president of the Société's plant section. He expressed himself with remarkable precision and clarity, and charmed by the elegance of his speech as much as by the soundness of his judgment. All those who had the honor of knowing Mr. Paillieux, as well as remembering the prodigious activity of this worker who seemed always on the move, will treasure the memory of his exquisite affability and kindness. (Revue horticole.) L. BOURGUIGNON. For the past ten years, we have been cultivating a large number of little-known or unknown exotic edible plants. We consider as little-known those whose names we read in a few horticultural treatises, but which are rarely or never found in gardens. We'll cite as examples, among twenty others, Burdock, Baselle, Glaciale and Benincasa, which we consider to be little-known plants. We consider unknown plants to be those that appear only in botanical nomenclatures and are not cultivated anywhere. Examples include Tuberous Mustard, Tuberous Stachys, Miôya, Kudzu, Tuberous Asparagus, etc. There are very few food plants that are absolutely unknown. Among the peoples they visited, explorers had only to open their eyes to see what they ate. Savages eat all plants that grow spontaneously and require no care. Peoples with a civilization different from our own, but highly advanced, cultivate everything that pays for work; they uproot from the wasteland and the woods everything that is edible. In Japan and China, the populations are so poor that no edible plant is neglected. As one of our correspondents said of Lilium tigrinum: "In the province I lived in, they didn't grow it for the table; yet the poor eat it; but what vegetable don't the poor Japanese eat? Another correspondent, referring to Momordica Charantia, wrote: "The Chinese eat it too; they eat everything. It would be easier to list the things of vegetable origin that the Chinese don't eat than those they do." From the foregoing we must conclude that all edible plants are known; that, if we can still come across some that have not been reported, this will be a very rare case; finally, that we do not claim to have introduced absolutely new plants, and that, in reading us, you will not be making a voyage of discovery. If we consult M. A. de Candolle's book L'origine des plantes cultivées, we can see that central and northern Europe was, in more or less ancient times, extremely poor in vegetable plants, and that our soil spontaneously produced only a very small number of them. The species we have today, of which we have obtained countless varieties, came to us successively from countries warmer than our own. Only one vegetable plant, an insignificant one at that, the arrowroot, came to us from the North. Reduced to its natural production, France would have virtually no vegetables. Beans, peas, beans (1), onions, salsify, potatoes, melons, pumpkins, tomatoes, large-fruited strawberries and thirty other common vegetable plants would be lacking, which demonstrates two things: firstly, that new vegetable plants can only be introduced into our crops by requesting them from warmer climates than our own; secondly, that these plants, given the care appropriate to their nature, can thrive in our climate. After ten years of more or less fruitful research, we believe the time has come to report on trials whose end we will never see. The task we have undertaken is of such a nature that it cannot be completed. Experience has shown us that a plant which (1) The origin of the common bean is not known, but it is too sensitive to the cold to have been born in our climate. shows itself to be resistant to cultivation in our climate sometimes has early varieties which, not requiring as long a vegetation period as their type, can take their place in our gardens. These varieties need to be discovered. And it's not just a few leagues from Paris, in the garden we have at our disposal, that we need to continue experimenting with exotic vegetable plants. As we have said, all those whose introduction can be attempted belong to climates much warmer than the one around Paris. Crops that fail in our garden will often succeed between the Loire and the Mediterranean. What we can only obtain using market gardening methods can, in the Midi, be obtained in the open air and become the object of a lucrative trade. Railroads facilitate a vegetable trade that distances once made impracticable. We hope that experimentation on the plants to which we draw attention will take place at various points in the region, under conditions more favorable than those imposed on us. Meritorious efforts are already being made in our Mediterranean departments. We wish them every success. We present the results, good or bad, that each trial has given us. Future experimenters will therefore be able to avoid useless experiments, or at least choose the plants that seem to offer the best chances of success. Educated by the synonyms we have carefully indicated, he will not be exposed to receiving under an unknown name, and consequently as a new plant, a species he may have had for a long time, and which, sometimes, he may even have rejected from his crops. Our aim is to extend the field of vegetable horticulture; if we happen to have helped propagate useful plants, however few in number, we shall consider ourselves very fortunate. In the thirteen years since the Société nationale d'Acclimatation began publishing Le Potager d'un Curieux, we have not interrupted our research for a single moment, and have been able to obtain and experiment with over a hundred plants not included in the first edition. Today, after twenty-three years of research, the field seems more or less exhausted, and we doubt whether it will be possible to find one or two species each year that have so far eluded us. Asia, Africa and America have given us what they have, but Oceania, Australia and New Zealand have provided us with nothing, because they really have no indigenous food plants, spontaneous or cultivated, other than Yam, Potato and Taro. It's not, however, that edible plants are in short supply on the inhabited surface of the globe. An American botanist, Mr. Lewis Sturtevant, of South Framingham (Massachusetts), has taken the trouble to count the world's edible plants and has found 4,233 of them, divided into 1,353 species and 170 genera. 211 species, according to the author we quote, are cultivated for cooking, as vegetables; this small number of species would make up only a quarter of the total number of known edible species. Future researchers will undoubtedly be encouraged by these figures to dig even deeper into the immense field in which we no longer know how to discover anything. We wish them well. But, if it is today, if not impossible, or at least very difficult, to find plants in exotic food flora that can be usefully introduced into our vegetable gardens, it would be relatively easy to increase the resources of this kind in our colonies, by giving each of them what it lacks and what the others possess. In the course of our research, we have come to recognize that vegetables commonly used in some of our far-flung possessions are often absolutely unknown in their French sisters. Without neglecting what can be borrowed from abroad, from Japan, China, India, South America and even Africa, we feel that the best way to achieve our goal is through exchange between our colonies, through mutual acclimatization. Success is not in doubt. In several of our possessions, gardens have been established and maintained at public expense, in which European vegetables are grown, and some of them vegetate fairly well, provided the seeds are frequently renewed. In all their establishments or stations, our missionaries also maintain gardens in which they grow these same vegetables, for their own nourishment, and also to teach and propagate their cultivation and use. Just imagine how abundant and healthy the vegetable supply of our colonies would be if, in addition to these European vegetables, which are painstakingly obtained, we were to add those which refuse to grow in our climate, but which would thrive in French Guiana as well as in Gabon, the West Indies and Cochinchina, etc., and which would spread everywhere where our compatriots still suffer cruel hardship today due to the extreme scarcity of food plants. Let's assume for a moment that we're dealing exclusively with the Congo. It has a colonial garden in Libreville, which is in excellent hands, and missionaries in Haut-Congo who do not neglect to grow French vegetables. From Japan and China: Daïkon, Pé-tsaï, Sinapis napiformis, Trapa bicornis, Nélombo; From Cochinchina and Tonkin: Baria beans, Pachyrrhizus angulatus, Ipomxa reptans, numerous varieties of Sojas, the best varieties of Dolics; From Pondicherry and English India : Baselle with heart-shaped leaves, Benincasa cerifera, twenty varieties of Phaseolus Mungo, Cajan or Ambrevade (Cajanus indicus), the square pea (Psophocarpus tetragonolobus), a perennial legume whose pod, raised by four very prominent wings, is excellent for eating green; From New Caledonia and Tahiti : excellent Taros and thirty varieties of Yam; From the West Indies: Gombo, Maranta arundinacea, Cucumis Anguria, Pachyrrhizus tuberosus, Chayote (Sechium edu e), Solanum betaceum or Tree Tomato, a shrub that produces an abundance of sweet, tangy fruit that can be used to make sauces and marmalades; From Ecuador: Solanum muricatum, Solanum quitoense; From South America : Canna edulis and discolor, Arracacia, Dioscorea triloba, as floury and tasty as potatoes, large varieties of Oxalis crenata, Pachyrrhizus tuberosus de la Paz, white Quinoa, Claytone perfoliée, Physalis peruviana, the seven-year old pea or Ilaricot de Lima (Phaseolus lunatus), A perennial bean whose seed is of excellent quality, Dolic Asperge or long pod (Dolichos sesquipedalis), which could be of great service in our colonies due to its abundant production of pods which, picked before full maturity, can be used like green beans; From Java : Coleus tuberosus; Madagascar: Plectranthus ternatus; Madagascar or Cape Bean (Phaseolus capensis); Spain or Asia: Siam Squash. If the Congo received all these plants, which are easy to grow and common in hot countries, would it not be as well provided for as we are in our civilized countries, and would this wide variety of vegetables not be a guarantee of health for white people? At a time when our colonial expansion is occupying everyone's minds and provoking so much effort, the work we are presenting here appeals to all men of good will, directors of botanical gardens, colonial gardeners, missionaries and, in particular, our Société nationale d'Acclimatation. This new edition of Potager d'un Curieux is accompanied by previously unpublished figures and others whose photographs have been kindly made available to us by the management of the Revue horticole, by Vilmorin-Andrieux et Ce, the Société nationale d'Acclimatation and the journal Le Naturaliste. Our warmest thanks to all. ACCOUB DE SYRIE GUNDELIA TOURNEFORTH L. Fam. Compositae. Milky plant like Scolyma. Stem quite strong, twining, reaching Om, 30 to Om, 40 in height. Radical leaves long, deeply incised, with lobes bordered by spiny teeth. The main vein is thick, white and covered with down; stem leaves are sessile, semi-amplexicaul. In June-August, purplish flowers in oval flowerheads resembling those of certain Panicauts (Eryngium). Involucre uniseriate, monophyllous, shorter than the flowers, with scales ending in a spiny point. Corolla regular, glabrous, with five lobes longer than the tube. Stamens 5, not protruding. Stigma bifid. The four florets around the circumference are male or sterile; the central one is hermaphroditic. Fruit (achaine) fairly large, oval, lacking aigrette. Perennial plant, native to Asia Minor, where it grows in uncultivated areas. Tournefort observed it on his voyage to the Levant, and named it Gundelia, after his friend Gundelsheimer, who accompanied him on the trip. For a long time, it was cultivated at the Jardin des Plautes in Paris, using seeds from this trip; it was then lost, but was soon found again. Today, there are a number of strong Gundelia plants here, but they produce very few fer8 4 Fig. 1. - Syrian Accoub (Gundelia Tournefortii). tiles; moreover, as with many plants with taproots or lactes, clump division is hardly practicable. Gundelia is therefore difficult to propagate. Its cultivation also presents some difficulties. Originating in a country where the wet vegetative season is short-lived, followed by a period of absolute drought, it happens that, when cultivated here, the plant has completed its vegetation by midsummer; from this moment onwards, it begins the period of rest, which would correspond precisely, in its country of origin, to the dry season. Our autumns are usually rainy, so the plant must be protected from humidity by covering it with a bell or a frame, otherwise it will soon rot. We have been kindly provided with a letter from Mr. Blanche, French consul in Tripoli, Syria. It reveals a use for the plant that we had not suspected: "As far as plants that live in all environments are concerned, I'm sending you one to which I'd like you to pay special attention: it's the Gundelia Tournefortü L., with large roots and thorny leaves. The Arabs call it Accoub, from which Vaillant had of course formed the genus Hacub. "For many years now, I've wanted to acclimatize it here; I must have sent you some in the past; I sent some to Decaisne and Palermo, etc., etc., and I didn't succeed; I'm starting my naturalization trials again this year. It is especially as a vegetable plant that it deserves attention. The young shoots, stripped of their thorns, and especially the buds in the nascent bud stage, make up a vegetable that is highly esteemed by the Arabs, and which, in my opinion, rivals the artichoke. In Syria, according to Boissier (Flora orientalis), the young stems of this plant are eaten after cooking. It is known as Accoub. Olivier, in his Voyage en Orient, remarks that the roots of this plant are tastier, far less bland than those of Salsify and Scorsonera. There is no doubt," he says, "that this plant succeeds very well throughout southern France, and may become one of our best vegetable plants. (Lamarck, Encyclopédie, suppl.). It can be seen from the above that the roots, stems and flower heads of Accoub are equally edible, in short that the entire plant makes an excellent vegetable. Before Mr. Blanche's letter, it had not been mentioned that the budding flower heads were particularly sought-after, and it is precisely these that we have been able to sample. Up to now, we haven't had enough plants to be able to sacrifice a few of our subjects to eat the roots or ribs, but once the experiment was over, one of us was able to write to friends in June 1886: "Excellent vegetable! Fierce plant! My gardener approached it carefully, pruning shears in hand. He detached about thirty round, flowering buds the size of a large pineapple strawberry. "I cut off the thorns on them and threw them into the fresh water as I went along. "On contact with iron, the section turns black like that of an artichoke. "The buds were cooked in water and accommodated in butter like flageolet beans, without parsley. "The result was extremely satisfying, and this is not only the opinion of the enthusiast writing to you, but also that of his whole family. "The taste of the vegetable is also close to that of Asparagus and Artichoke. "Accoub would be called by gourmets to the highest destinies, if it were not the most formidable of thistles, if cooks could accept it. One of our correspondents, Doctor G..., wrote to us from Dijon in October 1890: "This year, I harvested a crop of Accoub that was found to be excellent by all. The seeds sprout with difficulty, some after a month, others after three months. The flower aborts. The plant then needs at least four years to reach maximum production. We would nevertheless like to draw the attention of enthusiasts to the Gundelia; if it cannot be sold commercially, it deserves a place of honor in their gardens and on their tables. The difficulties its cultivation may present in the vicinity of Paris would not exist in the Var, Alpes-Maritimes, etc., where the distribution of humidity and drought is much the same as in Syria. It is highly desirable that serious trials be carried out, and that a happy outcome be the prize of our consul's persevering zeal. ALLIUM ODORUM L., Mant. 62 (1). Family Liliaceae. Bulb tunnelled, brown. Spike naked. Leaves linear, flat, canaliculate. Multiflora umbel. Flowers white, erect, fairly large, borne on 10 to 15 mm pedicels; bracts hyaline. Spathe bifid, membranous, three or four times shorter (1) This plant should not be confused with the Fragrant Garlic, Allium fragrans Veut. or Nothoscordum fragrans Kunth. than the umbel. Anthers tawny lilac. Ovary three-located, green, surmounted by a short style. Fig. 2 - Garlic with edible flowers (Allium odorum L.). Scented garlic is a vegetable from Japan, where it is called Nira, and from China and Cochinchina. We have received seeds from Yokohama and Saigon. It is pretty enough to be considered ornamental. Allium odorum can be found growing wild in the mountains around Peking. It is also cultivated in all gardens, under the name of Kieu. The Chinese eat the whole plant raw. It flowers in August, and at this time of year, cut flowers are sold at the market, which they also eat (1). The above information suggested the idea of a successful trial. We decorated a Chicory salad with Allium odorum flowers, as we do with Nasturtium flowers. Mixed with the salad, these flowers gave it a special fragrance, not unlike that which connoisseurs seek when they introduce what is commonly known as capon into Chicory salad. Our friends, after tasting, have given their approval to our attempt, and there may be a use for it that should not be scorned. Garlic flowers can be picked for two months, from August 1st to October 1st, and perhaps even longer. The plant produces an abundance of seeds, which are sown in April; in this way, flowers only appear in the second year, but when bulbs are planted, they appear as early as August 1st. Allium odorum is a hardy perennial. According to M. de Heldreich, Allium roseum L. and the related A. neapolitanum Cyrillo produce edible bulbs. Both plants are native to (1) Docteur E. Bretschneider. MINISTÈRE DE L'AGRICULTURE BENTRE DE RECHCRCRTS) MQNUCS OE PRNVERC of the Mediterranean region. The latter is grown extensively in the south of France, and its pure white flowers are shipped to florists in major cities for winter bouquets. Another species, A. leptophyllum Wallich, from the Himalayas, produces bulbs more strongly prickly than those of ordinary onions. Captain Pogson considers them to be sudorific. Its leaves are said to make a good condiment. We have received Allium nipponicum Franch. el Sav. from Japan, courtesy of Mr. M. Vilmorin. According to Messrs. Batchelor and Miyabe (Ainu Economic plants) (Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, vol. XXI, 1893. p. 231), this Allium is known as Membiru, Nobiru among the Aïnos, who generally eat the bulbs fresh, in salads, and who sometimes also use them "to give a delicate flavor to food". Another Allium species, A. japonicum Regel, from Japan, which we found mentioned in Mr. Edward Kinch's List of food plants used in Japan (Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, tome XI (1883), was also supplied to us by Mr. M. Vilmorin. The plant we received under the latter name was none other than A. vleraceum, a common plant in France of very mediocre interest. 3 ALSTRŒMERIA LIGTU L.; A. Ligta Ruiz et Pav, Bot. Mag. tab. 125; Red, Litiac. tab. 40; Delaun, Herb. de l'amateur, vol. 2. Family Amaryllidae. Stems, some sterile, 20 to 25-centimeter haules, terminated by a rosette of leaves; others, 3-6 florets, 30 to 40 centimeters high. Leaves small, lanceolate-linear; those of spatulate rosettes, oblong. Flowers large, spindly, as if bilabiate, arranged in a simple umbel. Peduncles longer than flower leaves. Sepals white, speckled with red. Petals scarlet, immaculate. Roots fasciculate, rounded, thick, covered with brown, slightly gnarled bark. This plant grows on the banks of streams in Peru and Chile. In Chile, it is called Liuto. "Alstrœmère Liuto appears to be the plant that yields the verilable Chuno, a starch extracted from tubers in the same way as potato starch. In Chile, it is frequently used, especially for the sick and those with delicate stomachs. It grows especially in the provinces of Cauquenes and Concepcion". (Claudio Gay, Flora Chilena, vol. VI, p. 85.) The interest of this note lies in the information we have gathered on Liuto's precious starch. We won't change a syllable in the answers to our questions. - Fig. 3 - Alstrœmère Liuto (Alstrœmeria Ligtu L.). Liuto grows only in sandy, damp soil with a temperate temperature similar to that of the Seine department. Only one species is known in the country (Concepcion). The A. pelegrina mentioned by Cl. Gay is unknown. The plant's Chilean name is Liuto, the only one known in the country of production. Chuño is sold for local consumption. It is widely traded in Chile. Little is exported. Chuño is not made in factories or in families. Poor people pull up the roots. The women do all the manufacturing, which takes place in March and April, and take the product of their labor to market as they go along. You could ask for it in Chile and receive a certain quantity. It sells by the measure: 10 to 12 francs per decaliter. It keeps perfectly well. Dr. Thévenot's opinion on the food value of Chuño de Liuto: Dr. Thévenot practiced medicine in Chile for many years, where he was highly regarded. He now lives in Paris, and we were introduced to him by one of our friends, Mr. A..., a large landowner in Chile. Here's a summary of the interview we had with the eminent practitioner on the subject of Chuno: "Chuño is an excellent food, not as rich as some other starches, but light, easily digested and very useful for children and convalescents. It is used to make highly prized pastries. "Mr. A... was kind enough to bring us some Liuto roots and a certain quantity of Chuño from Chile, which, when tasted, lived up to the opinion we had formed of it, and enabled Dr. Mène to present a report to the fifth section of the Société d'Acclimatation on May 12 1885, from which we extract the following: "The small quantity of Chuño that I received as a gift from Mr. Paillieux to the Société d'Acclimatation did not allow me to carry out many experiments, and I cannot give complete conclusions on the value of this product; but the results I obtained are very good. "As a foodstuff, Chuño is excellent in soups, either with fat or milk: a tablespoonful for a bowl of broth or milk; dilute cold and pour while boiling, leave to boil for four to five minutes. Chuno doesn't thicken much during cooking, and forms a soup without lumps, revealing a few small transparent grains like tapioca and giving only the broth or milk a slightly thicker consistency. "Very pleasant to the taste, it makes a really delicate soup, very easy to digest. "I've given it to convalescents, who digested it without any difficulty and asked me for more as it was pleasant to the taste and sustained them well. "I gave it to children aged six to ten months in milk; the parents were very satisfied and asked me if it was possible to obtain more, as the children took this soup with pleasure. "In two patients suffering from gastralgia and with very poor digestion, Chuno was well tolerated, without causing the stomach upsets and swellings to which they were prone after ingesting almost all foods. "Administered externally as a poultice, in a case of incipient phlegmonous inflammation of the dorsum of the foot, and in a stye of the upper eyelid, it produced marked relief. "Used in lotions with lukewarm water (one mouthful for two-thirds of a bowl of water), followed by an application of Chuño powder, it brought rapid relief in a case of erythema of the leg. "It can also be used in place of rice powder to alleviate razor burn when the beard has been shaved." We don't need to add anything to the above to appreciate the services that Liuto would render if it could be cultivated. The climate would no doubt not be an insurmountable obstacle. We know that several Alstrœmères are hardy in the Paris climate, and for several years we have had a clump of A. pelegrina L. that has withstood the winters without shelter. A. versicolor Ruiz et Pav. could be cultivated as an ornamental plant for its curious flowers of the most brilliant and varied colors, but it tolerates the open air perfectly in the Botanical School of the Muséum. MINISTÈRE DE L'AGRICU' TURE "r nr ar nut DOUCC ARORUNUINIEE nE DRRUE MRE AMARANTE OLÉRACÉE Brède, Brown spinach. - Natya Sag (South India). Caruru (Brazil). AMARANTUS OLERACEUS L. ; Euxolus oleraceus Moq; Albersia oleracea Kunth. Family Amarantaceae. Annual plant with erect or ascending stems, Om.30 to Om.50 high, lined with pale-green, stalked, oval, very obtuse, notched, slightly rough leaves. In July-August, greenish flowers, arranged at the top of the plant and in the axils of the upper leaves, in spikelets shorter than the leaf petioles and forming erect, obtuse, dense spikes; calyx once as long as the bracts. Fruit utricular, oval, smooth, acute. "This useful and edible plant is very common in the West Indies. It is found everywhere. Inhabitants eat its leaves, seasoned like those of French spinach, to which it bears a striking resemblance. It is used in the famous Creole stew called Calalou, with Giraumon buds, Purslane, Gombo, Morelle laman, poultry, a piece of ham, crabs, crayfish and, above all, lots of Pimento cheese. (Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles.) In Brazil, this species and A. flavus L. are eaten like spinach. They are both confused under the vulgar name of Caruru. "Amaranth and its varieties are cultivated on a large scale by the natives throughout India. It is used during the rains. The part of the plant that is eaten is the stem, which is tender and succulent. It is cut into small pieces and prepared like beans. To my taste, it's a very tasteless vegetable, barely acceptable when you can't get another fresh vegetable. "Dr. Roxburgh says there are several varieties cultivated as vegetables, of which the following should be distinguished: "2. viridis. - Green, ordinary, widely cultivated. "3. ruber. - Beautiful variety with bright, light-red stems. Branches, petioles, veins and the leaves themselves are more rust-colored. "y. albus. - All the parts that are red in the previous variety are bright white in this one. Widely cultivated in Bengal. "5̀. giganteus. - 5 to 8 feet tall, with a stem as thick as the wrist. The tender, succulent tops of its stems, as well as its branches, are sometimes served on our tables as a substitute for Asparagus (1)." Amarantus gangetieus L. (Lal Sag (2)), tristis L., (Mekanada in Sancr.; Sirru Kirai, in Tam.) are still cultivated in India. R. P. Camboué sent us seeds of A. spinosus L. from Madagascar, which the Madecasses eat (1) Firminger, A manual of gardening for Bengal. (2) According to the Special Catalogue of exhibits, etc., Colonial and Indian Exhibition. Colonial and Indian Exhibition, 1886, Amarantus gungeticus is perhaps the most important Sag (green vegetable used like Spinach) cultivated in India as a vegetable herb under the name Anampatsa. This species is used for the same purpose in many regions, notably in India, where it is called Kantanatya. We have received from Mr. Pierre, agent for colonial cultivation in Gabon, the seeds of a plant labelled Spinach of Gabon, which we have recognized as Euxolus caudatus Moq; this species is frequently used as a vegetable in our West African possessions. AMARANTUS PALMERI S. Wats. On his return from a trip to Baja California, M. Diguet, a traveler and naturalist, gave us a bag of Amarantus Palmeri S. Wats. seeds, known in Baja California as Quelite. According to a note given to us by M. Diguet, this plant grows in clay or sandy-clay soils. It is only found after the summer rains, when it develops rapidly. It does not grow during winter, even after the rains. Its size varies according to the circumstances in which it grows: between 30 centimetres and 2 metres. The regions that this plant is particularly fond of forming real fields are the Sierra plateaus, and especially certain parts of these plateaus known as Lagunas, depressions where rainwater accumulates for several days. The great plains of the Pacific slope are even more propitious; as the soil here is highly impregnated with nitrates, Quelite reaches its maximum size, i.e. two meters. Quelite is used in Baja California as fodder, and Californians eat it young as a salad and spinach. M. Diguet says it's an excellent vegetable, which he prefers to spinach. As fodder, Quélite can be consumed by livestock, either fresh or dried. Fresh Quélite should be used as soon as it is cut, as during the withering period it undergoes a kind of fermentation that makes it toxic. As a yield per hectare, Quélite would give, in dry hay, a weight in excess of three tons. A single plant requires a surface area of 200 to 250 square centimetres for normal development. The plants we obtained in 1895 were very few in number and developed poorly. However, we were able to collect seeds which enabled us to sow them again in 1896. This time, the plants grew vigorously and reached over 1 meter in height. The leaves, prepared like Spinach, did not seem to us to have any marked superiority over those of other Amaranths. Our supply of seeds will easily enable us to cultivate the plant a little more extensively, with a view to verifying M. Diguet's assertions that Quélite could be useful as a fodder plant, due to its considerable yield. Trials could perhaps be carried out in Algeria. To this end, we have sent some seeds to Dr Trabut, government botanist in Algiers. All in all, vegetable amaranths are used by many populations, and it is for this reason that they are included here. We do not recommend their cultivation. ANGOURIE DES ANTILLES West Indian cucumber. - Brown cucumber. - Spiny cucumber. Wild cucumber. - American spiny cucumber. CUCUMIS ANGURIA L. Cucurbitaceae family. Annual plant. Creeping, angular, hispid stems, 2 m to 2*.50 m long. Leaves petiolate, palmate, deeply sinuous and rough to the touch. Axillary yellow flowers, small like those of Bryone. Female flowers are followed by ovoid, whitish-green fruits, spiked all over with small spinular spikes. Very long peduncle. The fruit's small size and soft spines give it the appearance of a Horse Chestnut. This cucumber has long appeared in catalogs under the name of Arada cucumber, which does not belong to it. The Arada Cucumber, described by Descourtilz, takes its name from a particular conformation which makes it resemble, in a certain respect, the women of the Aradas tribe of negroes. We have so far been unable to obtain a copy. This is Linné's Cucumis compressus. The Angourie cucumber grows naturally everywhere in the West Indies, mainly in dry savannahs and near rivers with rich vegetation along their banks. It is found in New Grenada, Brazil, near Bahia, and throughout South America, mainly in its eastern part, where it is frequently cultivated in vegetable gardens. The cultivation of Angourie presents no difficulties. Five months elapse between sowing and harvesting. Sow in a greenhouse in March; pot in April; plant under a bell from May 15 to 25; harvest from August 10. Fruiting is extraordinarily abundant, with around a hundred fruits per plant, but if the plants are rained on for several days, the crop is completely destroyed. However, it is impossible to grow them under glass, as they quickly fill the trunk, suffocate there and can no longer produce anything. Angourie doesn't require new or old soil; simply plant it in bunches 2 meters apart, topped with a little consumed manure. Although it does not tolerate rain, it should be liberally watered. Fruits forming far from the plant are not affected by water. The water should be poured into the center of a small basin around the plant. The bells are not removed, but raised on three racks. On August 10, 1876, we presented to the Société nationale d'Horticulture de France, Angouries admirably well grown, sown on March 16 and loaded with a multitude of fruits ready for harvest. In the Paris climate, this is an amateur plant that we took great pleasure in cultivating. In the Midi, its cultivation would certainly be profitable, as we can see from its uses. Angourie fruit is eaten as a salad. In Basse-Terre (Guadeloupe), our naval infantrymen gather them on their walks around town and add them to their regular diet. This pretty little cucumber is prepared in a variety of ways: in sauces, calalou, and vinegar preserves, particularly in those in the colonies known as A charts. According to Descourtilz (Flore des Antilles), to prepare it, you cut it down the middle and remove the infinite number of seeds it contains, then cook it on its own, or with ham, crabs, tomatoes or cod. To preserve it in vinegar, strip it of its seeds and add stems, vine shoots and green chilli fruit. Dr. Sagot, in the Bulletin de la Sociéte nationale d'Acclimatation, 2e série. volume VI, 1872, page 550, tells us that the young cooked fruit of Cucumis Anguria is tender and very pleasant. In good soil, the plant bears a lot of fruit. It is the Pepinhodo mato of the Portuguese colonies. M. Naudin, in the Annales des sciences naturelles, has published an instructive note on C. Anguria, to which we refer the reader. According to him, the plant is indeed of American origin, which he had initially doubted. It is considered a wild plant and cultivated as such in a large part of America. In this respect, it seems to have been put to some use in Italy in the last century, as we learn from Gilii and Xuares, in a now very rare opuscule (Osservatione fitologice, etc.), which was part of Mr. Delessert's library and that of the Institut. We experimented with Angourie as a cooked vegetable. Picked at half-girth, its fruits were peeled, cooked whole and served like fresh flageolet beans. It's a pleasant dish that will please most, but not everyone. We have preserved the fruits of our small Cucumber in vinegar, prepared with Elder flowers, Pepper, Tarragon, Catawissa Onions, etc., without removing their seeds. We consider this precaution unnecessary. This preserve is good and pretty. The fruits should be picked before they are fully developed; their skin hardens quite quickly. In conclusion, we strongly recommend Angourie cultivation to amateurs in the Paris region and to horticulturists and market gardeners in the south of France. Sales of its fruit seem assured. ANYS-WORTEL ANNESORHIZA MONTANA Eckl. et Zeyh. et A. MACROCARPA Eckl. et Zeyh. Umbelliferae family. Under the name of Anys-Wortel, Mr. Dr. Mac Owan, government botanist at Cape-town (Cape of Good Hope), sent us, in May 1895, the seeds of two species of Annesorhiza, plants of the Umbelliferae family, which grow wild on the Cape mountains, and are eaten by the boërs and natives. The edible part is the root. You'd think," Mr Mac Owan told us, "you were looking at parsnips as wide as a finger: their flavor is such that you'd suppose they'd been cooked with Anise." The seeds so kindly sent to us by our kind correspondent germinated very well: they belonged to two species: Annesorhiza montana Eckl. et Zeyh., with flat, bi-tri-pinnate leaves; A. macrocarpa Eckl. et Zeyh., with very indented leaves. The plants obtained were planted outdoors, in well loosened soil, and we covered the plantations with glass cases to shelter them from the cold during the winter. At present, both species continue to vegetate; they flower and have even given us a few seeds. The leaves have a strong aniseed scent. Unfortunately, the root has not yet developed to the point where it can be used. GLYCINE APIOS L. ; Apios tuberosa Mœnch. 23 Leguminosae family. Perennial, herbaceous, glabrous; stems to 2 meters, climbing, arising from a tuberous root. Imperipinnate leaves; in August-September, dark purple flowers, variegated with pink-chair, fragrant, in axillary clusters. Around 1845, the agricultural world was in the grip of a veritable panic. The potato was suffering from a disease that was threatening its complete disappearance. People wondered how they could do without the precious Solanée, how they could replace it. Entire populations, if not in France, at least in other countries, were threatened by the horrors of famine. The terror was great, as was the eagerness to experiment with the cultivation of plants proposed as substitutes for the diseased tuber. The potato has not disappeared, and neither has the disease, but it only causes the grower accidental losses. We can therefore say, without too much sadness, that the meritorious efforts that have been made to replace the potato have been absolutely in vain. Arracacia cannot be grown in France. The Picotianene produces nothing; the Olluco, no more; finally, the Apios, which we are dealing with at the moment, is barely edible and its yield is practically nil. We'd like to pass it over in silence, but its name made some noise in the years following the invasion of the terrible disease, and we owe it at least a mention. Under the title: Culture de l'Apios luberosa comparée à celle de la Pomme de terre, G. Moretti, professor at the University of Pavia, published an extensive note which the curious can read in Revue Horticole, 4e série, volume I, 1852, page 84. The following is as brief a summary as possible: "Jacques Cornut, a Parisian physician, was the first to make Apios tuberosa known, in 1635. The plant was originally from Canada; it quickly spread to all the botanical gardens of Europe, and became naturalized in Italy, Austria and Bohemia. "In the Comptes rendus de l'Académie des sciences, February 1849, page 194, M. Payen reported on the chemical analysis of Apios tubers: Nitrogenous matter...................... Fatty substances..................... Starchy starch, dextrin, sugary matter 4.50 0.80 analog, pectic acid, pectin, etc. 23.55 Cellulose, including epidermis.......... 1.30 Mineral matter.................... 2.25 Water................................. 57.60 100.00 "At the same time, M. A. Richard sent the Institut de France a note on the nutritional qualities of Apios and even proposed a cultivation method which the professor, whose note we summarize, considers impracticable. "In the first days of March 1848, Messrs Barbieri and Moretti had planted 2 kilograms of Apios tubers; they harvested 3 kilograms on the following November 8. "A second trial, planting 1 kilogram of tubers, yielded 1/,185. A comparative cultivation of Apios and Potato demonstrated that the latter provided six times as much nutritive substance as the former. "A notice by Mérat on several tubers proposed as substitutes for potatoes (Revue horticole, vol. IV, p. 13-14) presents conclusions absolutely unfavorable to Apios. Le Bon Jardinier says that, when we eat a certain quantity of these tubers, they leave a sort of singular and unpleasant catch on the palate and the back of the mouth, which is due to the presence of a milky juice very similar to rubber. Apios can be grown as a curiosity. Every year, it produces underground sprays that swell from distance to distance and present a string of tuberosities of a highly original appearance. It is also an ornamental climber suitable for covering trellises and arbors. APONOGETON DISTACHYUM THUNB. Family Naiadaceae. Beautiful aquatic plant, swimming, perennial, native to the Cape of Good Hope. Stump formed of ovoid, agglomerated, brownish tubers. Leaves glabrous, stalked, the longer the deeper the water in which the plant grows; elliptical, lanceolate, cheerful-green blade. Peduncle more or less long, swollen at the tip, Fig. 5 - Aponogeton with two spikes (Aponogeton distachyum Thunb). bearing two opposite spikes of white flowers exhaling a most suave odor. Flowers lack both calyx and corolla, and are formed of oval, whole, distichous bracts, fused with the axis, accrescent, in the axil of each of which are about twenty stamens and 5 or 6 pistils. The fruit is pear-shaped, unilocular and contains 1 to 3 seeds. "This curious aquatic plant could be naturalized in our ditches, marshes and lakes (Australia), in consideration of its edible tubers. The part of the plant that bears the fragrant flowers provides a Spinach." (Mueller, Select extratropical plants.) Aponogeton distachyum is natur alized in Hérault and Finistère, and could be in most of France. Protected by 1 or 2 meters of water, it doesn't suffer from the Fig. 6 - Rhizome of Aponogeton distachyum. cold and even flowers in the middle of winter in the départements just mentioned. Delile, director of the Jardin des Plantes de Montpellier, introduced it to the region a long time ago, but despite its merit, and with the exception of amateur gardens, it has not spread in the region and has remained confined to the Lez, the main river in the area. It has lived there for over fifty years, and the late. M. Planchon collected it there in 1844, making it the subject of his first botanical work (1). In the Lez, Aponogeton is very rarely found (1) Annales des sciences naturelles, IIle série, t. I, p. 109 et seq. downstream from its original locality; it does, however, bear fruit, but its seeds, if not carried to the sea, fall and germinate on the spot. "The plant has long been naturalized around Brest. Thirty years ago, it was much more common here than it is today. It had multiplied so much in certain streams that it prevented the water from flowing, which led to its destruction in several places, and most notably in the Kérolan stream, from which it has completely disappeared. It was one of the curiosities of Brest, beginning to bloom around Christmas and continuing until July. "It has been said, but we repeat it with reservations, that the Aponogeton distachyum was brought from the Cape, around 1840, by Rear-Admiral des Rotours, owner of the Kérolan stream; but it is also claimed that it came from Toulon to the Brest Botanical Garden, around 1857, brought by workmen who put it in the Kérolan stream. Mr. Blanchard, head of the Botanical Garden at the Brest Maritime Hospital, to whom we owe the above information, goes on to say in his letter to us about the Aponogeton: "In any case, the Kérolan stream is the first place where it was acclimatized. From there, it was carried to a pond at Maison-Blanche, where it is very abundant and from which the tubers I am sending you have sprouted. It was also taken to Poulaz-Ferenten, where it is also quite common; these three localities are in the commune of Lambézellec; I know of no other for the moment. "One of my workers had planted it in the Gouesnon river, near a mill; it must have been uprooted, as I have passed through this locality several times and have noticed no trace of it. "I haven't eaten any of its tubers, and I don't know of anyone who has taken a fancy to them; I've seen it in some damp meadows around the Kérolan stream, and I don't think cattle touch its leaves, but I'm not sure. "I must also tell you that it doesn't grow everywhere, because I've planted it in streams other than those I've mentioned, and I've never noticed a single foot of it; at the Garden, it doesn't even grow very well in our ponds. It's not the cold that bothers it, it's the water, which probably doesn't suit it. "One of my Bretons remarked that it prevented other aquatic plants from growing in its vicinity; thus, Potamogeton, Callitriche and Ranunculus would generally be suffocated by its presence; but I wouldn't certify the fact, as I've never noticed it. In any case, it's a beautiful plant in countries where it can live in the open air, because it flowers almost all year round, and it's especially in winter that it has merit, because it blooms abundantly and spreads a delicious scent in the places where it's grown." Wishing to experiment with various edible aquatic plants, we had a hole dug and filled with water, which is large enough to hold those that accept our climate. The Aponogeton blooms there from April to July with extraordinary abundance and perfumes the air around it. We're convinced that, if we don't put a stop to it, it will invade all the space we have and make life impossible for any other plant. How is it not yet introduced into all lakes, ponds or basins deep enough for frost not to reach it, in all streams whose current is not too fast? This can only be explained by routine and carelessness on the part of the owners. We do not propose to prepare its flowering stems as spinach, although, according to Baron F. von Mueller, this can be done; we do not even believe that its rhizomes can feature on our tables. Their fine, white substance is too compact, making them difficult to deglaze, and they borrow an unpleasant, muddy flavor from the soil in which they grow. They should nevertheless be considered edible and could undoubtedly be used in starch factories, as Nelumbium and Sagittaria roots are in China. In any case, we recommend the plant for the beauty, abundance, duration and fragrance of its flowers. In the Revue horticole, 1876, page 330, M. Carrière suggested growing this plant terrestrally, in pots and greenhouses, during the winter. The abundance and fragrance of its flowers would be of great merit, especially for the bouquet trade. M. Carrière has obtained excellent results. We don't think his example has been followed. The editor of the Revue Horticole goes on to say: "Another quality lies in the tubers of Aponegeton, which contain very large quantities of a brilliantly white starch that makes them edible and means that, cooked and cut into pieces and reduced to a paste, poultry and even pigs are very fond of them." Whatever the merits of Aponogeton distachyum, it would be desirable to experiment with the cultivation of several species belonging to the same genus; but we lack information on these species, so we will speak of them very briefly; we will even limit ourselves, for some of them, to giving their names and their homeland: Aponogeton monostachyum L. f. (Roxb. Flor. ind., vol. Il, p. 210), India. Nama is the name of the plant and its root is called Nama dumpa. It grows naturally in fresh, stagnant, shallow water: it appears and flowers during the rainy season. The natives are passionate about its roots, which are almost as good as potatoes. A. echinatum (Roxb., loc. cit., p. 210) Found, with the previous species, in shallow, fresh water. A. undulatum (Roxb., loc. cit., p. 211). Native to Bengal, with tuberous, edible roots. A. microphyllum (Roxb., loc. cit., p. 211). Tuberous, edible roots. A. crispum Thunb. (Mueller, Select extratropical plants, p. 30). From India and New South Wales. The roots of this aquatic plant are starchy and very tasty. A. angustifolium Ait. Cape of Good Hope. A. crinifolium Lehm, Cape of Good Hope. A. desertorum Zeyh, Cape of Good Hope. A. junceum Lehm, Cape of Good Hope. A. zosterxfolium Schrard, Cape of Good Hope. A plant related to Aponogeton, OUviranpra reNESTRALIS Poiret, which grows in mountain streams in Madagascar, also produces edible tubers. R. P. Camboué sent us a shipment of these under the name Ovirandrana (Ovy, tuber, Randrana, branch, rope-like braid). Ouvirandra is very difficult to grow, even in a hot greenhouse. This plant has extremely curious, windowed leaves; as the veins are not filled with parenchyma, they resemble lace. De Flacourt, in his Histoire de la grande isle de Madagascar, says: Ouvirandre, small roots as big as octopus, very good to eat. Found in ponds. ARACHIDE Ground pistachio. ARACHIS HYPOGÆA L. ; Trew, Plant. rar. tab. 3, fig. 3; Rumph, Amb. 5, tab. 156; Turpin, Dict. des se. nat. 254, 256. Leguminosae family. Annual plant with fibrous roots, usually giving several stems bristling with soft hairs; leaves alternate, petiolate, with two pairs of obovate leaflets, entire, obtuse; stipules adnate to the petiole; flowers small, yellow, axillary, sessile, usually geminate. After fertilization, the young fruit curls towards the ground, where it sinks to mature. The fruit is an oblong, cylindrical, strangulated pod containing 2-4 seeds, criss-crossed in all directions by veins arranged in a network. The plant is said to be native to equatorial America; it is generally grown in India, Senegal and the southern United States, as well as in certain parts of South America. The largest production areas are on the west coast of Africa and in India. The flavor of the fresh peanut seed is reminiscent of that of the green bean; it is an excellent food containing around 30 0/0 of nitrogenous matter; roasted, it has the flavor of hazelnuts. The seed contains around 45 to 50 0/0 of oil, which can be extracted Fig. 7 - Groundnut or Pistachio (Arachis hypogæa). by simple expression with or without the intervention of heat. Peanut oil, when extracted cold, is edible, almost colorless, with a pleasant taste and odor; it is said to be commonly substituted for olive oil in the trade. When this oil is obtained by the intervention of heat, it takes on a dark color and an unpleasant taste and smell; it is then 3 unfit for consumption and is used either for lighting or for making soaps, after having been treated with alkaline solutions of potash and soda which saponify it. The oilcake is used as animal feed and is an excellent fertilizer. As the oil in shelled peanuts goes rancid fairly quickly, European manufacturers usually ship the fruit in the shell, which keeps longer without losing its quality. In the past, Sénégambie alone produced almost all the groundnuts sold in the market, and thus made substantial profits, as the selling price remained relatively high. Indian growers in turn began to cultivate the precious legume, and as labor was plentiful and cheap in India, competition developed to such an extent that our African colony gradually lost its monopoly on this crop. Pondicherry used to be the port of export for peanuts from India, but the Pondicherry trade is now threatened by the expansion of peanut cultivation in English possessions. In 1876, Marseilles received only 11,000 tons of groundnuts from India, compared with nearly 44,000 from Africa. Today, imports of this legume into France are estimated at over 150 million kilograms, of which 70 million kilograms come from Senegambia. The main import ports in France are Marseille, Bordeaux and Dunkirk. Peanuts must be grown in light, loose, sandy soil, into which the young fruit can easily penetrate. In Senegal and India, seedlings are sown in July-August. Harvesting takes place 5 to 7 months later. Production is 2,000 kilograms per hectare on fertile soils. There are two main varieties of groundnut in Senegal: A. de Galam, which is small, has a pleasant flavor and yields superior quality oil; and A. Cayor, which is larger, but yields less and is of inferior quality. We don't need to dwell on this subject any further, but we do recommend the cultivation of the Ground Pistachio to enthusiasts in our southern departments, as it will provide them with a pleasant-tasting kernel and the most singular spectacle of fruiting. We have grown the plant in the Landes department. We knew that trials had been carried out there during the First Empire. We only sowed a garden bed made of fine sand, blackened by heather and fern detritus. Vegetation grew steadily, but without much development. We did, however, have the pleasure of harvesting a small crop. ARRACACIA ARRACACIA XANTHORRHIZA Bauer (I). Arracacha esculenta DC; Conium Arracacha, Exot. fl., tab. 152; Bot. Mag. tab. 3092. Family Ombeltiferes. Very fleshy roots; stem 60 to 90 cm long, herbaceous, sparsely branched, ridged, glaucous, lined with (1) In Central America, Arracacia are famous for their edible roots, mainly those of A. xanthorrhiza, which are eaten in Colombia, boiled, like our Potatoes, and some leaves smaller than the radicals. Radical leaves long-stalked, from Om, 40 to Om, 50 long, irregular, biternate, segmented Fig. 8 - Arracacia (Arracacia xanthorrhiza Bauer). oval, irregularly three-lobed, acuminate, coarsely incised-toothed, glabrous and dark green; in July-October, dark purple or yellowish flowers, used to extract an analeptic starch, compared to Arrowroot, and to make a fermented liquor said to be stomachic. A, moschata is used for the same purpose in Mexico (H. Baillon, Histoire des Plantes, vol. VII, p. 193). arranged in few, slightly concave umbels. We don't think we should overlook this precious plant, which has so far rebelled against any attempt at cultivation in our climate. We were no happier than our predecessors in the trial we carried out. A crate of Arracacia tubers was brought to us from Venezuela by a kind friend. Dr. Ernst, Professor of Natural History in Caracas, had presided over the selection and packaging of the roots. We shared the contents of this crate, which was in the best possible condition, with the Museum. We planted our tubers in the first fortnight of June, on a bed and under a ventilated frame. Vegetation took off admirably, and the stems grew rapidly. By August, they were full of flower buds, but these failed to open and the stems broke at half-height. When we lifted the plants in October, their primitive tubers were rotting away, and no new ones had formed. Our failure was complete. We won't dwell on the undisputed merits of a plant that has thwarted every attempt at cultivation. We were unable to obtain seeds, which we requested from the countries of origin without obtaining any. Would sowing have given good results? It's doubtful. In any case, the trials that have so far failed will undoubtedly be repeated, and this forecast commits us to indicating to our successors the sources from which they can draw all the desirable information. We wish them every success in their future endeavours. Publications to consult: Bulletin de la Société centrale d'Horticulture de France, vol. V, p. 251, 1829. Annales des sciences physiques et naturelles de la Société d'Agriculture de Lyon, t. I, p. 206, 1838-39. Note sur la racine de l'Arracacha, by M. L. Vilmorin. Bulletin de la Société centrale d'Horticulture, vol. XXV, p. 16, 1839. A.-P. de Candolle, Cinquième notice sur les plantes rares du Jardin botanique de Genève. Revue horticole, vol. VII, p. 64, 1845-46. Culture de l'Arracacha et possibilité de l'introduire en Europe, by M. Boussingault, of the Académie des sciences. Revue horticole, vol. VII, p. 356, 1845-46. Note sur l'Arracacha, essais de culture, by Vilmorin. Revue horticole, vol. XIII, p. 42, 1851. Note sur quelques plantes féculentes exotiques, by M. Posada Arango. Bulletin de la Société botanique de France, vol. XVIII, p. 372, 1871. Bulletin of Miscellaneous information (Royal gardens Kew), 1887. no. 8 (August), p. 10. ASPERGE TUBÉREUSE ASPaRaGuUs LuciDus Lindl, Bot. reg. 1844, misc. no. 36; Asa Gray, Bot. jap. 403; Miq, Prol. 315. In Japanese: Tomo Roki; Ten mado, according to Miquel; Te mon dó, according to X Fam. des Liliacées. Climbing plant, sarmentose, about 1*, 50 high; branches with small, whitish, scale-like leaves, from the axils of which arise fertile branches or green ramuscules (cladodes), usually mistaken for leaves; these ramuscules are solitary, linear, falcate, shiny green; peduncles uniflorous. "This plant is close to A. falcatus, from which it differs in having smaller solitary leaves and flowers that do not form clusters. (Lindl., loc. cit.) " In this Asparagus, it is the roots and not the shoots that are food." (Miquel, loc. cit.) A few years ago, tuberous asparagus was brought to our attention by Mr. Eugène Simon, former French consul, who had eaten its tubers and sent a plant to the Muséum. After a five-year wait, we finally received it from Japan. Left unprotected, it survived the winter of 1882-1883 well. We would have been wiser, however, to cover her with a bit of bedding. So far, it has only given us very small tubers, the shape and volume of Olive. When tasted, these tubers are neither floury nor free of bitterness. At the same time as the previous species, we received from Japan a curious form of Asparagus trichophyllus Bunge. This plant is very dwarfed, barely reaching Om, 15 in height; it grows in compact clumps and, like A. lucidu, produces fleshy claws. These asparagus may be considered as food plants in China and Japan, but they will probably have little success here. Another species of asparagus, Asparagus ascendens Hamilt. native to India, produces tuberous roots from which we make a kind of salep called White Musli. Mixed with water, this Musli makes a pleasant, starch-free mucilage much appreciated by the natives. BAMBOO COMESTIBLES In a book entitled Étude pratique du commerce d'exportation de la Chine, published in 1848, Mr. Natalis Rondot says, in the article Bamboo: "The uses of Bamboo are so numerous in China, the services it renders are so great, that it justly deserves the name of national tree". After listing the uses of the various parts of the plant, he adds: "Its young shoots, tender and delicate, are a vegetable that can be eaten in a variety of ways, and are said to be as good as Asparagus. Boiled, seasoned and candied, they produce excellent preserves, so sought-after that they form a fairly important branch of the domestic trade and are shipped in large quantities to various parts of the empire, especially to the capital, where they feature at the banquets of the great. Buddha's priests, who take a vow of abstinence and adhere to a low-nutrition, plant-based diet, have found in this delicacy a resource equal to that offered by fish to our clergy". All travelers who have visited China and Japan cite the many applications of this precious plant. R. Fortune concludes the chapter he devoted to Bamboo in his Voyage agricole et horticole en Chine with these words: "Whatever incredulity this long enumeration may find in the reader, I will add that I am far from having cited all the uses of Bamboo in China, and, in truth, it would be almost as difficult to say what it is not good for as to indicate all the uses it is given; it is in demand everywhere and for everything; it is useful to the Chinese throughout their lives and does not even abandon them at their death, since it is used to shade their graves. " According to Dr. Mène (1), the species of bamboo most commonly used in Japan for food are Mo-só, Madake, Ofetchiku, Hatchiku and Metake. "The Japanese call young bamboo shoots Take-noko. They eat them cooked; at other times, they preserve them in brine or vinegar, some whole, others cut in their longitudinal half; they resemble medium-sized asparagus, remarkable for their knots spaced 1 to 2 centimetres apart. The Chinese also subject them to desiccation, forming bundles which are shipped in large quantities to Manchuria and Mongolia; they simply need to be immersed in hot water to return to their normal size, without losing any of their taste. "In India, bamboo shoots are eaten in salads, purées and fried. Dr. H..., to whose kindness we have had recourse on so many occasions, provided us with the following information on the use of edible Bamboos in Japan: "After planting, it takes at least three years before you have shoots worth eating. We never cut off all the stems, but we thin out the old stems in winter, always removing the weakest ones, and we take half or three-quarters of the young shoots as vegetables, sparing the larger ones to fortify the plant, which is smoked abundantly every year on the surface, preferably with horse manure. "In autumn, we cover the plants with a certain thickness of dry leaves or litter. "I don't think there are many Europeans who have tried bamboo shoots as much as I have. I ate them two or three times a week for four months every year, for three years. I'll tell you how they're used in Japan. "In April, we eat Mô-so-také shoots. This is the earliest and produces the largest shoots; they are often 12 or 15 centimetres in diameter and often weigh 2 kilograms. In May, when Mô-só shoots become too hard, Ha-tsikou and Go-santsikou are eaten. These much smaller shoots are also very good. In June and July, we eat Ma-také, which is the latest variety; its shoots have the great disadvantage of being quite bitter. They can only be eaten after blanching in two or three waters. Apart from this, preparation is the same for all of them: they are stripped of their tough, spathiform sheaths, and cut circularly at the point of insertion. If the shoot is advanced, the top is removed, which is unpalatable; the rest has a consistency similar to artichoke stock or cardoon root. Cut into thin slices, blanch and serve with a sauce made from Cho-you and grated Katsoud́ (dried meat from a fish of the same name, which is close to tuna). "This is how I ate them, and I enjoyed them; but, for the taste of Europeans who are not used to doing without fat in their sauces, it would be better to accommodate them, like Cardoon or Celery, with butter and meat juice. "In Japan, it is said that Bamboos grain once every fifty years, and that there is a shortage of Rice that year. It's likely that they grain only in very hot, very dry years. "Unfortunately, the fourth, which is the most beautiful and the best species as a food plant, Mo-sô-také, does not grow here; it is not warm enough during the summer; in other words, it would grow even less in the vicinity of Paris, or at least no better. "The only one whose botanical name I know: Phyllostachys aurea, is the one called Go-san tsikou (Bamboo from the land of Go). It is also called Hotei tsikou, Zin-men tsikou (Man-faced bamboo). It is grown in China as far north as the Great Wall, where the thermometer falls to -20° every winter. It was highly recommended to me in Japan for its resistance to the cold. In fact, it's the hardiest of the big bamboos and the least difficult to work with in terms of terrain. It's very good to eat and produces excellent quality wood. Its faults are that it has a stiff habit and doesn't grow very big. "Ha tsikou has a very attractive half-full growth habit. It is a little less hardy to the cold than its predecessor and more demanding in terms of terrain. It is very good to eat. It was imported from China to Japan. "Ma-daké is the only large bamboo found in the wild in the mountains of Japan. It is very robust, reaching 25 or 30 meters in height and 10 or 12 centimeters in diameter. It is sometimes eaten in Japan, but is bitter and inferior to other vegetables. The bamboo commonly known as Ma-daké is Phyllostachys mitis (Bambusa mitis, B. edulis); as for Mo-só, it is probably B. macroculmis A. Rivière. As Dr. H. Rivière so aptly put it, the latter species is not cultivable in our climate, but it does very well in Algeria, and is the one that produces the largest clumps and strongest stems, rapidly reaching 15 to 25 meters in height and 15 to 20 centimeters in diameter. Messrs Auguste and Charles Rivière, in an extensive work published in 1878 (1), claim to have tried eating young bamboo shoots prepared in various ways. They claim to have obtained only mediocre results, but add that they had not subjected them to any preliminary preparation (2), which, according to Dr. H..., is essential. In the Paris climate, Phyllostachys aurea and mitis withstand the cold perfectly, but their shoots are too spindly, and we have to confess that, to date, we haven't found it possible to use them. For further information, read, in addition to the works cited above: Verdier de Latour, Études sur les Bambous, Algiers, 1854. Dr. J. Vidal, Notes sur les usages des Bambous (Bulletin de la Société nationale d'Acclimatation, 1874, p. 743). Munro, Transanctions of the Linnean Society, XXVI. (1) Les Bambous (Bulletin de la Société nationale d'Acclimatation). (2) Page 606. Edible burdock. - Gobc. LAPPA MAJOR Gærtn. var. EDULis L.; L. edulis Sieb. 45 Fam. Compositae. Biennial plant, 2 to 2.50 m high. Involucre glabrous, with scales scarcely serrated at the base, the rest perfectly smooth; the inner ones mute, radiating; flower heads arranged in corymbs. In July-August, purple flowers. Fusiform roots, gray on the outside, white on the inside, 40 to 45 centimeters long after four months of vegetation. Gobô du Japon is considered, not as a species, but as a simple variety of the great burdock, Lappa major, a common plant throughout France, where, according to Duchesne, it is called Bouillon noir, Gloutteron, Grippe, etc., depending on the place. The same author says that in Scotland, its roots, leaves and young shoots are eaten. It is likely that only the indigent use it. Here's what Poiret has to say about it in his Flore médicale: "Whenever I taste burdock root, I'm astonished not to find it more often in kitchens than in pharmacies. It can be prepared in the same way as Scorsonera, while the young shoots, picked in spring, can be eaten like artichokes, cardoons and asparagus. In any case, the Japanese have a variety that is superior to the common burdock and quite worthy of our attention. Gobô is generally cultivated in Japan, and its seeds were included in all the shipments we received from that country. In the last collection we received were three packets of these seeds, one labelled: Gobó, tout court; another: Hockate Gobó; a third: Umeda Gobô. The latter was said to be taller or larger than the Fig. 9 - Japanese burdock (Lappa major Gærtn., var. edulis). other two, and its cultivation did not justify this indication. We have to say that, except for the height of the stems, we recognized no difference between the three varieties; the stems of Umeda Gobô rose less high than those of the others. We presented roots of Japanese burdock to the Société nationale d'Horticulture de France on August 26, 1880. These roots had been sown the previous May 10, and were ready for consumption; but we don't recommend imitating us and sowing in spring. Summer drought hardens the roots, and besides, this kind of vegetable plant is less useful in the season when fresh vegetables abound. We therefore suggest sowing on July 15, in rows 20 centimetres apart, and thinning out the sowing so that the plants enjoy this 20-centimetre space in all directions. It's a good idea to sow in soil that has been broken up to two spade-irons deep, so that the roots can penetrate easily and don't branch out too much. Numerous bifurcations or ramifications of the roots are, in fact, a serious disadvantage for market sales. Sometimes, a real bundle of roots descends from the collar of the plant, too small to be sold. This damage must be avoided as far as possible, and the most effective means are to break up the soil, sow late and, in dry weather, water to stimulate vegetation. After one hundred to one hundred and twenty days, the roots are as big and longer than the best-sown salsify. As winter approaches, vegetation comes to a halt; the leaves, which are still healthy, are fed to the rabbits, who are greedy for them; the harvest begins and continues despite the frosts, if the plantalion is covered with litter. The preparation of Gobô for the table is the same as for Salsify or Scorzonera. It would be a good idea, however, to cook the roots of the Japanese plant in two waters, to remove the slight wild flavour that some people reproach them with; but how can we get cooks to start cooking in the first water and finish in the second? We doubt we'll succeed. Two notes on Japanese burdock, published by Dr. Sacc and Mr. J. Dybowski (1), are of interest. The latter presents Gobô only from the point of view of vegetable cultivation, which is our own. Dr. Sacc proposes it to farmers as a forage plant. We do believe that it could be useful as a forage plant, but it's not our job to deal with that question. As a vegetable, Gobô seems to us inferior to Salsify and Scorsonera; it cannot, to any degree, stand comparison with Spanish Scolyma; but its rapid vegetation, the length of its roots which enables it to feed without exhausting the soil, its resistance to cold and drought, the date at which it is sown which makes it, within a fortnight, a catch crop like Turnip, do not allow it to be neglected. bablement utilisé. (1) Description, cultivation and use of edible burdock, Lappa edulis Sieb. by Dr. Sacc (Bull. de la Société d'Acclimatation, t. VI, p. 30). Note sur la Bardane du Japon, by Mr. J. Dybowski (Journal de la Soc. nat. d'Horticulture de France, 3e série, t. Ill, p. 770). BASELLE BLANCHE Chinese spinach. BASELla ALBA L., Spec. p. 390, no. 2; Wight, Icon. tab. 896; Gandola alba Rumph, Herb. Amb. 5, p. 417; Plukn, Phyt. t. 63, fig. 1. family Salsolaceae. A climbing plant with very succulent stems and leaves used as a vegetable in the manner of Spinach, cultivated by the natives and lining their homes in all parts of India, but scarcely accepted as a vegetable by Europeans (Thomas A.-C. Firminger). Its Hindostani name is Poi. White Baselle may be considered a variety of Red B.. Its leaves and stems are consistently greenish, rather than purple-red like those of B. rubra. In terms of cultivation and use, it differs in no way from the latter. BASELLE ROUGE Malabar spinach, Brède d'Angola, Brède Gandole. BASELLA RUBRA L., Spec. plant. p. 390, no. 1; Gandola rubra Rumph, Herb. Amb. 5, p. 417, t. 154, fig. 2; Basel 'a rubra Lam. III, t. 215, fig. 1. Annual or biennial plant. Stems spindly, fleshy, twiggy, crimson-red, rising to about 4 ft. high, rolling around the plants around them. These stems have alternate, oval, entire, slightly acuminate, thick, fleshy leaves, purple-red like the stems and borne on a short, thick petiole. The flowers are small, reddish or light purple and arranged in axillary spikes on peduncles longer than the leaves. This plant is native to the East Indies. In the 8 Fig. 10 - Red Basil (Basella rubra L.). Indies and America, it is cultivated in gardens and the leaves are eaten cooked (Brèdes), seasoned in various ways, and especially spiced and spiced, which is then called Calalou-Baselle. Each plant can provide three good dishes in the course of a summer. All Baselles, except the white one, are more or less red, and their berries, like those of Phytolacca, provide a very beautiful purple juice, which we have not yet been able to determine (Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles). We have cultivated Baselle rouge. We sowed it on a warm bed under a frame, and we grew it in a greenhouse.

planted in the open ground towards the end of May. As the walls of the kitchen garden are to be used exclusively for vines and fruit trees, Baselle cannot be used there. We trained it on a coarse, very wide-mesh trellis, raised on stakes with a southern exposure, and, under these conditions, it developed well and ripened its seeds well. The need to trellis Baselle does not allow market gardeners to grow it, but it can be grown in the kitchen garden. It's quite a good vegetable. Its thick leaves can be picked all summer long, once the spinach it is intended to replace has all but disappeared from gardens. CORE LEAF BASELLE BASella CORDIFOLIA Lamk, Dict. 1, p. 382, no. 3, B. crassifolia Wight. This species differs from B. rubra and B. alba in the shape of its leaves, which are large, almost rounded and heart-shaped at the base. It is grown in gardens in the Malabar region. It is fleshy and succulent, with a flavor comparable to that of Poirée, but a little inferior; it is laxative and not very nourishing. Its leaves are eaten cooked and mixed with Brède (prickly pigweed), in much the same way as we eat our spinach (Lamk., loc. cit.). Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cle, in their work Les Plantes potagères, p. 32, refer to this plant as Baselle de Chine à très larges feuilles, and say that it was imported from China in 1839 by Captain Geoffroy. According to the same authors, "this plant would certainly be preferable to other species of Baselles because of the breadth of its leaves and the abundance of its product. However, cultivation does not seem to have spread, probably because of the difficulty of germinating it in France. MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie, in the List of Novelties they put on the market in January 1897, add that "this Baselle is invaluable as a substitute for Spinach in places where production of this excellent vegetable is almost impossible in summer due to drought. Sown in April on a bed and transplanted in May, preferably at the foot of a wall facing south, just a few plants are enough to obtain, with a little support and a few waterings, an ample supply of leaves that will renew themselves throughout the summer". Dr. Trabut, government botanist in Algiers, has cultivated Basella cordifolia in our colony, and the results he has obtained show that apart from intertropical regions, where the plant has its marked place, it can be of great interest in warm temperate regions. In Algeria, the plant is very vigorous, bearing fruit at the end of summer; "its broad, succulent leaves cook to a pulp that is less dry than that of spinach. Combined with a little sorrel, Baselle is a vegetable that pleases everyone. In the note he published on this plant in the Journal de la Société nationale d'Horticulture de France, 1896, p. 145, Dr. Trabut adds that Baselle should be raked. This makes harvesting easier. In the Algiers Hospital garden, over 350 kilograms of leaves were harvested from a 50-meter square in the summer of 1895. Baselle thrives in oasis gardens. In Biskra, it has given very good results. Dr Trabut recommends successive sowing from April onwards. By sowing fortnightly, so as to keep the plants young, and giving them sufficient water, you'll obtain very vigorous plants that will produce truly extraordinary results. BENINCASA CERIFERA Savi; Cucurbita cerifera Fischer. Cucurbitaceae family. Annual plant, native to India and China. Stems about 2 meters long; leaves cordate, with five acute, crenate lobes; simple tendrils; in May-July, yellow flowers, large, pedunculated, axillary, solitary; fruit green, hanging. India, 1827. We have grown Bénincasa often and have not experienced any failures; but we have grown it under a frame and only exposed it to the air at the end of summer, when the fruit was already large. We think it's wise to do so. The Bénincasa cérifère is a delicate, light food which, prepared like the Cucumber, is, in our opinion, much preferable to it. The authors who wrote about it before us express the same opinion. M. Naudin, in Annales des sciences naturelles, 4° série, tome XII, cahier n° 2, page 9, tells us that B. cerifera is one of the classic and most esteemed vegetables of Austro-East Asia, and particularly China. He cites Loureiro, who, of all the Fig. 11 - Benincasa cerifera Savi). squashes, knows of none more wholesome or suitable as food. Its introduction into Europe, says Mr. Naudin, dates back nearly half a century, yet it is scarcely known outside a few botanical gardens. The volume of its fruit, which is that of a small pumpkin, sometimes much larger, its easy preservation for several months and sometimes even for a whole year, the excellence of its flesh and, finally, the ease with which it can be cultivated, should long ago have led to its inclusion in vegetable gardens. It's hard to understand why it has been forgotten. This fruit is remarkable for the abundant waxy, powdery exudation it covers when ripe, and which continues long after it has been picked. So far," says Mr. Naudin, "I know of only two varieties of Bénincasa, and they differ very little from one another. The first, found in our botanical gardens, is recognizable by its cylindrical fruit, 0.25 to 0.40 m long. The finest sample I have seen was sent from Algiers to the 1855 Universal Exhibition; it measured almost Om.60 long by Om.20 to Om.25 thick. The second variety, recently arrived from China, differs in that its fruits are simply ovoid, shorter and at the same time larger. The secretion may also be less abundant. MM. J. Monnier et Cie, in their book entitled: Les Plantes potagères, say that the Bénincasa remained forgotten for a long time, but that reintroduced a few years ago by the Société d'Acclimatation, it seems to have regained, if not some vogue, at least the place it deserves among vegetable plants... It has many similarities with the cucumber and is preferred to the latter by many enthusiasts because of its lighter flesh and less pronounced flavor. According to Thomas A.-C. Firminger, the Benincasa is a very large and beautiful ovoid squash (1), which appears to be covered with a pale greenish-white waxy flower. He doesn't know if Europeans eat much of it, but the natives eat a lot. It has a very pleasant effect on thatched cottages, where it can often be seen in the most exposed and least protected position. When I wanted to know (1) This is undoubtedly the Chinese variety, he says, whether its fruit was not in danger of being frequently stolen, I was assured that other fruits in the same situation would be quite likely to be stolen, but that the Benincasa enjoyed a special respect due to certain religious considerations which made it perfectly safe. In Bengal, its seeds are sown during the rains and the vegetable is eaten in the cold season. The Bénincasa is, in our opinion, worthy of the attention of connoisseurs. On October 26 1882, speaking to the Société nationale d'Horticulture, we said (1): Bénincasa fruits, knotted under glass, are always very beautiful, whereas those that receive rain and are subject to atmospheric influences are always stained and deformed. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the plant is best cultivated in the Melon region. Besides, it could only be an amateur plant here. Only three fruits can be obtained under a panel, and their market value cannot match that of Cantaloupes, which would have occupied the same space. Benincasa should therefore be cultivated beyond the Loire. Its fruit keeps well throughout the winter, travels well and could be sold in Paris at a moderate and remunerative price. In 1888, Mr. Charles Naudin sent us a charming little variety from India, roughly spherical in shape; its drawback is that it yields very little edible flesh. (1) Journal de la Société nationale d'Horticulture de France, 3e série, 1882, t. IV, p. 720. LEOPOLDIA HOLZMANNI, Heldr. 57 Family Liliaceae. M. de Heldreich, in a work entitled Les Plantes utiles de la Grèce, shows the importance of spontaneous edible plants in the diet of the Greek people. "The numerous and rigorous fasts of the Greek Orthodox Church, during which neither meat nor anything animal, such as milk, butter, cheese, eggs, etc., nor fish on certain days, nor even oil, are allowed to be eaten, force the Greek people to often resort to a purely vegetable diet, which among them, perhaps more than among any other people, plays the principal role in the household. "In summer and autumn, fruits of all kinds, especially those of the Cucurbitaceae; in winter and spring, vegetables and wild herbs are the dominant foods. However, Olives, Onions and Garlic are, in fact, the mainstay of the frugal meals of the working class and thrifty country folk in all seasons. As it is these two classes who observe fasts most rigorously, and as vegetable gardening is found only in the gardens around the big cities and is almost entirely unknown in the interior of the country, spontaneous plants above all serve as food. "In winter and spring, especially on Sundays and feast days, it's a general occupation for women and children to gather and pluck these plants from wheat and fallow land, when they are still young and tender. Cooked in water, or more often simply scalded and prepared with lemon juice, salt and oil, as in the old days, and without the latter on days of great fasting, they form a real foodstuff on the frugal peasant's table, not just a simple meal. "Usually, the dish consists of a mixture of several kinds of these herbs, or just one kind, depending on the circumstances. "In addition, many other herbs are eaten raw, in salads or even unseasoned. Leopoldia Holzmanni is said to be highly prized by the Greek people. This plant can hardly be distinguished botanically from Muscari comosum, the weed of our fields; it has only been cultivated by our gardener out of obedience and with great repugnance. Last winter, M. de Heldreich gave us the following information on this unusual plant: "You have seen, in my little monograph on the genus Leopoldia (Bellevalia), that in Greece we have a fairly large number of species, all of which have more or less affinity with the Bellevalia comosa (Hyacinthus comosus L), which is very common in Europe and with which you are very familiar. The most common species in the Greek flora is L. Holzmanni HELDR. but the bulbs of all the species are very similar and the people do not distinguish between them; they collectively call them Bolboi or Borboi (plural of Bolbos), and this is surely the Bolbos edódimos, gnórimos pasin, ou esdiomen, eustomachus enkoileos purros, etc., of Dioscorides (Mat, med., Leopoldia is nowhere cultivated, but the various species, and especially L. Holzmanni, are so abundant on dry hills, in seedbeds and elsewhere, that large quantities of bulbs are easily collected and taken to market to be sold (in Athens at 20 centimes per ogat, weighing around 1,250 grams, or 26 centimes per kilogram). "It's a highly esteemed food, considered (as Dioscorides already said) to be very healthy and excellent for the stomach. "They are eaten in spring (February-March), especially during the Great Lent before Easter. As for preparation, it's quite simple. Once the bulbs have been cleaned of their outer scales, they are boiled in water. After a good cooking, the water is drained off and the bulbs are placed in vinegar with a certain amount of salt. This preserves them for quite a long time, but they are ready to eat after just 24 hours. Once you've removed as much of the vinegar as you want to eat, you can season them with a little olive oil and lemon juice (ad libitum). They are eaten with bread during Lent, or as a sort of hors d'oeuvre with meat. The taste is always a little bitter, but quite pleasant. "As for cultivation, I've said that they're not grown here. They're found wild in large quantities." Keenly interested in such precise information, we asked Messrs. de Vilmorin to bring us a fairly large quantity of L. Holzmanni bulbs, and these gentlemen requested them from Dr. Gennadius, director of the Botanical Garden of Athens, whose kindness was well known to them. He hastened to send them, with this note: "Leopoldia Holzmanni is considered a very stomachic food. After cleaning the bulbs, they are soaked in water for a few hours, then boiled, changing the water once or twice to remove their bitterness, and eaten as a salad." Given a good supply of bulbs, we planted most of them. They didn't give any sign of life the year they were planted, because their vegetation had begun in Greece. In 1890, the plant grew well, but our gardener, in his horror of weeds, removed many of them. Tasting Leopoldia Holzmanni has not been kind to him either. It's too bitter. Perhaps we didn't prepare it with due care. It is certain that the bulbs of this plant are of great service to the Greek people. We could try using its congeners, Muscari comosum, so abundant in our harvests. It would be nice to get rid of an enemy by eating it. BOUSSINGAULTIA BASELLOIDES Kunth. Family Salsolaceae. Subterranean apparatus highly developed. Roots few in number, fibrous and fleshy. Tubers abundant, agglomerated and branching, elongated, irregular, with a number of more or less elongated underground buds throughout, giving them an irregular shape, and bristling with large spikes. Externally, they are an earthy gray-black, while internally they are homogeneous, with a very white tissue, abundant in thick, stringy mucilage. Stems are long and stalky, reaching up to 10 meters in length; they are loose, spindly, leafy and supported only by a support; lying on the ground, they root easily; leaves are abundant and fleshy. The plant flowers but does not bear fruit, however well exposed it may be. Boussingaultie is native to Mexico and Chile. This plant may be of some use in ornamental gardens, but we don't need to concern ourselves with it in that respect. We have tasted its leaves, prepared like spinach; they are barely edible. The tubers are no better. According to Mérat, their slimy nature and unpleasant flavor make them unsuitable for use as food (1). According to Philippar, they have a very bland taste and are so abundant in mucilage, even after cooking, that it is impossible to eat them (2). According to Louis Tellière, when Boussingaultia baselloides was introduced into our country, it was thought that its leaves could be eaten like spinach and its tubers like potatoes; but it was soon recognized that neither (1) Notice sur les tubercules proposés pour remplacer la Pomme de terre. Librairie agricole de la Maison rustique, rue Jacob, 26. (2) Notice descriptive, culturale et économique sur deux plantes tuberculeuses Bull. de la Soc. d'Agriculture, 2e série, t. IV, p. 425, 1848). others could not serve as food, the leaves being very safe and fat, and the tubers being soft and slimy. I have eaten," he says, "both leaves and tubers, and I confess it is very bad (1). These testimonies are sufficient proof that Boussingaultie has no right to any place in the vegetable garden, and for this very reason, it provides us with a subject for meditation. How is it that, to replace the potato, plants of no value whatsoever have been proposed? How could anyone believe for a moment that Dahlia, Apios, Boussingaultie, Picotiane, Olluco, Poire de terre Cochet, could replace the Potato? Some of these plants refuse to be grown at all, while others are inedible. Are researchers of new plants invincibly prone to all kinds of illusions? Following their example, we promise ourselves not to give in to the same temptations as our predecessors. Can we? CAMASSIE COMESTIBLE CAMAssia ESCUlEnTa Lindl; (Anthericum esculentum Spr.; Phalangium esculentum Nutt.; Phalangium Quamash Pursh; Scilla esculenta Sims.). - Greenhouse flora, 3, 275; Botanical Register, t. 1486; Bot. Mag. t. 1574 and 2774. Family Liliaceae. This plant takes its generic name from the American name Quamash or Camash, which the type species bears in its native country. (1) Boussingaultia baselloides (Revue horticole, 1869, p. 419). Bulb medium, ovoid, smooth, brown; leaves linear, gutter-folded, attractive green; spike 3 to 5 decimeters long, erect, bearing numerous flowers in elongated clusters, accompanied by a scarlet bract; flowers purplish-blue in one variety, white in another. Perianth with six lanceolate linear divisions; ovary rounded, triquetrate, surmounted by a style longer than the stamens, terminated by a trifid stigma. Fig. 12 - Camassia (Camassia esculenta Lindl.). This beautiful plant is worthy of a place in our gardens as an ornamental; its habit is somewhat reminiscent of the Saint-Bruno lily. It is native to north-western North America, in rocky valleys, along the Colombian coast, etc. It flowers in May-June, in the summer, in the fall and in the fall. It flowers in May-June. "The Camassie, whose bulb is good to eat, can be grown in the open ground in the Paris climate. (Jacques, Hérincq et Duchartre.) " Wild people eat its bulbs cooked; they harvest them for winter and eat a lot of them." (Répertoire des plantes utiles, Duchesne.) " The grass disappears under the Quamash flowers in the meadows around Oregon-City. The natives make an enormous consumption of its bulbs." (Information given by a former resident of Oregon-City.) " This plant is not cultivated in Oregon, at least in the part I've lived in. The Indians gather it from the somewhat damp prairies, where it grows in fairly great abundance." (Excerpt from a letter we received from a former Oregon resident). "Kamass root or Wild Hyacinth (Camassia esculenta). This root has the shape of an onion and the volume of a walnut (Carya alba). It produces a pretty blue flower and grows on rocky hills. It is harvested in June and July. "Eaten raw, it has a pleasant, mucilaginous taste. Boiled, it resembles the common potato. "To preserve it, the Indians dig a pit and line it with stones on which a fire is lit. When these are sufficiently heated, they are cleaned and the roots are piled on top. Grass or twigs are first spread over the pile, and finally it is covered with earth. "After a few days, the pit is uncovered and the white Camassie roots have converted into a perfectly cooked, dark-brown homogeneous mass, about the consistency of a soft strong glue and as sweet as molasses. "With the roots cooked by this process, we often make, by stirring and pressing, large cakes which, slightly dried in the sun, become flexible and supple and resemble the black tobacco carrots of the navy. "This preparation is not of an appetizing color, but its flavor is sweet, mucilaginous and as pleasant as that of the fresh root, except for a slight smoky taste it contracts as it cooks. "In this compressed form, Camassie keeps softer than raw or simply cooked, and can be kept for a year or more. "The roots, boiled in water, produce very good molasses, which is highly esteemed and used by various tribes on days of great rejoicing. The Indians of Cape Flattery, the Nez-Percés of Idaho and those of Pitt-River, in California, are the greatest consumers of this food, under the name of Camass root" (1). "Eight days ago, while camped at Deer-Park, on Lower Arrow Lake (Columbia River development), I had the opportunity to witness how the Indians cook Camassia esculenta. This species of Camassia is very abundant along the Columbia River, between the Upper and Lower Arrow lakes, flowering during the first weeks of May. "The Indians collect the bulbs before the seed is completely ripe; they consider this the best time. The individuals I'm talking about had at least twenty to twenty-five bushels. "For two or three days, before cooking began, the women were busy cutting and bringing to camp branches of Alder and Maple (Alnus rubra and Acer glabrum). Several bunches of the broad leaves of Lysichiton kamchatcense (Skunk cab(1) Extract from the Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for 1870; Washington, Government printing office, 1871. bage) and two or three of Alectoria jubata, the black-haired lichen that grows in abundance on Larix occidentalis, were brought in at the same time. "With everything ready, the men cut down a large Pine tree, with the sole apparent purpose of procuring its smaller branches, for they made no use of any other part; then, near the edge of the lake, in a sandbank, they dug a hole about 10 feet square and 2 feet deep, which they filled with broken Pine branches ; on top of this, they piled several cords of dried Cedar and Pine, which they covered with small pebbles; then fire was set in the pile in several places, and it was left to stand for several hours. When the Indians returned, the burning stones lay in a mass of ash. They removed the few pieces of unburnt wood that remained near the edges, and the women, with wooden spades, leveled the sides of the heap with sand, throwing enough over the stones to fill all the little crevices, through which a tongue of flame could shoot out from the coals still burning under the stones. The whole was then covered a foot or more thick with branches of Maple and Alder, after they had been well trampled. Broad leaves of Skunk cabbage were placed on top, until all the cracks were sealed. Slabs of Tamarac bark were spread over the smoking mass, and the bulbs placed on top. About half of them were in closed bark baskets, each containing about a bushel and a half. They were carried to the center of the las or pyre. The Lichen I mentioned was then placed on the unoccupied bark, after being thoroughly washed, and the remaining bulbs were spread over it. The whole was then covered again with branches and leaves, and a roof of bark slabs was made, over which two or three inches of sand were thrown. On top of this we piled the materials for another fire, more substantial than the first, which we lit just as the sun was setting, and continued to burn all night. "The next day, our camp was far away, and I was unable to see the result of the day's work. An Indian who could speak a little English told me, however, that the oven would have a day to cool down and that, when it was opened, the bulbs in the baskets would be converted into flour from which bread could be made, while those mixed with the Lichen would have united with it and formed a solid substance, resembling, in consistency and color, a tobacco-black carrot (plug) that could be broken up and kept well for a very long time (1). Cultivation. This plant is perfectly hardy, even in the climate of Paris; in the more northerly departments, however, it is wiser to keep a few bulbs in a frame, or to protect those left outside from sudden temperature variations and excessive cold, by means of a layer of leaves or straw. The bulbs are planted in light soil in August or September. Flowering takes place outdoors from May to June, and as early as (1) Sur la cuisson du Quamash, by Mr. James M. Macoun (Garden and Forest, vol. III, 1890, p. 343). May for bulbs kept under glass. Camassia is grown mainly in Holland, as an ornamental plant, where it has so far only been propagated by cloves. By cultivating Camassie as it is done in Holland, we have been able to observe: 1° That it presents no difficulties and that the plant is quite hardy in the Paris climate; 2° That the harvest obtained every two years is quite abundant and would be remunerative as soon as the excellent material that it makes available to cooks was intelligently used. Uses. In November 1886, we received 1,200 Camassie bulbs. We planted 750 of them, and used the remainder for experiments in cooking, pastry-making and confectionery. Pies made from these bulbs gave us mediocre satisfaction, but a sweet pastry we presented to the Société d'Acclimatation was really excellent. This paste was absolutely pure. It was nothing other than the cooked bulb, crushed and topped up with sugar, with no perfume, no mixture whatsoever. It was a good cough remedy, as pectoral and soothing as marshmallow paste or Arabian Nafé (okra) paste. In fact, it was much more pleasant. Here's the formula: Peel the bulb with a silver or ivory knife; leave nothing to color the paste; steam between two cloths; grind with a wooden roller on granite. At about this time, place sugar on the stove and cook to the same point as for fondant. The quantity of sugar should be equal to that of the paste. When you're ready to work with the fondant, add the ground paste and proceed in the same way as for all fondants. Keep in reserve and use as required. Camassie is more fatty than floury, but its flavor is so clean and pure, and its whiteness so appetizing, that we believe it lends itself to many culinary uses. We regret not having succeeded in making Camassie a resource for the table. We don't have at our disposal the skilful man who would be willing to apply his art to creating the sauces, jellies and dishes that the bulbs would provide. Enthusiasts will cultivate the plant; if they don't use its bulbs to make pectoral paste, or lartelettes, or sweet entremets, they will at least have one more pretty flower in their gardens in the spring. In the Manuel de l'Acclimateur, Messrs Naudin and Mueller list Camassia Fraseri Torr. (Scilla Fraseri A. Gray) as also producing edible bulbs. This species is said to be very prolific. To date, we have only been able to obtain a few bulbs of this type from Quamash, and it is impossible for us to comment on their value. We have also had in our possession a few bulbs of another Liliacea, Calochortus luteus (Cyclobothra lutea Lindl.), which the Indians of Utah and Arizona eat, and which the Americans call Wild Sago. This species, as well as several others belonging to this genus, is a very pretty plant; but it has not given us any results from the special point of view with which we are concerned. Finally, Dr. Philippi sent us from Chile a number of onions of Conanthera bifolia Ruiz et Pavon, and Cumingia tenella Don, other Liniaceae with edible bulbs of little interest. CANNA COMESTIBLE Starchy balisier, Capacho, Achira. CANNA EDULIS Ker., Roscoe, Monandrian plants of the order Scitamineæ, pl. 5; Bot. Mag. tab. 2498. Scitamineae family. Rhizomes tuberous, voluminous and starchy; stems 3 to 4 meters long, rounded and reddish; leaves large, ovate-lanceolate, with very pronounced veins; spathe lanceolate, acute, green, with purple margins; corolla with light orange-red outer divisions, the inner ones darker. "This species is native to Peru, where it is cultivated as a food plant. It is often called Toloman. A starch is extracted from its rhizome, known as Chouchoute starch, Toloman starch or Tolomane starch. In Trinidad, C. edulis is known as Toulema or Tulema (every month). The starch extracted is called Tulema starch (Heuzé, plantes alimentaires, vol. Il, p. 57). "An article sold in stores under the name Tous les mois bears a very close resemblance, in quality and appearance, to manufactured Arrow-root, to which it is considered superior for children's food, because it is less constipating. Dr. Lindley assumes that it is the product of Canna edulis. If this is the case, as the plant thrives perfectly in India, it would be extremely easy to manufacture, using the same procedure as for Arrow-root. The same would be true if, as Mr. J.-M. Jones says (1), there is a giant species of Arrow-root (Canna coccinea), the product of which is known as Tous les mois." (Firminger, Manual of gardening for Bengal). "A kind of Arrow-root called Tous les mois was imported into England from St. Kitts about the year 1836, and, as it was recognized as forming an excellent food product, national markets were opened to it. Until now, it has been imported into England exclusively from St. Kitts; but the plant is now grown over large areas in Australia" Nicholls and Raoul, Petit traité d'Agriculture tropicale, page 359. "I have found no indication in herbarium labels of the food use of Canna roots, and I have no clear idea of the distinction of species (1) The naturalist in Bermuda. in this very difficult genus: they all look alike, there are some in all parts of the world, and horticulture ignores their certain provenance and has created hybrids. "I believe that many Cannas, perhaps all, have the edible cooked tuber, at least the new part of the tuber, terminal bud and lateral buds. However, there must be some species where the tuber is slightly larger and more tender. Cultivation and climate must influence the edible quality of the tuber. In very smoky soil, it should be better and bigger. I assume that the northern climate is also favorable to its quality. I don't know if the marshy quality of the soil has any influence. "The remarkable thing about all Cannas is that, although they come from hot countries, they grow easily in summer in our gardens, flowering in the open ground (except for a few large species, 3 meters high, which can only flower in the South or in greenhouses) and, for the most part (except for L. liliiflora and iridiflora), form a tuber that is easy to store in winter in an orangery, cellar or cold greenhouse. "Small Cannas have an elevation of 80 centimetres or 1 metre, large ones 3 metres in warm countries. The same country often has several species at the same time. I've seen two in Guyana, and in my herbarium, I have a third from that country. Simmonds cites, among the Cannas whose grated tuber yields starch: C. Achiras Gillies. C. glauca Lin. C. flaccida Dill. C. edulis Ker. C. edulis has been taken to Australia and has spread from the Botanical Garden to the estates. "It seems to me that new tubers in formation should be cooked separately; not yet stemmed or rooted, they are much more tender and delicate. Older tubers sometimes have a few fibers. Canna edulis has no distinct taste of its own. It is mealy, tender and a little watery. The new tuber buds make up at least a third of the stump, perhaps half. They can be used either for human or animal consumption. I think it's better to use them separately. (Extract from our correspondence.) In the spring of 1879, a friend of ours brought us rhizomes of Capacho (Canna edulis) from Caracas, which we planted on an old bed. The plants vegetated vigorously and reached a height of 2.30 m; they did not flower. We detached the new buds from the stumps and cooked them in salted water; we removed the fibrous envelope and obtained a good vegetable, tender, starchy, somewhat resembling artichoke stock in flavor and consistency. For four years, we have been growing and tasting Capacho, and we believe that this Canna can be a useful addition to our vegetable gardens. The Société d'Acclimalalion has generously rewarded our experiments, and Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cte have included the plant in their catalog. Capacho culls in the same way as all Cannas, whether in the spring it is put into vegetation under a frame, or left in place during the winter, under the protection of a little litter. It does not flower in the Paris climate, which is why it is edible; if it did flower, if it did ripen its seeds, it would certainly become too fibrous to be used. Our horticulturists will be able to take advantage of this vegetable, which is both highly productive and easy to store. List of food Cannas. C. edulis Ker, Roscoe, Scit. 5; Bot. Mag. tab. 2498. Peru. C. discolor Lindl, Bot. reg. tab. 1231. Trinidad. C. indica Lindl., Roscoe, Scit. 2; Bot, reg. tab. 776. West Indies. C. paniculata Ruiz et Pav. Peru. G. gigantea Desf., Roscoe, Scit. 4; Bot. Mag. tab. 2316; Bot. reg. lab. 206. Brazil. C. coccinea Ait., Roscoe, Scit. 11; Amer. mérid. C. glauca Lin., Roscoe, Scit. 7. southern Carolina. C. flaccida Dill, Roscoe, Scit. 6; Redouté. Lil., 107. Caroline. All provide a valuable starch, and many can be prepared as a vegetable in a variety of ways. For the latter use, we believe they should be harvested before flowering. CANNA DISCOLOR Two-colored balisier. CANNA DISCOLOR Lindl. bot. reg. tab. 1231. Rhizomes tuberous; stems 3 to 4 meters long, reddish; leaves oblong-oval, colored reddish-angled below, lower ones washed with purple, upper ones colored only on the veins. Erect bunches, with red rachis, emerging from a coiled spathe, covered with abundant glaucous dust; flower very bright red outside and pale yellow inside. "This species is native to the island of Trinité, where it is widely cultivated. It supplies the starch known as Canna-root". (Ileuzé). It is less productive than Capacho (Canna edulis). In the Paris climate, this species rarely flowers. A comparative tasting, carried out with the most scrupulous attention by several people whom Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie had called together for this purpose, demonstrated that Canna discolor was of superior quality to Canna edulis. Several varieties of ornamental Cannas, tasted on this occasion, were declared inedible. We believe that, in amateur gardens, Canna discolor should be grown in preference to Capacho. We know of several food Cannas that we have not grown. In Ruiz and Pavon's Flore du Pérou, all Cannas are named Achira. C. paniculata is Achira Cimarrona. C. indica is simply Achira. C. iridiflora is Sumac Achira. Its rhizome is not tuberous. According to these authors, the roots of C. paniculata are edible, but tasteless. Peruvians, they say, eat C. indica roots prepared in a variety of ways. "Canna indica. - It is widely cultivated in Colombia to extract the starch from its roots, which is given to the sick, like Arrow-root or Maranta starch....." (Note by M. Posada Arango, Bull. Soc. Bot. de France, t, XVIII, 1871, p. 372). "Four species of Cannas supply Tolomane starch. These are C. edulis, coccinea, discolor and glauca. This starch, also known as "of all months", comes to us from the West Indies and was imported into England in 1836. It is remarkable for its satiny sheen and is composed of flattened grains of considerable volume". (Pennetier, Matières organiques premières, p. 150.) CAPUCINE TUBÉREUSE TROPÆOLUM TUBEROSUM Ruiz et Pav, Fl. per. 314; Bot. Mag. tab. 3714; Fl. des serres, 5,432; Belg. hort. 2, 36. Tropéolées family. Roots tuberous; stems numerous, branched, glabrous, from Om, 50 to Om, 60 in height. Leaves cordate at the base, with 5 or 7 entire lobes, indented, sometimes bilobed; petioles twice as long as the blade, twisted into a tendril; peduncle much longer than the leaf; calyx crimson red, shorter than the spur; petals orange-yellow, toothed, streaked with black on the tab, about as long as the sepals. Blooms in October. Tuber pear-shaped, almost spherical, attenuated at the base, varying in size from that of a Chestnut to that of a medium-sized Pear. Its color is pale yellow, variegated with blood streaks. Its surface is covered with slightly protruding nipples. "The tubers of this plant are said to be edible in South America. Here, we haven't yet been able to make use of them. I have tried pickling them in vinegar like gherkins, but have not been satisfied with the result. A subscriber to the Revue horticole Fig. 13 - Nasturtium tuberosum (Tropxolum tuberosum Ruiz et Pav.). had the same idea, and enjoyed the product in a different way... What does this mean? It seems that we shouldn't discuss tastes, or that my soil wasn't suitable for the plant. Our subscriber left his tubers to marinate for three months, added no seasoning, and found that, "in this state, they offered a species of Pickles much more agreeable to the taste than the real thing, besides which the vinegar acquired a perfume suitable for use in sauces and sulades." "Ordinary potato cultivation is suitable for this plant, which is lightly ridged. The tubers only begin to form in September, and should not be harvested until the last possible moment to avoid the effects of frost." (Capucine tubéreuse, by Neumann, Rev. hort., 1845-46, p.17.) " The tuberous nasturtium, Tropœolum tuberosum, or Ysaño (pron. Ysagno), is regarded by everyone in Europe as such a detestable vegetable that there is absolutely no use for it. In fact, when Ysaño tubers are pulled from the ground, they have a most unpleasant pungency, accompanied by the odor peculiar to all species of nasturtium. "Well, in Bolivia, we've found a way to get rid of these defects, and have succeeded in making the Ysano, if not an everyday vegetable, at least a very edible one. "Coction is not enough to produce the desired result; freezing is added. "Tropœolum tubers should therefore be eaten cooked and frozen, and they should be eaten before they thaw, i.e. crunchy. In this state, I can affirm, as I've tried them many times, that they are quite a pleasant dish. "There's hardly a day that goes by that you don't see one or two rows of market women in La Paz selling nothing but these frozen Ysaños, or Taiachas, as they're called, which they protect from the sun by wrapping in wool or straw. The women of La Paz are all extremely fond of them, and are in the habit of taking them as refreshment during the heat of the day, by soaking them in molasses." (Note by M. Weddell, Rev. hort., 1852, p. 148.) That nasturtium tubers, frozen and soaked in molasses, are a pleasant refreshment during the summer heat, we have no intention of denying, but we don't expect our Frenchwomen to ever be served it at Tortoni's. So we'd still be in the presence of a new idea: the use of nasturtium tubers as a refreshment. We'd still be dealing with a beautiful tuber, easily obtained but useless, if the subscriber to the Revue horticole, quoted above by Neumann, hadn't taught us how to use it. A few years ago, we candied Nasturtium tubers in vinegar, and the result was entirely satisfactory. They were tasted by our family and friends, and our preparation was unanimously approved. We were far from believing then that we had been beaten to the punch, and that thirty years earlier, the subscriber had candied these tubers in vinegar, without the addition of any condiment, and had publicized the success of his attempt. Between Neumann's unfavorable opinion and that of the subscriber, we can therefore make a decision, and we do so without hesitation: the subscriber is right, a hundred times right. We have to say that we have prepared Capucine tubers like all our vinegar preserves, by adding Tarragon, Elderflower and Chilli. They turn the vinegar pink, but this coloring doesn't last long. Tuberous nasturtium, preserved in vinegar, retains its distinctive flavor, albeit slightly attenuated, an advantage not possessed by the vegetables usually associated with gherkins. We have proposed (1) a new composition of Pickles which rightly includes the Tuberous Nasturtium: Chinese Hibiscus or Catawissa Onion; Angourie Cucumber, from the West Indies; Miôga, from Japan; Tuberous Stachys (Crosne), from China; Tuberous Nasturtium. We believe we can add to this list the very bitter young fruits of Momordica Charantia, M. Balsamina and M. muricata; the former is eaten in China and Cochinchina, and the latter two are also edible. In Réunion, M. muricata is prepared in a variety of ways for the table, and is used in the composition of Acharts. Edible merchants sell Capucine tubéreuse for use as an hors-d'oeuvre. In dinners ordered from them, they present it in ramekins, cut into extremely thin slices and seasoned, like celery, with salt, oil, vinegar and mustard. It's a good idea to prepare this appetizer a few hours in advance. Tuberous nasturtium is very easy to grow. Its tubers are planted at the beginning of May, in the ground, 80 centimetres apart in all directions; the plantation is hoeed until the stems, spreading over the soil, cover it completely. Before planting, we put the tubers to vegetate in cups which we place under frames, as we do for (1) Nouvelle composition de Pickles (Bull. de la Soc. nat. d'Accl., 1883, p. 235). Cannas and Dahlias. This practice gives us excellent results. The leaves freeze before the tubers are fully formed; we use the frames, which are no longer in use at that time, to cover the plants from the beginning of October. Harvesting should only take place in November. Tropwolum polyphyllum Cavan and edule Paxt. tubers from the Chilean Andes are also said to be edible. Finally, according to F. Mueller (Select extratropical plants), those of T. sessilifolium Pœpp. et Endl., another Chilean species, are the largest and best. In Brazil and Paraguay, the leaves and fleshy stems of T. pentaphyllum Lamk are eaten as a vegetable herb. GAIRDNER CARVI CARUM GAIRDNERH Benth. et Hook. Umbelliferae family. This plant is abundant in Washington, Idaho, southern California and Utah. Asa Gray says its roots are an important food item for the Indians. It is biennial. "Geyer probably had this plant in mind when he spoke of an Umbellifer as being among the delicacies of the Indians in Oregon. This root, truly delicious, bursts when boiled and shows a floury substance, white as snow, with a sweet flavor like cream and possessing somewhat the fragrance of Parsley." (Lindley). Our American correspondent, Dr. Havard, sent us seeds and roots of this plant, and for several years we carried out cultivation trials with a view to ascertaining its food value. Unfortunately, the results did not meet our expectations: the plant, which is very hardy in the Paris climate, developed perfectly; it even flowered and fruited, and many seedlings survived the winter of 1890-1891 without suffering. From a practical point of view, however, Gairdner's Caraway is of no interest; the roots we obtained after two and even three years of vegetation were so small that we felt they could not be used. CHAYOTE, CHRISTOPHINE, CHOUCHOUTE Vegetable pear (English Colonies). - Chuchu (Brazil). - Chocho (Jamaica). - Pipinella, Chayota, Chahiota (Madeira). SECHIUM EDULE Swartz - CHAYOTA EDULIS Jacq. GriZgures: Jacquin, Amer., Il, p, 155. - Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles, tab. 328. - Flora Brasiliensis, II, 4, p. IIl, tab. XXXV. - Gardeners' Chronicle, 1865, p. 51 - Le Naturaliste, 1891, p. 170. Cucurbitaceae family. Plant native to Mexico, with tuberous stump, perennial, half-linear stems, climbing, bearing five-lobed leaves. Greenish or yellow flowers, the "96 CHAYOTE Fig. 14 - Chayote (Sechium edule Swartz). 4, Ramcau. - B, Female flower. - C, Male flower. - D, Fruit. 83 some male, others female, on the same plant. Pear-shaped fruit, from Om, 10 to Om, 15 long, containing a single seed, with a surface covered with stiff hairs, and greenish or creamy-white in color. There are two distinct varieties: one with pale green flowers and fruit, the other with creamy-white flowers and fruit. The fruit of the latter variety is also larger. According to Macfadyen Flora of Jamaica, vol. Il, p. 141), the white variety is the most delicate; added lemon juice and sugar, this fruit is used to make excellent tarts; the root, properly prepared, is very healthy and very pleasant to the taste. Lunan (Hortus jamaicensis, vol. I, p. 182) says that Chayote fruit is a healthy and pleasant vegetable, but that it is much improved by Lemon juice. Prepared with lemon juice and sugar, it is an excellent substitute for apple marmalade. The large roots, boiled or roasted, are floury and healthy. Lowe (Flora of Madeira, vol. Il, p. 292) writes of Sechium edule: "It is a favorite and highly esteemed vegetable. It resembles a young Squash rather than a Cucumber; but, when ripe, it is firmer and meatier in consistency, with a nutty flavor. The large-fruited variety, cream or white in color, looks better, but is considered to be of poorer quality than the green variety." We have grown this plant vigorously without fruit, but if Chayote cultivation is impractical in central France, it gives good results in the Mediterranean region. Cultivated in good southern exposure, the plant develops well and produces abundant fruit. For a number of years now, some edible merchants, notably Mr. Hédiard, have been selling Chayotes during the winter; but the price is still very high, and this excellent fruit will only become popular the day intelligent growers begin to cultivate it on a large scale in our Algerian colony. Chayote keeps for a very long time and can travel far; it would be an excellent trade item that would find easy outlets. Prepared in white sauce or like cardoons, it is an excellent dish. Sold at an affordable price, it would quickly take an important place among our all-too-rare winter vegetables. The plant is propagated by planting the whole fruit. The stems can be climbed on trellises, but can also be left to lie on the ground, like those of ordinary squash. CHERVIS Berle des potagers, Chirouis, Girole. SIUM SISARUM Lin. Umbelliferae family. Perennial plant with tuberous, fusiform, fasciculated roots, about Om, 20 long, fleshy, russet outside, white inside. Stems cylindrical, 0°, 30 high, reminiscent of parsnips; leaves pennate, those at the apex with 3 oblong-acute, toothed segments; involucre with 5 reflexed leaflets; flowers small, white, with a calyx with a denticulate or almost null blade. Flowers in July-August. Jacques and Hérincq date the introduction of this plant to Europe from 1548. It is thought to have come from China. However, it has been said that Chervis was one of the food plants of the ancients. Édouard Martens is far from affirming this (1). Poiret does not doubt it: "Pliny," he says, "tells us that the Emperor Tiberius, during his stay in Germany, found Chervis roots so delicious that he demanded a certain quantity each year as tribute. Dupuis, after quoting Poiret, adds: "It seems that the Chervis of the ancients is none other than parsnip. In his work on the origin of cultivated plants (2), M. Alph. de Candolle makes an in-depth study of the question, but without resolving it. We refer the reader to it. We have tried, on several occasions, to grow Chervis, and we must confess that we have not obtained the tender, delicate roots that were the delight of our fathers. We are inclined to believe that we have been unskilful and have not known how to cultivate Sium Sisarum. In our pamphlet entitled: Nouveaux légumes d'hiver (3), we said: Chervis is now known only by name in the Paris region and in the (1) Les plantes alimentaires des anciens, by Edouard Martens (Rev. de l'instruction publique en Belgique, nouvelle série, t. I). (2) Origine des plantes cultivées, by Alph. de Candolle; Paris, Germer, Baillière et Cle, 1883. (3) A Paillieux et D. Bois. Nouveaux légumes d'hiver, expéiences d'étiolement pratiquées en chambre obscure, Paris, 1879. It was once highly esteemed and widely cultivated. Nowadays, it is no longer cultivated, but garden lovers may well find a place for it in the kitchen garden, once they learn that its roots lend themselves to two very different uses. Once again, it will be a dual-purpose crop. In fact, its etiolated shoots produce a 6 X 8 Chervis salad (Sium Sisarum Lin). Fig. 15 - Plant habit. Fig. 16. - Roots. aromatic, with a pleasant flavor, which can be eaten with or without mixing. An interesting acquisition. We would also return to the preparation of Chervis roots, as practiced by our forefathers, and we would like to reproduce here a recipe from 1656. The author of Délices de la campagne said: "This root is so delicate that it almost only wants to enter hot water to remove its skin; then it is fried, having been powdered with flour and dipped in batter like Scorsonère. Orange juice is its real sauce. If, when cooked and peeled, you eat it in butter, in a touring or German sauce, or in oil, in a salad with Spanish chervil, as soon as it starts to sprout its leaf, it's a delicate and delicious meal." Carrots, parsnips and celery have produced many varieties, but not so the Chervis. It has remained unchanged since its introduction, some three hundred and forty years ago. Perhaps it has degenerated. It used to be widely cultivated; its roots were found on the best tables, and Linnaeus reports that, in his day, it was grown in almost every garden. Greatness and decline! What can be the cause of the oblivion into which it has fallen? It would be wrong of us to teach the cultivation of the Chervis after admitting that we have undoubtedly done it badly. We will describe it in the words of Mme Aglaé Adanson: "Chervis requires open, soft, deep soil. It is sown light on March 1st, in newly spaded soil, in rows of five rays Om.04 deep, which are covered with a rake. When the plant is strong enough, it is thinned out to Om,10, weeded, crimped and watered from time to time. It is good to eat from November until it bolts. Even though it's perennial, it's a good idea to renew it every year; it'll be much better. According to Mme Adanson, the germination period of its seed is four years, and according to M. Vilmorin, only three years. We recommend growing Chervis; it's a vegetable with an excellent flavor, which, it seems, can be grown abundantly and tenderly by careful cultivation. Publications to consult: Note sur le Chervis, by M. le docteur Sacc (Bull. de la Soc. d 'Acclimatation, vol. Il, 1855, p. 561). Le Chervis, by M. Huzard (Bull. de la Soc, nationale d'Hort. de France, 2e série, 1856, vol. II, p. 147). Chervis. Note, by M. A. Dupuis (Rev. horticole, 2e série, 1856, vol. V, p. 302). Another umbellifer, Tinguarra sicula Parlatore (Athamantha sicula L., non Ucria), native to Sicily, produces a fleshy root, reminiscent in shape of Salsify and with an aromatic flavor quite comparable to that of Parsnip. We grew the plant from seeds kindly sent to us by Mr. Todaro, Director of the Palermo Botanical Garden. Growing Tinguarra presents no difficulty, but it's not until the second year after sowing that we have roots large enough to use. We have collected many seeds, but we don't think there is any point in propagating this plant in gardens. CHUCKLUSA PEUCEDANUM CANBYI Coulter et Rose. Fam. Umbelliferae. In 1894, Mr. Meehan of Philadelphia sent us tubers of this plant. It is the Chucklusa of the Spokane Indians. The stem reaches 10 to 25 centimeters in height; the tubers are globular and measure 6 to 12 lines in diameter. According to Coulter and Rose, Revision of north American Umbelliferæ, p. 56, Chucklusa is, after Quamash (Camassia esculenta), the most important food plant in the region where it grows wild. Mr. Meehan included two other species of Peucedanum in his shipment: 1° P. farinosum Geyer, or Tuhuha of the Spokane Indians; 2° P. ambiguum Nutt. We have grown these plants in the open ground, sheltering them with glass boxes during the winter; they flowered in February, in 1895 and 1896, and even fructified; but we have recognized, as for Bunium incrassatum, from Algeria, that these are plants that can only be used where it is possible to harvest them in the wild and in sufficient quantity. Once cultivated, it takes too long to obtain small tubers of no particular merit by sowing, the only possible method of propagation. Another member of the Peucedanum genus is P. Cous Watson, whose starchy tubers are sought after by the Indians under the name of Cous (Coulter and Rose, loc. cit., p. 58). CIBOULE CATAWISSA Catawissa onion. ALLIUM FISTULOSUM L., var. Family Liliaceae. Very large, perennial, bulbiferous Ciboule, i.e. producing small bulbils instead of flowers, like the Rocambole Onion. Planted in spring or autumn, as the plant is perfectly hardy in the Paris climate, these bulbils give rise, in the first year, to two or three stems topped with bulbils which, as soon as they are formed, develop new stems crowned with new bulbils, which very frequently give rise to a third tier of shoots, the whole rising from Om, 75 to om, 80. After a year or two, the vegetation changes. The clumps become very vigorous, consisting of twenty bulbils, but developing secondary stems much less frequently. The taste of bulbs and shoots is more or less the same as when eaten, although the first envelope, which is very hard, is removed (Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie). The Catawissa Onion has hitherto been considered to be of American origin, but recently, while perusing Dr. E. Bretschneider's book entitled: Early european researches into the Flora of China, Fig. 17 - Ciboule Catawissa (Allium fistulosum). We had the satisfaction of discovering its true homeland. A Frenchman named Louis Le Comte, a Jesuit missionary to China in 1687, published a two-volume work in Paris in 1696 entitled Nouveaux mémoires sur l'état de la Chine. The author, born in 1655, died in Bordeaux in 1729. Le Comte speaks (I, 178) of a particular Chinese onion in the following terms: "I have seen a species of onion which does not come from seed like those of Europe, but, at the end of the season, small filaments emerge from the tip or stem of the leaves, CIBOULE CATAWISSA Ciboule Catawissa. Fig. 18 - Whole plant. Fig. 19 - Inflorescence. in the middle of which forms an Onion similar to that which germinates in the earth. In time, this little Onion grows leaves like those that support it, in such a way, however, that their size and height diminish as they move away from the earth." This description would probably not be sufficiently convincing, if Dr. Bretschneider did not add the following: "This onion appears to be the one described as Lou tz'tsung (Onion growing in tiers) in the Kiu huang pen ts'ao, published at the end of the 14th century. It also features a good figure. The description states that four to five small onions grow at the top of the leaves, and that other onions grow on top of these, forming three to four tiers. These onions are seedless...". The Catawissa Onion was imported from America by M. A. de Lentilhac aîné, and offered for sale by M. Gagnaire fils aîné, horticulturist in Bergerac. We cullivated it as soon as it was introduced, and we'll say what we think of it later. M. Gagnaire wrote in Revue horticole, 1875, page 57: "No one is unaware that the onion which is eaten green in spring, in Paris as well as in the provinces, is, on the one hand, the result of sowing carried out by gardeners during the month of August, while, on the other hand, and particularly in our region, Green onions are obtained by planting, in September and October, bulbs unfit for consumption, which, in spring, produce three or four green stems, sometimes more, which are detached from the stump according to the needs of the house or the sale. "Whatever the means employed, the fact remains that the onion to be consumed green in spring must be sown, transplanted and planted annually in autumn; and if, on the other hand, the aim is to obtain small onions in the garden for preserving, I don't have to tell you how much care this work requires, not to mention the fact that it's not always easy to achieve satisfactory results. However, with the Catawissa Onion, these inconveniences disappear, since it has the faculty to give each spring, and for three or four years, green Onions in abundance, in summer bulbils in quantity for candying, and that it requires no other culture than that which I am going to indicate. "The Catawissa Onion is a vegetable plant with a perennial stump, producing from twenty to thirty stalks at its base in spring, as big as Leeks, long, tender and excellent for eating green; earlier by a fortnight or even a month than Onions planted in autumn. It is grown in multiples of bulblets, which are planted from October to February, and treated as follows: "The land destined for the Catawissa Onion having been worked and thoroughly amended beforehand with a heavy layer of manure or fertilizer, several furrows spaced at Om,40 to 0m,50 each are drawn with a chalk line, in which the bulblets are placed, equally spaced Om,40 to Om,50 apart. This distance, which can be easily taken advantage of in the first year when growing Chicory, Lettuce, Carrot, etc. between the rows, is essential in the second year of planting, because of the development that strains are bound to take on. Bulbils planted from October to February will grow vigorously in spring, but in the first year they will only produce a single stem, which can be supported with a small stake. During the summer, this stem will produce one or two stages of bulblets at the top, which can be used for planting, or taken advantage of by pickling in vinegar, like gherkins. "The second year is the first harvest. From the end of February to the end of April, sometimes even into May, in place of the bulbils planted the previous year, we find a clump of green onions, as big as Leeks, containing twenty to thirty stems of a flavor and quality that are second to none to the best cultivated onions; and since a hundred clumps of Catawissa Onions will not be enough for an ordinary household to consume the green stems they provide in spring, those that remain on the vines develop, reaching a height of Om.80 to 1 meter, and are crowned at the top, in summer, with one or two tiers of bulbils that can be used as I indicated above. "From then on, Calawissa Onion clumps will produce abundant stems every spring, and bulbils in quantity every summer, for two, three or even four years, without any care other than a few hoeings applied during the vegetation period and a good ploughing in spring, a little before the stems appear. "The Catawissa onion is extremely hardy, withstanding 20 to 30 degrees below zero without deterioration. M. Gagnaire's note is followed by a few observations from M. Carrière, who acknowledges that the Catawissa Onion is absolutely distinct from the Rocambole Onion, which was disputed. We will add nothing to the foregoing regarding the cultivation of the Catawissa Onion, other than to endorse it. As for its uses, there are some whose importance we can neither acknowledge nor deny. We know that green onions are eaten in large quantities, but we've never eaten them, and we've never seen anyone around us eat them. We haven't even thought of using Catawissa in this state. We therefore don't know whether its stems have the flavor of the common onion, but we can affirm with M. Gagnaire that its strains are extremely fertile. We shall confine ourselves to assessing the merit and usefulness of its bulblets. Chinese Allium has its own distinctive flavor, which is precisely not that of Onion, Chive or Shallot, which is why we recommend its cultivation. In fact, Catawissa bulbils, preserved in vinegar, are excellent and different from any similar preparation. The plant is also very curious. According to Baron von Mueller (Select extratropical plants), Allium canadense Kalm (Wild Garlic), a species native to North America, could be cultivated or naturalized in wet meadows because of its aerial bulbils, which are much sought-after for the preparation of superiorly fragrant pickles. CLAYTONE PERFOLIÉE CLAYTONIA PERFOLIATA Willd. ; C. cubensis Bonpl. Bot. Mag. t. 1336; Belg. Hort. 1.58 Family Portulaceae. Annual plant. Leaves veinless, those at the top opposite, rounded, fused at the base to form a cone, radicals petiolate, oval rhombiform; in March-June, white flowers. small, pedicellate, arranged in clusters, lower ones fasciculate; petals whole or slightly indented. We have grown the Claytone to be able to express a personal opinion about it. The experience has not been unfavorable and, however, Fig. 20 - Claytone perfoliée. we have not renewed it, to save time and space. Claytone is a good substitute for Spinach. Like most spinach substitutes, it has neither vices nor virtues. In fact, it belongs to the innocent Purslane family. The underlined word belongs to the note we're about to read (Revue horticole, 1829-31, vol. I, p. 357): "Claytone, an annual plant, 12 or 15 inches high, originally from Cuba (1) was brought back by M. de Humboldt in 1804 and given to the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, where it has almost become acclimatized, since it grows there by itself in several places. Until now, it had been considered a useless plant, or rather, it had been neglected, even though its succulence and tenderness should have led to the suspicion that it was good to eat; all the more so as it belongs to the innocent Purslane family. Nevertheless, in the twenty-six years since botanists have seen it reappear each spring, they have not been tempted to subject it to any experiments. It's true that the usefulness of plants hardly occupies them; their science is limited to counting and measuring their parts, nothing more. "Fortunately, there are also a few men who examine plants from other points of view, who seek to apply them to our needs, without however neglecting the somewhat arid science of the botanists. One such man is Mr. Madiot, director of the Rhône department's naturalization nursery in Lyon. He has found that perfoliated Claytone leaves are good to eat raw in salads, and cooked, like sorrel or spinach, under a fricandeau. This is what he tells us in one of his letters, dated December 4. He tells us, moreover, that the seed of this plant is greedily eaten by small birds. "Claytone is easy to grow. It is sown in spring, very lightly, because it branches a lot from its base, on a well loosened, well top-dressed bed with good exposure. It is watered and weeded as needed; it rises and grows (1) C. perfotiata is native to North America; it was introduced from Vancouver by Menzies in 1796. rapidly, branching so much from the base, if sown light, that M. Madiot has counted up to 63 branches on a single plant, capable of growing to 15 and 18 inches in length; but these are cut off 2 or 3 inches from the ground before flowering is complete, and others grow back which can be cut off two or three more times. It's enough to leave a few feet for seeds. We make use of the stems, which are tender and succulent, and the leaves, which are shell-shaped or ear-shaped, placed at great distances on the stems." Duchesne says of Claytone: "This watery, refreshing vegetable is eaten like Purslane in South America. M. Sahut, from Montpellier, considers it excellent, providing a dish with a finer and more delicate flavor than Spinach. In our opinion, Claytonia can be grown like any other summer spinach. We have grown Claytonia virginica L., a perennial species native to North America, whose tuber is said to be edible. C. virginica is a fairly ornamental plant, with small but very abundant pink flowers that follow one another uninterruptedly for quite a long time. From a nutritional point of view, it is of absolutely no interest to us. The plants we have obtained from seed have only given us a strain that cannot be pulped, even after several years of cultivation. In our climate, C. virginica also requires light winter shelter. Kou or Kiao, Kiao paï tsaï, Kiao sun. HYDROPYRUM LATIFOLIUM Griseb. 101 Grass family. This plant was discovered more than fifty years ago by Turczaninow in Trans-Balkan Russia, where it grows wild. This Russian botanist originally named it Zizania palustris. It is grown throughout China, in water, like Rice, for its stems, whose lower part (of the young plant), near the roots, is eaten as a vegetable. In Beijing, the plant reaches a height of 2 meters. This plant is mentioned by: Franchet et Savatier, Enumeratio plantarum in japonia crescentium, II, p. 156; Dr Mène, Productions végétales du Japon, p. 230; Siebold, Synopsis plantarum œconomicarum japoniæ, 1827, 368 (Graminea makomo frumentum pro farina in provinciis septentrionalibus cultum). Dr. Bretschneider, to whose kindness we have had recourse so many times when it came to obtaining information on plant production in China, wrote us the following: "In Chinese botanical books, this plant is described as Kou or Kiao. See Pentsaokang mou (Bretschneider, Botanicon sinicum, p. 54, chap. XIX, p. 26); Tchi wou ming shi t'ou K'ao (Bot. sinicum, p. 72, chap. XVIII, p. 13). "In the Kin huang pen ts'ao (Bot. sinicum, p. 49), an old 14th-century book in my possession, I find an article on Kiao cultivation, accompanied by a figure (leaves and roots). "The plant is also illustrated and described in the Japanese botanical Phonzo zoufou (Franchet et Savatier, loc. cit., I, p. 15, chap. XXXIII, p. 21 and 22). The figure is uncharacteristic. "The cultivation of Hydropyrum in China is very ancient. It is mentioned in classical books. According to Chinese books, this plant is also cultivated for its seeds. This is not the case in Beijing, where it is grown only for its young edible stems. Its common name in Beijing is Kiao pai tsai (Kiao cabbage). This vegetable is also known as Kiao sun (young Kiao shoots)". Under the title On a Chinese culinary vegetable, Mr. H.-F. Hance published the following interesting note in the Journal of Botany (1872, p. 146): "Among the vegetables esteemed by the natives, there is one called Kan sun by them, and known to Europeans who do not reject it, as some do, simply because it is Chinese, under the name Cane-Shoots. "It is brought to market in white, cylindrical pieces, 2 and a half to 3 and a half inches long and 1 to 1 and a half inches in diameter. It is attenuated towards the top into a conical point, surrounded and surmounted by leaves and thatch, from which it is easily detached. "The taste of raw Shoot is reminiscent of a half-ripe walnut, but it is never eaten unless cooked. The Chinese prepare it with meat; foreigners cut it lengthwise, in two or three pieces, boil it well and serve it with melted butter. Prepared in this way, it is, to my taste, one of the most pleasant and delicate vegetables I know. It's hard to say exactly what flavor it has. It is perhaps that of Green Corn which comes closest, boiled as the Americans eat it under the name of Green Corn, although it possesses a particular flavor of a delicacy to which I know nothing comparable in any other vegetable. "A very slight examination shows that these Cane-Shoots, as they are called, consist of the solid base of the stem of a grass; but, although I had long desired to determine the species, it was only the other day that I succeeded in obtaining live samples, in flower. On examining them, I was greatly surprised to find that they related to Hydropyrum latifolium Griseb. a plant discovered, some forty years ago, by Turczaninow in lakes at the confluence of the Schilka and Argun rivers, in Amuria, and since found on the Ussuri ripper, in Lake Kengka, in the vicinity of Peking (from where I had specimens collected by M. Swinhœ) and in Japan. It is not spontaneous in southern China, but only cultivated (in slack waters) for the table; and I find that it is also grown as a vegetable in Kiu-Kiang, on the Yang-Tze. I assume, although I have no definite data on the development of its cultivation, that it is very widespread in this country. "As a species, it is very close to H. esculentum Link. the Indian rice or Water oats, Zizania aquatica L., from North America, with which Trinius, with hesitation, combines it; and even Grisebach, having no specimen of the latter herb, was not convinced of their difference. I'm of the opposite opinion, however. Turczaninow notes that his species also differs in the presence of an elongated rhizome, which he asserts is absent in H. esculentum. "Endlicher combines the genera Hydropyrum and Hydrochloa, and Dr. Chapman, while admitting the latter genus, refers Hydropyrum to Zizania, as does Professor Asa Gray. Meissner recognizes both Hydropyrum and Zizania as valid genera, dubiously combining Hydrochloa with the former. Admittedly, these genera are extremely confused and poorly distinguished. "It is the extreme connection of the herb submitted for examination with the American species which, although it furnishes an excellent grain, somewhat resembling Rice, which was in general use among the Indians, especially among the tribes living in the vicinity of the great lakes, and has never, I suppose, been employed otherwise, leads me to think that the identificalion of the Chinese vegetable may be of interest and importance to American gardeners; for I cannot doubt that Hydropyrum esculentum would yield a product identical in volume and flavor to that of the plant it so closely resembles. "I call the attention of skilled horticulturists in the United States to this herb, in the belief that it will pay for the trouble of its experimental cultivation. "Our American cousins are, as a rule, more fond of and connoisseur of vegetables than we English, and like a greater variety of them at their meals. "If the preceding article had the effect of introducing a new, and, as I think with many others, exceptionally delicate and select vegetable, to their tables, I should feel only too glad to have been useful in calling their attention to it. I also hope to succeed in sending to my country live specimens of the Asiatic species, which, according to the temperature of the localities where it grows, would undoubtedly be immediately naturalized in the lakes and marshes of northern and central Europe and would provide, without requiring any particular care and without encroaching on the land occupied by other crops, a healthy and pleasant food. Hydropyrum esculentum has been acclimatized in England and Scotland". Our attention was drawn to this plant by Mr. Eugène Simon, former French consul in China, who had sent a plant to the Ministry of Agriculture. This plant having been entrusted to the good care of M. Hardy, we asked for information from the eminent director of the Ecole nationale d'Horticulture de Versailles, who replied: "On November 20 1857," he told us, "I received a certain quantity of an edible reed from Chang-Haï. "This reed bore the Mandarin name of Kao-paé and that of Co-ba in the vernacular. "Co-ba, it seems, doesn't produce seeds, so I only received plants that were in very poor condition. I was, however, able to keep one which vegetated quite miserably for two years and eventually perished, despite the assiduous care with which it had been treated. "The plant could not be determined scientifically. "Here is some information I had at the time about Co-ba. I think you'll find it interesting. "There are two kinds (1) of Co-ba: the Co-ba of FouTcheou, and the Co-ba of Chang-Haï. These are aquatic plants that grow in all running or stagnant waters in northern China. "The first type produces two harvests a year. Its roots do not trace. Care must be taken at each harvest to separate the young shoots from the large stems and replant them in the mud. "The second yields only one crop a year, unless there is a long, hot autumn; but the roots trace and spread in all directions; it grows spontaneously once planted. "The base of the stalk is eaten to a length of Om, 25 to Om, 30, either raw in salads, or cooked in a variety of dishes. "Co-ba is good for harvesting only when it is completely white. Its delicate taste is reminiscent of saw palmetto and bamboo. It can be stored for several months and is easy to transport. "As for cultivation, it is said to be as follows: "The Chinese pull up Co-ba plants, which they dry (?) in the sun for a few days; then, from November 15th to December 15th, they put the roots in the ground, or rather in mud, in running or stagnant water. Harvesting takes place between September 15 and October 15 of the following year. This cultivation applies to ordinary Co-ba, which produces only once a year and has a tracer root. "(1) It would be interesting to know whether one of these two types is not Hydropyrum esculentum (Zizania aquatica), which does not seem to differ much from Hydropyrum latifolium. subject to regular cultivation. It also requires flooded soil and yields two harvests a year. It is replanted each time and smoked. "The material used for manuring is generally the residue of the oil pea known in Chinese as Téoupinn, which is spread in the proportion of 60 kilos per half-hectare. Mr. Eugène Simon, former French consul in China, gave us the following information on attempts to introduce Co-ba in France: "Co-ba was sent by Mr. de Montigny and myself. I did not make any shipments in 1858. "In 1861, I sent a shipment to the Ministry of Agriculture. The Co-ba plants were planted in damp soil and in a greenhouse at the Ward. I don't know the non-tracking variety, which gives only one crop. "I shipped the cultivated species that yields two harvests a year. My consignment was given to Mr Hardy, who, in 1864, showed me some plants that were still alive, but in poor condition. Since then, no further attempts have been made to introduce the plant. We finally succeeded in obtaining the plant, thanks to the kindness of Vilmorin, and entrusted it to a serious amateur, Mr. Latour-Marliac, from Temple-sur-Lot, so that he could experiment with its cultivation in the south of France. In a letter we have received, our correspondent tells us that the plant withstood the 16° cold of the winter of 1891-1892; that it grows vigorously, but that he has not yet been able to taste its stems; with its beautiful upright leaves, it would certainly be of some interest from an ornamental point of view. MANDERI CUCUMBER CUCUMIS SACLEUXII Paill. et Bois (1). Family Cucurbitaceae Stems flat-lying, furrowed, covered, like all parts of the plant, with stiff, whitish hairs. Fig. 21 - Mandera cucumber (Cucumis Sacleuxii). Petioles grey, sometimes up to 1 decimeter long. Rounded kidney-shaped leaves, obscurely lobed, irregularly toothed, scabrous on both sides, grayish-green, especially on the inner side(1) Experimental cultivations in 1889. Revue des Sciences naturelles appliquées, No. 8, April 1890. férieure. Simple tendrils. Flowers monoecious, solitary: male flowers borne on filiform peduncles 2 to 2.5 centimeters long; calyx campanulate, 6 to 7 millimeters long, hispid, with subulate teeth; corolla about twice the length of the calyx, hairy on the outside. Female flowers with peduncles about 7 cm long; ovary hispid. Fruit ovoid, 8 to 10 centimeters long and 4 to 5 centimeters in diameter in the middle, a little scabrous, dark green with pale-green longitudinal stripes. Seeds brownish, small, compressed, 1/2 centimeter long and 3 millimeters wide in the middle, attenuated at both ends. The seeds of the Mandera Cucumber were sent to the Museum by R. P. Sacleux. M. Maxime Cornu was kind enough to give us a few. We sowed them in April, under glass, and transplanted the seedlings into pots in the open air, as is usually done for cucumbers. The plant vegetated vigorously; its stems intertwined so tightly that, together with the leaves, they formed a thick fabric that could be lifted in one piece like a coat, but not without pricking your hands, as the plant was covered with numerous stinging hairs. The flowers didn't bloom on top, but underneath, they withered away for lack of air, and fell without setting fruit. We remedied the problem by giving the plants a little air, using poles slid horizontally under them, but it was too late. We obtained abundant, well-developed fruits, but they remained green and did not ripen their seeds. It seems to us that the stems of the Mandera cucumber should be tied to lanterns, or trained on a wide-meshed trellis, as is done for the Row Melon. We cultivated the plant again in 1890, with no further success. But one of our correspondents. M. Latour-Marliac, from Temple-sur-Lot, to whom we had entrusted some seeds, has made an abundant harvest of perfectly ripe fruits, albeit with the color indicated in our description; they are divided lengthwise by narrow white stripes which contrast nicely with the dark green of their rind. We presented fruit preserved in vinegar to the Société nationale d'Acclimatation. When tasted fresh, we recognized a strong cucumber flavor. They could be used for preserves by harvesting them young and as large as olives. The cultivation of Mandera cucumbers is only practicable in the south of France. SIKKIM CUCUMBER CUCUMIS SATIVUS L., var. sikkimensis J. D. Hooker. Cucurbitaceae family. "The Sikkim Cucumber is the most remarkable variety of cucumber for its size and the volume of its fruit. The leaves are almost as large as those of Pumpkins, often with 5 or even 9 lobes. The fruits, about the size and shape of fine Cavaillon melons, are ovoid, elongated, very regular, with a rounded outline, and usually contain five placentas instead of three; the flesh is white and very thick, and the skin finely mottled with yellowish-white and russet. I know this variety only from a colored drawing in the possession of Mr. J. Dalton Hooker and from a few dried fragments in the Kew Herbarium. According to this learned traveller, the Sikkim Cucumber is cultivated throughout English India, but particularly in the province whose name it bears here. It is an excellent vegetable, which the natives eat indifferently cooked or raw. It would be desirable to introduce it into the vegetable gardens of Europe". (Naudin, Cucurbitacées). We were fortunate enough to realize this wish, but eighteen years had passed since it was first made. In March 1877, Dr Hooker, whom we can't thank enough for his courtesy, sent us seeds of Cucumis sikkimensis, which only existed in the Royal Gardens at Kew, of which he is Director. Sown on a bed and under a frame, these seeds gave us vigorous plants and abundant fruit of excellent quality. Their volume is that of the largest white cucumbers, and their color, which is truly curious when ripe, is clearly reticulated. They seem to have a small-meshed net stretched across their brown background. That's the least of their merits. They're equally good served in the ravier as hors-d'oeuvres, or dressed like ordinary cucumbers. In cultivating Cucumis sikkimensis for the first time, we took every precaution to ensure success; but, later, we left several plants in the open air and were able to observe its hardiness. On July 12, 1877, we presented to the Société centrale d'Horticulture de France (Henri Véniat, gardener) fruits of C. sikkimensis, on which a report was submitted on the 26th of the same month by Messrs Arnould-Baltard and Hédiard, who declared that, charged by the committee for vegetable cultivation to assess their eating merit, they had recognized them as excellent, with very fine flesh and much more delicate than that of the ordinary Cucumber. We also presented some at the exhibition opened by the same Society in October 1877. More recently, we have distributed seeds of the Sikkim Cucumber to members of the plant section of the Société d'Acclimatation, and we shall continue this work of propagation of a plant that we consider a happy acquisition. We conclude with an extract from an article in the Botanical Magazine, January 1876, pl. 7206, (Journ. de la Soc. nat. d'Hort., 1876, p. 365): "This singular variety of Cucumber is commonly cultivated in the eastern part of the Himalayan chain, i.e. in Sikkim and Nepaul, where its fruit is obtained and consumed in immense quantities, and where cultivation of this plant extends over large areas of land up to 1,500 meters in altitude.... Its fruit reaches Om, 38 in length and as much in circumference... Mr. D. Hooker says that in 1840 he saw all the inhabitants of Sikkim, men, women and children eating these Cucumbers almost from morning to night." We hope that the cultivation of C. sikkimensis will become widespread in our country. MUSKED CUCUMBER Calabaza de China. Curuba or Curua (in Brazil). SICANA ODORIFERA Ndn, Ann. des se. nat. ser. 4, vol. 18, p. 181 tab. 8; Cogniaux, Flora Brasil, fasc. 78, p. 22, tab. 3, and Monographiæ Phanerogam, p. 522; Fd. André, Rer. horticole, 1890, p. 515 (with colored figure). Fam. Cucurbitaceae. Perennial plant, native to Brazil, cultivated in tropical parts of South and Central America. In 1888, M. de Lafon gave us a packet of seeds of this curious plant, which he had observed on his trip to Costa Rica. He enclosed a note from Julio Rossignon's Manual del Jardinero y Arbolista, with the translation we reproduce below: "In Central America, there is a variety of cucumber improperly called Melocoton in Guatemala and in all the Central American provinces, and Calabasa from China to Panama, which is remarkable for its size, its beautiful foliage, its thick, light-yellow flowers, and above all for its fruit, which, when ripe, turns a purplish-red DR Fig. 22. 22 - Musk cucumber (Sicana odorifera.) A. Portion of twig with tendril, leaf and female flower. 1. Male flower bud, not blooming. 2. Open male flower, showing reflected lobes of calyx and corolla. 3. Male flower, longitudinal section, showing stamens. 4. Female flower, showing pistil and ovary cut longitudinally. and give off a very strong, slightly musky scent. "In Central America, the ripe fruits of this Cucurbitaceae, to which we have given the name Cucumis Abelmoschus elatior, are placed in chapels during Holy Week and at the Nativity, where they give off a sweet fragrance. They are sometimes served half or three-quarters cooked in syrup, and seasoned in the same way as potatoes. "As vegetables are generally in short supply in hot climates, we thought it would be useful for those of our readers who are unfamiliar with the properties of this Cucurbitaceae to go into these details. What's more, Calabaza de China can be grown as an ornamental plant to line walls, form trellises or climb to the top of some tall tree; nothing is as pleasing to the eye as a trellis (cradle, arbor) laden with dark purple or reddish fruits, interspersed with golden-yellow flowers and green leaves." These seeds did not germinate in the Crosne garden. M. Naudin, director of the Villa Thuret in Antibes, was happier than we were. He obtained the plant and was able to harvest two fruits, which were the subject of the following note, published in the Revue horticole, 1889, page 35: "Sicana odorifera is a remarkable Cucurbitaceae from Brazil, whose climbing stems, 8 to 10 meters or more long, cling to the smoothest walls with the help of their tendrils, the ends of which spat out into very adherent suckers, which is not peculiar to this species. It is monoecious, with yellow flowers, and its fertilized female flowers give rise to cylindrical fruits, the size of a very large Cucumber or a small Butternut squash (Cucurbita moschata), which turn red or orange as they ripen. They are edible, but not to everyone's taste, due to their aromatic odor. They are used as a means of keeping insects away from apartments, as the smell puts them to flight. "Sicana requires more heat than our ordinary Cucurbitaceae, even more than the large varieties of butternut squash that rarely ripen in Paris. It will therefore be a southern plant, at least until it produces less demanding and earlier varieties. It would have succeeded perfectly in Antibes if this year's summer had been normal; but it was exceptionally cold, and everything was delayed in the gardens by more than a month. "We did, however, obtain two fruits after artificial fertilization, and one of them, which seems to me to have reached its full size, will perhaps ripen in the heated apartment where we keep it in reserve. If this happens, we'll have seeds with which to repeat our experiment, and probably with more complete success, for years, like days, follow one another and are not alike. "I have just mentioned the possibility of obtaining from Sicana, sooner or later, varieties better suited to our climates than the plants first introduced. Whether we regard this result as a fact of acclimatization or judge it otherwise, the fact is no less certain for the Cucurbitaceae of exotic origin that we have long been cultivating in our gardens. Whenever I have received seeds of these same species from tropical countries, the plants have been more difficult to raise and later than their French counterparts, which have been introduced long ago and somehow softened by long culling. We can therefore hope that the same will be true of Sicana and probably of several other species. The fruits harvested by Mr. Naudin ripened perfectly, enabling Mr. Ed. André (loc. cit.) to publish a good colored figure. We saw these fruits at the home of the editor of the Revue Horticole and we fully agree with him when he says they exude a penetrating smell of Pomme de Reinette. CORCHORUS POTAGÈRE Vegetable mallow, Jewish mallow, Melonkie. CORCHORUS OLITORIUS L., var. edulis (1). Tiliaceae family. Annual plant, native to India and tropical Africa. Stem Om, 50 high, cylindrical, smooth; leaves alternate, petiolate, ovate-oblong, toothed, with lower teeth often terminated by a setaceous fillet; flowers small, orange-yellow, pedunculated; fruit (1) The fibers of Corchorus olitorius and several other species. especially C. capsularis L., known in the trade as Jute, are used, mixed with Cotton, Hemp and Linen, to make cheap fabrics and cloths, but which have little resistance and cannot withstand washing. Waste is used to make paper pulp. These fibers are actively traded. In 1877, 200,000 barrels of jute were imported into England, and 25,000 into France. (capsule) siliquiform, long, hairless; seeds angular, greenish. According to Poiret (Voyage en Barbarie, vol. II, p. 179), the plant is cultivated both in the Levant and in Barbary. It is used in cooking. According to MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie, its leaves are eaten as a salad. Finally, Mr. Delchevalerie's report on the 1878 Egyptian exhibition tells us that, since gardens do not exist in Egypt, it is cultivated in the fields, under the name of Kolbesch, and that Egyptians eat its leaves like spinach. It is said to be a bland, mucilaginous food, comparable to okra. As a matter of curiosity, we have grown the Corette potagère in a greenhouse. We devoted only one panel to it, and our harvest did not allow us to make a dish from it for our table; we therefore confess that we did not enjoy its leaves, either as a salad or as spinach. It seems certain to us that Corchorus olitorius cannot be usefully cultivated in the Paris climate: moreover, the number of salads and spinach substitutes is so great that this plant seems to us to be absolutely devoid of interest. Bicorne jaune, Martynie jaune. MARTYNIA LUTEA Lindl. Pedaline family. 119 Annual plant, height Om, 50, pubescent glandular; leaves cordate-orbicular, a little toothed; in August, flowers yellow, ample, infundibuliform; fruit with beak much longer than the body. Native to Brazil. Sown at the end of April on a bed and under a frame, transplanted into cups and kept under glass, like Melons, until the end of May; then placed on an old bed and generously watered, it acquires enormous proportions. Its branches are as thick as spade handles, and its yellow flowers form abundant conical clusters, followed by large, horny fruits. As curious as the Martynie is, we wouldn't bother with it if its fruits, picked as soon as they form, didn't go into vinegar like gherkins. It can therefore be classified as a vegetable. Here's what William Darlington says about a Martynia, in his Agricultural Botany (Philadelphia, 1847): "This plant, native to Mississippi and the plains of Mexico, has been much cultivated for some time for its singular fruits, which, in their youth, before becoming hard and woody, are used to make the condiment which bears the name of "Martynia".

Pichles." Clémenceau, in the Revue horticole (1867, p. 109), gives the same information: "... Fruits picked very young, when only a few days old, are preserved in vinegar and eaten like our little green gherkins. In this state, the fruit is firm, crisp and of excellent quality. Even though Martynia is not used for food, enthusiasts grow it as an ornamental plant, producing extremely cuCornaret (Martynia lutea). Fig. 23 - Shoot with fruit. Fig. 24 - Mature fruit deprived of its fleshy envelope. rieux; mais nous recommandons d'éviter toucher aux feuilles du Martynia lutea, le seul que nous avons cultivé. They leave an infectious, abominable, stercoral odor on the fingers. Duchesne says that the inhabitants of Cartagena (Colombia) eat the roots of M. Craniolaria Swartz with beef, or candy them for dessert; but Mr. Triana assures us that only the indigent use them. Duchesne adds that, in North America, these roots are used to make a bitter, refreshing beer. CUCURBITA MELANOSPERMA A. Braun. 121 Cucurbitaceae family. Perennial, cullivated as an annual in the Paris climate. Stems spindly, long-creeping; leaves 5-lobed, sinuate; fruit ovoid-rounded, mottled white, full and covered with a subligneous rind. Flesh soft, white, fibrous; seeds blackish or even very black. We borrow from Mr. Ch. Naudin's historical account of the genus in a memoir entitled Nouvelles recherches sur les caractères spécifiques et les variétés du genre Cucurbita (Annales des sciences naturelles, 4° série, t. IV, 1856): "Cucurbita melanosperma was announced in the year 1824, precisely under the name melanosperma, by Al. Braun, in the plant catalog of the Carlsruhe garden; then, in 1837, by M. P.-C. Bouché, of Berlin, under the name C. ficifolia. It is finally described in detail under its first name by Mr. Al. Braun, in the Appendix specierum novarum, etc., of the Berlin Botanical Garden, in 1853, and, according to the same author, in Volume I, page 362 of the 4th series of the Annales des Sciences naturelles, in 1854. "This species has only been known in Europe since the beginning of this century. It is not known precisely from where or by whom it was introduced, but its common name of Siamese gourd leads us to believe that it originated in southern Asia. "It has not yet given rise to any variety in Europe, and is the same today as it was the first day it appeared there. Cucurbita melanosperma has sometimes been called Malabar squash, but we still call it Siam squash (Cucurbita melanosperma), as it appears in the Manuel de l'Amateur des jardins. It is an annual in the north of France, where it freezes in winter, and a perennial in the south, in Hyères, for example, where its stems can survive the winter unaffected by the cold, harden, become somewhat woody and last for several years. Under these conditions, they can grow to an inordinate size, for example 30 to 40 meters long (1). (1) Manuet de l'Amateur des jardins, t. IV, p. 255. The Siam squash is beautiful. It's as big as the Watermelon and looks a bit like it. It is green, speckled with white, with white ribbon-like lines running from the umbilicus and narrowing towards the stalk. Seeds are large and black, sometimes brown. They are very easy to grow, and in no way differ from the pumpkins and gourds usually grown in France. Its yield is considerable. In 1877, 20 vines planted by us on upturned turf produced 130 fruits, weighing a total of 670 kilograms. In 1878, 4 plants gave us 70 fruits, weighing a total of 370 kilograms. The Siam squash runs a long way and requires a lot of space; as it spontaneously pickles, only winter can stop its development. When ripe, its fruits are wrapped in a woody rind that preserves their contents from rot for a long time, to the point where they can be kept intact for a year, two years and perhaps even longer, like Coloquintes. This is a fact to which edible merchants and restaurateurs can testify, who, without using them for any other purpose, place them as ornaments in their displays. In France, the Siamese gourd has hitherto been a mere object of curiosity, but in China, it is used to feed livestock. We know that the herd of yaks sent to France by M. de Montigny, our Consul General in China, in 1854, was accompanied by a supply of melanosperm squash, destined to feed them. On this subject, we quote M. Naudin: "When the yaks were sent from China to France by M. de Montigny in 1854, a large quantity of melanosperm squash was taken on board at Shang-Haï to serve as food for the animals during the journey. When they arrived at the Museum, where we know the yaks stayed for almost a year, there were still several barrels of these perfectly preserved fruits. It would seem, from this fact, that the plant is cultivated on a large scale in China. Its semirusticity below the latitude of Paris, its ease of cultivation and the long life of its fruit may one day make it an economic plant of some importance in Europe, for feeding livestock, especially during the winter". The foregoing prompted us to introduce the Siam pumpkin to the cows of several farmers in our village. Its fruits, divided into three or four pieces, were eagerly eaten by them. The experiment involved 200 or 300 kilograms. The Siam squash forms fruit until the frosts, which means that the fruit is not ripe and cannot be preserved. They should therefore be given to the livestock first. Ripe fruit can be kept indefinitely. Picked while still young, Siamese gourds can be prepared and eaten like cucumbers, which they do not taste like. We've used them in this way, creating a pleasant, delicate dish. In the Canary Islands, the Siamese gourd is grown as a vegetable under the name of Pantana (1). In Spain, Cuba and South America, it is used to make highly prized jams known as Cabellos de Angel or Angel's Hair, the recipe for which is given below. The pulp of the Black Seed Squash contains filaments that are not destroyed by cooking, so they are found when tasted, and (1) De la végétation aux îles Canaries, by Dr. V. Pérez and Dr. Paul Sagot. the impression one gets is singular. Angel Hair is no less a good jam. We said earlier that the Siamese gourd was still only an object of curiosity in France, and that it was only used to garnish or decorate a few storefronts of caterers or edible merchants; we set out to demonstrate that this gourd can be used on any table; that its long, easy shelf-life makes it a food available at all times, and particularly useful in winter; and that its cultivation should therefore be encouraged and propagated. The whole point of this note lies in this demonstration. Mr. J. Mamoz has provided us with the movens. This skilful practitioner, always driven by a desire to be useful, has researched and found several ways of preparing Siam squash, which tend to prove that it should take its place among our usual vegetables. First, we give the recipe for jams, a recipe long practiced in Spanish countries, but absolutely unknown in France: Confitures de Courge de Siam, dites Cheveux d'ange (Cabellos de Angel). A large basin should be used, to ensure easy rotation. When the water is boiling, throw in the squash, broken into pieces, rind and pulp, and even the seeds. After half an hour, three quarters of an hour at the most, the pulp detaches from the rind without too much difficulty, and you can be sure that it is cooked to perfection. Remove from the heat and throw the pieces of squash into cold water. They are successively washed in two or three waters, then, with the handle of a tinned spoon or a silver spoon, the pulp is detached from the rind, and this pulp is again plunged into cold water. The filaments are broken down to isolate each one. Wash again. Seeds and anything else that might alter the jam's whiteness are removed. Press by hand, in a cloth or with a press, to squeeze out all the water. Boil sugar at 32 degrees, or at the lowest setting, and throw in the pulp filaments. Boil slowly, stirring the bottom with a spatula, for a quarter of an hour. When the syrup has reduced to a trickle, remove from the heat. Add to the jam the essence of your choice: lemon, orange, vanilla, etc., and fill into jars. The amount of sugar used should be sufficient to allow the pulp to bathe easily and soak completely in the syrup. We now turn to the new recipes proposed by Mr. Mamoz. Whatever way you want to prepare Siam squash, you should cook it as follows: break or cut a squash into quarters, either twelve or fifteen pieces, and put them in a basin of boiling water. Boil for one hour. You can tell when the squash is cooked enough when the pulp detaches easily from the crust. Then remove from the heat; throw the pieces into cold water; detach the pulp from the rind with a spoon; break up the pulp, which divides into large white threads. The pulp is then pressed to squeeze out the retained water. In this state, it can be used in a variety of ways: 1° If you want to make a fatty soup, cut the pulp into small pieces and use as much as a pigeon's egg for as many soups as you have to serve. It goes without saying that the fatty broth must be salted and seasoned as for any other soup; 2° For milk soup, same proportions. The threads are cut shorter, and this soup is very similar to vermicelli with milk, with the difference that the threads are less melting in the mouth. In our opinion, this soup is preferable to fatty soup; 3° Seasoned with chicken sauce, Siamese squash makes a very good vegetable dish, comparable in taste to pearled bacon or cardoons; 4° Squash can be prepared with tomato sauce. It's a pleasant dish, but one we wouldn't put first; 5° Prepared like macaroni, i.e. with alternating layers of grated cheese and pulp, with butter, breadcrumbs, etc., our squash makes an excellent dish; 6° Siamese squash fritters are perhaps the best of all. Well-pressed and well-divided filaments are placed in a prepared batter and amalgamated. A large handful of these filaments is then thrown into the boiling frying pan. The resulting doughnut is golden, appetizing and very pleasant to eat. To conclude, we transcribe a letter addressed to Mr. Mamoz, who shared it with us: "Colonies agricoles et industrielles de Moisselles et de Fouilleuse, administration, boulevard de Clichy, n° 8. "My dear Mr. Mamoz, You ask me if I'll have more space this year to plant Siam squash. "I am quite willing, in view of the results obtained in the first year, to plant a larger quantity of these gourds, and I would be grateful if you would provide me with the necessary seeds. "I was very satisfied with last year's harvest, although for the first time we didn't do what we should have done in terms of planting time and care. "As far as the use of the product is concerned, of the recipes you gave me, three in particular were successful: gratins, fritters and jams. There is another, much more general use: soup. I intend to put these various methods to good use with the next harvest, and hope to make a very good food from this type of squash. "Signed: L.-P. Bochet, founding director". We lack the space to cultivate the plant from the point of view of livestock feed; but we are convinced that, cultivated for this purpose, it would render serious services. According to information given to us by Mr. J.-R. Villavicencio, the Siam pumpkin is widespread in the hot, humid valleys of Colombia and Ecuador. It is known there under the name of Sambo. It is perennial and yields several harvests. Indians in the poorest provinces use it as a staple food. In the Cauca valley (Colombia), the raw fruit is used as cattle feed. 129 CRAMBE TATARIA Jacq, Miscell, II, p. 274. - Jacq, Icones rariores, tab. 129. - C. tatarica Willd, Species, vol. III, p. 419.- C. laciniata Lamk, Dict. vol. Il, p. 163. Cruciferae family. We reproduce below a notice by M. Alexandre Sébéok de Szent-Nillôs, a Hungarian nobleman, published in 1779 by Jacquin, in his Miscellanea austriaca (1). (1) Jacquin, Miscellanea austriaca ad botanicam chemiam et histoiam na turalem spectantia, cum figuris, vol. Il, p. 274. We owe the translation of this interesting note to Dr. Ed. Bamberger, assistant librarian at the Muséum. We are pleased to be able to express our gratitude to him here. In fact, Dr. Bamberger made the following remarks about the way in which he handled certain parts of his translation: "While tightening the text as much as possible," says M. Bamberger, "it has been necessary to rectify some of the errors. Bamberger, "I had to resort to a few periphrases, and sometimes sacrifice rigorous versioning and stylistic correctness, in order to convey the author's thoughts. I was faced with a triple obstacle: 1° a Latin text full of low Latin expressions; 2° the transition from an ancient language to French, which is always perilous in scientific matters; 3° a work of criticism dating from a scientific era more than a century before ours. "I have therefore taken care: 1° to quote the Latin text whenever it was obscure, so as to leave competent people free to criticize the chosen version; 2° to always put the Latin name next to the French name, and very often to stick to the former in cases where I ran the risk of attributing to one plant a name used today by another; 3° to put the Latin geographical names next to their translation, and sometimes even to limit myself to the former, as a modern region does not strictly agree with an ancient one. The Crambe Tataria. "Dissertalion inaugurale médicale soumise à la discussion publique, by Alexandre Sébéok de Szent-Niklôs, Hungarian nobleman. Vienna, June 5, 1799 (1)." Crambe tataria foliis multifidis. Tataria ungarica Clus. Hist. p. CXCI. Tataria ungarice edulis, panacis heraclei folio, semine libanotidis cachryophoræ. Bauh. Hist. vol. III, part. 2, p. 163. Panaci Heracleo similis ungarica. Bauh. pin. 153. Cachrys ungarica, panacis folio. Tourn. Inst., 325. The first, most famous and tireless of all plant researchers in Pannonia and Austria (1), Charles Clusius, offered the learned world a Notice on this plant; it is not inappropriate to reproduce his entire description here. He wrote "This plant, whose root is very thick and very long, is not commonly found; in fact, I remember having received some the size of an arm and the length of a cubit, and some larger, from the illustrious Lord Balthasar of Bathyan, who, in my favor, ordered me to bring some from Transdanubian Hungary (2) so that I could import them into the garden in Vienna. It produced leaves that differed little from those of Rave (3) in their incisions and cut-outs, but were shorter, more like the leaves of Panax Heracleum, covered with a rough, bristly down, contrasting with the greenery in their paleness (4); others, divided by slightly shallower, equally rough cut-outs, from the middle of which emerge (1) Stirpium pannonicarum austriarumque. (2) Ungaria transdanubiana. (3) Rapi. (4) Ex viridi pallentia. ge a stem a cubit or more high, an inch thick, ridged, concave and knotty, rough like the leaves; it is embraced by means of a wide pedicel by small, multifid leaves, equally rough thanks to the down that covers them. The stem ends in an umbel, similar to the umbels of Panax Heracleum, in which the flowers are similar in shape and color (1). Faded flowers were followed by rare (because some flowers are not fertilized), very thick fruit, rather similar to the large, ridged fruit of Libanotis cachryfera. "I cultivated these roots for two years, before a single one produced a stem, flowers and seed; then they rotted and gave off such a foul smell that they were thrown out of the garden. "The Hungarians neighboring Erlau (2), as well as those living immediately beyond the borders of Dacia, feed on them in years of famine and misery, instead of bread; this was assured to me not only by this illustrious man (3), but by other distinguished men who lived in this province. The result was that I was left in doubt as to whether it was identical with the Baltracan born in Tartary (4), as recalled by Josaphat Barbarus, a Venetian pratrician, in a letter to Peter Barocci, bishop of Padua, added at the end of the last chapter of his narrative published on his departure for Persia. "(1) Summus caulis in umbellam desinebat, Panacis Heraclei umbellis similem, in quibus flores et forma pares et colore. (2) Agriæ vicini. (3) Heros ille illustris ? (4) An eadem esset cum Baltracan in Tartaria nascente. name of Tartaria; indeed, like the Germans, they commonly name Tatars those we call Tartars. "Thus concludes Clusius; Jean Bauhin copied him in his Histoire des Plantes; but it is to be believed that neither he, nor any other author of those he cited, except Clusius, saw Hungarian Tartaria (1). "All of them, imitating Clusius, wrongly classified it among the Umbelliferae. It must be admitted that, in the first month of stem growth, as long as the plant still bears its curled, folded leaves (2) and its flowers closed and clustered on the ramuscules, it resembles, in a way, a Heracleum, in such a way as to be able to impose it on a botanist; but it differs greatly from it after its blossoming, so much so that I cannot wonder enough that Clusius, the most exact man besides, could have confused a cruciform plant (3) with an Umbellifera. "Indeed, we find no mention of it in his Histoire des Plantes de Pannonie et d'Autriche, published in 1583, and, before his return, he died in Vienna in 1587. It may well follow that this description was less well elaborated by him; perhaps it was from memory that he entrusted it to paper after the plant's death; what seems likely to corroborate this conjecture is that he did not depict such a rare plant and that, contrary to his habit, Clusius said nothing of its (1) Sed nec hunc, nec præter Clusium auctorem alium ex citatis ullum Tatariam ungaricam vidisse, credibile est. (2) Dum planta folia adhucdum sua rugose complicata... gerit. (3) This was Tournefort's name for the plants that made up the fifth class of his system. "For a long time now, Jacquin's illustrious professor had been possessed by the desire to see and examine the plant he knew from Clusius; an opportunity soon presented itself: The famous imperial astronomer Maximilien Hell was leaving for Agria (the Erlau of the Germans, the Eger of the Hungarians), a town in the county of Hevesch (1), in Hungary; Jacquin asked him, if he came across the plant called Tataria by the locals, to be so kind as to bring it back to him on his return, or to send it to him. "This distinguished man took care to transport to Vienna two roots which he had had dug up; he brought back dried samples of the flowering plant himself, and, on the way back, took care of the roots which, after a six-week journey in summer, arrived putrefied and fetid. One of them was four feet long and, though truncated, almost as thick as a leg. The dried samples indicated, against all expectations, a cruciform plant. "The very learned and skilful surgeon of the Caramellia regiment, H. Engelsdorfer, also carried out this mission, and more happily, in 1777; he sent to the Botanical Garden, at the request of the illustrious professor, several roots that he had been able to collect that were shorter and thinner; they recovered very well and produced ripe flowers and fruit every year. "He answered several questions (although he was unable to answer the others because of his sudden departure for the Bohemian army): 1° that the plant was now called Tataria by the locals; 2° that it (2) Comitatus Hevessiensis in Hungaria... grew in the fields, in the middle of the harvest, in a soil composed of fertile, black earth, one foot deep, under which lay a three-foot layer of yellowish clay, then, finally, and below, sand; that the root of the adult plant penetrated to this depth; that because of this, it was difficult to remove it whole, because the hole, as soon as you reached the sand, filled abundantly with gushing water: 3° that every year, the roots were torn up and cut by the plough, and that, even when thus wounded, they still grew back; 4° that nowhere around Erlau did he discover that they were consumed, except by children who ate the cooked root because of its sweet taste (1); 5° that some were eaten by hares, which are very numerous in this area. "It grows not only around Erlau, but also in other parts of Hungary. The servant of a very learned professor, who was of Hungarian nationality, having seen some brought in, immediately recognized it, referred to it by the Hungarian word: Tatar-Kenyér, or Tartarian Bread, and declared that he had eaten some in Debrezin. On his suggestion, we made a salad from the fresh, raw root, peeling it, cutting it crosswise into thin slices and seasoning it with oil, vinegar and salt; it pleased everyone. "A pleasant taste is also obtained by cooking the still tender stem, before the flowers have developed, and preparing it in the same way as cauliflower (2). Its use is not, however, very convenient, unless you take care to remove the bark fibers, which are numerous, tough and difficult to chew. (1) Ob dulcedinem. (2) Brassicæ caulifloræ adinstar... "At the same time, the Reverend Norbert Boccius, superior of the Order of St. John of God in Feldsperg and a tireless researcher of Moravian plants, also made known this plant discovered by him and a learned professor in that country. He found it growing abundantly in vines, in clay soil, near the village of Hurtau, near Aussitz; it is known there, he says, as Hieronymus-Würzel (1), or St. Jerome's root, and is carried to Bohemia, where farmers give it to cows to increase their milk. ." Clusius' conjecture that our plant is identical with the Batracan of the Tartars is destroyed by this: Josaphat Barbarus split the bark of the Batracan at the moment of ripening, separated it from the woody part (hence the conclusion that the stem appears to be perennial and frutescente) and added that the seed was of a strong odor, but nevertheless of a pleasant flavor; none of this relates to our plant. "I think it far more worthy of attention that Clusius says, according to others it's true, that in certain parts of Hungary, the inhabitants feed on this root in times of famine and misery. In any case, the root's long lifespan, its volume in the adult state, its resistance even to deep lesions, its resistance to the cold of our winters, etc., all encourage its cultivation, or at least its preservation, (1) Racine de Saint-Jérôme (St. Jerome's Root) seems to me to be the correct translation; the word saint is often neglected by Germans, who give the fruit of the Carob tree, commonly known as Pain de Saint-Jean (St. John's Bread), the name Johannisbrod. (Translator's note.) (2) The conditions in which this plant grows naturally, as indicated above, suggest that it prefers open areas. "Its Hungarian name of Tataria, which Clusius believed to be derived from the Tartars, so concerned our illustrious professor that he sent a drawing of the plant to the famous Pallas in Petersburg, asking him if he had encountered it in his travels. "Here is the scholar's reply: "The Crambé, whose drawing you submitted to me, corresponds in every way to the one that grows here in this vast southern plain stretching from the Dnieper (1) to the Jaik, the Rymnus of the ancients. Nowhere does it extend beyond the 51st degree of north latitude. It likes dry soils, as well as loamy (provided it's not salty), sandy and humus-rich soils. However, it prefers the depressions found in arid plains, varying in size but never reaching, in dry terrain, the size of the drawing transmitted to me. In succulent soils near rivers, where it also spreads, it produces the largest, most pungent-tasting roots. In dry soils, it acquires the taste of turnip (2); the Cossacks who inhabit the deserts of the Don (3) eat it avidly, raw or cooked. Its vulgar name in this country is Katràn, with the epithet bjeloi or white, to distinguish it from a kind of Statice growing in the same regions, multi-stemmed, very branchy, with thick roots, which is harvested in abundance, in the absence of Oak bark, for the preparation of leather, because it is very suitable for this use; it is called Krasnoi Katràn because of its red flowers. Near Irtisch (4), I found very rare individuals of Crambé à (1)... In Borzsthene (2)... Napi... (3)... Tanaensibus in desertis. (4) Ad Irtin... with less laciniated leaves and sometimes in bloom, so that we can judge their difference. Moreover, on our Crambé, which blooms near the Volga, there is an abundance of a particular Meloë, which is completely related to Linné's Meloë de Syrie (1), but always smaller than the Meloë vésicant (2), and with a black head instead of the blue of the rest of the body." "Here is a description of the plant, based on live specimens in the Garden, and others dried from the forests (3), as well as on sketches: "Perennial root, long fusiform, as thick as the arm and thicker in the adult state, two to four feet long, cylindrical, simple or divided inferiorly into limb-like forms (4); it blackens in the air; fresh, it is even black; washed and dried, it is rather grayish; it emits few fibrils throughout its extent. Inside, it is clearly fleshy, whitish with a slight dirty-yellow tinge, with irregular radiating lines; the flavor is mild, with no real pungency. Kept in the air, it gradually shrinks, becomes rough and covered with protrusions, hardens, ceases to be like itself (5) and becomes useless. "The radical leaves that first appear are often small and entire; then they themselves, as well as the stem leaves and those of the lower branches (6) are variously and irregularly multifid, sometimes very ample, pinnatifid, of decomposed form or (1) Meloe syriaca. (2) Meloe vesicatoria. (3) Instead of forests, we should always understand, no doubt, the state of nature. (4) ... Aut inferne incrura divisa. (5) Fitque sui dissimilis... (6) Et caulina atque ramea inferiora. overdecomposed (1), sometimes divided into oblong, toothed and acute strips, of a slightly glaucous green, glabrous on both sides; the upper leaves of the stem and branches are simple and oblong. The angular petioles are glabrous in the larger leaves, but the petioles of the smaller ones, like the ribs, are very thick and prominent, and the veins are bristling with white hairs. However, this hispidity and the shape of the leaves not only vary in the different plants, but also in the different parts of each plant, so that a description that would suit each and every one would be in vain applicable here. "The flowers, which are very numerous, spread out in terminal, stalked corymbs, exude a strong, pleasant honeyed odor, so much so that it is as if you were approaching the nostrils of a bee's comb; The calyx is greenish-yellow, the petals milky-white, the anthers greenish, the ovaries green, the stigma yellow, the fruit pea-sized, consisting of a shiny green fleshy envelope, but dry, rough and poorly colored when ripe, and a seed with a blackish envelope and a pale yellow embryo (2), with a slightly acrid and unpleasant taste. It begins to flower in mid-April. The fruit ripens in June, but only a few reach the desired stage of development; most remain small and unripe (3). Considerations relating to fruiting (4) must be accepted as such. (1)... Decomposite vel supra decomposite pinnatifida (2)... Nucleo... (3) Steriles perstant. (4) In fructificatione character observatur nune subjungendus. "Calyx tetraphyllous, leaflets oblong, obtuse, concave, canaliculate, spreading, deciduous. "Corolla with four petals, oval-faced, very obtuse, flat, almost twice the length of the calyx, inserted on a short, erect tab. "Stamens. Six thick, erect threads, two of which are opposite, the same length as the calyx and simple; the other four are longer than the first and bifurcated at the apex, one branch of this bifurcation directed towards the ovary and sterile, the other slightly inclined outwards and antheriferous. Incumbent anthers. "A green glandula alternates with the threads belonging to the large stamens. "Ovary ovate, style absent, stigma capitate. "Fruit globose, unilocular, indehiscent. "Single, subrounded seed. "On the plate (which has not been included with the Mélanges, due to its size, but which can be studied in the fascicule of drawings) (1) are represented: one of the least large roots, whole, but much reduced; then the upper part of the same, of natural size; the top offers several sprays deprived of leaves as they are in winter; at one of the sprays, contrary to the reality of this season, are painted the bases of three perfectly recognizable leaves. At the top of the drawing, where the caulescent part begins, there are no radical leaves (2). Then there is a flowering branch, the first of its kind in the world. (1) The fascicle of drawings referred to here is none other than Jacquin's remarkable work entitled: Icones plantarum rariorum. The plate devoted to our plant is the one hundred and twenty-ninth. Part of the drawing is colored. (2) Caput autem caulescens caret plerumque foliis radicalibus. which arises from the stem. I have seen it emerge in such abundance from the stem of a cultivated plant, that it occupied a space four feet in diameter with its tightly-packed flowers (1). "There is also half of a large leaf, a whole, toothed radical leaf of recent growth, a fruiting shoot and the embryo of a seed. "Against all expectations, analysis of the root, treated by distillation, produced results quite different from those usually obtained with cruciform plants. It yielded an aqueous mucus, an acidic spirit (2), an empyreumatic oil; having obtained the above, it was treated in a new vessel and at a higher temperature; a small quantity of a volatile alzaline spirit was obtained, just as with other plants an acidic spirit is abundantly obtained. By incineration, the residue yields fixed vegetable alkaline salt in great abundance. C. Tataria seeds are difficult to obtain. We asked in vain for them in Pesth and Vienna; they finally came to us from Saint Petersburg, thanks to the benevolent enterprise of MM. Vilmorin, who obtained them for us from M. Regel. But the learned director of the Bolanic Garden in St. Petersburg was unable to provide us with the information we wanted on the plant's cultivation and uses. To the two questions put to him on our behalf by Dr. Bretschneider, with the kindness he always shows us, Mr. Regel replied that Crambe Tataria grows wild in southern Russia; that it is not cultivated(1).... Ut hæc aream occuparet diametri quatuor pedum densissimam. (2) -. Spiritum... vait nulle part; qu'il n'avait lui-même fait aucune expérience concernant cette espèce et sa culture; qu'à Saint-Pétersbourg on ne pouvait pas cultiver du lout. The seeds we received gave us five plants in the spring of 1881; they did not flower. In 1882, the plant developed somewhat, but has not yet flowered. Finally, in 1883, it flowered and gave us an extraordinary quantity of seeds, which, when sown immediately, i.e. around July-August, did not germinate. As you can see, we have made very little progress in the experimental cultivation of C. Tataria. We doubt very much whether it will ever be a vegetable to be introduced into our kitchen gardens, but it does interest us a great deal, and we'll tell you why. In France, little use is made of these light, easily digested starches, particularly suitable for feeding children and convalescents, of which considerable quantities are imported from England under the name of Arrow-root (see the chapters on Maranta arundinacea and Canna). The name Arrow-root is wrongly given to the starch obtained from various Canna, Tacca pinnatifida and, according to Simmonds, a few other plants. The real Arrowroot comes from M. arundinacea, but we can't say whether this is superior to the similar starches often substituted. Liuto's Chuno is another type of Arrowroot (see the chapter on Alstrœmère Ligtu). Leaving aside Sago, Salep and Tapioca (Manioc), this brings the number of plants from which beneficial starch is extracted to four main species: Maranta arundinacea; Canna; Tacca pinnatifida; Liuto (Alstrœmeria Ligtue). However, we are inclined to believe that the roots of C. Tataria are also suitable for the produclior of an Arrow-root. C. Tataria is classified as a food plant by the ancients. "Crambe Tataria Jacq., a plant from Hungary, appears to be the Chara whose roots fed Caesar's soldiers in Albania (Caes., B. C., 3, 48); Hungarians still make bread from it in times of famine (1)." Crambe cordifolia Steven, from Persia and the Caucasus to Thibet and the Himalayas, at altitudes of up to 14,000 feet, is a beautiful perennial, very hardy in our climate and extremely easy to grow. Its roots and leaves are edible. Harvested as they begin to develop, the leaves are tender and can replace cabbage, but their flavor is milder. PARA SPILANTHES OLERACEA L. Compositae family. Annual plant, native to South America, which, along with its fusca variety (S. fusca Desf.), is cultivated in our gardens as an odontalgic. According to P. Joigneaux (2), the leaves of Para cress have a very penetrating flavor that provokes salivation and hence digestion. Its flowers (1) Les plantes alimentaires des anciens, by Édouard Martens. (2) Le jardin potager, by P. Joigneaux, page 307. pressed between the jaws are reputed to cure even the most unbearable toothache. It is a very energetic antiscorbutic, and highly esteemed in tropical regions, where it advantageously replaces Cochlearia, which would not grow there. It is an ingredient in many toothpastes. Rousseau, Histoire naturelle et médicale du Cresson de Para, 1825, has highlighted the merits of this plant, which is extremely easy to grow, even in our climate. The hot, peppery flavor of Para watercress makes it highly sought-after as a condiment in hot countries. It is used in small quantities and well chopped, in combination with salads. R. P. Camboué sent us some seeds from Madagascar, with the following note: "Anamalahobé, a very tasty vegetable in Tananarive; grows well in the vicinity of the capital, where it is cultivated in fairly large quantities. We cannot recommend Cresson de Para as a vegetable in Europe, where we have Cresson de fontaine, which has the same properties and a flavor better suited to our palate. The same cannot be said for tropical regions, where the lack of fresh vegetables is almost absolute, and where antiscorbutics are necessary. This is why certain plants are sought after under the name of cress, which if cultivated in Europe would seem useless to us: Lepidium chilense Desf., Chili. - Piscidium Forst (L. oleraceum Ait.), Oceania. - virginicum L., Sept. Amer. Senebiera pinnatifida DC, Temperate subtropics. Europe, America, Oceania. Nasturtium indicum DC, India. Gynandropsis pentaphylla DC. tropical Asia, Africa and America. Fig. 26 - Gynandropsis pentaphylla DC. This plant, which belongs to the Capparidae family, was sent to us in 1897 by Baron d'Yvoire, under the name Momendu Ajoouo, which he had received from a missionary living in the Lake Nyassa region (Africa), with the note: "Cruciferous plant whose young shoots are prepared and eaten like spinach". In the French West Indies, this plant is used to make the famous Calalou dish, known as Mougambi. It is an annual and can be grown without difficulty in our climate. Kan-lu, Tsao che tsan; Tignou tzé. China. Tsyo rogi, Choro-gi, Daima giku, Daima gik. Japan. STACHYS AFFINIS Bnge, Enum. pl. chin. n° 289; S. Sieboldi Miq, Prol. Fl. Jap. p. 44; S. tuberifera Ndn. Bull. Soc. d'Accl., 1887, p. 394. Fam. des Labiées Synonyms: English: Chinese Artichoke; German! Knollenziest; Italian: Tuberina (1). DESCRIPTION. - MORPHOLOGY Perennial plant. Stump emitting numerous underground, tuberous rhizomes. Tubers formed by a succession of nodules, rather resembling the swollen root collars of rosary oats (Ar(1) G.-S. Bullo, Raccoglitore Anno, XIII, series III. 10 LE POTAGER D'UN CURIEUX Fig. 27 - Crosne (Stachys affinis), Iubercules. V CROSNE Fig. 28 - Crosne (Stachys "ffinis), flowering branch. 147 rhenatherum elatius, var. bulbosum Gaud.; Avena precatoria Thuill.) Stem simple or stalked, erect or flattened at base, quadrangular, 25 to 40 cm high, hispid at corners. Leaves opposite, petiolate, rough, hispid, cordate at base, acuminate, crenate-toothed; lower ones ovate-oblong, gradually smaller as they grow higher. Flowers sessile, grouped 6-4 in distinct false whorls. The flower consists of a subcampanulate or infundibuliform calyx, obconical, with equal, acute teeth. Corolla 10 to 24 millimeters long, purpurine, with exserted tube, before a ring of hairs inside. "Tubers have the same morphological value as those of the potato. They are swollen twigs, tuberculated under the influence of the underground station. As they swell, each internode of the modified branch loses, so to speak, in length what it gains in diameter. "On a cross-section of one of these swollen, perfectly round internodes, we find, as in the aerial branch, four libero-ligneous bundles occupying the place of the rounded angles. The bark is not very thick, while the medullary tissues develop considerably, forming almost the entire mass of the tuber. Lateral roots, arising directly from the node, form on either side of the angular libero-ligneous bundle, so that there are eight roots at the same level, a little above the emergence of the leaves. Other lateral roots may form above these, always in the same way. When the tuber is planted, the buds that develop into twigs and stems are those closest to the upper end (1). Habitat. - Denominations. "In a memoir entitled Fragmenta floræ orientalis (Bulletin de la Société impériate des naturalistes de Moscou), vol. 54, no. 4, M. de Maximowicz, a learned Russian botanist and himself a well-known explorer of eastern Asia, has given brief but precise information on the Labiatae in question, concerning its history, homeland, synonymy and, I might add, dietary characteristics. In the above-mentioned memoir, it is stated in substance: Stachys affinis Bunge, Enum. pl. ch. bor. n° 289. S. Sieboldi Miq, Prolusio, p. 44 (description follows). Hab. - Northern China to Kantaï (Bunge); Peking (Tatarinow), where the plant is cultivated under the name Kan-lu, because of its fleshy root, edible according to Skatschkow and Dr. Bretschneider, who found it on Mount Po-hua-shan. In Japan, the plant has been observed in Yedo, where it is rarely cultivated under the name Daima Gik (Siebold). The Japanese botanist Tchonowski observed it in the principality of Nambu (M. de Maximowicz does not say whether it is cultivated or spontaneous)... Stachys affinis Bunge is known to be cultivated in several Chinese provinces. It is discussed at some length in volume IV (vegetable plants) of the great Chinese encyclopedia entitled Tchi wou ming chi thou Kuo, where the plant is (1) P. Maury, Association française pour l'avancement des sciences; Oran, 1888. skilfully illustrated as Tsao che tsan (silkworm stone plant). I am indebted to the kindness of a priest of the Missions étrangères, the R. P. Mutel, a learned sinologist, for this information. Mutel, a learned sinologist, the translation of the article concerning the Stachys affinis, and I give it here, deleting the passages unnecessary to the subject: "The Tsao che tsan was revealed and mentioned for the first time in the great Flora called Pen-tsao-hou-eipien: it is the Kan-lu (sweet dew); its stem and flowers resemble those of the aquatic thyme (Lophantus?); the root has unions (united pearls). In northern lands, it is grown "extensively as a vegetable. Tou-peu-Tsucun (a poet of some sort) says this in his poem "du Ta-houah-tsai" (vegetable from Jede's ring): the plant "called Kan-lu, what does it produce? At its decline, it bears "Jade rings, bound together and yet mobile, ind" hanging from each other. These rings are precisely the "vegetable" we're talking about. The above passage from the Chinese encyclopaedia describes the Kan-lu in an entirely oriental manner, i.e. by comparison with objects we can actually see. Nevertheless, it shows that it is cultivated mainly in the northern provinces, and that the describer's imagination was particularly struck by the pearly, jade-like appearance of its rhizomes. Elsewhere, it is said that Kan-lu holds a place among the food plants listed in the Kiou-Hung-Pentza (Flora of the Salvation from Dearth), a work often cited in Chinese books. In this respect, Kan-lu deserves attention, and the multiplicity of its rhizomes, combined with their nutritional qualities, indicates that its cultivation can, to a certain extent, offer a resource not to be scorned. Very recently, Mr. Delavay, a missionary in Yunnan, sent the Museum Herbarium some fine specimens of Stachys affinis in flower and fruit; they were accompanied by the following label: "N° 3079. Red flowers. Cultivated for its edible root; small tubers in rosaries. Chinese name: Tignou-tze (earth button). Harvested at Tcheou-choui, near Tapin-tze, September 23, 1887." Another label reads: "The woods at Talong-tan, near Tapin-tze." This shows that the plant is not only cullivated in northern China, but also in the Austro-Western provinces of the empire, where the name given to it is not that of Kan-lu, no doubt due to a particular dialect, but which nonetheless offers a meaning analogous to that of: united pearls, ring of jade, which, as I said above, serves elsewhere as a term of comparison for the rhizomes of the plant. Siebold received Stachys affinis from the Decima Garden in Japan, but he seems to have been unaware that it was a food plant and gave it no name. For his part, M. de Maximowicz saw it in Yédo, in the gardens, where, he says, it is rarely cultivated and where Dr. Savatier collected a single specimen. Miquel, Prolusio, p. 44, had given Siebold's plant the name Stachys Sieboldi; but, with the help of the extensive material he obtained, Maximowicz demonstrated that it did not differ from Stachys affinis. Finally, more recently, M. Faurie, a missionary in Japan, sent us a specimen of this species, with this note: "Aomori (prov. sept. de Nippon); the plant is cultivated there for its root. It is also shown under the name Tsyo rogi, Chorogi, in CROSNE, volume XI, plate 13, of the Japanese collection entitled Somokou dusets (1)". INTRODUCTION IN FRANCE - CULTIVATION AND YIELD In the spring of 1882, we received from the Société nationale d'Acclimatation a box containing rhizomes of Stachys affinis, a plant that had long been on our desiderata lists. The rhizomes had been sent by Dr. Bretschneider, physician to the Russian Legation in Peking, who was kind enough to respond to a request for useful plants from China addressed to our Minister in Peking, Mr. Bourée, by the Société nationale d'Acclimatation. All but five or six of these rhizomes had rotted during the trip, but the plant's power to multiply is such that the loss of most of them left us with no regrets. In the first year, every tuber planted on an old bed gave us a satisfactory harvest, and by the end of the second year, the clumps left in place gave us two to three hundred to one. On January 4 1888, M. Paillieux presented the following note to the members of the plant section of the Société nationale d'Acclimatation: "Gentlemen, if you will allow me, I will speak to you again today about Stachys. It will probably be the last time. "You know that, for three years, I have offered and given to everyone, in and outside Paris, seedlings of our new vegetable. Last spring, however, I predicted that it would not be offered on the market again this winter, and that it would only be grown in a few amateur (1) A. Franchet, Le Jardin, 1889. gardens. It was impossible to predict when the plant would be adopted by growers and enter general consumption. "Now, I'm loaded with years and in a hurry to act before age forbids any work. "I knew that bulbous chervil, introduced into Western Europe in 1726, had only been known in France for fifty years, and was still not widely grown today. "If I consulted my memories, they would tell me that, in the space of a hundred years, only two new vegetables had been introduced to France: the Chinese yam, which has almost been abandoned, and the bulbous chervil, which I mentioned earlier. "I wanted to spare Stachys the long incubation period undergone by previously introduced plants. I wanted to try to achieve in three months the propagation of the excellent vegetable that our Society has introduced, and which, in my opinion, is destined to occupy a large place in general consumption. "I thought I could only achieve my goal by immediately becoming a producer and seller. The foregoing considerations led me to this decision. "I rented some land around my garden and planted Stachys, thus securing a harvest which is not yet complete and which will give me around 3,000 kilograms of tubers. "Convinced that the words Stachys affinis could not be pronounced by our cooks, I named the tubers Crosnes, which is the name of my village. "I had three thousand prospectus cards printed to publicize the vegetable, which have been a great help to me. I distributed some of them to the members present at the January 4 meeting, and I'm making some available to you again today. "From the last days of November, I've been making room, looking for buyers, rejected by most, welcomed by a few. "At the moment, I have ten buyers in Paris whose sales are increasing daily. I ship our vegetable to Lille, Roubaix, Amiens, Reims and even Brussels. I'm expecting requests from a few other towns. "I have the satisfaction of seeing that purchases are constantly being renewed. Our success is not a flash in the pan; it's a fire that won't go out. "I had my tubers tasted by Brébant, the friendly and renowned restaurateur you all know. He recognized their merit, put them on his daily menu, and included them in the Japanese salad, the fashionable dish whose recipe is pleasantly given in Francillon, and the author is now familiar with Stachys. "MM. X..., from Paris, have used 100 kilograms of Stachys to make their Pickles. They are sending some to a house in the provinces, and wrote to me on January 30th: "Yesterday, Saturday, the courier gave us a case of Stachys on your behalf. Please send us more: "30 kilograms next Tuesday; "30 kilograms next Saturday. "In case your crop runs out, please reserve about 100 kilograms for us. These Stachys are all shipped to the provinces and eaten as fresh vegetables. Success seems assured, and we believe that next year you can produce them without fear. "L'Art culinaire of January 30 contains a small note on Crosnes, with a very exact figure of the tuber: "Under the name Crosnes du Japon, the Société nationale d'Acclimatation has just introduced and wants to propagate this new vegetable. We can only applaud this attempt. "Appearing only in winter, when our excellent French products are in very short supply, this vegetable can be of real use in culinary service. Its shape is original and graceful; its taste is reminiscent of the artichoke. It is very easy and quick to cook, and can be used in a variety of ways. "To spread the use of our vegetable more and more, I have just made an agreement with an active and intelligent young man who will continue the work begun. "Unfortunately, it is doubtful whether my harvest will meet demand during the month of February. I couldn't possibly undertake a more extensive cultivation. "As soon as Stachys appears at Les Halles, do I need to tell you that your colleague will disappear as a salesman and return purely and simply to being the researcher of new plants to whom you have always given your sympathy and encouragement? Success was thus assured from the start of 1887. It grew steadily. Mr. Paillieux was overwhelmed with requests, which he met to the best of his ability. Hundreds of publications, in France and abroad, special journals, bulletins of horticultural societies, scientific bulletins of major newspapers, celebrated the new plant. As early as 1891, commission agents at Les Halles received and sold large quantities of tubers. Our vegetable could be seen in almost every fruit store in the capital; it even made an appearance in the small cars of four-season merchants. It's now a household name. The price has dropped considerably. Consumption will be widespread. It's a given, a definitive conquest. In Le Potager d'un curieux, 1st edition (1885), p. 88, we were the first to mention the cultivation of Stachys, twelve years ago. We publish hereafter all the information we have gathered since then, indicating, where appropriate, the sources from which we drew it. The plant is hardy. Since 1882-83, it has withstood our winters without suffering. It will certainly withstand the coldest weather. We've been growing Crosne for fifteen years, which allows us to indicate a very simple cultivation procedure. The tubers should be planted in February, after which they would begin to vegetate. They are very willing to come out of their rest. If a plantation is covered with manure so that frost or snow do not interrupt the uprooting, the rhizomes germinate immediately. We can't say which soil Crosne prefers. All soils are suitable, but it seems to us that in a compact, clay soil, digging would be very laborious and too often interrupted by frost, snow or rain. We therefore recommend choosing soil that is a little sandy, or in any case well loosened. We plant in holes 20 centimetres deep, spaced 40 centimetres apart in all directions, with three tubers per hole. We repeat the hoeing until October 1, to keep the soil perfectly clean. When we do the last hoeing, we think it's a good idea to lightly butter the clumps. We don't hoe after October 1, because the tool would cut the rhizomes that extend horizontally. In the Paris climate, we believe it's wise not to start uprooting before December 1st. Tubers are not perfect until then. They begin to vegetate again on March 1st. In home gardens, we pull as the table requires. There's no need to worry about frost. In the field, large quantities are harvested at a time for sale. Tubers can be stored in sand, in a dry place. They do not fear the cold, but when exposed to the air, they wither and are no longer presentable after twelve or fifteen days. Yield, as always, is more or less considerable, depending on the fertilization and the care given to the crop. We dare not say what it might be in a garden, but we have seen that it always exceeds expectations. In large-scale cultivation, we think that we could count on 12,000 kilograms per hectare; but the plant is above all, and can be exclusively, destined for small-scale cultivation, because of the difficulties of uprooting and preserving the produce. No matter how much care is taken in uprooting, a host of offshoots appear in May. This plant can be transplanted and produce a harvest equal to that produced by the tubers; but if left in place, it is unpleasantly surprised, when winter comes, to have almost no harvest at all, as the plant quickly exhausts the soil. Exposure to too much heat is not without danger. It's true that we've only once lost a plantation to sunburn, and we've always feared that this accident would happen again. In the south of France, Stachys must be grown in the shade, and requires frequent, moderate watering. Dr. Louis Planchon, who has experimented with growing this plant in Montpellier, tells us that he has obtained good results only thanks to these conditions; he adds, moreover, that nowhere in the region has Stachys flowered. We know of no other enemy to Crosne than the white grub. It takes around 600 tubers to make 1 kilogram. INTRODUCTION IN OTHER PARTS OF EUROPE Crosne has spread from France to England, where it is known as Chinese Artichoke. Numerous cultivation trials have been carried out, as evidenced by articles published in horticultural journals such as The Gardeners' Chronicle, The Garden, etc.; however, we do not know whether the plant is widely cultivated in this country, or whether it has definitively entered the consumer market. In Belgium, it was cultivated soon after its introduction, and success was at least as complete as in France. In Germany, where the plant is known as Knollenziest, Crosne is cultivated only by a few horticultural enthusiasts, but efforts are being made to spread it. According to Villkomm, attempts made in Austria suggest that Crosne can thrive in open fields in all parts of the empire, and that it would be worthwhile extending its cultivation. In Italy, as early as 1887, Messrs Ingegnoli frères of Milan recommended its cultivation; the plant, which they had been experimenting with for some time, had given very good results, and they wrote that it "deserved one of the best places in vegetable gardens". The Italian newspaper Raccoglitore had written about it in 1886; in 1887, various cultivation experiments were carried out in the province of Padua and in the Royal potager agraire, thanks to the active president of the Comice agraire de Padoue, Professor Keller. Mr. Bullo, in agreement with Professor Saccardo, proposed the name Tuberina for the plant, which has the merit of being easy and brief. He published in the Raccoglitore, vol. XIII, ser. III, a long note on the history, uses and cultivation of this new vegetable. We have extracted some interesting information on the introduction of Crosne in Italy. "In Lombardy, several individuals grow Stachys affinis; however, it has not yet appeared on the Milan market. On the contrary, in Monza, near Milan, it is very much in vogue: we started growing it in the Royal Park, and, having pleased the court, all the city's families wanted to grow it. It is sometimes seen on the Monza market and, in memory of the protection given to this vegetable, it is called Pomme de terre de la Reine (Pomo di terra della Regina). I would have really liked to keep this name," he says, "but thinking that it is too long to become popular quickly, and that there are already other plants with almost similar names, I decided to propose the name Tuberina, which is shorter and easier, and which cannot be confused with others. "I was supported in this idea by competent people who encouraged me to make the proposal. "In Piedmont, Stachys is known by name only; we hope soon to see it cultivated there too, at least on a trial basis. "In the southern provinces, it is still unknown; the Société d'Acclimatation in Palermo is currently trying to make it known in Sicily, and the Dammann house in Saint-Giovianni di Teduccio has been experimenting, but, to tell the truth, with unsatisfactory results, obviously due to the too-high summer temperature. "Italo Mazzon, the excellent poultry farmer from Padua and lover of all that is new and useful, cultivated it as early as 1887, and this is what he wrote to me on the subject: "Stachys affinis is a plant that deserves to be cultivated on a large scale, especially in sandy soils. The tests I have carried out have convinced me that, in clay soils, although quite productive, it would not be to be recommended, because the rather fragile roots would tend to lengthen and the nodes to enlarge. A tuber of any size, planted in suitable soil, yields about 1.5 kilograms of product, and many other tubers about the size of a finger. "I was already convinced that Stachys must give a large product, but experiments made at the Royal potager agraire have never given the product noted by Mazzon, and this must depend absolutely on the quality of the soil where the experiment was made. "Mazzon sent Stachys tubers to the Treviso exhibition in 1888 and won a medal. CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF TUBERCULES (1) "Of particular interest are the tubers known in the trade as "Crosne", which are formed by the swollen internodes of the underground branches of a Labiatae (Stachys affinis)(1) A. de Planta. This work was carried out at the agricultural chemistry laboratory of the Zurich Polytechnicum, directed by Professor E. Schultze Revue générale de botanique, February 15 1889, p. 85. These tubers, which are being used more and more every day in France, England and Switzerland, are indeed a first-rate foodstuff, and the nature of the substances they contain was known only very inaccurately. "I shall not insist here on the details of the procedures I used for the chemical analysis of tubers (1), and I shall leave aside their morphological development. "Here is the result of the analysis of slow-growing tubers harvested in February in Paris: Water............................ Protein substances........... Amides......................... Fat (extracted by ether)...... Carbohydrates, mainly galactan...... Cellulose...................... Ash........................ TUBERCULES Fresh. Dry. 78.33 1.50 1.67 18 6.68 7.71 82 16.57 76.71 73 3.38 1.02 4.70 100.00 100.00 "The tubers therefore contained 21. 67 p. 100 dry substance, the centesimal composition of which is shown in the preceding table, right-hand column. "It can be seen that nitrogenous substances are found in significant proportion in this food, and that carbohydrates, in very high quantities, are represented above all by galactan, a substance discovered in 1886 (1) See the article I published in Nobbe's Versuchestationen, 1888. 11 by Messrs. E. Schultze and Steiger, in the seeds of Lupin (Lupinus luteus). "Galactan, this new substance, is intermediate between starch and sugar; it is a material analogous to dextrin, but is very clearly characterized. The proportion of galactan in tubers is around 75%. 100% of galactan in Stachys affinis tubers is quite remarkable, and no plant is known to contain a similar proportion of this substance at any stage of its development. Sugars are found only in trace amounts in these tubers, and even then their presence is not certain, as glucose is formed after the interversion of galactan by extended hydrochloric acid. "I would add that, among the nitrogenous substances, I was also able to isolate glutamine and tyrosine. "The richness in non-nitrogenous substances, and especially in galactan, which is a very easily assimilated substance, shows that crosnes are a precious food in many cases for the sick and for all those who suffer from a delicate stomach. "The only analysis of these tubers that I could find in my bibliographical research was published by M. Carrière, in the Revue horticole, in 1885. "The chemist who carried out this analysis found 68.96 O/0 starch, and the tubers I analyzed in February contained no trace of it (1). "It is true, as M. Dufour (from Lausanne) has noted, that traces can sometimes be found (1) The analysis published by M. Carrière gives only 17.88 e/, of starch and non-nitrogenous substances. Revue horticole, 1885, p. 236 - P. et B. d'amidon dans les tubercules de Stachys affinis récoltés en automne, mais ce n'est là que de l'amidon transitoire qui, selon toute apparence, se transforme en galactane pendant l'hiver. This interesting fact shows that a chemical study of these tubers at various stages of development could yield remarkable results. "In any case, it is not this transitory starch (existing only in trace amounts) that may have been found in the analysis I have just quoted. It is, without doubt, galactan that has been counted as starch, and the difference between these two bodies is important enough from the physiological point of view, as well as from the dietary point of view, to deserve to be pointed out." Messrs. Planta and Schulze discovered a new substance in Crosne, which they named Stachyose and described in two memoirs summarized below: STACHYOSE. - Extracted from the juice obtained by pressing Stachus affinis using a series of treatments with lead acetate, hydrogen sulfide and alcohol. Slowly crystallizes by careful addition of alcohol to its aqueous solutions in the form of shiny crystals adhering to the walls of the vases in which they are deposited. Weakly sweet, highly soluble in water, strongly dextrorotatory; reduces Fehling's liquor only after boiling with acids, like cane sugar; gives by oxidation with azotic acid about the same quantity of mucic acid as milk sugar. Its formula is CISH32 OIe - 3 Ha O. Stachyose resembles tactosine, which Meyer extracted from the Caryophylae, but differs in its rotatory power, which is lower than that of lactosine (1). When boiled with extended acids, Stachyose gives a (1) See Planta and Schulze, Berichte der deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft, t. 23, p. 1692. mixture of reducing sugars containing half its weight in galactose, the other half being a mixture of glucose and levulose. In this respect, it can be compared with raffinose from beet or cotton cake, which gives the same reducing sugars in the same circumstances, but in equal proportions. It is therefore possible that the formula for Stachyose should be doubled and written as C38 Het O3* (1). In the two memoirs we have just summarized, the authors do not indicate the quantity of Stachyose supplied by tubers. Just as starch and inulin give glucose and levulose when heated with acidulated water, so Stachyose treated in the same way gives galactose, but at the same time as glucose and levulose: CE H32018 - 2H2O stachyose CHROS Ce He 9e glucose T levulose C HOU galactose FOOD USES Crosnes are all the better for being freshly plucked. They don't need to be peeled; simply wash them carefully so that no earth or sand remains in the internodes. They cook in twelve to fifteen minutes; if left too long on the fire, the water will penetrate them and they will become mushy and bland. Cooks have given the newcomer a warm welcome; indeed, there's no other vegetable that's so quick and easy to prepare. This one (1) See Planta and Schukze, same collection, t. 24, p. 2705. therefore met with no resistance and immediately became a regular, a friend of the house. Its flavor is pleasant, but weak. It has to be cooked in saltier water than usual. We don't know how the Chinese prepare it for the table, but here it accepts all the preparations with which we are familiar, and that's enough. It is likely that the Japanese prepare it with their excellent and inevitable sauce, "Shoyu"; but we really have no information on its use in Japan other than this: Choro-gi has tuberous, caterpillar-like roots, which are preserved in plum vinegar for eating (1). In France, crosnes are usually served as fresh flageolet beans, with or without chopped parsley. They are delicious as a garnish for veal stew, and in this state, the farmers in our village are crazy about them. They are also excellent fried. One enthusiast recommends cooking them the day before and frying them, cold and firm, the next day. They can also be eaten au gratin. They are perfect in salads, simple or mixed. Potel & Chabot sometimes cook them in stock beforehand. Lastly, they are very good in vinegar preserves, combined with gherkins, Catawissa onions and so on. As you can see, all our preparations (1) Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878, Paris. A la Commission impériale du Japon, 15, avenue de Matignon, 1878. are applicable to them, and the hostess is spoilt for choice. In recent years, marsh marigold (Stachys palustris) has been advocated as being able to provide the same services as Crosne. Some authors have even argued that these two Stachys are identical, and that there's no reason to grow a Chinese plant when we have its analogue in France. We have grown both species side by side for several years. It never occurred to us that they could be confused. In Stachys palustris, the leaves are sessile, lanceolate, whereas in S. affinis they are petiolate, oval, attenuated at the apex and cordate at the base. The former species flowers abundantly every year, while the latter only very exceptionally (1). Finally, and most importantly, the rhizomes of marsh milkweed are very elongated; they can reach 15 to 20 centimetres in length; they are acrid and bitter, almost inedible. To consider using them, we'd have to start by creating an improved breed, as suggested by the ancient authors who wrote about their edibility. Mr. Chappellier, of the Société nationale d'Acclimatation, is undertaking trials to this end, by hybridizing the two species. We hope his efforts will be crowned with success. (1) Stachys affinis has a rare peculiarity, but there are other examples. The abundance of rhizome production is such that the plant doesn't need to form seeds to reproduce. Flower buds appear, but remain small and do not bloom. The first flowers observed in France with any certainty were seen by one of us, in Mr. Le Tourneur's garden, at Roche-Gauthier, near Granville (Manche) (See Revue Horticole, 1891, page 463). On March 24 1892, M. Chappellier presented to the Société Nationale d'Horticulture de France (see Journal de la Société Nationale d'Horticulture, 1892, p. 137), tubers of Stachys floridana Shultlew, (native to Florida), which had been sent to him from the USA under the name Florida Artichoke. The presenter was unable to give any information on the use to which these tubers might be put, but he thought that the vulgar name under which he had received them suggested that they were edible. M. Chappellier has cultivated Stachys floridana, and we were able to see a few plants in flower in his garden at Boissy-Saint-Léger (Seine-et-Oise) (see Revue Horticole, 1893, page 17). The plant resembles Stachys affinis, but is less developed and less vigorous. The tubers are more elongated, reminiscent in shape and volume of the rhizomes of Stachys palustris; they have a pronounced unpleasant flavor that makes them inedible. Mr. Chappellier continues to cultivate Stachys floridana in the hope of one day obtaining a hybrid between this species and Stachys affinis. In the meantime, there is no doubt that, through selection, we can increase the volume of Crosne tubers, if we judge that it is in our interest to have them larger. CYCLANTHERA PEDATA Schrad. Cucurbitaceae family. Annual plant, with climbing, glabrous stems; bifid tendrils; alternate, petiolate leaves; in July-September, small, axillary green flowers, the males in long-stalked corymbs, the females solitary, sessile at the base of the male flowers. Pediaria is native to Mexico. It is a trailing or climbing plant of extraordinary fecundity. We won't dwell on its cultivation, which is that of the Gourdes. We left the stems lying around, and for several months they produced flowers and fruit in abundance. Supported by a trellis, these stems reach up to 4 meters in height. The leaves resemble those of the Virginia creeper and are very filling. Fruit should be picked daily. If they are to be used, they must not be larger than olives, as they soon become soft and spongy. Harvested at the right time, they can be candied like gherkins. Their defect is that they are not crunchy. They have a strong Cucumber smell, which they give up to take on the taste of the vinegar in which they are immersed. The same is true of almost all the vegetables we associate with Gherkins. Cyclanthers are no better or worse than others. They're pretty little vinegar sponges. The seed is black and curious. The plant is hardier than the Cornichon de Paris. COMESTIBLE CYCLANTHERA CYCLANTHERA EDULIS Ndn. Pepino de comer of the South American Spaniards, who eat the fruit in a variety of ways. The plant differs from C. pedata only in its larger size and in the size of the fruit, which is six to seven times the volume of C. pedata and retains its shape, but is smoother. Strong, climbing annual plant with broad, pale-green leaves; female flowers usually solitary and subsessile in the leaf axils; spongy flesh before ripening, with a strong cucumber odor. Rapid growth. Very rambaceous, very fertile plant (Catalogue of Ch. Huber et Cle, horticulturists, Hyères). Cyclanthera edulis appears to be native to Colombia and, if memory serves, Mr. Triana tells us that its fruits are usually eaten halved and stuffed like cucumbers and eggplants. The fruits prepared in this way are therefore, to all appearances, much larger than those of C. pedata, and this is in fact what the Catalogue of Messrs Huber et Cie, quoted above, says; but it is a fact that we have not been able to verify. We received the seeds listed in their catalog from these gentlemen, and gave half of them to a skilled gardener in our neighborhood. We sowed them in trays and on beds and obtained very strong plants, similar to C. pedata, with flowers, but no fruit. Our neighbor obtained flowers and fruits, but these were hardly larger than those of C. pedata. This is what Mr. Naudin reports about C. edulis: "We received from New Grenada, under the name of Pepino de comer, through the intermediary of Mr. de Geoffroy, French consul in Bogota, the seeds of a Cyclanthera which, if it is not identical with C. pedata, as I am tempted to believe, is extremely close to it. We cultivated it at the Muséum in 1858; but, owing to various accidents, the three or four living individuals we had were so retarded that they only flowered in the late season and did not set a single fruit. The ovaries were perfectly smooth, and this is about the only difference I found between them and C. pedata, where they are somewhat mature. "According to what M. de Geoffroy told us, the fruits are edible before they are ripe, and can be eaten cooked. This species is probably the Momordica pedata pomis striatis of P. Feuillée..." Journal des observations physiques, mathématiques et botaniques, faites par ordre du roi, sur les côtes orientales de l'Amérique méridionale et aux Indes orientales, par le R. P. Louis Feuillée; Paris, 1725, vol. Il, p. 754: Momordica fructu striato: "All Peruvians, among whom this plant is found, eat the fruit in their soups; it is extremely refreshing and therefore very necessary in Peru, where the heat is excessive. The failure of Mr. Naudin to grow C. edulis at the Muséum, the failure we experienced ourselves, and the advanced age at which our neighbor obtained some fruit, sufficiently demonstrate that the edible Cyclanthère differs from C. pédiaire, the latter being of much better composition, both very early and very productive; but neither is it proven to us that the plant catalogued by MM. Huber et Cie is the one mentioned by Mr. Triana. There is a desideratum here that has not been satisfied. We have also cultivated the Cyclanthera explodens Schrader, which can be found in botanical gardens and requires no more care than the C. pedata. Its fruits are shorter and smaller than those of C. pedata; too soft to be used as pickles, they have the peculiarity of exploding when ripe, spitting their seeds violently in the face of any indiscreet person who touches them. CYPHIA TORTILIS N.-E. Brown. Family Campanulaceae, tribe Cyphiaceae. In February 1894, Professor Mac Owan, government botanist at the Cape of Good Hope, sent us tubers of a plant which, he told us, was related to the Bosch Barroe (Cyphia sylvatica Eckl.), but nevertheless distinct, tubers which are eaten after being roasted in the ashes of the fire made by outspanned? travelers, but which could not be recommended as having first-rate eating qualities. We planted these tubers under a frame, in the open ground, and, in the course of the year, we observed the flowering of most of the plants grown. This same species had also been sent to Kew Gardens, and in the October 1894 issue, p. 356, Mr. N.-E. Brown described it as new. In the autumn, we harvested these tubers, which had not multiplied and had not grown appreciably. We cooked some of them and offered the others to the Museum, the tasting having made us recognize the futility of continuing to cultivate them as a food plant. Japanese radish. 173 RAPHANUS SATIVUS L., var. Cruciferae family. Although Daikons have been described by Henri Rivière as belonging to a particular species, we do not believe we should adopt this view. These plants, like the varieties of Radish we grow in France, vary infinitely, both in the shape of their leaves and their roots, and should be attached to Linné's Raphanus sativus. We had a large collection of Daikons presented to the Société nationale d'Horticulture by gardener Henri Véniat. If we're not mistaken, this was the first time that several varieties of this little-known plant had been presented to the Society. Until then, we'd confined ourselves to showing off a specimen of some kind and saying: here's the Daikon, without considering that this vegetable, like so many others, has properties, qualities and even defects, which vary infinitely, depending on the variety we've grown. Our Radishes are of Chinese origin, but we've obtained countless varieties that appear in the catalogs of grain merchants. Round and short, long and half-long, early and late, white, pink, red, violet, yellow, grey, black, small or huge; it's enough to make you get lost. The same applies to daikons. Some are sown in spring, others, more numerous, are sown in August and used throughout the winter. One is very fast-growing and must be used after a few weeks' sowing, otherwise it will be eaten hollow. Some are inordinately long and require ploughing with two spades; others are short or half-long and require only ordinary ploughing. All the varieties we have are white. Some are said to be red inside and out, and would be the best. We asked in vain for them in Japan; all we received was a degenerate pink winter radish from China. In June 1878, we received three varieties highly esteemed in their country of origin: Sakurashima, Tsuri and Nerima Daïkon. We sowed them immediately; these plants went to seed so quickly that they did not form usable roots, but we knew from then on that we had to sow late. In 1881, we received new seeds, which we sowed on August 1. The result was very satisfactory, and the horticulturists of the Société d'Horticulture de Montreuil can recall a presentation of very fine roots made to them by Henri Véniat. We give here the names of the varieties we have. We mark two of them with a question mark because they are doubtful for us; we consider the others to be correct: Shirimain nedzumi (Fig. 29); Hosone; Mia shige; Arkie (?); Nedzumi; Maru nerima (Fig. 30); Nerima; Kedissune (Fig. 31); Ku nichi; Songetty (?) Ninengu. We lost the Sakurashima and the Tsuri. We did not receive the San Guwatsu, which is cited first by the Japanese author of "Japon à l'Exposition uniFig. 29. - Shirimain nedzumi (au quart de grandeur naturelle). verselle de 1878", and whose name means Daikon of the third month (April). We'll say a few words about each of the varieties we grew in 1881 and 1882. Shirimain nedzumi (fig. 29). - This Daikon is large and short. Its roots do not grow out of the ground. It does not require any deeper ploughing than is usual in gardens: a merit that should make it sought-after. Hosone. - Its roots rise to Om, 20 above ground. It nevertheless requires deep plowing. It grows quickly. It becomes hollow from the first days of October. Mia shige. - Its roots protrude about 1.10 m above ground; it requires deep ploughing. According to the above-mentioned Japanese author, Mia shige Daïkon is a renowned product of Owari province. Arkie (?). - This Daïkon requires deep ploughing. Its roots are only Om.05 to Om.10 high above ground. Nedzumi. - Requires deep plowing. Its leaves are unlike those of any other daikon. Maru nerima (fig. 30). - 15 centimetres above ground. Deep ploughing. Nerima. - 20 centimetres above ground. Deep ploughing. Kedissune (fig. 31). - Very divided and finely cut leaves, almost ornamental. Ku nichi. - 10 centimetres above ground. Deep ploughing. Its name means: nine-day daikon. Songetty (?). - Deep plowing. Ninengu (1). - 20 centimetres above ground. Deep ploughing. All these varieties are sown on August 1 and used in winter. However, we have one which, sown (1) MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie (Les Plantes potagères) say that, to reach its full potential, Ninengo (or Ninengu) should be sown as early as April. It requires deeply worked and abundantly smoked soil. Some Daikons, according to authorities who seem to be reliable, reach the fabulous weight of 15 to 20 kilograms. in spring, did not go to seed until late summer, so we feared we might not harvest any Fig. 30. - Maru nerima (quarter natural size). Fig. 31 - Kedissune (quarter natural size). and we had to wait a long time for the siliques to dry. This variety, to which 12 the Japanese author quoted above gives the name Natsu Daïkon, i.e. Summer Daïkon, was part of a collection of forty-two seed packets collected by the intrepid traveller Mr. Colteau, a collection which had come to us through the kindness of Dr. Paul Sagot. It contained several other varieties of Daikon, which, sown in spring, went to seed without producing anything useful. It is therefore well established that, with the exception of Natsu Daïkon, sowing should take place around August 1st, and even later in the Midi, on ordinary ploughing for short or half-long Daïkon, and on ploughing with two spades for long-rooted varieties. Sow in rows and, if you want to obtain well-developed plants, thin to at least 15 cm. As for fertilization, we'll quote what Count de Castillon said in Volume IV, page 519, 3rd series of the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation, to challenge certain points: "Struck by the negative results obtained in France in growing Daikon, I wanted to find the cause. To do this, I thought I could do no better than to consult the Japanese work entitled: Só moku so date gusa; here is what it says about Daïkon, which would be more than enough to show the reasons for the lack of success that is generally complained of: in spring" and summer, the ground is dug up extensively; a mixture of ash and pou" drette is "carefully incorporated, and sown from the first to the tenth day of" autumn (late September), in rows and on ridges. There are also daikons that are entirely red, not only on the outside but also on the inside; they are very tender and have a delicate taste. "Japanese cultivation can be summed up in the following three points: 1° deep cultivation; 2° highly active, rapidly assimilable powdered fertilizers; 3° (and this is a crucial point) autumn sowing. It's obvious that the Japanese don't sow Daikon in spring, because they've recognized that seedlings sown at this time go to seed very easily, without producing large roots. Something similar happens with certain plants, such as turnips. "It should also be noted that the variety of Daikon "most esteemed in Japan for its edible qualities" is red Daikon. It is therefore on this variety that "the next trials should preferably focus". We have no doubt that a very good result can be obtained by digging deep into the soil, amending it with ashes, and smoking it with poudrette; but we do not consider these practices necessary. Daikons are extremely hardy and thrive in good garden soil. They sprout spontaneously, and the seeds that spread from side to side give rise to superb plants. We confess to being at a loss to understand the difficulties the first experimenters seem to have encountered. We would like to draw your attention to the comment made by M. Rivière in January 1876, and recorded in the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation, 3e série, volume III, page 39: "M. Rivière points out the advantages he feels would be gained by cultivating Daikon or Japanese Radish (Rapha" nus acanthiformis). He had received a few seeds of this radish from a consignment sent by Mr. Kreutzer, attached to the Japanese legation, and had them tested on an estate belonging to Mr. Talabot, near Limoges, obtaining a sufficient quantity of seed to propagate the plant, which he believes has a great future ahead of it. Its "nutritional qualities, invaluable for dairy cows, which are very fond of it, seem to place it "between the green-necked carrot and beet. "Daikon is also likely to play a major role as a catch crop. Sown in the second half of July, the plant can be harvested in October, so it takes up very little land and is doubly valuable. The way we use Daikon is completely different from that of the Japanese. They eat all varieties, cooked or salted; they also use it as a condiment, grating it when fresh, or drying it. They also eat the leaves prepared in the same way as the roots. Here, however, it's a different matter. We gauge the roots in November and take them fresh as and when we need them. They are tender, full of vegetative water, and less pungent than black radish and even Chinese pink winter radish. They are infinitely pleasing to the people in our families and to the edible merchants to whom we let them taste. Cooked, we find them inferior to turnips. We have yet to experiment with Daikon as a fodder plant, in catch crop. It's not up to us to resolve this important question. Satzouma daikon This variety deserves a special mention. To highlight it, we reproduce a note by Mr. Louis Sisley, published in the Revue horticole, year 1874, page 444: "We extract from the letters of Dr. Hénon, from Ikouno (Japan), a few passages relating to the Japanese radish known as Daïkon: "Daïkons, large white radishes, have almost everywhere replaced wheat, hemp, peas and broad beans, where there are no rice fields. In parts of the country where no water has been brought in, and where rice cannot be grown, Raves or, more generally, a huge white radish or horseradish is grown in addition to the cereals, and is consumed either fresh or raw, preserved in salt. It exists everywhere in Japan and China; "but the seeds I'm sending you belong to "a particular variety, the famous Daikon, the Radish of Satzouma, which differs notably from the other "varieties widespread in the country, since it reaches up to a foot in diameter, which we never see here, in Osaka, Kioto or Yedo. I don't think it's been imported to France, as our compatriots who have been to Satzouma are not numerous. "In good soil, this radish often reaches 90 centimetres in length. It is sown in July-August and harvested in autumn and winter. In "fabulous" times, Sacourasima is said to have had a daikon "that was a league around. These are only "degenerate children", but they are still of a nice "size". Cattle are very fond of daikons, and are "given a large quantity"; but it's men "especially who eat them in great quantities. "They are eaten raw, in salads, cut into very thin slices, cooked in the Japanese sauce called shoyu, and especially raw, after having been preserved in salt for one or more months. The Japanese, incidentally, find that "cheese smells even worse, and are astonished that "we can swallow something so vile. "Daikon candied in salt is the usual seasoning for boiled rice, among the poor as well as the rich. DOLIC BULBEUX Bangkoang (Javanese), Daun Sabran (Malay), Short podded Yam-bean (English Colonies), Dau (Annamite Mandarin), San rucang (Annamite vulgar). PACHYRRHIZUS ANGULATUS Rich, DC, Prod; Dolichos bulbosus L., Spec, p. 1020; Roxbg, Flor. Ind. 111, p. 309; Stizolobium bulbosum Spreng, Syst. 111, 252. GrapiZgne:iustrtes : Flora brasifiensis, vol. XV, I, pl. 53; Plumier, Plantes d'Amér. pl. 222; Bull. of miscell. informat. (Royal gardens Kew), 1889, p. 121. Leguminosae family. Perennial, voluble, giving rise to several rounded or napiform tubers. Stems hairy when young, becoming almost hairless with age. Leaves composed of three broad, hairless leaflets, the terminal one larger, angular, toothed; the lateral ones unequilateral. Reddish flowers in short, pauciflorous clusters, followed by oblong or cylindrical, pointed, glabrescent and slightly gnarled pods. According to Rumphius, this plant is native to the Philippines. It is grown in several parts of India and in the Moluccas. Roxburgh (loc. cit.) assumes that it was introduced from America to the Philippine Islands. "The sample in our collections was collected in the Galam country, near Bakel, by M. Leprieur, who does not tell us whether it is cultivated or wild in this country. "Its importance as a food plant led us to bring it from Java to Bourbon, Cayenne and the Natural History Museum in Paris. It was cultivated in 1824 in the Richard-Tol garden, but we don't know whether it had been brought there from Bakel or Eastern India". (Guillemin, Perrotlet et Richard, Floræ senegambiæ tentamen, vol. I. p. 221). "The root tubers of P. angulatus have the shape and volume of our Rave; sometimes, they become much larger. They are rarely eaten other than cooked, and can be made into a very tasty dish with butter, sugar and spices. "Roots left in the ground until the fruit is ripe lose all their flavor and can no longer be used as food. (Spach, Végét, phanérog., vol., I, p. 334). De l'usage que font les Javanais et les habitants des îles Philippines du Dolic bulbeux, appelé vulgairement dans le pays Ignamas, par M. Perrottet, botaniste-cultivateur (1). "The Dolic bulbous belongs to the Diadelphia decandria and is a member of the Leguminosae family. It is closely related to the bean genus and, like it, grows sarmentose, creeping stems; it produces a taproot, similar in shape and size to the European sweet turnip (Brassica napus maxima), but more nutritious and softer than it. The Malays and the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands delight in it, eating it raw or boiled like potatoes. It can be found on the best tables, prepared in a variety of ways, making it both a healthy and tasty dish. The rural landowner, when he gathers a lot of it, feeds it to his domestic animals; I've noticed that they eat it greedily and that it fattens them up in no time, especially the pigs. "It seems to me of the utmost importance to recommend the cultivation and multiplication of this bulbous plant to the inhabitants of the French colonies, especially as it can, at any time, provide them, without any preparation, with healthy and abundant food. "The growth of this plant is very rapid; three to four months are enough for the root to acquire all its perfection. "(1) Bibliothèque phyysico-économique; Paris, t. X, year 1821, p. 311. however, it is more voluminous and more pleasing to the taste when grown in good, substantial, slightly moist soil. It is easily propagated by means of its seeds, which ripen very well; but, to obtain them, it is advisable to leave a certain number of plants in place, because, for its root to be delicate and succulent, we must not wait for the seeds to ripen; on the contrary, we must pull out the bulbs long before flowering, because then the root acquires a consistency as it ages.

I'm convinced that this plant can be naturalized very well in France, especially in our southern departments. "I'm convinced that this plant can be very well naturalized in France, especially in our southern departments; it's an annual, so it only needs three to four months of heat to grow to its normal size. It would be all the more valuable for us as it would fill the gap often left between the potatoes of the last harvest and the new ones. Bulbous Dolichos has the advantage of growing faster than potatoes, the earliest of which don't usually appear until August, i.e. eight months after planting, whereas Dolichos, sown in April, can be eaten as early as July. "I have scattered its seeds in the French colonies of Africa and America which I have just visited, and where I have had the good fortune to introduce several other useful plants about which I reserve the right to speak to you later. I won't end this note without announcing that Cayenne is producing a rather remarkable crop this year, and that everything leads me to believe that Dolichos will spread rapidly there. "I have been told in Java and Manila that the seeds of this plant are poisonous; this property, which it shares with the potato, although from a very different family, cannot be a reason to keep a plant that is useful in so many other respects away from our crops. We have received seeds and tubers of Pachyrrhizus angulatus from Mr. Martin, head government gardener in Saigon, accompanied by a note which we transcribe: "Cù Sáng (Annamite). This climbing plant produces a very large tuber. It should be planted on a ridge, and heavily shod in due course. When the plant is 30 to 40 centimetres tall, pinch off the tip and false buds to force the sap back into the tuber. "Put two or three seeds in each hole and, when they're well established, leave just one and transplant the others. This plant belongs to the legume family; its tuber is very good cooked or even raw, but its fruit is considered poisonous. The tubers I am sending you can only be used to provide seeds for sowing, as each seed produces only one tuber (1). Sow in early April; harvest in September". We sowed under a sowing frame in April, keeping only single plants; we stubbed out (2), pinched back the main secondary stems and watered frequently. (1) The plant usually produces several tubers. - P. B. (2) As the tubers form quite deep in the soil, far from the plant's collar, the ridging recommended by M. Martin does not seem useful to us. - P. B. The plants vegetated well, and, if they hadn't been pinched, would have risen to 2 or 3 meters in height, like those the tubers gave us. Around November 15, we harvested one, two or three tubers from each plant, slightly smaller than a turnip, which we found tender, sweet and pleasant when eaten raw. The tubers, large and slightly angular, which we received from Saigon in perfect condition and planted under a frame, vegetated with great vigor, but showed no inclination to flower until the beginning of October. In the end, we obtained neither flowers nor fruit. So we don't see how we can obtain seeds for our seedlings in the Paris climate. We have tried propagation by bedding, but without success. So we'll still have to get our seeds from the country of origin, which presents no difficulty whatsoever. It's almost certain that we'll be able to obtain seeds in the south of France, and even more so in Algeria. We would even point out that our seedlings have shown inflorescences which have not blossomed, but which give the assurance of fruiting in a warmer climate than Paris. Mr. Perrottet is undoubtedly mistaken when he says that Dolic bulbeux is an annual; but it seems that, in hot countries, it is cultivated as a biennial, the first year to supply its edible lubercules and the second year, by means of a few tubers preserved ad hoc, the seeds necessary for sowing, the latter, like so many other roots, then losing their edible properties. Pachyrrhizus angulatus is a very interesting plant that amateurs can grow in the Paris area, and that growers in the south of France should not neglect. They should not forget that the sweet root of bulbous chervil is sold in Paris at a high price, and that production often remains below demand! In 1892 (1), Mr. Pierre, director of the Jardin Colonial in Libreville, French Congo, wrote to us about this plant: "Since 1887, I have tried on several occasions to grow Pachyrrhizus angulatus in Libreville. In 1887, I took with me five seeds entrusted to me by Professor Maxime Cornu. I cultivated the plant and the results I obtained are marvellous. In 1887, 1889-1890, I showed this plant and roots, one of which weighed 300 grams, at what is known as the agricultural competition in Libreville. "I harvested 7,000 kilograms per hectare in poor soil. The harvest could have risen to 10,000 kilos if I'd been able to grow an excellent crop and obtain fertilizer, and that in three months. "Three or even four harvests could be made each year, bringing the possible harvest to 40,000 kilograms. In these countries, this plant could be of great importance, not only as a source of food for Europeans and natives, but also for animals. "I recently collected 2,000 seeds and sent them (1) M. Pierre died shortly afterwards; he was succeeded by M. Chalot. to all the posts in the French Congo, as far as the Oubanghi, to the various people who love useful plants, missionaries, planters, etc., and to the possessions north of the French Congo. "Less sweet than the Potato, this precious and precocious vegetable can be considered a substitute for the Potato, which we are obliged to buy on the coast from liners who sell it to us at a very high price: 0 fr. 60, 0 fr. 75 and even 1 franc per kilogram." LOLIC TUBEROUS Ahipa (Peru) Yam-Bean (British Colonies). PACHYRREZUS TUBEROSUS Spreng; Dolichos tuberosus Lamk. Grigures: Plumier, Plantes d'Amer. pl. 220; Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles, VIII, p. 127, pl. 554; Bull. of misc. informat. (Royal gardens Kew). 1889, p. 662. Fam. Leguminosae. This plant is undoubtedly native to Martinique, but has long been known in Peru, where it is cultivated as a food plant (see Notice sur l'Ahipa et l'Aricoma, plantes alimentaires du haut Pérou, by A. Weddell, published in this volume, under the article Poire de terre). The above-mentioned learned botanist observed the plant in La Paz; having been unable to collect more than incomplete samples, he was unable to determine it with any certainty. For many years afterwards, no further samples were obtained, and no one knew to which botanical species Ahipa could be attached. In 1886, Dr Ernst from Caracas sent Kew samples of a plant cultivated in Merida, which he said corresponded exactly to Weddell's description of Ahipa, and which he believed to be Dolichos tuberosus Lamk. There were several specimens of Dolichos tuberosus in the Kew herbarium, including those collected at Tarapota by Spruce. Professor Oliver found this plant distinct from Pachyrrhizus angulatus. Mr. Bentham considered Spruce's samples to belong to the latter species. Finally, Dr Morris thought it might well be a variety produced by cultivation, but marked enough to require a distinct name for cultivation. He published a series of notes on both plants in the Bulletin of miscellaneous information of the Royal Garden of Kew, with a view to making their merits known, accompanied by two good figures enabling the distinctive characters of these species to be easily seen. According to him, Pachyrrhizus tuberosus differs from P. angulatus in its leaves, which are rounded rather than toothed, its flowers, which are white rather than violet, its pods, which are much wider, and perhaps also its seeds, which are kidney-shaped, white, black or variegated. Like the Bulbous Dolic, the Tuberous Dolic is a most valuable food plant for hot countries; but it is curious to note that its seeds, as well as those of several other Phaseolae, possess toxic properties. According to Dr. Ernst, these seeds are used in Merida (Venezuela), either as a decoction or in powder form, to destroy vermin. One of his students wrote to him from the state of Tachira that he had seen a case of poisoning with a type of bean called Tapiramo (a species of Dolichos); cooks therefore usually throw away the first water in which Tapiramo is cooked. For the uses of this plant, we believe we can do no better than reproduce what Macfadyen says about it in Flora of Jamaica, page 285: "Its root is formed of a number of ramifications several feet long, running under the surface of the ground, emitting in their course a succession of tubers. Its seeds are poisonous, but the root yields abundant and very healthy food. The product of three plants is generally enough to fill a bushel. "The tubers, after being boiled, can be eaten like yams and other common roots; they would also produce an excellent substitute for Arrow-root. The starch is pure white and equal in all respects to the latter product. It is very pleasant to the taste and easy to digest. It is used to make custards and puddings. The waste obtained after extraction of the starch, which is unusable in Arrow-root, can be dried to produce a good, healthy flour. A delicious flour can also be obtained by cutting the tubers, drying them in the sun and then reducing them to powder. The plant certainly deserves to be much more widely cultivated than it has been up to now. It should, with great advantage, replace Arrow-root in crops. "It can be planted at any season of the year, and the roots are ready to be pulled up after four to five months. Its production is much greater than that of Arrow-root, and the proportion of starch is also more considerable, so that its low price could put it on the market, even for use by cloth printers, in place of starch, which is usually used. Yam-Bean has been cultivated for many years in Jamaica. It is said to have been introduced from Martinique. SWEET FENNEL FOENICULUM DULCE C. Bauh; Anethum dulce DC. Umbelliferae family. Stems a little compressed at the base, 1.30 m high. Leaves radical, almost distichous, with elongated, capillary segments; umbels with 7-8 rays. Italian sweet fennel is an annual plant. It is said to be native to Italy. Miller, in his Dictionnaire des jardiniers, makes no such claims. It is believed, he says, to have been imported from the Azores. He gives it the name Fœniculum azoricum. Abbé Rozier, in his Cours complet d'Agriculture, confines himself to saying that the sweet fennel of Italy, as reported by travelers, is much less sweet than that of the Azores. He cites the coasts of Attica as one of the most renowned countries for this plant. Sweet fennel is sown in February and March, in nurseries, under frames; later, in the open ground, until the end of July. In Italy, it is still sown in August. As soon as the plant is ready, it is planted at Om, 35 in all directions. This spacing facilitates ridging, which is carried out once or twice. Since the part of the plant you want to obtain is white and tender, and hardly Fig. 32. - Sweet fennel. more than Om, 10 high, it is rarely necessary to ridge more than twice. Fennel needs a light, loamy soil. For several years now, we've been culling it on an old layer, and we get superb plants. It's important to hoe in good time and water abundantly. Thanks to this care, the petioles agglomerated above the plant's collar form a thick, flattened apple, the only one used for the table, to the exclusion of stems and leaves (1). Fennel goes to seed too quickly in summer, and rot often sets in. Keep an eye on it and pull it out in good time. It keeps for quite a long time (1) Les Plantes potagères. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cre. 13 out of the ground. Besides, it's better to have less beautiful apples than to risk losing everything. Sowing at the end of July is the most important. It's the one that will provide Fennel for the table until January. The plant is placed in three rows in September, so that it can be covered with a frame when winter approaches. All that's needed for the plant to continue to vegetate and develop is for the temperature not to fall below zero. So, as is customary in such cases, straw or leaves are placed around the boxes and straw mats on the frames, and air is let in whenever the weather permits. When the fennel has formed its head, we keep it under the frame, or pull it out and put it in the vegetable greenhouse. It's easy to reach the month of January, and we think it's easy to go beyond that. Fennel seed degenerates quickly, and all horticultural treatises agree on this point. It has to be brought in from Italy every year. We prepare sweet fennel in three equally satisfying ways. We prepare it with cream, juice or parmesan. This last recipe was supplied to us by Le Bon Jardinier, 1873, from which we reproduce the following information: "Fennel is consumed in large quantities in Italy. It is eaten raw, like artichokes à la poivrade, generally without seasoning. It is very good as a garnish for poultry or large meat stews; in white sauce, au jus, au gratin or macaroni. For the last three, it is cooked in water beforehand. To prepare 'au gratin' or macaroni, take a saucepan, put some butter in it, then a bed of already cooked and drained Fennel, cut into quarters; salt and pepper lightly; sprinkle with grated Parma cheese and small pieces of butter, and continue until the saucepan is full. Cook over a moderate heat, covering the pan with its lid, which should be topped with coals. During a trip to Italy, Mr. Audot gathered new information that we are now presenting as a complement to the above. In Naples, especially in the Roman Elats, and even further afield in Venice, Fennel is so widely used that you can't take a step into a town or cross a village without encountering it. There is not a table where it is not served, from January to June. To our heaviness, we'll quote M. Audot: "Like Celery, Fennel is served in blond sauce and salad, or in soup, like Cabbage; but the most general custom is to serve it for dessert with fruit; it then decorates the lable, planted in the water of a glass bowl and raising its fine, elegant foliage like plumes; it is also eaten unseasoned. At first, I laughed at this custom, which reminded me of the English practice of serving Radishes for dessert, and even of carrying some in one's pocket to eat when out and about; but it wasn't long before I got used to Fennel, whose mild flavor and pleasant taste appealed to me; only, I preferred it as an appetizer, like Radishes and baby Artichokes (1)". 11) Extract from Notes sur les jardins du sud de l'Italie, recueillies pendant un voyage en 1839-1840 et lucs à la Société royale d'Horti faveur than in Italy, and it is in vain that most horticultural treatises present Fennel to amateurs as an excellent vegetable to introduce into their gardens. We believe that it has always been grown in France, but has never been widely used. The obstacle is undoubtedly its slight anise flavor. However, we accept this flavor in anisette, gingerbread, croquets and so on. We accept sweet fennel seeds converted into small sugared almonds. Fennel apples, candied like Angelica, are excellent. A tin of candied Fennel was part of the lot exhibited by gardener Henri Véniat (Société d'Horticulture) in October 1877. This preparation was very favorably appreciated by all who tasted it. Our fathers sought out Spanish chervil, which they blanched. It had a pronounced anise flavor. The Germans make great use of Cumin, whose taste is very close to that of Anise; they melt it into bread. The English and Arabs use it as a condiment. The Russians make a liqueur called kümmel. The Dutch are said to use it in their cheeses. The Italians can't do without their fennel. Fennel and bread! they say. In the province of Venice, it's used in bread, just as Cumin is used in Germany. Italian gourmets use the tubular stalk of the Fennel plant as a blowtorch to sniff the culture of Paris, by M. Audot, editor of Le Bon Jardinier (Revue horticole, vol. V (1844-1844), p. 16). and the liqueur acquires an exquisite aroma in the process. In Spain, on the African coast and in the Azores, Fennel is not sought after. It seems to us that the flavor of Anise, which is common to Cumin and Fennel, is considered excellent throughout Europe. In France, it is not yet universally accepted in this vegetable, which is easy to grow and available in all seasons: it's a question of habit and taste education. Abbé Rozier, in his Cours complet d'Agriculture (1786), tells us that sweet fennel is grown in gardens in the north of the kingdom. What was done in the past will undoubtedly be done again. In spite of its slight anise flavor, we say, because of this flavor, say the Italians, sweet fennel is, in our opinion, an excellent vegetable. We recommend it to connoisseurs. FUKI PETASITES JAPONICUS F. Schmidt. Family Compositae. This plant is native to Japan, where it bears the name Fuki; it is the Korokoni of the Ainos, who use it extensively for their food. According to Messrs Balchelor and Miyabe, Ainu Economicplants (Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japon, p. 222), the Ainos eat mainly the petioles, but also the flower, called Makayo. The petioles are often roasted over the fire, then peeled and eaten; more generally, they are boiled (stewed); they are also made into Pickles or preserves, by salting them after boiling, and mixing them with Ikokuttara leaves (Polygonum sacchalinense), which give them a reddish tint; sometimes no salt is added. The Catalogue of Japanese products at the 1889 Exhibition says of Fuki: "To use the flowers of this plant, collect those that grow on the ground before the leaves; their taste is a little bitter; the pleasant smell is similar to that of Jamasó (Hops); they are used when their length is about thirty centimetres". We received a few Fuki plants from Japan, which we planted in the Crosne garden in 1896, and sheltered with glass boxes during the winter. In March 1897, inflorescences developed, preceding the leaves as happens in the various species of the Petasites genus. The leaves then developed, very large and numerous, reaching a height of seventy-five centimetres. The plant's rhizomes had passed under the glass trunk and invaded all the surrounding parts of the flowerbed. We picked a few leaves and peeled and cooked the long, fleshy petioles. The tasting was not favorable. Fuki may be acceptable as a pickle, but we found it to have such a pronounced aromatic and bitter flavor that we cannot recommend it in any capacity. GLACIAL Ice herb, Crystalline Ficoid. MESEMBRYANTHEMUM CRYSTALLINUM L. De Candolle, Plantes grasses, pl. 128. Family Mesembryanthemata. Annual plant, native to the Cape, Canaries, etc., imported, according to Miller, from the Cape of Good Hope; long cultivated for ornamental purposes. Flat-lying, fleshy herb, covered on all sides with transparent vesicles full of water, giving the impression of being covered in ice. In July-October, white, insignificant flowers. According to Duchesne (Répertoire des plantes utiles), Glaciale leaves are often eaten as a vegetable in Bourbon. In a letter to Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cle (1), Mr Picard of Saint-Quentin recommends using this Ficoïde as a spinach. Cultivation: Sow in March-April in a well-exposed spot, or preferably on a bed. Transplant to a well-soil bed as soon as the plant has a few leaves, at 0.60 m in all directions; do not neglect watering. The plant (1) Revue Horticole, 1859, p. 72. soon takes on extraordinary growth and can be picked throughout the summer. The Glaciale has its rightful place in the vegetable gardens of the curious. It is both beautiful and useful. There's no one who hasn't admired, on a fine winter's morning, the marvellous effect of sunlight on frost-covered trees. This is the spectacle offered by the Glaciale in midsummer. Unfortunately, it's spread out on the ground, so you have to bend down to admire it properly. It's not exactly an ornamental plant, and that's not why it belongs in this book. We consider it a highly esteemed vegetable, similar to Tetragona in cultivation and use. We pick its tender leaves and the tips of its stems. We prepare them in the same way as spinach, and everyone we've tried them on has agreed that Glaciale is a good vegetable with a distinctive flavor, a sui generis dish that's highly recommendable. Mme Henriette Davidis, whom we like to quote when talking about vegetables that are unusual in France, has this to say about this Ficoïde: "Glaciale is an admirable ornamental plant for gardens, and at the same time provides a delicate vegetable in summer. Its leaves and stems, as long as they are tender, should not be chopped, but only cooked, with breadcrumbs slightly browned in fresh butter, seasoned with salt, nutmeg or nutmeg flower and served with potatoes. Cooking time: barely a quarter of an hour". We give this recipe for what it may be worth; but, in recommending Glaciale as a vegetable, we also take our cue from a note by M. Siroy to be found in the Journal de la Société d'Horticulture de France, 2e série, tome XI, page 525. We believe that the Glaciale should be cultivated, admired and eaten. Our attention was drawn to it by a note from M. H. Lecoq, Revue Horticole, 1869, p. 207: Ficoïde à feuille en cœur (Mesembryanthemum cordifolium L.). Perennial plant, native to the Cape of Good Hope, from where it was brought by M. Bruyère. Although vigorous, it is not nearly as productive as its predecessor. Its flavor is also less pleasant. However, it deserves to be classed as a substitute for Spinach, or better still, Chicory, with which it is slightly bitter. Multiplication by cuttings taken in autumn, overwintered in a greenhouse and planted in spring, or by seedlings as described for Glaciale. The plant is very leafy. It spreads widely, so you need to give it about 2 meters of space. Five or six plants, planted in good soil in May and liberally watered, are enough for table service. Mesembryanthemum angulatum Thunb. from southern Africa, a species closely related to M. crystallinum, can also be used as a spinach substitute. Mr. Mac Owan, government botanist at the Cape of Good Hope, writes that he finds this vegetable comparable to New Zealand Tetragon, but a little more glutinous. GOMBO, KETMIE COMESTIBLE HIBISCUS ESCULENTUS L. Fam. Malvaceae. Annual plant. Stem 6-7 decimeters, simple; leaves cordate, 5-lobed, obtuse, toothed; petioles Fig. 33. - Long-fruited okra. longer than flowers; in June-July, yellowish-sulfur flowers, with purple centers, solitary, axillary; capsule pyramidal or conical; calicle of ten deciduous leaflets; calyx tearing longitudinally. South America. We wouldn't go too far if we said that okra is one of the most precious vegetables known to us. It is used daily in Egypt, Syria, Greece, Turkey, India, Louisiana, the West Indies and throughout South America. Its various culinary applications, as well as its properties as a substitute for coffee and cocoa, are described below. Its cultivation is scarcely known in the Paris region, where the climate is unfavorable: sow the seeds on a bed in February, prick out the young plants also on a bed, and wait until the last days of May to place them permanently on a new bed, under a high frame or on a well-sheltered hillside, in light, well-smoked soil. When the summer is hot, you can succeed by planting on June 1 on an old bed. Harvesting is then later. It is necessary to water abundantly during hot spells. In our climate, okra will never be more than an amateur plant, not very productive, and market gardeners will not grow it. Its capsules travel well without spoiling, and if they were in demand in Paris, Provence, which already sends us some, could produce and sell them, at low prices, in quantities equal to demand. We know of French people living in the colonies who declare Gombo to be excellent; however, there is nothing to suggest that it will soon be a success. Foreigners living in Paris are so far the only ones to buy it when it goes on sale. We do, however, see it occupying an honorable place in a good house, very Parisian and very distinguished. It is frequently served on the table, and the cordon bleu chef who prepares it has kindly shared his recipe with us. Gombo seems to be only an accessory to the dishes of which it is a part, but it is not; it is essential and, without it, these dishes would not exist. Interesting information on okra can be found in the following publications: Flore des Antilles, by Descourtilz, vol. IV, p. 169; Note by Dr Sagot (Journal de la Société nationale d'Horticulture de France, 1872, p. 545); Manual of Gardening for Bengal and upper India. by Thomas A. C. Firminger; Agricultural botany, by William Darlington; Note by Léon Rattier (Revue horticole, 1854, p. 171). From this last, very extensive and instructive note, we feel we must extract a few passages: "During my travels in the East, I almost always heard it called by the Greeks Grekika kerata (Greek horns), and by the Turks Bamieh. The latter name seems to have been adopted in Egypt, according to M. Bové (Observations sur les cultures de l'Egypte, extractes des Annales de l'Institut horticole de Fromont, t. VI, avril 1834)... Wherever the plant is cultivated, it provides an important resource for food and medicine. In the West Indies, the natives eat it boiled in salted water or raw in salads. It forms the basis of Calalou, highly esteemed by the natives and popularly used. Nor do we disdain serving its various preparations on the most sumptuous tables; but then, almost always, it is combined with foods or seasonings of high taste, to spice up its somewhat bland flavor; it becomes a very pleasant dish, but no longer possesses the qualities that make it sought after for medicinal use...". "M. Bové says that in Egypt, Ketmie is one of the country's most common vegetables; that it is highly esteemed in the various regions where it is grown, and that Europeans consume it extensively for seven or eight months of the year. "Nafé paste and syrup, prepared in Paris with the mucilage of edible Ketmie, have given good therapeutic results. "Finally, the infusion of roasted Ketmie seeds has been recommended as a substitute for coffee, and M. Vilmorin, in the latest edition of Le Bon Jardinier, mentions this preparation as one of the least bad of those that have been substituted for mocha. "I doubt that M. Vilmorin has experimented with it himself, for I myself have drunk the infusion of Ketmie seeds in the East, often prepared with more than carelessness, and it has always seemed to me a very pleasant drink, offering a marked superiority over the inferior qualities of coffee and sometimes almost equaling mocha. But to obtain this result, it is necessary to use well-chosen seeds, perfectly ripe and roasted with great care. The process I've found most successful is to place the seeds in a wedge-burner and heat for as long as the crackling sound lasts. As soon as the crackling stops, place them on a marble table, or on any other object that will cool them quickly. Stack and filter. "I have tried to roast only to a degree sufficient to color the inside of the seed a light hazelnut; then the starch it contains remains soluble. After reducing it to a fine powder and passing it through a sieve, we mix it with milk or sugar water; if we then proceed as when we want to obliterate a flour porridge, we obtain a product quite similar to chocolate, very pleasant to the taste, and retaining much of the special aroma that distinguishes the seed...". CALALOU PREPARATION (1) Here are the recipes we have obtained. We give them as they are, without changing a syllable. Louisiana recipe. Calalou prepared with dried okra. - Take 500 grams of beef brisket and 500 grams of ham, and brown them in hot lard. When the beef and ham are well browned, moisten with the following: Shrimp heads crushed in a mortar, mixed with water and passed through a fine sieve. Add the shrimp, lobster or crab tails, chilli, salt and pepper to the pan. Put the okra in the boiling water and sauté (1) In his Flore phanérogamique des Antilles françuises, p. 48t, R. P. Duss, professor at the Collège de la Basse-Terre, describes Calatou as follows: "Calalou is an exquisite dish prepared with Xanthosoma hastifolium leaves, small thorny cucumbers (Cucumis Anguria), Mouzambi leaves (Gynandropsis pentaphylla), small silver-leaved Valerian underneath, (Boerhaavia paniculata), nightshade (Solanum nodiflorum), purslane, French sorrel, tender potato leaves, young okra fruit, Guinea sorrel (Hibiscus sabdariffa), tomatoes and chili pepper. To make the dish even spicier, add a little white wine, cloves, nutmeg and grated cinnamon bark. Cook with bacon, ham bone, salt beef or crabs (vulgo ciriques). Calalou is always served with Ru en grains. Add it at the same time as you moisten (Note by M. H.). We forgot to mention the quantity of Gombo in proportion to the 1,000 grams of meat, but I think 125 grams of dried Gombo should suffice. Recipes from Martinique. 1° Take 250 grams of ham and cook. When cooked, add 250 grams of chopped okra to the stock. Stir and cook for fifteen minutes. Add 250 grams of spinach; stir well and cook for a further fifteen minutes. Add a little butter if the preparation is not fatty enough, salt and a chili pepper. Cook for a further fifteen minutes. With this dish, you can eat rice cooked in water and salted like a rice cake. 2° Take spinach and cook it. When almost cooked, add sliced okra, chopped ham, chopped crabs or shrimps. Add a little butter, salt and pepper. Mix and grind everything together and cook over a low heat. You can also eat rice cooked in butter with this dish, which is very tasty. This recipe was tested at the 1867 Exposition. Recipe from Guadeloupe. (Given by an inhabitant of Pointe-à-Pître). Chopped okra and Seguine leaves (1) are cooked together. Bacon or crab is added; then, when everything is thoroughly cooked, it is mixed using an instrument similar to a chocolate frother. On the other hand, you can have rice cooked in water, and eat one with the other. Riz Calalou is a dish that is sold, penny by penny, in (1) It is highly doubtful whether this refers to the leaves of the Dieffenbachia Seguine Schott. which is very venomous. We use Madeira (Colocasia esculenta), another Aroidea, and Xanthosoma hastifolium Schott. and sagittifolium Schott. Séguine and Madère are local names. the streets of Pointe-à-Pître, like Pommes de terre frites in Paris. We often taste them at the locals' place, at four o'clock, with two sous of Riz Calalou per person. Parisian recipe. Take a pound of rumpsteak, cut into small squares, brown in a saucepan with a little butter; add a little flour moistened with broth or water. Cook gently for four hours; add two fruits of Pimento and a chicken, cook with all and 250 grams of sausage. The okra should be cooked for two hours with all this. Put it in at the beginning of the third hour and serve. To eat with this soup, for some people's tastes, a pound of rice, not overcooked, is served on a separate plate. Everyone can use it as they like. Spun okra Take veal breast, chicken, ham, oysters or mussels, lobster. Cook over low heat for five or six hours. Add the water in which the lobster was cooked and the water from the oysters as a stock; then, while everything is still on the heat and boiling gently, add a tablespoonful, for six people, of spun gumbo. Stir, as with tapioca, until it's just right. Chalcam, between Tashkent and Samarkand 209 Gongoulou is a turnip of a very distinct variety, recommended for its beautiful red color, its pretty shape, which is that of a medium-sized spinning top, its strong flavor and its consistency. It doesn't melt when cooked, and is particularly suitable for garnishes and stews. We won't describe it here as a common turnip. We received the seeds through the kindness of Mr. Ermens, former director of cultivation for the Maharadja of Kashmir, who had requested them for us from Mr. Boulay, his successor in Srinagar. Gongoulou is grown in the same way as turnips, and requires no special recommendations. It is an interesting variety to add to the many we already have. Its area of cultivation is very extensive. Mr. G. Capus, the energetic travel companion of Messrs. Bonvalot and Pépin, wrote to us on April 2 1889: "I have encountered this toupiform Turnip in Bockara, Khiva, Turkestan and Kashmir. My notes mention the abundance of this Turnip (red spotted with white (1), on October 4th, in the bazaar of Oura-Tépé, a small fortress-city between Tachkent and Samarcande. The natives cut it into branches or small (1) The root seems to be spotted with white because it bleaches and partially discolors with water and rubbing. 14 pieces, like the Caroltes, and eat it raw or cooked with Palao (rice, mutton, spices), as we do in pot-au-feu. They call it Chalgam. Shall we recount what was reported to us by a merchant? A passer-by came into his house. Give me 2 kilos of Gongoulou," he said. I ate some at the foot of the Himalayas; I want my friends to taste it." Over there, it's eaten as a salad, sliced thinly and seasoned with salt and pepper, oil, vinegar and mustard. We didn't learn the name of this passer-by. GROSSE ANGUINE SOLANUM MACROCARPUM L. ; DC, Prodr. vol. XIII, 1, page 353; Dunal, Solanées, p. 244 Fam. des Solanées Maurice, Madagascar, Comores. Perennial, glabrous, with ample, non-spiny leaves; rather large, blue flowers; fleshy, globose, greenish-yellow berry, reticulated with green, the size of a small apple. This Solanum is grown in France in botanical gardens. We received its seeds from Mr. Daruty de Grandpré, President of the Société d'Acclimatation de Maurice. In his letter of March 15 1886, our kind colleague informed us of the plant's uses: "We prepare its green fruits like Aubergine, or boil them to eat them in salads. There's nothing remarkable about this vegetable, especially for European palates; but the plant brings in a lot and could be useful in the south of France, in Algeria and in the West Indies". Fig. 34 - Large Anguine (Solanum macrocarpum). We have grown large Anguine under cold conditions. It proved ornamental with its beautiful leaves and abundant flowers, but the plants grown from seeds sent from Mauritius did not bear fruit. On the other hand, in 1891, we obtained satisfactory results from seeds that Mr. Cornu, professor of culture at the Muséum, had been kind enough to give us, and which he had received as belonging to an indeterminate species of Solanum, with edible fruit, from Mr. Pierre, director of the Colonial Garden at Libreville (Gabon). This plant, in which we recognized the Solanum macrocarpum, gave us some beautiful fruits under frame, and we were able to harvest a few others, naturally less beautiful, from plants grown in the open air on old beds. Finally, Mr. J. Daveau, director of the Lisbon Botanical Garden, and Mr. Latour-Marliac, from Temple-sur-Lot, to whom we had entrusted a few seeds, sent us some superb fruits which they harvested. We prepared these fruits in the same way as the Aubergine, cutting them in half and sprinkling them with salt to make them drain. With the seeds removed, we filled the central part with minced meat and cooked. The resulting dish is very pleasing in appearance, as the skin of the fruit retains some of its pretty color; as for flavor, we have to declare that it is far inferior to Aubergine and always has a little pungency. In the letter quoted above, Mr. Daruty told us that he would explore Madagascar, whose flora is, according to him, extremely rich, as soon as the treaty with the Hovas was ratified. Here is what R. P. Camboué, from Tananarive, wrote to us on October 5 1886: "Your kind letter of April 23 last came to find me in the capital of the great African island, where I have finally arrived after a long and interesting journey. "Next spring, I shall send you various edible seeds. Despite the change of names, which are a little different from those given by S. de Flacourt, I was able to find some of the plants mentioned in your desiderata. "M. Daruty, from Maurice, one of your correspondents, is entering my home just as I am writing these lines. He has come to make a short excursion in our vicinity. He asks me to tell you that, if he finds anything for you, he will send it to you. "Pending the pleasure of sending you some of our seeds and some of our edible tubers, please accept, etc." This letter gave us great pleasure. To have two correspondents in Tananarive at the same time, who were able to discuss the goal that all four of us are pursuing, and to receive from them the promise of interesting shipments, wasn't that both a very singular encounter and a precious pledge for the future? HARICOT DE BARIA Tonkin bean. PHASEOLUS TUNKINENSIS Loureiro, Flora Cochinch, vol. Il, p. 529; DC, Prodr. vol. Il. p. 293. Leguminosae family. Perennial plant, about 2 or 3 meters high; stems voluble, twining; leaves composed of three leaflets, thick, small, wedge-shaped, flat, glabrous on both sides; flowers very small, greenish-white, becoming yellowish before withering, arranged in short, terminal, axillary clusters; rolled standard; short, compressed, smooth, hanging, somewhat crescent-shaped pods, containing three seeds, small, ovî̈des, dull white, reminiscent in shape and color of the common Hungarian Dwarf Bean. Baria Bean differs from Phaseolus lunatus only in its adult, hairless leaves with firmer tissue, its shorter and more numerous flower clusters, and its ovoid and not strongly compressed seed. "This plant, native to Tonkin, is cultivated in Cochinchina. Its seeds are good to eat. (Loureiro, loc. cit.) The Baria bean is cited by various authors as a very useful food plant and is generally cultivated in Cochinchina. Loureiro describes it as an annual; but we received seeds of two varieties, one annual, the other perennial, from M. Martin of Saigon. We only dealt with the latter. We sowed the seeds in April, in pots and terrines. At the end of May, we sowed in the open ground. On the same date, we placed the potted plants in the open air, with good exposure, and transplanted the terrine plants into the open air. The three cultivation methods we used gave roughly similar results; however, the advantage remained with the potted plants. We harvested few ripe pods, but enough fresh ones to eat twice as a family. Eaten like Flageolet, Baria beans are tender, very sweet and of good quality. However, in the Paris climate, it is only of interest to us if it is perennial, which we very much doubt, as our plants did not complete their full course of vegetation during the exceptionally warm season that has just ended, and were still showing flowers when the cold came. We only kept a small number of stumps, which we covered with cork debris; but these stumps did not produce shoots the following June. We have given up cultivating the Baria bean, which is not to say that we consider it impossible to grow in the Midi or in Algeria, but it seems to us that it requires six months of continuous high temperature, and we are far from being able to grow it here under these conditions. PHASEOLUS RICCIARDIANUS Tenore. Leguminosae family. We cultivated this plant from seeds given to us by M. Decaisne, professor of culture at the Muséum. It was not new to us. M. Durieu de Maisonneuve had already grown it in Bordeaux, praised it and distributed the seeds. Two notes on this plant were published in the Journal de la Société notionale d'Horticulture de France, 1868, p. 64 and 731. The first of these gives it as originating in China. M. le Dr Sagot has given us seeds of this plant, collected in Java by M. Colteau. The stems are voluble and pubescent, as are the leaves. The flowers are yellow, fairly large, and appear in great numbers throughout the summer. The pods are linear, cylindrical, very spindly and hairless; the seeds are small, 6 to 7 millimeters long and about 3 millimeters wide; they are cylindrical, slightly depressed laterally and rounded at both ends, reddish-brown in color; the hilum is linear, white and about two-thirds as long as the seed. The plant is extremely productive, and if it doesn't find enough warmth in the Paris climate to produce a regular, abundant harvest every year, it would certainly thrive in the Midi. We tasted its fruits in salads. The flavor is nil. The plant's extreme fecundity is its only merit. EARTH HORN Hog-nut. AMPHICARPÆA MONOICA Ell. et Nutt. Glycine monoica L., G. comosa L., G. bracteata L., G. monoica Michx, Cryntolobus americanus Spreng, C. sarmentosus Spreng. Leguminosae family. Grows in wooded and bushy areas of North America: Canada, Florida, Louisiana. Annual, climbing plant, about 1.25 m high, with a slender root that plunges deep into the ground, a slender, much-branched stem, pubescent or covered with brownish hairs, bearing trifoliolate leaves with oblong oval segments. The flowers appear in August-September; they are of two kinds: airy and perfect, and imperfect and petalless, borne on loose, whitish, stoloniform underground shoots that grow from the collar of the plant. These flowers are followed by fruits, which are absolutely different in shape in both cases. Those produced in the soil look like small tubers and, as they perpetuate the plant without the need for resowing, the species was long thought to be perennial (1). The perfect flowers are gathered in numerous, short, hanging clusters, attached to the branches by thread-like peduncles. They are composed of a tubular calyx with four or five short, somewhat triangular teeth, and a purplish or almost white corolla with a carina and wings of similar shape, a little shorter and much narrower than the standard, borne on long tabs. The stamens are diadelphous; the ovary is quadri-ovulate. These flowers are often sterile. The pod is small, linear, oblong and compressed, containing three or four very small, kidney-shaped, yellow seeds mottled with brown. In the imperfect flowers, the calyx differs little from that of the aerial flowers, but the corolla is missing altogether, with the exception sometimes of a rudiment of the stamen (1) There is a native Vetch, Vicia amphicarpa, as curious as the Earth Bean, which also gives aerial and underground seeds. The stamens, which are either absent or 5 to 10 in number, are distinct; 3 or 4 of them have perfect anthers, while the others have only rudimentary ones. Ovary 1-3 ovulate. These flowers are usually fertile; they give rise to an obovate or pyriform fruit, blackish purple when ripe, enclosing one or two large seeds with considerably thickened cotyledons, enveloped by a whitish epidermis, variegated with purple. The fruit usually ripens below the surface of the soil. Amphicarpxa sarmentosa is a more recumbent form, bearing only a small number of petal-like flowers. In 1887, we asked Vilmorin to provide us with a perennial bean that we knew existed in North America. But instead of the Kidney bean, a large perennial bean from Arizona, which the Apaches eat green and dry, they received and gave us seeds of Amphicarpæa monoica. We sowed them on April 25, 1888. They vegetated well, fructified above and below ground, and the underground beans left in the soil produced abundant, vigorous plants in the spring of 1889. Amphicarpæa is as easy to grow as chickling vetch (Lathyrus sativus). The underground fruits should be removed as late as possible. In November, there are still pods forming in the ground, at all stages of development. Apparently, yields in loose, well-smoked and well-worked soil could be as high as one liter per square meter, but we can't guarantee this. Harvesting would be much more difficult than for ordinary beans, but it might have the merit of providing a fresh vegetable throughout the winter. We consulted the authors in vain to find out whether Amphicarpæa seeds were edible. They are silent on this point. They could have been poisonous, and we would have prudently abstained from tasting them; but we were fully reassured in this respect by Mr. V. Havard, surgeon of the United States Army. On October 22, 1889, our kind and learned correspondent sent us the following interesting letter: "I went to consult the botanical library of Columbia College, where are the fine collections of Dr. Torrey and others, about Amphicarpæa monoica, but almost without results. I had some notes on this plant at Fort Bufard, which I will pass on to you on my return, if they seem to me to be of any importance. The aerial seeds are not edible; they may be quite tasty, but they are too small and yield too little for cultivation. The underground seeds are edible. I've seen the Indians dig them up and stock up on them in spring, after the first leaves have sprouted - in other words, as soon as there is any sign of their presence. "These seeds are found 4 or 5 centimetres below the ground and are easily extracted with a pointed stick. They are almost entirely formed by the cotyledons, are rounded, somewhat flattened and 1 to 2 centimetres in diameter. They are eaten like beans. The Indians often just roast them over coals. I don't distinctly remember their taste, except that it's not to be despised. "This plant has never been cultivated by the Indians, much less by the whites, who are unaware of its properties. "Torrey says that, in places where this curious plant abounds, pigs dig into the ground to extract the underground nuts, from which it gets its name of Hog-nut. The plant seemed interesting enough to us that we felt authorized to distribute the product of our first collection of aerial seeds at one of the sessions of the Société nationale d'Acclimatation. JAPANESE EARTH HORN AMPHICARPÆA EDGEWORTHI Benth. var. JAPONICA. Leguminosae family. We have grown A. Edgeworthi Benth. var. japonica Oliver, which we received from Japan, where it bears the names Gin-Mame and Yobu-Mame. It is the Aha of the Ainos. In their note entitled : Ainu Economic plants (Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japon, vol. XXI, 1893, p. 217), Messrs Batchelor and Miyabe state that the Ainos collect the seeds of this plant in large quantities. They are boiled, alone or with rice, after having been stripped of their husks, roots and young shoots. They are said to be very sweet, with a taste reminiscent of chestnuts. The underground seeds are about 7 to 10 times larger than those produced in the pods, which are born above ground. The former are known as Aha, and the latter as Ahacha. Ahacha are also collected and usually eaten boiled, with rice. From a culinary point of view, this plant does not seem to us to present any notable differences from the American ground bean, with which it is very similar in botanical characteristics. Among the latter, we would highlight the shape, volume and color of the aerial seeds, which in the A. monoica, are kidney-shaped, depressed, averaging 6 mm long by 5 mm wide, light brown in color, mottled with blackish brown, whereas in A. Edgeworthi, var. japonica, they are slightly smaller, oblong-cylindrical, obtuse at both ends, covered with a grayish vestimentum that can be rubbed off and under which the black testa appears. HARICOT MUNGO PHASEOLUS MUNGO L. - Phaseolus radiatus L.; P. minimus Rumph; P. hirtus Retz; P. Max Roxb; P. subvolubilis Ham; P. aureus Roxb; P. viridissimus Ten; P. humilis Hassk. Leguminosae family. Annual plant, with cylindrical, hairy, twiggy, rarely voluble stem; leaves with three oval or oval-lanceolate, acuminate leaflets; geminate, oblong lanceolate stipules; long petioles; axillary, angular peduncles bearing flowers gathered at the head; yellow flowers; pods are slender, cylindrical, horizontally arranged, hairy, 5 to 6 centimeters long and 3 to 4 millimeters in diameter, black when ripe, containing six to fifteen very small seeds, glabrous, green, white, black, yellow or red, depending on variety, oval, truncated at both ends; linear hilum. Germination is interesting: the cotyledons remain underground, and the second internode is very long. Under the name Phaseolus Mungo are grouped a large number of related forms, which various botanists have made into species, while others consider them to be mere varieties. They are simply characterized, some by a subvivaceous root, instead of being annual; others by a more or less climbing stem instead of being straight, a fistulous stem, more or less wide stipules, small, or rare, or long and fairly abundant hairs; the color of the seeds has also been used to distinguish some of them, although the same variety sometimes seems to have seeds of different colors. P. Mungo L. (typica) has green or black seeds, while P. radiatus !.. has brownish-red or greenish-yellow seeds. The Mung Bean is native to Asia and the Indian Archipelago, and is generally grown in India. MUNGO BEANS IN CHINA Dr. E. Bretschneider wrote to us: "I believe that Soja hispida and Phaseolus radiatus have a great future in Europe. "The very small-grained Phaseolus, grown in Peking under the name Lou teou (Green Pea), and from which vermicelli is made, is the true Phaseolus radiatus. It's a very important plant for the Chinese. This vermicelli is very good to eat. I'll get you some samples from Peking, but later. The doctor had previously written to us: "I'm sorry you haven't received the pasta made from the seeds of Ph. radiatus (1). These are long threads, like vermicelli. The dough is made from the flour of Lou teou seeds and hot water, and passed through a sieve. A JAVA On his return from Java, Dr de la Savinière pointed out the importance of growing Ph. Mungo (1) These pastes, sent to the Société d'Acclimatation, did not reach him. - P. B. in the country, and we took interesting notes under his dictation. In Java, the plant is known as Katjang heedjah or hied-joe (pron. Katian idiou). Among other uses, it is sown very tightly on an impermeable bed and covered with a centimetre of water. After two days, the shoots are harvested; they are Om, 07 in length and have the color of Capuchin Beard. These shoots, marketed in considerable quantities, are called Taugee (pron. Taugué). Gado-Gado is made as follows: put a little oil in the pan; throw in the Phaseolus Mungo shoots; after cooking for ten minutes, add black sauce (Ketjap), egg yolk, turmeric, etc. IN JAPAN The mung bean is one of the Japanese plants we've been growing for the longest time. We received seeds from Dr. HETT in June 1878, accompanied by this note: "This bean does very well here (Haute-Savoie) and ripens to the last pod. It should be sown very far apart, at least 50 or 60 centimetres, and only two seeds per clump, which becomes very strong." The following November, the doctor wrote to us: "I enclose with my letter a variety of Adzuki, different from the one I sent you. It was called Ahi Adzuki, i.e. Autumn Adzuki, because it is sown in July and harvested in November; the one I sent you earlier is called Natsu Adzuki, i.e. Summer Adzuki, because it is sown in May and harvested at the end of August. I believe that both varieties need the whole summer to ripen their seeds. September 1879. "I am sending you a sample of the paste or jam made in Japan under the name of Yo-kan with Adzuki, sugar and a kind of gelatin extracted from seaweed. This absolutely tasteless gelatin is known in Japan as Kan-ten. The Japanese use it extensively in cooking, and large quantities are exported to Europe. I'm afraid it will be difficult to sell Adzuki paste cheaply in France; sugar is too expensive. "Here's the recipe for Yo-kan, as practiced in Japan, and as I've often used here: soak the Adzuki for twenty-four hours in non-calcareous water; here, I use rainwater; in Japan, we simply use river water that contains no trace of lime. Cook them with water, then strain them to obtain a slightly thick purée; add half the sugar (by weight), then cook again and add, at the end of cooking, jelly obtained by dissolving Kan-ten (seaweed glue) while hot. I can't tell you what proportion of kan-ten to use, as the strength of kan-ten varies greatly according to quality. A square stick of Kan-ten, Om, 37 long by Om, 03 square, will, when of good quality, make a very consistent jelly from a liter of any liquid; I forgot to tell you that while the Kan-ten dissolution is hot, it must be passed through a cloth to retain any impurities or undissolved parts. "I have grown Adzuki (Natsu Adzuki) only in very small quantities for my own use; they grow quite well 18 here; however, I believe we would be more assured of good maturity in more calcareous and less compact soils. Here, the clumps become enormous and the inner pods often rot... "Although I don't have much Adzuki to harvest this year, if you'd like to try it out on a larger scale, I could send you some for seed, as you don't need much, as the plants have to be sown very far apart." April 1881. "In Japan, Adzuki (P. Mungo) are soaked in water and germinated in warm, dark earthen vases; they are then washed with plenty of water to remove the skins, and the seedlings are eaten under the name Moyashi (eye and legs). Needless to say, they are cooked first in salt water, then in Shoyu. It's quite tasty and an easy way to get a fresh vegetable in winter." IN FRANCE In 1862, Mgr Guillemin, Bishop of Canton, presented the Societé d'Acclimatation with a very large collection of seeds, including Phaseolus Mungo, also known as Lou teou, the green pea from which the Chinese make a fine vermicelli, Lou teou sze, and a highly esteemed wine, Lou teou tsieou. At the same time, Mr. P. Dabry also offered the Society a collection that included two species or varieties of P. Mungo, under the name Tsin teou. In June 1880, Mr. Eugène Simon sent the Muséum a considerable collection which also included Lou teou. At the same time, Mr. C. Ford, Director of the Hong Kong Botanical Garden, sent Mr. Giquel, who had kindly requested it for us, a collection in which the Lou teou was included, with the words: Medicine in fever. Syn. Liu teou. It was also at this time that M. Faivre, from Beaune, was receiving and distributing Lou teou seeds from China, a plant whose importance had been pointed out to him. Since 1878, we've been growing Phaseolus Mungo on garden beds, and every year we've harvested ripe fruit. Ripening is very late, however, and we strongly recommend leaving plenty of space between plants and sowing no more than three seeds in each hole. We have tried cultivating four or five varieties whose pods have not matured, and have only succeeded with Summer Adzuki (Natzu Adzuki), whose seeds are relatively large and dull red. The clumps are strong and the yield equal to that of our common beans. We'd also like to mention the Yaye nari or Bundô, Lou teou of the Chinese, whose extremely small, green gramn is used to make pasta. Whenever we sowed it on its own, its shoots melted as soon as they came out of the ground, and nothing remained of them; but as chance would have it, some seeds mixed with those of Adzuki were sown in the same holes, and we saw with pleasure, and not without surprise, that, under the protection of the latter, Yaye nari grew quite well and produced a small harvest. We consider a result obtained in this way to be a failure and assume that, in a climate a little warmer than that of Crosues, the cultivation of green mung beans will present no difficulties. We have made a purée with early Adzuki that we have found to be very good. Its flavor is close to that of both beans and lentils; it's a good vegetable. We are awaiting with extreme interest the samples of Lou teou vermicelli that Dr. Bretschneider has kindly requested for us in Peking. If the tasting is favorable, we hope that they will try to win the prize offered by the Société d'Acclimatation for the cultivation of Phaseolus Mungo or radiatus: "The prize will be awarded to the person who has successfully cultivated this Bean in a field of at least half a hectare. "If there are several competitors, preference will be given to the one who produces the finest specimens of food preparations obtained from its seeds. "Competition extended. Prize: 300 francs. Phaseolus viridissimus Tenore, a variety of P. Mungo, was sent to us from Baghdad in March 1889 by Mr. C. Metaxas, delegate of the Société nationale d'Acclimatation. This bean is known in the country as Mash. Here is the information accompanying the shipment: "I am sending you seeds of a summer vegetable grown here in the same way as beans. The Arabs call it Mâsh. It is sold at the market as you see it. The natives like it very much, and some prefer it to lentils, although it doesn't fetch the same price. Shortly afterwards, we received the same seeds from Mr. Alexandre Bataline, professor of botany at the Imperial Garden in Saint Petersburg. They had come from China. A little later, M. de Heldreich, professor of botany in Athens, sent us Phaseolus viridissimus, grown, he told us, in Messinia. We had often received it from Japan, under the name Yayenari, and from China, under the name Lou teou. From Pondicherry, we received ten varieties of mung bean, including not only Phaseolus viridissimus, but other varieties with very small white, yellow, red or black seeds. The area of cultivation of this plant extends from Japan to Greece, over China, the whole of India, Asian Turkey, and finally Messinia. We cullivated Mâsh unsuccessfully in the Paris climate, but not without harvesting a few seeds, and we hoped that the plant would have flourished beyond the Loire. There, we thought it might have produced a yield equal to or greater than that of the lentil, and that it could have replaced this vegetable, whose cultivation has been abandoned in France, to such an extent that the trade is obliged to obtain supplies abroad, in Moravia, Bohemia and neighboring countries. Thanks to M. Mélaxas, we now have a sufficient quantity of seeds at our disposal to carry out cultivation trials in various parts of France, beyond the Loire, in Algeria and Tunisia. We have to declare that the results of the experiment were not satisfactory. In France, only in the southernmost parts of the country was the harvest good; on the other hand, it was a complete success in our African possessions. The shipment of seeds we received from Pondicherry included the following Phaseolus species, whose cultivation did not give us any results worth mentioning: Kârâmanie payarou, Phaseolus calcaratus Roxb. Sada payarou, Phaseolus farinosus L. Toulka payarou (Moth or Mothi in Hindustan), Phaseolus aconitifolius L. fil. Caloundou; Mäsh Kolai (Beng.); Urd Mäsh (Hind.), Phaseolus radiatus L. Patché payarou; Mung or Mug (Hind.), Phaseolus Mungo L. There was also a bag of seeds of Cottavaré (Cyamopsis psoraloides DC.), a curious annual legume of the Lotée tribe, cited by Dr. Forbes Watson as supplying green peas to a large part of the population of India every year. The plant does not ripen its seeds in our climate. IGNAME ORIGINS Spontaneous Yam does not appear to exist in India. In Ceylon, Mr. Thwaites lists six native species. In China, Dioscorea Batatas has not been found in the wild. Other species have probably existed in the wild. Dr. Bretschneider lists three Dioscorea species as cultivated in China, and adds: "Dioscorea is indigenous to China, as it is mentioned in the oldest medical textbook, that of Emperor Schen nung. In Japan, Dioscorea japonica Thunb., generally cultivated under the name Naga imo, is probably indigenous, as is D. Batatas, Yama imo, which is not cultivated and is uprooted in the woods. Dioscorea alata, cultivated in the Pacific islands, is probably native to these regions, but has not yet been found in the wild. In America, Dioscorea triloba is probably indigenous. There are a few other species that are little or not at all cultivated. In Africa, there are even fewer spontaneous Dioscorea species than in Asia and America. In short, several wild Dioscorea species in Asia, especially in the Asian Archipelago, and others, less numerous, growing in America and Africa, were introduced into cultivation as food plants at times probably less remote than many other species (1). We are happy to present the reader with the unpublished study that follows, which we owe to the learned professor and tireless worker Dr. Paul Sagot. He could not have given us a gift we could appreciate more, and we are deeply grateful to him. THE DIOSCOREA BOTANICAL GENUS The Dioscorea genus contains over two hundred species, the vast majority of which are found in warm countries. However, a sizeable number of species grow outside the tropics, in Chile, the Cape of Good Hope, Australia, China, Japan and the United States. A small species was discovered on the (1) Vorigine des plantes cultivées, by Alph. de Candolle. southern slopes of the Pyrenees, fifteen or twenty years ago, to the extreme surprise of botanists. Many species are large lianas growing very high on trees; many are of more modest proportions; some (particularly in Chile) are very small plants, 2 or 4 decimeters high, with tubers as large as a Hazelnut or a Pea. Almost all have a tuberous perennial stump, and the stems, though tall, are only annual. The D. villosa from the United States, however, has a woody rhizome, small, elongated and running underground. Botanists have varied on the nature of the tuber: for some, it is a rhizome, i.e. a radiciform underground stem because it emits buds and has a structure reminiscent of a stem; for others, it is a root-like organ, gorging itself with starch and accumulated nutritive juices. In samples of mediocre-sized species whose roots have been harvested, many of the root fibers seem to emerge from the plant collar above the tuber. The tuperculus is sometimes soft and floury, sometimes hard and leathery, sweet-tasting and edible, or acrid and poisonous, simple or lobulated, fasciculate, multiple, concentrated or diffuse with partial pedicellate tubers. It is placed underground, at a lesser or greater depth. The stem is climbing, voluble on the left. It is tender or leathery, the size of a pen or slightly larger, or very spindly, inert or thorny, round or angular, with membranous wings. Leaves are usually cordate, acuminate, attenuated at the apex, polynervate, and never toothed at the edges. They are firm-coriaceous or membranous-thin, usually glabrous, sometimes a little tomentose or pubescent, especially on the underside. They vary from species to species, being large, mediocre or small, narrower or wider, strongly cordate at the base, obtuse or even rounded and sub-attenuated. Some species have lobed leaves or even 3, 5 and 7 leaflets. Leaves are either opposite or alternate; however, on the opposite-foliated species, there are a number of alternate leaves, especially on the small terminal branches. These details, perhaps a little long and meticulous, will make it easy to understand that the Dioscorea genus is still poorly known, difficult to study and to classify in herbariums; that it is very easy to suppose distinct specimens of the same species (main stem or terminal branches, abnormally shaped flowers or fruit...).); that, if botanical sections have been established in the genus in relation to seed, fruit or elamines, many specimens are impossible to classify, if they have only male flowers, female flowers without ripe fruit, too young fruit..., etc.; that, depending on whether the botanist likes to distinguish many species in minute detail, or to unite many forms under a single name, there will be many more or many fewer species admitted. The latest monograph on the Dioscoreaceae is by Kunth (1850): Enumeratio plantarum... It includes one hundred and fifty-nine species of Dioscorea and thirty species of Helmia, a genus that most botanists now group with Dioscorea. Judging by a few cultivated or American species that I've seen alive and with which I'm familiar, I think Kunth has multiplied the species too much. On the other hand, after Kunth's work, herbaria received a number of new species, notably from Brazil, Mexico and Africa... Various local floras have also published new species, or combined several earlier species into a single species. M. de Candolle's chapter on yams (Origine des plantes cultivées) gives a glimpse of the many uncertainties surrounding our knowledge of this very difficult genus. Dioscorea globosa Roxburgh- Excellent species, ranked first in English India; highly esteemed by Europeans. White, rounded roots, often very large; Roxburgh has only seen this species cultivated. D. rubella Roxb. and D. purpurea Roxb. may be compared as varieties. I have not found this D. globosa in the Museum herbarium. Its description bears some resemblance to D. alata. The stem is winged, the petiole also winged; the leaf shape is similar, but there are some differences. The lower part of the stem is aculeate, the leaves are alternate or opposite, the petiole is longer, and the flowers are fragrant. D. triloba Lam. - Excellent American species. Tubers very tender and floury. D. alata L. - A good species, though not as fine in quality as the previous two. Considerably cultivated in Oceania, where it is (along with Taro) the main food plant. Highly productive when carefully cullivated. Grown in Java, Mauritius... Quite numerous varieties. D. Berteroana Kunth (D. cayennensis Lamk.). - West African species, cultivated in America, where it has been imported. Fig. 35 - Winged-stem yam (Dioscorea alata). large, productive, very hardy. Single, rounded, discoid tuber, sometimes a little hard. Leaves somewhat leathery, resistant to sunburn. D. atropurpurea Roxb. - Asian species, widely cultivated in Malacca, Pegu and the eastern islands. Very large tuber with purplish flesh, at least near the bark. Appears to be a very productive species. The description bears some resemblance to D. alata, which has varieties with purplish roots. D. eburnea Loureiro. - Wild and cultivated in Cochinchina; large, long, curved, white roots, vaguely similar in shape to an elephant's tusk. No spines. Leaves alternate, cordate. D. aculeata L. - Wild and cultivated in India, the Malay Archipelago and Oceania. D. pentaphylla L. - Tubers very slender, floury, of mediocre volume, subrounded, multiple. D. sativa L. - Uncertain species, poorly known, previously confused. Leaves cordate, alternate; bulbils axillary; fruit obovate wedge-shaped. Linné received the seed from America and cullivated it in a garden where the tuber persisted in the ground without the stem flowering (Voy. Hortus Cliffortianus). Flora writers Miquel, Flora Indiæ batavæ; Bentham, Flora Honghongensis; Bojer, Hortus mauritianus, mention this species as wild and cultivated in India, Mauritius and the Moluccas. Linné, who bred it from seeds received from America, assures us that it also grows in India. Appears to be very similar to D. bulbifera, differing only in less vigorous vegetation, a tuber without pungency, and a larger fruit. D. Schimperiana Hochst. Collected wild in Abyssinia by Schimper. Cooked root, edible according to Schimper's label. Young shoots puberulent. Similar to D. sativa L. D. bulbifera L. - Appears to grow wild on the old and new continents. The American plant (Guiana and West Indies) has been described as D. lutea Mey. Vigorous vegetation; abundant flowering; large, light-green, cordate leaves; numerous, very large axillary bulbils. Tubers probably large, but pungent, to be destroyed by washing with water. D. japonica Thunb. and D. Batatas Dene. - Species that can vegetate in temperate climates, where however the first cold snatches their leafy stems before they have supplied all their juices to the tubers; also cultivated in warm climates, in southern China, in Java. Numerous axillary bulblets. Tubers fusiform, elongated. I was unable to find out whether, in Algiers, the leafy stems of D. Batatas turned yellow and dried out in autumn before the roots were harvested, but I did learn that it takes several years for a plant raised from bulblets to become a vigorous plant. D. triphylla L., syn. D. dœmona Roxb. - Wild-growing species in Asia, the Malay Archipelago and East Africa; very vigorous vegetation; aculeate, elevated, sublinear stem; gradate, trifoliolate leaves; paniculiform male inflorescence with numerous dense, short, bracteolate flower spikes; ovoid, oblong, trigonal, large fruit. Tuber voluminous, discoid, probably a little hard, often (always?) nauseous (Roxburgh). D. oppositifolia L. (D. nummularia Lamk.). - Wild species, growing abundantly throughout southern Asia, around which are grouped various related species, which are perhaps only varietals; medium vigor of vegetation; young shoots more or less puberulent. Leaves oval, slightly acuminate at the top, not cordate at the base, briefly petiolate. Abundant flowering. Male spikes short, clustered, fasciculated on a short floral axis. Fruit ovoid, rounded, trigonal, flattened, leathery. Roots hard and somewhat woody, according to Roxburgli, of mediocre volume according to other authors, eaten by natives. A. Reynoso says that certain lgnames can multiply by cuttings or marcotte (I assume he means D. triloba), which I have never seen multiply by cuttings in French Guiana. In general, yam tubers that have been cut and washed in water are slippery and glutinous, exuding a peculiar gum. They are dense and sink to the bottom of the water. They are thought to be more nutritious than potatoes. Inerminous species with tender leaves could make good green fodder. Aerial bulblets are abundant or occur at least fairly often: Dioscorea Batatas; D. japonica; D. sativa; D. bulbifera; D. crispata Roxb.; D. toxicaria Bojer, from East Africa; D. alata. Single voluminous tuber or tubers in small numbers, fascicles, united, not growing to a depth that makes extraction inconvenient: D. Berterouna; D. alata; D. eburnea; D. atropurpurea; D. aculeata Roxb. ; D. fasciculata Roxb.; D. globosa Roxb. Tubercules pedicellate, multiple, somewhat diffuse, but easy to extract: D. triloba Lam; D. pentaphylla. Tubers pungent to some degree or even poisonous: D. bulbifera; D. triphylla and its variety D. dæmona; Roxburgh says of the latter that it is "terribly nauseating, even after being put in water"; D. toxicaria Bojer, from the east coast of Africa (Monbaze). Vigneron-Jousserandier says that in Brazil, an Iguame native to Africa, with a thorny stem and large single tuber, which seems to me to be D. Berteroana, has a somewhat bitter tuber. Wild species whose tubers are good, or at least of acceptable use in times of shortage: Good: D. pentaphylla; D. aculeata. Fairly good: D. anguina Roxb., lnde. - - - D. oppositifolia, India. D. Schimperiana, Abyssinia. D. tomentosa, Ceylon (Thwaites, Flor. Ceylon), resembles D. triphylla. D. intermedia Thwaites. - D. spicata Roxb. Notes communicated at various times to Dr. Paul Sagot. In 1854, agricultural journals in the United States recommended the cultivation of lgnames in the Southern States: D. sativa (?) D. alata (?); it was claimed to be very profitable, yielding 17,000 kilograms per hectare (Patent Office Reports). New Zealand yam has been tried in France, but without success. Professor Chatin published a brochure on this species. M. Hardy had obtained some beautiful tubers in Algiers. What botanical species was this New Zealand yam? D. alata, var. (??) It had been received from Calculta, from Mr. Piddington (Report by M. Hardy, Bull. Soc. d'Accl., vol. V, p. 546, 1858). The New Zealand flora does not mention any Dioscorea. M. Hardy, at the Hamma garden in Algiers, made many observations on lgnames. He exhibited a fine collection at the 1867 Universal Exhibition. At the 1878 Exhibition, there were none. In 1877, following multiple cullings, M. Hardy published the following table of comparative yields: kil. 1° lgname ailée blanche........ 12,380 l'hectare. 2° Igname cultivée.. 20,960 3° Purple yam............. 23,700 4° New Zealand yam. 23,700 5° Chinese yam........... 33,000 6° Elephant yam........ 37,040 7° Trifoliate yam............. 46,660 8° Turtle-leg yam..... 64,780 - - - - - - - - Yam, being an irrigated summer crop, is difficult to spread widely in Algeria. Injured tubers are said to rot easily. When propagating by tuber fragments, M. Hardy explained that the fragment had to bear bark for a shoot to emerge. In Algiers, the planting of a bulbous Chinese yam yielded, in the first year, only a root the size of a little finger; this root could be used as a seedling for the following year. The largest roots of Chinese yam, in the first cultivation trials, weighed 675 grams. Later, much larger roots were obtained. I cannot guess which botanical species are represented by Mr. Hardy's vulgar names, other than: I. ailée blanche, D. alata; I. de Chine, D. Batatas; I. trifoliée, D. triphylla. I don't know whether the Chinese yam in Algiers reaches full maturity, i.e. turns yellow and dries out. I don't know whether the Botanical Garden of Orotava, Tenerife (Canary Islands), has cultivated yams. In the Canaries, by misuse of words, we call lgnames Colocases, Aroïdées tuberculeuses. The same vicious name is sometimes used in Brazil, where real lgnames are called Caras (Vigneron-Jousserandier). I'm not aware of any collections being cultivated at the Jardin d'Acclimatation in Antibes, nor at the Jardin d'Acclimatation in Collioure. I believe they were grown most extensively at the Calcutta Botanical Garden. In Calculta, the rains don't start until May or June, so it would be easy to ask for seedlings for France in March or April. There is a large plant of D. alata in the greenhouses of the Muséum. As it is kept in the most humid, warm greenhouse, its stem veges, I believe, continuously. 16 SUMMARY GLOSSOLOGICAL INDICATIONS The word Igname appears to come from the American word Namain (Caribbean dictionary) or from the American word Inicoma. The authors say that they are called Yam in part of the west coast of Africa, and that this word also means "to eat". On the island of Cuba, D. triloba, an American lgname, is called Aje, while D. Berteroana, or yam brought from Africa, is called Name (A. Reynoso, Agricultura de los indigenas de Cuba et Haïti). It can also be found in Brazil, in the yams known as Caras, while the name Inhame is sometimes used for an edible tuber Aroidea, a species brought from Africa, with a large single tuber, spiny stem, sandy soil and good drought resistance: D. Berteroana. In Mauritius and Reunion, yams are called Cambare. In Taïti, Oceania and the Malay Archipelago, they are called Ubi, Oubi, Oebi. In Calcutta, Aloo (alou), Kam aloo, D. alata. In China, Sain-In, Chou-Yu, Tou-tchou, Chan-yu (De Candolle, Origine des plantes cultivées). In general, lgnames are much more cullivated in hot, humid countries than in hot, dry ones. In Oceania, there is a strong desire for regular rainfall immediately after planting. In hot countries, they usually remain in vegetation for six or eight months before being harvested. If the plant is strong and the soil fertile, vegetation lasts longer. If a plant is weak, it may take up to two years before it can be harvested. SUMMARY The study of yam cultivation is complicated by the fact that there are fifteen or twenty good species in cultivation, and that they differ greatly from one another. Intertropical America, Attica, India, the Malay Archipelago and China cultivate their own particular species, and although several of the good species have been carried from one continent to another, it is not possible to compare them on the spot or with equal knowledge of each other. Each species has, moreover, several varieties of unequal merit, and one author may have appreciated a species without knowing its best varieties and its best method of cultivation. No botanical garden in warm countries has yet assembled a collection of all cultivated Iguams, and if one were able to do so, it would still not be possible to establish a complete and rigorous comparison of the relative merits of the species, as the local climate may to some degree favor the vegetation of one species and discourage that of another. Without leaving hot climates, one species may require more abundant and prolonged rainfall, another a longer dry season, and another too much solar radiation. The cooking of lgnames, even in their native country, is delicate and shows great variations in yield. Nothing is more uncertain than a general assessment based on a partial trial of one species, especially a foreign one. Cultivation in European greenhouses, and even at the Jardin Botanique d'Alger, has not provided much in the way of solid documentation. In Algiers, the climate is far too dry in summer, the only season when the heat is sufficient, and Yams have only arrived from a few countries, without any precise bolanic determination, most often with simple vulgar local names. It is even possible that some of the species collected by Mr. Hardy have not been preserved in the garden. In greenhouses, we can't give the lgnames sufficient space, soil or heat, nor can we alternate the six or eight months of humid heat with six or four months of dry heat and rest. For some species, cultivation under glass may be a little more successful than in the greenhouse, but the house will never achieve a general result that can be applied to all species and lead to truly practical results; a mealy root, however good it may be, cannot hope for a fancy price like an exotic fruit. The general conditions for successful yam cultivation in hot climates are as follows: Choice of an excellent species; Planting of robust seedlings. In the best climate and in the best soil, a small, young bud can only produce a small, unproductive plant, which will take at least two, three or five years to develop into a good seedling; Fertile, well-drained soil, wide spacing and a support system to support the climbing stems and expose them to the air and sun; Sufficient, sustained, humid heat for leafy vegetation, which normally lasts six to eight months and which, in insufficient temperature, should be prolonged further to acquire its full development; Dry heat of at least four months for tuber formation, reabsorbing the nutritive juices from the leafy stems, which must turn yellow and dry out while the tuber grows and gorges itself with starch. The study we have just read deals scientifically with the question of lgnames. It does not reveal the rank each variety occupies in the esteem of those who cultivate it, nor the details of cultivation and use, particular to each country, which should not be ignored. We find these various nolions in the writings of botanists, in the publications and correspondence of travelers and Creole and European planters, and we believe it useful to present them to our readers. I. - Yam in China and Japan. Yam seems to occupy only a very secondary place in the cultures of China and Japan, and is represented there, with few exceptions, only by Dioscorea japonica and one or two varieties of the species. Dr. Bretschneider writes: "In Peking, only D. japonica is grown (I don't know whether this species differs from D. Batatas, as the late Mr. Decaisne claimed). Like you, the Chinese complain about the great difficulty involved in pulling up the fragile rhizomes of this plant. They have to break up the ground to pull them out. In Peking, yams are only grown in gardens. The natives think less of it than the potato (Batatas edulis), which is grown on a large scale in the fields". In Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878, we read: "Tsuku imo (Dioscorea japonica) is eaten cooked. One of its varieties, called Jecheimo (1), has flattened tubers; its seeds, known as Nukago, can be eaten (2). "Jinen jo (Dioscorea japonica, var.) is a wild plant used in much the same way as the previous one; it produces a highly prized starch. "Naga imo, or Dioscorea japonica, is used for the same purposes as the previous one; it includes a variety called Shisen imo. It can also be made into a (1) It should probably be read Jeche imo. (2) Don't we mean bulblets here? a kind of gruel, eaten with a special sauce, if grated and pounded beforehand; this also applies to the two preceding varieties. It can be seen from the above that Dioscorea japonica is the only variety grown in Japan, and that Naga imo appears to be the tvpe, of which there are four varieties. We received Naga imo (1) and another variety with long rhizomes; we found no appreciable difference between these two yams. We also received a variety with rounded rhizomes: it vegetates badly and its tubers do not grow. We received from Dr HE**, under the name Kiri imo, two small tubers of a Yam cultivated in Japan. The doctor wrote to us from Savoie: "This yam does not do well here. I tried it successively in clay soil, then in gravelly soil, both of good quality, and it did not grow well on either side. In Japan, it is grown preferably in greasy sand that retains a little moisture and is very heavily smoked, which is essential for harvesting slightly large yams." Here are some more extracts from the doctor's letters: "Naga imo, long tuberous edible root, as the word imo applies to all starchy edible roots. This is the name given to one of the cultivated varieties of D. Batatas. The same, in its wild state and more highly esteemed as a food, is called Yama imo, mountain root. I don't know either Tsuku imo or Jinen jo. In the part of Japan I lived in, we don't cultivate D. Batatas; we just collect its tubers, which are very common in the woods, but very difficult to pull up. They are more highly prized than cultivated yams. In the case of Kiri imo (D. Decaisneana), for small plantations, we confine ourselves to preserving the snares as and when they are consumed; we plant them in April and uproot them in winter. "For larger plantings, bulblets are collected, sown in spring and pulled out in autumn. The bulbils can vary in size from a walnut to a small egg, and provide planting material for the following year. "Here, it's quite different; this lgname grows very little and gives no bulbils (1); this is a pity, as it is much easier to grow than D. Batatas. DIOSCOREA FARGESHI Franch. Yam from Farges or Mao-Vu-Tsé. M. A. Franchet described in Revue Horticole, December 1 1896, p. 541 (Un nouveau Dioscorea alimentaire de la Chine occidentale), under the name of Dioscorea Fargesii, a new species of Yam, native to Se-Tchuen, where it is found at an average altitude of 1,400 meters, below latitude 32° 5' North. In 1894, the R. P. Farges, missionary at Tchen-KéouTin, sent us, under the name of Maô-yu-tsé, (1) We have collected bulbils, but in small numbers. - P.B. Fig. 36 - Igname de Farges (Dioscorea Fargesii Franch.) (The flowering branch was drawn from a sample kept at the Herbarium of the Muséum.) aerial bulbils of this Dioscorea, to M. Maurice. de Vilmorin. At the same time, he sent the dried plant to the Museum herbarium (Farges, no. 227). Doctor Henry also collected it as a dry plant (Docteur Henry, ner 2666 et 750t). D. Fargesii Franch (fig. 36), has edible tubers; it belongs to the Dioscorea group, which instead of having whole or lobed leaves, has 3-5 distinct leaflets, close together at the top of the petiole like those of the Virginia creeper, and is very reminiscent of D. pentaphylla L., which R. P. Delavay encountered in Yunnan, in the mountains, at Tapintze and on the Ilee-chan-men, at a height of 2,500 meters. The tubers of D. pentaphylla have long been used in food, and the altitude at which the plant was encountered by R. P. Delavay seems to indicate that it could withstand fairly low temperatures. According to M. Franchet, D. Fargesii differs from D. pentaphylla in its leaflets, which remain thin, almost membranous; in the narrow, lanceolate shape of the bracts, which are as long as the flowers during anthesis; in the tomentum, which persists on the fruit; and in the rough aerial bulbils. In D. pentaphylla, the leaflets quickly become leathery; the bulbils are shiny and very smooth; the bracts accompanying the male or female flowers are constantly very wide, almost orbicular, concave and abruptly terminated in a very short mucron. M. Maurice de Vilmorin was kind enough to entrust us with a bulblet of D. Fargesiï. We planted it in Crosnes and, after two years of cultivation, we have just harvested a spherical, slightly depressed tuber, 0.55 in diameter, about the size of a mandarin orange, and yellow-brown in color. Particular attention should be drawn to this new and very interesting Yam, whose tuber, of good quality, develops almost on the surface of the soil and is therefore easy to pull up. It is certain that the lubercule will reach a much more considerable relalive size after three years of cultivation, the time required by Chinese Yam and Decaisne Yam to reach full development, when reproduced with bulbils. The Farges yam seems to us to be superior to the Decaisne yam, its tuber being smooth and the production of bulbils extraordinarily abundant, the only plant we have having enabled us to harvest 120 this year (1897). II. - Yam in the East Indies (1) DIOSCOREA GLOBOSA Roxb. Beng. Choopuree aloo. "1 Rounded, white tubers. I have only found this species in cultivated elat. It holds first place among the tuberous roots on which the Hindus of these regions feed, and is also the one most esteemed by Europeans." (1) W. Roxburgh, Flora indica, vol. IlI, pp. 797-808. Extracts. D. ALATA Willd, IV, 792. Beng. Kam-aloo. "2 This species is cultivated in various parts of India. On the Coromandel coast, it is, I believe, the only one cultivated as a food. "In Bengal, it ranks only second, D. globosa being more highly esteemed. Nevertheless, it is widely cultivated. It flowers at the end of the rains. D. RUBELLA Roxb. Beng. Guranya-aloo. "3 I have only come across this species in cultivated form. The Hindus place it immediately after D. purpurea; consequently, it ranks only fourth among the Dioscorea in their esteem. It is widely cultivated near Calcutta: "oblong tubers with red skin". D. PURPUREA Roxb. Beng. Lal-guranya-aloo. "4. oblong tuber, colored in all its parts more or less dark purple, but always deeply tinted, and farmers and cultivators of this species say that this color is permanent. "I have only come across D. purpurea in the cultivated state, and I don't know where it exists in the wild. Its root is

D. alata, and therefore ranks third among aloos. This species is widely cultivated. D. ATROPURPUREA Roxb. "5. subrounded tubers, purple in all their parts. "This species is widely cultivated in Malacca, Pegu and the eastern islands. Its tubers are very large, irregularly shaped, smooth, almost round and grow so close to the surface of the soil that, in dry weather, they can be seen through the cracks they produce by lifting the earth. This fact and the very dark color of the stems make it easy to recognize the species". D. ACULEATA Roxb. " 6. Native to Bengal. Its roots are oval, generally weigh 2 pounds or more, are pleasantly white, and, during the cold season, are plucked from the woods, as the plant is not cultivated, and carried to the Calcutta market, where they are known to the natives as mou-aloo. Outwardly, this lgname closely resembles the species we have named D. fasciculata, the Soosni-aloo of the Hindus". D. FASCICULATA Roxb. Beng. Soosni-aloo" 7. This species is cultivated on a very large scale in the vicinity of Calculta, not only as a foodstuff, but also to extract starch from its roots. "These roots consist of numerous tubers, the size and shape of a young hen's egg, linked by spindly filaments to the base of the stems.... "The cultivation and use of the roots of the various species mentioned above or below are too well known to require that I expand on the subject here. My aim is to dispel the obscurity with which useful plants of this kind have hitherto been shrouded, not only with a view to satisfying botanists, but with a view to indicating to those who are not botanists the signs by which they can distinguish the species; and the surest of these are generally to be found in the shape and color of the root. These characters are permanent and guide the Hindu cultivator; but I fear that botanists will blame me for departing from Linné's rule, which forbids reliance on color. In that case, they will have to consider D. globosa, rubella and purpurea as varieties of the same species, to which I readily consent, if they find it a better method than the one I have followed." D. PULCHELLA Roxb. " 8. Native to Chiltagong. Tubers almost round, quite small. So exactly similar to the D. crispata which follows, that it can only be distinguished by its perfectly soft, smooth skin and cylindrical stems, which show not the slightest appearance of ribs. "It blooms at the end of the rainy season in the Botanical Garden. 255 " 9. A large, elegant species, native to the interior of Bengal and introduced by Dr. Carey, in 1798, to the Botanical Garden, where it flowers during the rainy season. "Tuberous roots, approximately round and small in relation to the large dimensions of the plant, with numerous, branching, tenuous threads emerging from all parts of the tuber... Like potatoes, the old roots perish when the new ones are formed... Axillary bulbils, both numerous and large, can be used for reproduction." D. ANGUINA Roxb. Beng. Kookoor-aloo. " 10. Cylindrical tubers. I found this species in the wild in the woods near Calcutta. It flowers at the end of the rains. "Its root is not highly esteemed, though poor people eat it when pressed by hunger." D. NUMMULARIA Willd. IV, 792. Hind. and Beng. Shora-aloo " 11. I first mistook this species for D. oppositifolia; but on finding some old woody plants armed with numerous strong thorns, I became convinced that they belonged to a very different species. It is native to the woods around Calcutta. It flowers at the end of the rains. "Its root appears to be unfit for food. D. GLABRA Roxb. " 12. Tubers small, subfusiform. Native to Silhet. D. HETEROPHYLLA Roxb. " 13. Native to Pulo-Pinang and the Moluccas. D. OPPOSITIFOLIA Willd. IV, 797. Teling. Ava-tenga-tiga. " 14. Spontaneous on dry land, among bushes, on the Coromandel coast. Flowers during the rainy season. "The natives eat its roots. D. TOMENTOSA Koen, mss. 15. Tuberous root, in the form of the common yam, succulent and requiring less care in preparation than D. triphylla. D. DÆMONA Roxb. " 16. This very distinct species is native to the forests of Goruckpore and also to the Moluccas. Plants of both origins are currently before my eyes in the Botanical Garden at Calculla, where they thrive and flower towards the end of the rains. Their roots are horribly nauseating, even after boiling." D. PENTAPHYLLA Willd., IV, 789. Beng. Kanta-aloo. " 17. I have only found this species in the wild, although its root is large, white, considered very salubrious, of a pleasant flavor and eaten by the natives (1)." 111 - Yam in Fiji (2). "In the whole of Polynesia, man's diet is based, to the exclusion of all grains and vegetables, on the Yam, Taro, Banana, Breadfruit and Coconut: but in the various islands, the largest share is provided by a single one of these plants. In the Hawaiian group, Taro dominates, while the fruit of the Coconut palm is considered a delicacy, of which women were once absolutely deprived. In some of the smaller Coral Islands, the inhabitants feed almost exclusively on the nuts of the Coconut palm. The Samoans place the fruits of the Breadfruit Tree in first place. The Fijians prefer Yam to any other food, although the other plants we have mentioned grow perfectly well on their islands and present an infinite number of varieties. (1) This species also exists in China (see p. 250). (2) Flora vitiensis, by Berthold Seemann (Art. Dioscorea, p. 250). 17 A striking proof of the importance they attach to the yam is the fact that its cultivation and the season in which it ripens form the basis of their calendar, and that the only one of the eleven months between which they divide the year, and which bears no name referring to the yam, is the one in which the harvest requires no particular attention or has been covered up. "A version of this calendar has been published by Wilkes, in The narrative of the United States exploring expedition, and is placed opposite the one dictated to me by an intelligent Bauan chief and the consulate interpreter, Mr. Charles Wise (1). The names I give and the order in which I place them are not entirely consistent with those of Wilkes. This difference is partly due to the fact that Wilkes wrote his list according to Europeans imperfectly versed in Fijian, and adopted an inaccurate spelling. Month names may also vary in different parts of the group. The subject, however, calls for further study." FIDJIAN CALENDAR (according to Seemann). 1. Vula i werewere. JUNE-JULY. Month of balance. When the soil is cleared and cleaned. 2. Vula i cukicuki. AUG. When yam fields are cleared and planted. 3. Vula i vavakadi. SEPTEMBER. When the yams are given reeds on which to climb. (1) Seemann's version seems sufficient, and we do not give Wilkes'. - P. B. 4. Vula i Balolo lailai. OCTOBER. When the Balolo (Palolo 5. Vula i Balolo levu. viridis J.-E. Gray), a remarkable Annelid, makes its first appearance in small numbers. NOVEMBER. When Balolo appear in large numbers. November 25 is generally the day when the most are caught. 6. Vula i Nuga lailai. DECEMBER. A fish, named Nuga, appears in small numbers. 7. Vula i Nuga levu. JANUARY. Nuga arrives in large numbers 8. Vula i Sevu. 9. Vula i Ketikeli. 10. Vula i Gasau. 11. Vula i Doi. number. FEBRUARY. When offerings of the first plucked yams (ai Sevu) are made to the priests. MARCH. When the yams are plucked and placed under shelters. APRIL. When the reeds (Gasau) start to grow again. MAY. The Doi (Alphitonia zizyphoides A. Gray), a tree from the Fiji Islands, produces flowers in profusion. "The main cultivated lgname is Dioscorea alata L., which has a quadrangular, quillless climbing stem. Naturals distinguish many varieties, all of which are known by the collective name Uvi. Some have large roots, while others have small ones, either white or more or less purple in color, and differ both in shape and in the time of ripening. These varieties are called Daunini, Keu, Kasokaso or Kasoni, Voli, Sedre, Lokaloka, Moala, Uvi ni gau, Lava Namula, Rausi, Balebale, etc. At Nuava, in Viti levu, the Kuruduadua chief showed us a batch of 6-foot-long, 100-pound lgnames, which are by no means rare in the group. Skilled growers claim that, to obtain large, abundant roots, plantations must be made in hard, unprepared soil. According to them, the yam must meet resistance, or, as they sometimes say themselves, become irritated before it can display its full strength. I've even heard of a bet won by a woman who had practiced this method of cultivation, and who had wagered that she would obtain a root big enough to feed twenty people, while the man who bet against her had only produced one insufficient to feed a third of that number, even though he had taken great pains to loosen and prepare the land intended for his plantation. "The general signal for planting is the flowering of the Drala (Erythrina indica L.). As soon as the flowers begin to appear, which is around July or early August, all hands are on deck. The ground having already been cleared during the preceding months, mounds about 2 feet high, and 4 or 5 feet apart, are raised; these mounds are known as Buke, from which the highest mountain in Kadavu, which Mr. Pritchard and I first climbed on September 6, 1860, and whose shape resembles that of these mounds, takes its name from Buke levu or great mound in Ignames. "There are no spades or iron tools for ploughing. Everything is done with Mangrove poles and by sheer force of arms. Sections of old yams are planted at the top of the mounds, and after the short space of time it takes the plant to grow, less than a month, it requires reeds to climb on; then it's just a matter of clearing the ground of weeds. "Around February, the first yams begin to ripen and are used as offerings to priests in pagan districts. March and April see the main harvest, which is stored in sheds covered in Coconut leaves. During the season, the contents of these sheds must be visited at least once a month; roots showing the slightest trace of disease are removed, to prevent them infecting healthy ones. Yams are eaten baked, boiled or steamed, and naturals can consume large quantities. Whole cargoes have sometimes been shipped to New South Wales and New Zealand, and whalers and merchant ships never touch Viti without making ample provision. "Another species, Kawai (D. aculeata L.), is also planted on artificial mounds, although not as high as those where the winged yam is planted. Its creeping stems are round and furnished with thorns, but they are not raised on reeds, like those of the species mentioned above. D. aculeata ripens around June; by the 27th of that month, it was leafless. According to naturalists, it never produces flowers or seeds, and I have searched in vain in the fields in the hope of convincing them of this error. It is propagated by planting small tubers which, like the old ones, are oblong, brownish on the outside and pure white on the inside. "When cooked, its skin peels off like birch bark, as Wilkes puts it. Its root is very starchy, like that of a good floury potato, but whiter. Its taste is reminiscent of the South American Arracacha. All in all, Kawai can be considered the best root food in the world, and I strongly recommend its cultivation to all tropical countries that do not yet have it. "Several species of wild yam, such as Tikau, Tivoli and Kaile, hang in graceful festoons from the branches of trees and shrubs in almost every woodland. Tivoli (D. nummularia Lam.) has a spiny stem like that of the cultivated Kawai and climbs very high. Its roots are long, cylindrical and as big as a man's arm. Often, when entering forests, the natives pull out its roots with a stick, roast it and eat it on the spot. They find it excellent. "The Kaile (D. sativa L.) is somewhat similar in appearance to the Tivoli and is often found entwined with it, but its stems and branches are round and ineradicable, and the pungency of its roots means that they must be macerated in water before boiling. The dish prepared with them has the appearance of potatoes, crushed enough to be eaten only with the spoons provided by the leathery leaves of the spoon tree or Tatakia (Acacia laurifolia Willd.), or any other sufficiently sturdy leaves on hand. "Kaile-tokatolu (D. pentaphylla L.) is sometimes cultivated, according to Mr. Storck, and its tuber is a good food. I have not been able to obtain specimens of the wild yam that the natives call Tikau, but it is established in the Fijian Dictionary (p. 323. and 324) that it differs from Tivoli and that its name is used in some dialects of the group instead of the generic name Uvi. Could this be D. pentaphylla, or is it just another species? "The following list gives the key to Viti species: alato. tereti. Caule inermi Caule aculeato D. alata. D. sativa. Foliis oppositis. Foliis alternis integris. ! digitatis. D. nummularia. D. aculeata. D. pentaphylla. IV. - Yam in New Caledonia (1). "Yam is particularly demanding in terms of soil lightness, whether natural or acquired. It is only in light, deep soils that tubers so large that two men are sometimes needed to transport them can be obtained. As for the composition she seems to prefer, it's a mixture of sand and limestone, as found in soils underlain by coral, and strongly mixed with decomposing organic matter. "Another essential quality of the soil used for yams is that it has nothing to (1) Letter from Mr. V. Perret, former director of the Dumbéa agricultural penitentiary, December 20, 1883. fear from humidity. Few plants are as sensitive to the disastrous effects of stagnant water and persistent humidity. "All varieties generally thrive inland, as they do by the sea. Some, however, fear the influence of the sea wind. This is the case of the variety named Kilira in the North, and Cocodyi in the Centre, which does not grow by the sea. In short, although New Caledonia is essentially a clay soil, yams can be found everywhere, provided the land has been sufficiently well prepared. Opposite is a list of the main varieties of yam, with their names in two of the colony's languages, one of which, Falanguito, is widely spoken. Preparing the soil involves loosening and cleaning. "Here's how the natives operate in New Caledonia: when September comes, which is the dry season, they have chosen the site of their plantation and marked it with a stake, at the top of which is a handful of grass; this is a taking of possession. Some time later, when the day is favourable, they set fire to the grasses, and before the arrival of the Europeans, Caledonia was burning completely. After clearing the ground of shrubs and other obstacles the tool may encounter, the native attacks it with a stake 2.50 to 4 meters long, 6, 7 or 8 centimeters in diameter at the base, sharpened and hardened by fire. The natives use only certain special, heavy, hard woods for this purpose. They violently drive this instrument into the ground, repeatedly throwing it up and down the same hole, Names of the main varieties of Yam in New Caledonia. VARIETY DESIGNATION ATÉ LANGUAGE VOH LANGUAGE FALANGUITE QUALITY OR BAYE Potato shape and size vitelotte, sweet, fragrant. Purple, long, large.......... White, long, large.......... White, short, small......... White, short, large........... White, fairly long, small..... Fragrant........................ Large, long................... White, very short, small...... Red, short, very small......... Red, very short, small........ Long, big, white.......... Red, very long, quite big... Red, big, lougue........... Big, long............... White, very long, big...... White, long, big.......... A single name for two varieties, one white, the other purple... White, very small, short....... Red, medium, fairly short.... Red, medium, short.......... White, 2 meters long, thin. Red, forked, flattened, short, (hand with 2 or 3 fingers).......... Red, short, medium......... White, fairly long, thin..... White, fairly short, small...... Red, short, small............. White, short, small......... White, long, large.......... White, very short, medium.... Red, short, small............. White, very short, small....... Red, short, medium......... Red, long, thin........... Red, fairly long, thick...... Short, medium, red......... White, flattened, hand with 2, 3, 4, 5 fingers. White, long, large.......... White, short, quite small..... Red, long, medium, green leaves and stem.................. Red, short, medium........ Red, short, medium-yellow......... White, fairly long, large..... Oundi......... White, short, medium........ Ouitoupila.... Fuapendo_..... Cocathi..... C' h' oun...... Teiuha........ Aoui.......... Hèpè,......... Coubar....... Ghéléath..... Moindah...... Bou-aou...... Dipoû........ Ti-ôman...... Cathia..... Goin......... Hon-da....... Quacoulouta.. Ghéléhate..... Dîla......... Tha-ate........ Opou-âli...... Pocouta....... Dahambou.... Matoh....... Pouan........ Tikae..... Konndap...... Deh-enh...... Mouënne...... Onombitio..... Tapouar...... Dié-Nambué... Nakaan....... Fémafai....... Boounden..... Boutanhénn... Tanoa........ Llop.......... FounambouatKidétite....... Coumandioh.. Taquheth..... Toundo-onn... Ware......... Grabon.... Fuapendo..... Cocathi..... Ndhé......... Teinha........ Aoui. In SaintLouis: Initua Hèpè.......... Coupar........ Does not exist... Moindah...... Bou-aou...... Dîpoù...... Ti-ôman..... Cathia........ Goin...... Hon-da....... Quacoulouta.. Ghéléhate..... Dila........ Tanneh....... Dé-émi........ Pocouta....... Him-boueh.... Matoh....... Pouau........ Tikaé......... Konndap...... Deh-end... Ta-qui-Ouà... Onombitio.... Tapouar....... Does not exist... Nakaan....... Iu-Dioh....... Caboui........ Coutanham... Tanoa........ Toqui......... Brarou........ Diomali....... Coumandioh.. Tiagandou.... Top-Ondou... ===--- -c'-G~~~~o ~~~ ~~-=ec= meileure "" cicicicio until it penetrated to Or, 30 or so. In a few weighing operations, once the first clods have been removed, they topple a block of earth several cubic decimeters in size, sometimes even larger, better than could be done by workers armed with tools, especially when there are three or four of them breaking together. These overturned blocks are passed into the hands of the women, who slowly move forward on their knees, breaking up the clods as they go, first with small sticks, then with their fingers, until they are reduced to dust and all weed roots have been extracted. When this loosening work is complete, the layer of loose soil is increased by piling it up. If the cullivated portion is on the plain, the natives dig two deep furrows on each side and raise the soil up sharply in the shape of a humpback. For a width of 6 meters, I suppose, the difference in level can be as much as 1.50 meters. The colony's main valleys are covered with these furrows. If, on the other hand, cultivation has been carried out on the side of a hill, the soil is brought in from all ends and piled up in the middle in the shape of a plank, or crescent more often than not, unless it is in the thalweg, whose sinuosities it then follows. "They then prepare their seedlings; these are cut pieces of about half a cubic decimeter in volume, preferably the top of the plant. They are divided several days in advance to allow the wounds to dry. Yam is very sensitive to humidity and rots very easily; they put two pieces on each plant, almost flush with the ground, and cover them with a small dome of very fine soil. "When the shoot has emerged, they drive in large poles inclined away from the windrow and planted at Om, 40 or so from the base of the yam, so as not to disturb it. "As soon as the shoot is about Om, 30 long, they stick a small wooden or bamboo rod at its base, which connects the foot of the plant with the neighbouring pole, and the yam is led along this inclined rod to the stake that is to support it. "Three to six months later, depending on the species, the tubers are ripe. Depending on the species and variety, they range from 1 to 15 or 18, and come in all sizes. Some yams, from the New Hebrides in particular, have been seen on Coral soil, reaching over 2 meters in length and exceeding a man's weight. "The natives take great care in extracting them. The preservation of lgname depends on its integrity, and if it has been removed whole and healthy, it can be kept for seven to eight months in a suitable room. "This plant never flowers in New Caledonia; it is certainly imported. There are at least thirty varieties. The entire surface of the lgname skin is budding, despite the absence of visible eyes. V. - Yam in French Guiana (1) "The species cultivated in French Guiana are: "The Indian yam (D. triloba), cultivated throughout 41) Bull. Soc. bot. de France, 1871, t. XVIII, Dr Paul Sagot. antiquity by the natives of America. It is the species whose tubers are the most pleasant to the taste. "Igname pays-nègre or Guinea yam. Spiny yam, D. cayennensis Kth. (D. altissima Lam.). Its tubers are very large, but less delicate. "Igname franche, often misleadingly called Igname française (D. alata), is less widespread than the preceding varieties. "Here is their brief description: "The Indian yam, D. triloba L. (D. affinis Kth., D. truncata Miquel, D. trifida Meyer), has a thornless stem, raised with prominent membranous ridges. Leaves are broad, with the lower ones having 7 or 5 lobes and the upper ones 3, not reaching half their length. Foliage is light yellowish-green. Tubers are numerous, ovoid or rounded, covered with blackish, cracked bark. This American species is grown in Brazil and the West Indies, as well as in French Guiana. It is an excellent species. "Igname pays-nègre, D. cayennensis Klh. (D. altissima, Berteroana Knth.), probably brought from Africa in ancient times, has a spiny stem. Leaves are whole, cordate, dark green, shiny and fairly small. The tuber is generally simple, flattened and more or less ovoid. It is very large, but harder and less delicate to the taste than that of the Indian yam. It is also more productive and less demanding in terms of soil quality. "D. alata L., native to the Malay Archipelago and Oceania, has a thornless stem with prominent membranous ridges, and heart-shaped, entire, yellowish-green leaves. The tuber is ovoid, more or less elongated. This species is less widespread in the colony than the previous two. Its tuber is not as delicate as that of the Indian yam. "D. pubescens Poir is still sometimes grown in the colony, but I have not had the opportunity to observe it. The tubers of the wood yam, D. bulbifera, which grows wild in the forests, are sometimes collected. According to what Mr. Leprieur told me, the Indians at the top of the rivers cultivate, in addition to the Indian yam, a particular species that the colonists do not possess. Vl. - Yam in Venezuela (1) "Among the different species of yam grown in the country, there are three main ones, commonly known as : Name de SantoDomingo, Name liso and Name de espina. "These three species have not yet been classified, as far as I know; however, the first, or the so-called Santo Domingo Yam, would seem to correspond to Dioscorea bulbifera. "It is a plant with a sarmentose stem whose main production consists of the bulbils or tubers which develop on the aerial part of the plant, in the axils of the leaves; the underground root is only an accessory product; so it forms around it a (1) Plantes alimentaires du Venezuela, by M. A. de Tourreil (Bull. Soc. d'Accl., vol. VI, 1859, p. 481). kind of trellis on which it can climb and spread its branches. This yam is the least prized; its starch retains a certain bitter taste that is not very pleasant, but which could undoubtedly be corrected. "Could the smooth yam be Dioscorea sativa? It produces more or less elongated, club-shaped roots, with fleshy, compact, starchy, opaline-white tissue. Its tawny-brown surface is plain, with generative organs around the collar (1). Its roots sometimes swivel to great depths, but in general, the underground swellings that constitute the plant's essential product are almost round and easy to pull out. The stems also bear fruit, and stakes are placed near them to support them. "The spiny yam belongs to the same genus. It differs only from the smooth yam in that its glaze has eyes similar to those of the potato, and spiny rootlets. Its starch is fatty, soft and succulent; its stems are also climbers, reaching heights of several meters, but they are only staked for support, and the bulbils they bear are ignored. These two species are closely related to the Chinese Dioscorea. "There is another mealy root, known in the country by the vulgar name of Mapuey, whose shape and sarmentose stem indicate that it also belongs to the Dioscorea family (2). (1) By these words, organs of generation, we mean buds. - P. B. (2) Dioscorea trifida, Dr. Ernst. - P. B. "It comes in two different species, one purple, the other white. "The purple Mapuey is preferred; its radiciform swellings are large and short; its starch is very crumbly and tasty; cooked in salt water, in the oven or under ashes, it is eaten like bread. It's also a vegetable plant par excellence. "These plants like warm climates, but they also adapt to temperate climates. "Their rhizomes ripen within ten months at an elevation of 600 or 700 meters above sea level; but at higher altitudes, 1,600 or 1,700 meters, they take fourteen or fifteen months to reach maturity. "Here, yams are reproduced using whole tubers or sections of the upper part of the rhizome. This operation is often carried out without destroying the aerial part of the plant; the root is uncovered, cut about an inch below the collar, the excavation is filled in again, and the upper portion of the root is replaced and covered with topsoil. "Yam likes soft soil and usually spreads according to the space prepared for it; a plot dug 1 metre deep and 50 centimetres wide yielded yams in proportion to this size. Yam is capable of acquiring very large dimensions; in Venezuela, we have seen yams weighing up to 100 kilograms. "It often happens that, unable to develop fully underground, either for lack of space or because of some obstacle, the rhizomes of the yam rise above the ground to more than a quarter of a meter; they are then carefully covered with earth, which offers no obstacle to their production. "The yield of lgname is higher than that of the potato; it contains almost as much floury starch as the latter, and contains a nitrogenous principle that makes it nutritious. Its substance is recognized as very nourishing and easily digestible; it is used, if necessary, as bread for country people and, in general, as a vegetable plant for daily use. It also lends itself, in various forms, to the composition of various stews, and can be cooked in no time, either in salt water, in the oven or under hot ashes. "Hot climates are the most favorable for yams: the more intense the heat, the more active and vigorous the vegetation. The average temperature under which it vegetates is around 22 degrees centigrade and the maximum cold 15 to 16 degrees, while it tolerates very well a maximum heat of over 29 degrees. "The hardiness of the yam is such that its cultivation here requires no fertilizer; it even grows wild, and the birds are responsible for spreading its seed. VII. - Yam in France 273 The Chinese yam, introduced in 1848 by M. de Montigny, is the only one that has received serious attention in France. We shall be silent on this Dioscorea, which has been the subject of persevering experimental cultivation and is still grown in amateur gardens. We shall confine ourselves to listing the notes and memoirs that have been published on its subject, which are summarized in the article devoted to it by Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie, on pages 283-285 of Plantes potagères. A yam introduced from China to the Muséum in 1862, to which M. Carrière has given the name D. Decaisneana and which is perhaps no more than a variety of the preceding species, would interest us more if it were more productive. It has the advantage of not sinking deep into the soil, and is therefore easy to pull up. It is of good quality and absolutely hardy; unfortunately, the tuber that is planted perishes and is simply replaced by a slightly larger tuber, so there is no multiplication. You have to resort to the aerial bulblets that the plant provides in small numbers and whose volume rarely reaches that of a hazelnut. These bulblets are planted in a nursery and, three years later, tubers of very irregular shape and mediocre size are harvested. M. Doumet-Adanson has worked with D. Decaisneana for many years, with all the success 18 S Fig. 37. -- Chinese yam, leafy branch. He has presented some very fine specimens to the Société d'Acclimatation. This yam is of good quality, takes up little nursery space and deserves the care of amateurs. -L Fig. 38 - Chinese yam, tubers. M. Paillieux, setting an example, was able to provide the Société d'Acclimatation with several thousand tubers, which it distributed to its members. For several years now, Mr. Paul Chappellier has been making laudable efforts to obtain new varieties of Yam, either by sowing seeds of Dioscorea Batatas and D. Decaisneana, or by crossing these two plants (1). For its part, the Museum requested, received and sowed seeds of D. japonica. These seeds have sprouted, and in four or five years we'll know whether the experiment has produced any useful results. It would be a good idea to repeat the sowing every year, and to do it on a large scale so that success is likely. Once a variety shorter than D. Batatas and more productive than D. Decaisneana has been found, it should be fixed by repeated cultivation. Crossing these two varieties is highly desirable and is likely to produce the desired result, but in the Paris climate, we cannot obtain seeds of either variety. We will therefore have to operate in the south of France, or in Algeria, or in one of our other colonies. How is it that no cross-breeding has occurred, either spontaneously or artificially, in Japan or China, where both plants are cultivated and suffer no less than we do from their defects? We can't explain it. In any case, and in the meantime, we propose to grow the flat yam from Japan, which is D. Decaisneana. We received it directly from Japan a few years ago. (1) See Revue Horticole. Les Cultures de M. Chappellier, by M. D. Bois, 1893, p. 15; Culture de l'Igname, by M. P. Chappellier, same collection, same year, p. 274. Revue des sciences naturelles appliquées : Nourelle méthode de culture de l'Igname de Chine, by M. P. Chappellier, 1895, 1st semester, p. 402. This yam is of superior quality; it is hardy and easy to grow. We had to give up the Chinese yam, Dioscorea Batatas, which was impracticable to uproot; the flat yam from Japan is harvested from the ground. Harvesting bulblets in autumn, sowing them the following spring, and obtaining a plant which, when cultivated again, produces tubers of marketable size, are the operations applicable to these two yams. BULB PRODUCTION The largest tubers available are used for this purpose. They provide us with equally large tubers which we use for the same purpose, i.e. each year we replant new tubers from the bulblet-producing bed. They are deformed and unsuitable for sale, but produce strong plants that yield good harvests. You can expect an average yield of 5,000 bulbils per hundred feet of these large yams. We estimate that, in a garden, it will be sufficient to maintain a plantation of around fifty producing plants. We grow them in well-smoked beds, in two rows spaced Or,40 apart. Only these two rows are planted on a 1.30 m bed. As soon as they emerge from the ground, the young plants are given stakes at least 3 m high, on which the stems are directed, observing that they are voluble from left to right. The soil is then cleaned of weeds by a few hoeings; a light ridging, although not necessary, seems useful to us, as the lubercules sometimes appear just above ground level. Harvesting takes place at the beginning of November. IIIIt t 14 Fig. 39 - Chinese yam, bulb. Tubers are preserved either by placing them on boards, without stacking, in a cold, dry place, or by stratifying them in dry sand, or by burying them under a frame in the garden, protecting them from frost. SOWING BULBILLES (1) On garden beds 1.30 m wide, make four furrows in which to sow bulbils like peas. It would certainly be better to space them evenly, but it would be a lot of trouble. You can also thin out the planting after the bulbils have emerged, to obtain larger plants. As soon as the young plants emerge from the ground, they are reamed like peas. The soil is kept clean (1) It would be more correct to say "planted". by hand weeding. In early November, the plant is harvested to produce tubers of marketable size the following year. The resulting roots are stratified in sand in a cold, dry place (1). FIRST-YEAR TUBER PLANTING Plants are planted in holes about Om.20 deep, spaced 0.20 m apart, or at an even shorter distance if the soil is heavily smoked, and arranged in three rows in beds 1.30 m wide. As soon as the plants emerge from the ground, they are given stakes 2m, 50 to three meters high. Keep the soil clean with a trowel. You can leave the stems to coil spontaneously around the stakes, but it's better to tie them to the stakes, directing them from left to right. Harvesting takes place in the first days of November, and is either consumed or delivered to the trade. Only tubers too small for sale are kept for replanting. USES Japanese yam starch is remarkably fine and delicate. It does not have the sweet taste of potatoes, which many people dislike. Flat yam is superior to all others for sweet dishes (sweet from the English, mehl speise from the Germans), cakes and soufflés. It is excellent: as a light purée (1) By this we mean that they should not be kept in a place where humidity and heat could cause them to sprout untimely. for soup, sliced and fried in batter, baked in juice like cardoons, cooked under ashes. OTHER SPECIES We can only speak from personal experience. Some twenty years ago, we attempted to grow two varieties of Dioscorea alata under chassis, with absolutely negative results. Later, and on two occasions, we planted tubers of Mapuey branco (D. trifida, white) and Mapuey morado (D. trifida, purple), from Venezuela. The latter did not form tubers. The former gave us imperfect tubers, but cultivation under a frame may not be impracticable; unfortunately, the white Mapuey is much less esteemed than the purple variety. The latter was particularly recommended to us by Dr Ernst, Professor of Natural History in Caracas. We have already seen the esteem in which Dr. Sagot holds this species (1). We have tasted the Mapuey violet and declare that no better root could be found. It has an excellent flavor and is so floury that it crumbles as soon as you touch it, like the sand pies that children make. (1) This yam is cultivated throughout the West Indies, where it is known as Cousse-Couche, Couche-Couche. According to R. P. Duss, Flore phanérogamique des Antilles françaises, p. 566, it usually produces a large number of elongated or fusiform tubers, attached to a thread like those of the Topinambour, providing a delicate, highly appetizing and sought-after food, which far outweighs other yams in value. consider the cultivation of this yam impossible in the Paris climate. We have planted several New Caledonian species under frames, but we received them too late and the tubers that some of them gave us, not having reached maturity, were not preserved during the winter. We will, however, exclude the wild bulbous yam, which ripened its tubers and bulblets, a serious success in that it gives us hope that other species, chosen from among the earliest, will also be able to give happy results. The Société d'Acclimatation is offering a first prize of 600 francs and a second prize of 400 francs for the introduction and cultivation, for two successive years, of a lgname (Dioscorea) combining superior quality with easy harvesting. Will these prizes be won? We doubt it, if we're talking about a field-grown yam; we don't doubt it if we're talking about a vegetable-grown yam treated using market-gardening methods. These procedures are sufficient to obtain perfectly ripe and well-preserved tubers and bulbils from D. bulbifera, a species native to the hottest regions of the globe, and spontaneous in India, Guyana, etc. This lgname is not particularly early, and the information we have gathered tells us that the vegetation of several other species is of shorter duration. We therefore need to find the latter, and we have every reason to believe that this will not be long in coming (1). (1) In 1894, M. Maurice de Vilmorin gave us a bulblet of D. Fargesü Franch. (see p. 248), a new species from New Caledonia. We have given above a list of 42 species or varieties of Yam cultivated in New Caledonia. We have been informed of a bulbous variety, very productive, very early, which would require only three months of vegetation in the country; another, precocious, of which each plant would give 10 to 12 tubers, short and easy to store; a third, sweet and fragrant, slightly musky, precocious, producing an abundance of short, budded tubers, which keep better in the ground than outside, can be pulled up and planted all year round. It can be estimated that New Caledonia possesses no less than 50 species or varieties of Yam, which need to be cultivated experimentally and compared with each other, excluding those with very large roots. Several of these will be suitable for market gardening. NOTICE BIBLIOGRAPHIQUE Revue horticole. Note sur le Dioscorea Batatas, 1854, p. 242 et 443. Dioscorea Batatas, by M. J. Decaisne, 1855, 4th ser. IV, p. 69. Comparative description of D. Batatas and D. japonica. Chemical analysis of tubers. Cultivation. Multiplication. Dioscorea Batatas. Succès et revers de sa culture, by M. Naudin, 1855, 4th ser., vol. IV, p. 242. Dioscorea Batatas. Sa culture, by M. Naudin, 1855, 4th ser. IV, p. 442. Western China, close to D. pentaphylla, with edible tubers like those of this species, easy to pull up. We own the plant and will soon know whether we will be disappointed in our expectations. Dioscorea Decaisneana, by M. Carrière. Description, origine, culture, 1865, p. 111, 215, 407. Culture de l'Igname, by M. P. Chappellier, 1893, p. 274. Dioscorea Fargesii Franch (A new Dioscorea from Western China), by A. Franchet, 1896, p. 541. Journal de la Societé nationale d'Horticulture de France. Note sur la culture de l'Igname de Chine, by M. Vuitry, 2nd ser. vol. V. p. 110. Cultivation of Yam, by M. Lassausse, 2nd ser. IV, p. 495, 1870. Culture de l'Igname de Chine, by M. Colardeau, 2nd ser. IV, p. 270, 1870. Nature et végétation du tubercule de l'Igname de Chine, by M. Ch. Royer, 2nd ser. p. 735, 1873. Note sur l'Igname de Chine, by M. Vuitry, 2nd ser. VIII, p. 346, 1874. Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation. Note sur l'Igname de Chine, by M. Richard (du Cantal), vol. II, p. 271, 1855. Indications sur la culture de l'Igname, by M. le baron de Montgaudry, vol. Il, p. 337, 1855. Sur une nouvelle Igname de la Nouvelle-Zélande, by Mr. Piddington, vol. III, p. 156, 1856. Note sur l'Igname de la Nouvelle-Zélande, by M. Chatin, vol. III, p. 159, 1856. Sur la grande culture de l'Igname de Chine entreprise par M. Rémond, de Versailles, dans les départements de Seine-et- Oise, de la Drôme et des Landes, vol. IIl, p. 571, 1856. Acclimatization de l'lgname de Chine, by M. Moquin-Tandon, vol. V, p. 62, 1858. Sur les résultats de la culture de diverses espèces d'Ignames, by M. Chatin, vol. V, p. 26, 1858. Sur la culture des Ignames en 1857, à la Pépinière centrale du Gouvernement, à Alger, by M. Hardy, vol. V, p. 546, 1858. Notes sur divers modes de culture de l'Igname de Chine, by M. Henri de Calanjan, vol. V, p. 589, 1858. Culture et pain de l'Igname de Chine, suivant le système de M. de Montigny, 2nd ser. IV, p. 111, 1867. Note sur l'Igname, 2nd ser. V, p. 347, 1868. Dioscorea alata. Report on cultivation at the Jardin d'Acclimatation, by M. Quihou, 2nd ser. VI, p. 134, 1869. Note sur l'Igname, by M. Vavin, 3rd ser. V, p. 69, 1878. Note sur l'Igname (multiplication), by M. le Dr Lecler, 3rd ser. V, p. 188, 1878. Nouvelle méthode de culture de l'Igname de Chine, by M. P. Chappellier, 1895, 1st semester, p. 402. Notes sur la culture de l'Igname de Chine, by M. le Dr Heckel, 1897, p. 19. Flore des serres et des jardins de l'Europe, vol. IX, p. 197; vol. X, p. 184; vol. XI, p. 26; vol. XII, p. 22. KETMIE ACIDE Guinea sorrel. HIBISCUS SABDARIFFA L. Fam. Malvaceae. Annual plant. Stems 7 to 8 decimeters long, glabrous, reddish, twiggy. Leaves toothed, lower ones oval, upper ones with three wedge-shaped lobes. In June-September, flowers yellow, purple-ground, solitary, axillary, almost sessile. Twelve-toothed calicule. East Indies. We have cultivated Guinea sorrel under a frame, and have obtained flowers and seeds without difficulty; but we cannot conceal from ourselves that this culture will never be profitable in the Paris region. It may find a place in the kitchen garden of the curious, but it won't make it out of there. It's an amateur plant. "After flowering, the calyx lengthens, becoming thick, fleshy, dark red and acidic in flavor. In the West Indies, this acidity has led to it being substituted for sorrel, whose properties it shares. According to the nature of their respective functions, cooks and chefs use it in coulis and butter, and make good use of its calyxes and leaves for glazed stuffings, on which different meats are to appear; confectioners reserve a more distinguished use for the same parts, and make preserves and jams with a pleasant, refreshing acidity. "Acid Ketmia grows naturally in Guinea, the West Indies and all of southern America..." (Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles). Another note from A Manual of Gardening for Bengal and upper India, by Thomas A. C. Firminger: "Roselle-Indian Sorrel. Annual plant, native to the West Indies, but now cultivated in most gardens in India. "The part of the plant that is used is not the fruit itself, but the calyx, whose large, thick, succulent sepals are used to make delicious pies and puddings, as well as a remarkably beautiful jelly, which differs only slightly from red currant jelly, of which it is, in many respects, an excellent substitute. "There are two kinds of Indian sorrel, one red and the other white, which are very similar, except that the white one seems a little less acidic...". The Hindostani name for the plant is Patwa. We bought some Guinea sorrel jam from M. Hédiard, which we tasted and found pleasant. The formula was sent to us by an inhabitant of Pointe-à-Pître: Confitures de Groseille-pays. (Letter from Mr. BrEr.) " Once the fruit has been picked, the red petaloid calyx must first be separated from the green receptacle to which it adheres. Here, where the acidity of the fruit is feared, on the pretext that it is safe, and where, on the other hand, ripe fruit is disliked, saying that it is past its prime, here, I say, we begin by throwing boiling water on these quasi-flowers, to remove their excess sourness, and we don't use this first infusion. In a second operation, the red calyxes are cooked in water and the sugar melted. The proportions of sugar are at least those used to prepare all acid fruit syrups, without taking into account the pectin that the juice may contain; for it sometimes happens that the jams we eat are almost set in jelly, and, at other times, that they remain in syrup... It remains to be seen whether it is appropriate to use the first water, which is rejected here because of its excess acidity. Is there not a risk that this water will carry away all or part of the pectin along with the acid? In either case, one principle is sacrificed for the other. So it's up to you to decide which you prefer to keep. "I think we could perhaps make a first concentrated infusion, intended to prepare the acid jelly, and, with the same fruit, prepare a jam that would still be sufficiently sour. Another species of Hibiscus, H. cannabicus L., is often cultivated in tropical regions. Its acidic leaves are eaten like sorrel. KITESH or KEN HIRUGAWO CALYSTEGIA JAPONICA CHOISY (SYN. CONVOLVULUS JAPONICUS THUNB.). Family Convolvulaceae. This plant has some analogy with our great hedge bindweed (Calystegia sepium): the stems are voluble and can reach several meters in height; the rhizomes are extremely abundant and absolutely comparable to those of its European congeners. Batchelor and Kingo Miyabe: Ainu Economic plants (Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, p. 226), say that the long, fat roots of this plant are dug up in spring by the Ainos, for whom they serve as food. They eat them roasted or boiled, alone or with other foods such as rice or millet. We received the plant from Japan and it proved absolutely hardy in the Crosnes garden, where it quickly invaded the flowerbed dedicated to it. We tasted a few of the many roots harvested: fried, they proved stringy; cooked in water and pureed, we obtained a mild-tasting starch, pleasant enough, but of no particular merit. Among the other food plants sought after by the Ainos and cited by Messrs Batchelor and Miyabe (loc. cit.), but which we have not cultivated, we would point out: 1° Anemone flaccida Fr. Schm. (Pukusa. Kina, Gajo-so or Fukubero, whose leaves and stems are eaten by the Aïnos. The people harvest large quantities in spring, when it is in flower; they dry it for the winter, although they eat a little green. They eat it boiled with fish or sometimes in soup; the 2° Corydalis ambigua Cham. et Schlcht. (Toma, Engosaku). The Ainos eat large quantities of this plant's tubers, especially those from the Ishikari valley of Saghalien and the southern Kuriles. The tuber has a slight bitterness, which is removed by boiling it in water several times. In Etorup, the Ainos boil them with some earth to remove their bitterness. They are eaten either simply boiled or mixed with rice. In Saghalien, they are generally cooked with seal fat. Tubers are often boiled and then dried for later use. 289 AMORPHOPHALLUS RIVIERI Durieu, var. KoNJAC Engler, Monographiæ Phanerogam. vol. Il, p. 213; Conophallus Konjak Schott, ex Miq, Prolusio flor. jap. p. 134; Amorphophallus Konjac C. Koch, in Berl. Allg. Gartenz. 1858, p. 166; Arisæma Conjac Sieb. Fam. des Aroïdées. M. le Dr Vidal has published, in the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation (July 1877 issue), a memoir of the highest interest on the Konniyakou. This memoir occupies fifteen pages, and its length does not allow us to reproduce it in extenso; but we believe we must extract the essential parts and advise growers to have recourse to the memoir itself, when they undertake the cultivation of the plant. Extracts from Dr. J. Vidal's memoir. Dr. Vidal witnessed the great consumption of Conophallus Konjak tubers by the Japanese population. He was able to study its cultivation methods, as well as the type of preparation the tuber undergoes for use as food. "The specific name Konjak, given to the plant by the botanist Schott, is obviously a poor transcription of the native word Konniyakou, because the y is generally replaced by the j in the spelling of Japanese deposits, adopted by the Dutch and Germans. 18 DESCRIPTION "Konniyakou is a perennial aroid with a tuberous root. Its stem is a fairly light-green spike, speckled with brown and blackish spots, which can Fig. 40. - Amorphophallus Rivieri. reach a height of around 1 meter, with a circumference of Om, 70 to 0m, 80 at the base; it ends by giving rise to three large leaves (1) which spread obliquely, forming equal angles with each other and with the axis of the stem; the blade of these leaves is deeply and somewhat irregularly cut, so that (1) What Dr. Vidal refers to as stem and leaves is actually a single leaf whose petiole arises directly from the tuber and whose blade is trisected. They are almost pinnate; the main midrib is accompanied on each side by a band of leaf blade, which continues with that surrounding the secondary veins of the leaflets. At a depth of 3 or 4 inches below ground, the stem is implanted on the middle of the upper surface of a tuber, more or less developed according to the age of the subject; this tuber, which is more or less hemispherical, represents quite exactly the ties égales; and it is in the middle of the slightly concave plane of section that the neck of the plant is formed; as for the convex surface of the tuber, which is the largest, it gives attachment to a few rootlets and is provided with eyes, in the manner of Potatoes." The doctor did not see the flowering and fruiting organs of the Konniyakou, which, he was told, only flowers every two years and probably does not flower in the central provinces of Japan. It is therefore probably native to the southern provinces. According to the information provided to the author of this report, the Konniyakou flower has a spadix with male flowers at the top and female flowers below, surrounded by a large, red, lanceolate, acute spathe which curves at right angles through its middle, so that its upper half, now horizontal, rests on the tip of the spadix. The fruit consists of a large number of small red berries implanted on the corresponding, strongly swollen part of the spadix. CULTIVATION "Konniyakou cultivation is one of the simplest and most economical, and this is how the doctor saw it practiced in one of the most successful districts, some thirty leagues north-west of Yedo, in the province of Jo-chiou. "In this mountainous country, farmers prefer to plant Konniyakou on arid, non-irrigable land, unsuitable for growing cereals, and most often located on a more or less steep mountain slope; Holes 4 to 5 inches deep are then spaded, about 2 feet apart; a tuber is placed in each hole, and simply covered with soil; no fertilizer is ever added, and watering is also unnecessary. The tubers are planted in the spring, at the end of March or beginning of April, taking care to use only medium-sized tubers, i.e. those no more than one or two years old, as large tubers are said to be less successful. "Once the plantation has been established, little more attention is paid to it, and the tubers multiply in the following way: As the stem emerges from the ground, a certain number of underground branches or stolons of varying size emerge from the eyes on the convexity of the tuber, and when they have reached a length of a few inches, they swell into a mass that is the beginning of a young tuber; this develops rapidly, in turn supplying rootlets and producing an aerial stem that soon emerges from the ground shortly after the one that came from the first tubers planted. Each of these tubers gives rise to around fifteen new tubers within a radius of around 1 foot. "Harvesting takes place regularly every year, in autumn, in the last fortnight of October and in November. It simply consists in pulling out the tubers, exactly as if they were potatoes, sweet potatoes, etc., and then levelling them. All that's left to do is to roughly level the land, and use the harvested produce for other purposes. If the tubers are not to be used until some time in the future, it is essential to remove as much earth as possible from them, and to store them in a dry, well-ventilated place, on a floor as far as possible. "One might think that after a first harvest of Konniyakou, it would be necessary, as is usually the case in Europe, to plant a new crop in order to obtain a second one; but this is not the case, and the Japanese don't take this trouble; and, something which, while seeming strange, is no less real, they obtain every year, without any new expense or work, a harvest as large as that of the previous year. The Japanese explain this fact by saying that, firstly, it's very difficult not to leave a few unnoticed tubers in the ground when digging them up; and secondly, a certain number of those that appear too small are deliberately neglected. As a result, there are always enough tubers left in the ground to produce a normal harvest the following year. "During the winter, the Konniyakou stem withers, dries out and dies: it is replaced the following spring by a new stem emerging from the collar, immediately next to the place occupied by the previous one on the same tuber. "This brief description shows that nothing is simpler and less costly than cultivating this Aroidea; and, in fact, it's hardly possible to apply the name of cultivation to such simple procedures. There is no difficulty in choosing the land, since it is precisely the most ungrateful soils that are preferred by the Japanese; nor is there any expense, either in terms of fertilizers, which are never used, or in terms of labor, which is reduced to planting once and for all, and then simply uprooting. "However, given that the Japanese devote only their least fertile and even arid soils to this type of cultivation, we should not conclude that these types of soils are necessary for the success of the operation; This would be a mistake, as I've found that Konniyakou are even more successful when they are grown in better conditions, for example, when they happen to grow on good soil in the vicinity of farms, and can benefit from the fertilizers and watering given to the other crops they grow in. The Japanese have told me that they plant Konniyakou in poor soils only to make use of soil that is unsuitable for any other crop, and this is why it is only grown in mountainous districts; indeed, wherever the soil in the plains and valleys is of better quality or can be irrigated, it is always devoted to growing cereals, especially rice, which is by far the most important crop for the Japanese people. Nevertheless, in the sericulture districts, where plantations are often laid out around the edges of fields, rows of Konniyakou are also planted along the edges, sheltered by these same Mulberry trees. And on this subject, it should be said that, although this plant is very hardy, it should be avoided, if possible, if it is to be exposed too directly to the sun's rays; at least in slightly hot countries; for it should not be forgotten that it belongs to the Aroidae family, and that most plants in this family thrive in damp, shady places; so I have often seen plantations of Konniyakou in the vicinity of either Mulberry trees or Tea bushes; but any tree or shrub could perform the same protective function just as well, with the exception of resinous trees. "It has already been said that each tuber planted gives rise, on average, to about fifteen new tubers in the first year; this is enough to give an idea of the yield of a plantation; moreover, as the plant is perennial, the tubers can be left to grow for several years; but for food use, the Japanese only make their preparations with those from the first or second year, because those that are older lose in quality what they have gained in size. The weight and volume of the tubers vary greatly according to their age; those of the first year weigh, on average, from 75 to 100 grams, also having, on average, a circumference of Om, 18 to 0m, 20. I found that the weight of a third-year tuber was 1 kilogr. 700; with a circumference of Om, 56. These tubers are covered with a thin, brownish skin; their mass is formed of a white, resistant parenchyma, which, when cut, recalls the appearance of Turnip or Rave; they give off a strong, characteristic, unpleasant odor, which they do not lose by cooking in water; when cooked and simply divided with the fingers, they present a gritty, starchy appearance. Their flavor is strong, pungent and acrid, giving the mouth and back of the throat a tingling, burning sensation that can last for hours. "Fortunately, a simple and inexpensive treatment is all that is needed to transform it into a healthy and pleasant food. The secret of the operation consists in subjecting it to the action of a little milk of lime, by means of processes that the author has seen used by the Japanese, who prepare large quantities of it. "The Japanese use the Konniyakou tuber as a foodstuff in three different forms; but the basic preparation is the same, and it is only the handling that differs a little, as well as the form given to the manufactured product. Thus, they prepare a kind of vermicelli which they call Chira tahe, a wafer called simply Konniyahou and finally a kind of dry cake known as Chiro Ro." The author describes the processes used to make Chira take. He even gives two drawings showing the apparatus used. The product has the appearance of a large white vermicelli and is a healthy food with a fairly good taste. The doctor uses it in the same way as Italian pasta is used in Europe. The patties known as Konniyahou are slightly inferior to Chira take. The memoir describes how they are made, as well as Chira ko. Whatever form you give to the dough obtained from the Konniyahou pulp, the basis of the preparation is the same, and it always consists of adding a small quantity of milk of lime to the pulp. One thing is certain, and this has been demonstrated by centuries of Japanese experience: Konniyakou tubers, prepared as described by the author, are perfectly safe and wholesome. The memoir we have just read had been published for several years when we received a leaflet, translated for the first time from Japanese, which its translator, Count de Castillon, kindly sent us. The leaflet includes: 1° a brief history of Konniyakou; 2° its botanical description; 3° the methods used to cultivate it; 4° those employed in the manufacture of the food products it supplies; 5° finally, it describes the plant's uses other than for food. This document is of considerable interest. It confirms the information provided by Dr. Vidal on a number of points, but says nothing about these harvests which, according to him, would continue without new planting or fertilizers. It is likely, therefore, that the simple, economical cultivation methods described by the author of this report are only successful in the province he mentions. We will now read a description of Konniyakou cultivation, extracted from the notice translated by Count de Castillon, whose precision and clarity leave nothing to be desired. "After the spring equinox, the tubers saved for seed are dug up and planted in ridges of the same width as the Sato imo (Colocasia antiguorum). Although the price of seed varies from place to place, in general a weight of 24 kuwan me (90 kilograms) is worth around 2 yen (10 fr. 50). Although the shady, dry soils on the mountain slopes are ideal for growing this plant, it is prone to rot in very shady areas. Places under the cover of trees, where the sun only shines from ten o'clock to noon, are excellent. For fertilizer, we use horse litter, which decomposes and serves as manure. It also serves to intercept the sun's scorching rays during the hot season. At the end of autumn, when the stems are slightly wilted by the first white frosts, a general uprooting is carried out. The small tubers that have formed around the roots are detached. The large ones are converted into Konniyakou, and the small ones, destined to be used as seed the following year, are buried as if they were Sato imo tubers, in warm soil, in a pit covered with planks and then with earth, forming a small mound opposite the north and facing south, where they will be sheltered from the cold, rain and dew. "Although the yield varies according to the year's conditions, in good conditions 1 tan (9 ares 91 centiares) can yield 70 tawara (1) of tubers, just as they come out of the ground, i.e. unwashed. The cultivation rules we have just described (1) Tawara. In the wholesale of Imo, etc., one tawara represents a weight of 16 kuwan me, net, in Tokio and 20 kuwan me in Kioto. 1 kuwan me - 1000 me (3 kilogr. 750). pose vary slightly, depending on whether the soil is cold or hot. In warm soils, we cultivate on ridges in hata, hillside fields, and harvest in the course of the same year. In cold soils, the tubers are dug up and buried in silos. The following spring, they are replanted in hata. Silage is made as we have already mentioned." USES OTHER THAN FOR CULINARY PURPOSES "When rats cause damage, we keep them away by spreading this raw root, cut into slices, as if we wanted to make a plaster. "These tubers, also raw, are used to make a paper glue that sticks so well that it cannot be peeled off, and is also used to make snacks. "It is said that the decoction of this root is good against the winds. KON NIYAKU D'II NUMA "In the village of li Numa, Umi-Gami district, Simosa province, there's a plant called Kon niyaku d'li Numa; but it's not the one we've just been talking about, it's Tsuno mata (Gymnogongrus pinnulatus), which, when boiled, resembles the true Kon niyaku in consistency, hence its name. It is cooked with Shô yu, or eaten after being preserved in miso." After reading Dr. Vidal's memoir, which made a deep impression on us, we asked for Koniaku tubers in Yokohama, which we received and planted. Our personal observations seem to justify the author's assertions regarding the hardiness of this Aroidée, whose importance increased singularly in our eyes when we received the notice from M. le comte de Castillon. Koniaku is not a vegetable plant; it belongs not to horticulture, but to agriculture, whose domain is not ours; but, when we come across a plant of such interest, we cannot resign ourselves to ignoring it. KUDZU (Japan), KO (China). PUERARIA THUNBERGIANA Benth, Journ. of the Linnean Society, vol. IX, p. 122. Pachyrrhizus Thunbergianus Sieb. et Zucc, Fam, nat. Fl. jap, II, 113; P. trilobus DC, Neustanthus chinensis Benth, Flora Hongk, 86; Dolichos hirsutus Thunb, in Linn. Transact, II, p. 339. Leguminosae family. Plant with climbing, tomentose stems. Leaves trifoliolate, with mediocrely pedicellate lateral leaflets, rounded, pale and reticulate beneath, slightly hairy on both sides, 3 inches long, the terminal larger. Flowers purplish, arranged KUDZU Fig. 41 - Pueraria Thunbergiana. in clusters 6 to 7 inches long; peduncles tomentose, I inch long. Pods linear, compressed, 3 inches long, ending in a curved tip, covered with long yellowish hairs. Kudzu (pronounced Koudzou) grows in Japan (Thunb.). Ko in China In his Novus Atlas sinensis (1655), Martini reports that, in the town of Li-ping (prov. Quei-chen): "Pannos conficiunt incolæ ex cruda cannabe, seu herba cannabi prorsus simili. Co Sinæ vocant. Ex his vestes pro tempore æstivo eximiæ plane sunt ac commodissimæ." (P. 102). Pueraria Thunbergiana Benth (Pachyrrhizus Thunbergianus S. et Z.), Ko, in Chinese. P. trilobus DC. has the same Chinese name. Both plants appear to be textiles (1). In his Nouveaux Mémoires sur l'état de la Chine (1696, Paris, 2 vols.), Louis Le Comte reports that, in addition to cotton, the Chinese wear fabrics in summer made from nettle and another species they call Ko pou, which they highly esteem. The latter is supplied in Fokien by a plant called Ko, a creeping shrub that they let grow in the fields and which is often extremely long. It has rounded leaves, larger than those of Ivy. They are soft, green above and covered with white down below. The stem is as thick as a finger. To obtain textile fibers, the stems are immersed in water, as we do for flax, and, after stripping them of their outer bark, the fibers of the second bark are used to make a fabric that is very beautiful, transparent and fresh (I, 242). Pueraria Thunbergiana Benth. Already reported by Martini, Ko, in Chinese (2). (1) Bretschneider, Early European Researches, p. 14, London 1881. (2) Bretschneider, loc. cit,, p. 28. Information on the seeds of a textile plant sent from China by a French missionary (1): "The Ko plant is also called Hoang-kin, Lan-ho and Khithsi. It can be found everywhere, but especially in the provinces of Tche-Kiang and Kiang-nan. It grows just as well in uncultivated areas as in cultivated fields. It starts to grow in spring and extends its purple stem to a length of 1 me 2 tchang (3 to 6 meters). The stems are harvested and, after suitable preparation, textile filaments are obtained. The root is violet on the outside and white on the inside; it grows to the size of an arm and 2 to 3 meters long. Its leaves are three-lobed, like those of the Fong tree, but longer, with a green surface and pale underside. In the seventh month, this plant produces reddish-purple flowers in clusters. After drying in the sun, they can be boiled in water to make stock. "The fruits of this plant resemble small yellow beans. They should be picked in the seventh or eighth month. HARVESTING " The stems of the Ko plant are usually ripe in summer, which is when they are harvested. Those that are still green and short are left. Those about 3 meters long are harvested with the root, which, according to some authors, yields a nourishing starch. They are called Theou-ko, or Ko stems (1) Industries anciennes et modernes de l'Empire chinois, by MM.Stanislas Julien and Paul Champion. Paris, Eugène Lacroix, libraire-éditeur, 1869. of the highest quality. When the stems are extraordinarily long, with white spots near the root, they are good for nothing. As for those without white spots, 2 or 3 meters of each stem are cut off; these are called eulko, i.e. second-quality Ko stems. PREPARATION " Once the stems have been collected, they are boiled in water over a hot fire. The filaments are removed with the fingernail; they are as white as those of Hemp, but are not adherent to the green part of the plant. Once the filaments have been plucked, they are washed in running water, beaten and, after being thoroughly cleaned, dried in the open air. Their whiteness increases if they are exposed to the dew for one or two nights. After that, they should be placed in the shade, as they fear the sun's rays. WASHING KO CLOTHES "If these garments are washed in pure water crushed with Meï leaves (Amygdalus nana, according to M. Abel de Rémusat; Arbutus, according to P. d'Entrecolles), they will remain reeking all summer long. Some people wash them in a porcelain basin with boiling water, in which they have crushed Meï leaves. It's essential not to use a wooden tub, otherwise Ko's clothes will turn black. "According to M. de Jussieu's opinion, the plant in question appears to be a Phaseolae related to Dolichos and particularly Dolichos bulbosus. Kudzu in Japan In the book Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878, we read: "Kudzu (Pueraria Thunbergiana) is a wild plant whose roots yield starch. Its leaves are used to feed cattle, and its fibers to make cloth. We are indebted to the kindness of Count de Castillon for two notes he has translated from Japanese, which describe in the most instructive and comprehensive detail the use made in Japan of Kudzu roots and fibers. The one we're about to read describes the process used to extract the starch. The other, published in the Mémoires de la Société des Etudes japonaises, 1878-1879, describes the manufacture of Kudzu cloth. It and the foreword that precedes it can be found at the end of this chapter. KUDZU KO (Kudzu starch) (Extract from the Notice sur les pluntes à fécule du Japon) "Kudzu (Pueraria Thunbergiana) is a climbing plant that grows wild in mountains and wastelands. In spring, young shoots emerge from the old stem. Each petiole bears three leaves similar to those of Ingem mame (Phaseolus vul20 garis); leaves and petioles are covered with hairs. In autumn, clusters of wine-purple flowers similar to those of Mame (Leguminosae) emerge from the leaf axils, producing pods. From the ninth and tenth months until the twelfth, when the eyes start to develop, these roots are pulled out with an iron pick or hoe. They are washed to remove the soil, and carefully crushed on a flat stone with a wooden or metal mallet. A tub is filled with water, in which the roots are kneaded to extract the soluble parts. The pulp is filtered and placed in a hemp canvas bag, which is then pressed. The residue is discarded. Immediately afterwards, filter through a cotton cloth bag. Leave to stand for one day. Decant the top water and dry the deposit, which is divided with a cleaver. The black starch underneath is scraped off and discarded. Place a second time in the sumasi-ohe (washing tub) with a large quantity of water, and stir while swirling. As the deposit precipitates, the falsetto is successively removed from the superimposed cinnamons, starting with those at the top, to draw off the water from the upper part. This process is repeated two or three times. After the precipitate has dried, it is removed with a small trowel and placed in the sara-si (flat box), lined with a cloth sprinkled with ash, to dry in the sun. Kaï-Kudzu (Ashen Kudzu, Grey Kudzu) is then obtained, and to make this starch perfectly white, a suitable proportion is placed in a tub and stirred circularly in water as before. Filter through a tightly woven sack; leave to stand for a day, after which it is decanted; change the water a third time, leave the deposit to precipitate, and, by repeating this operation seven or eight times, remove all soluble parts. When the starch is dry, we place it in a sara-si stretched with thick paper, and, by putting it to dry every day in the sun, it forms perfectly white lumps, and we then have Kudzu ko (Kudzu starch)." In 1879, we sowed seeds we had received from Dr. Hénon against a wall facing south. They produced vigorous stems that soon reached the wall coping. They didn't flower, and when winter came, they froze. The stump did not suffer. In 1880, the stems were stronger than those the seedling had produced, and 30 degrees of cold froze only those parts that exceeded 1".50 in height. The lower parts, which had become woody, therefore withstood the severe winter; they had not flowered. In 1881, the full height of the stems survived the winter well. The plant did not flower. Since then, the plant has flowered every year at the end of September. We have therefore observed that the Kudzu is absolutely hardy, with luxuriant vegetation, but at the same time, in the Paris climate, it is completely sterile, making it impossible to multiply the plant by sowing. At the Muséum, where a few plants of Kudzu exist, the plants have, like ours, withstood the winters; it is true that they are placed in the part of the garden known as the layers, i.e. in the best sheltered spot. We tried taking cuttings, but failed. Laying down stems gave better results. Then, the mother plant having acquired extraordinary vigor and development, we were able to lay down some twenty stems, which gave us as many new plants. Multiplication is therefore easy and unlimited. This is a crucial point, as the plant does not produce seeds in the Paris climate. We have seen that the Kudzu stump provides a valuable starch and that its leaves are sought after by livestock; but Pueraria Thunbergiana is first and foremost a textile plant. In Japan, however, it does not seem to be cultivated for its fibers as widely as in China. When asked about this, Dr. Hénon wrote on July 29 1883: "If I have not spoken to you about the uses of Kudzu as a textile plant, it is because I have never seen it put to this use. In the part of Japan I lived in, Kudzu grows everywhere in coppices; it vegetates there with great power, grows stems 8 to 10 meters long, flowers very abundantly and is covered with pods, which, to tell the truth, contain few seeds. It is not cultivated, but in winter, poor people pull out the roots, not without difficulty, and an excellent starch is made. The starch obtained from this starch is much better, more resistant, without being brittle, than that from rice or wheat. This starch is sometimes used as a food starch and in cakes. Kudzu is therefore cultivated for two purposes: firstly, an excellent starch is extracted from its roots, and secondly, it provides material for the manufacture of fabrics, the industrial importance of which was pointed out to us a few years ago by Mr. Eugène Simon, former French consul. The stems of Pueraria Thunbergiana emit such long, numerous and fibrous sprays that one cannot doubt the profit that would be made if the plant were naturalized or cullivated in France. We believe in the accuracy of the information that presents its fabric as remarkably beautiful. It seems to us that Kudzu or Ko seeds should be imported from its native countries. It is so hardy that it can be grown anywhere by letting it crawl along the ground. Indeed, it would be impossible to provide high enough supports for a plant whose stems reach 8 to 10 meters in length. So we have to let it crawl, as the Chinese and Japanese do. In a letter dated August 16 1883, Count de Castillon wrote: "In the San kaï meï San dzu ye, Kudzu is shown as a plant crawling on the ground, and the drawing shows Japanese peasants extracting it. There is therefore no need to climb it. Kudzu or Ko could therefore be grown by letting its stems spread out over the field, and its stumps would yield abundant, inexpensive harvests for an indeterminate period of time. A perennial, textile and extraordinarily productive plant deserves serious and decisive experimentation. As for us, we thought we could take advantage of its nutritional properties to talk about it at length, as we have just done. LA TOILE DU KUDZU Notice translated for the first time from Japanese by M. le comte de Castillon (see Mémoires de la Société des études japonaises, 1878-1879). Kudzu (Pueraria Thunbergiana) is an extremely valuable food and industrial plant. It is also an ornamental plant, and its spirited growth combined with its extensive foliage make it ideal for lining walls and cradles. It also has medicinal properties that merit serious study. Its roots, flowers and pods are used as a remedy in China and Japan. In the latter country, its leaves are used as fodder, and its long, thin, very resistant twigs are used as string. The starch provided in abundance by its long, voluminous roots, which can reach a length of 3 meters and a diameter of Om, 10 to Om, 12, is of an exceptional quality. Its finesse, brilliant whiteness and pleasant flavor make it the best of its kind. Dr. Filhol, the learned chemist from Toulouse (1), has recognized the nutritive power of this root as equal to that of the potato. The only plant of this species that exists, we believe, in Europe, was introduced by us three and a half years ago, in the spring of 1875. (See Annales de la Société d'Horticulture de la Haute-Garonne, 1875.) Everything leads us to believe that this precious plant will adapt perfectly to our climate. Moreover, it requires no cultivation care. Finally, its climbing stem provides a fabric with special properties, but manufactured by processes that our industry will probably find ways to simplify. This is what we will be able to judge after hearing the Japanese author, to whom we leave the floor: "Kudzu (Pueraria Thunbergiana), a perennial plant of the Leguminosae family, closely resembles Fudzi mame (Dolichos cultratus Thunb.) and Ingen mame (Phaseolus vulgaris L.); but its stem and leaves are covered with hairs; its sarmentose stem is extraordinarily vigorous; its seeds are inedible. "This plant grows spontaneously in the various provinces, on mountains or in wasteland, depending on the place. Everywhere, a starch called Kudzu ko is prepared from its roots, and at the Kake gava relay station, in Yen siu (Totoini province), a thread is extracted from its stem, with which a fabric of the highest reputation is woven. This Kudzu comes from the mountains and wastelands of the village of Kura-ma, to the north-east of the aforementioned post house, from the localities of Matsu-ba and Oho zawa, and from the village of Tomi-da, located south of Naka-yama, Koya, etc. It is considered to be of the highest quality. It is especially considered to be of superior quality if it grows on the mountains of the village of Musi-bu, which faces the north side of Mari-matsi, in the Sudzi district, and on those of the village of No-be. "If now we investigate how long ago Kudzu began to be exploited, although this point is not yet elucidated, as we possess a song composed by His Exc. Tameal (1) on the Kudzu cloth of celieu, it is today something like more than 680 years since this fabric must have been made. "We will now give a general description of the manufacture of this fabric. As for Kudzu starch, it will be dealt with separately when we talk about this type of food. "Although Kudzu stalks are found to have reached a length of 2 to 3 zyau (3 to 9 meters) and beyond by the time autumn arrives, they must be cut for a period of about fifty days from the first fortnight of the fifth month (June 5-21) to make thread. Their length, which at this time is only 7 syaku (2m, 10), reaches 9 syaku (2m, 70) in the middle of this period, to reach 1 and 2 zyau (3 to 6 meters) in the last days. But as the 3 or 4 syaku (Om, 90 to 1°, 20) above the roots are of poor quality, they have to be left, which reduces the harvested length from around 3-4 to 6-7 syaku (Om, 90-1m, 20 to 1m, 80-2m, 10). "On the same day as this operation, they must be plunged into a boiler full of boiling water. They are shaken in all directions for a very short time (2 and a half seconds, 5 of our European seconds). After stirring, they are returned to the water for the same number of seconds, then removed. "They are then soaked in running water, where they are left for a day and a night. A doormat is spread on the ground, on which they are piled; another is laid on top as a blanket, and they are left wrapped in this way for two days and two nights, and, when they are uncovered, the fermenting stalks give off vapours; they are watered, which puts an end to this fermentation. This is called naha midzu (middle water, second water). "The mats are replaced as before, and the stems remain in this state for a day and a night. "They are then put to soak in shallow running water, where they are trodden on with the feet; the bark is then removed and the stem core discarded. The strips of bark are equalized in length, and placed in bundles of thirty; then, taking two of these strips at a time, with one hand, they are inserted between the branches of a small fork 2 tan (Om, 06) long, which is held with the other. "When they have turned white, they are hung on a horizontal bamboo pole to dry in the sun. Before drying is complete, they are removed and, by shaking them briskly, the bark fibers separate by rubbing against each other, thus obtaining the filasse, which is then left to dry completely before being converted into Kudzu wo (Kudzu thread). "To make Kudzu wo, we choose the best strands from the tow; with thumb and forefinger, we tear them apart as finely as possible; then we add them end to end, knotting them tightly. Scissors are used to cut off the ends of the threads that extend beyond the knots. The threads whose knots have been sheared off in this way are called tsuguri. They are then rolled up in the wo oke (a round yarn box with a louvered bottom), which is then placed in a basket of the same shape and immersed in water. "Then, by interlacing the threads in the shape of an 8 around the thumb and little finger (literally: as in the game children call aya, cat's cradle), small hanks are formed, and they are ready to be used for the weft. As this is their only use, silk, hemp or cotton threads must necessarily be used for the warp. "The loom does not differ in any way from the ordinary loom; only that the weft thread is wetted with water before being placed in the shuttle, and as it passes the reed, the knots are lifted out, which are trimmed with scissors when the weaving is complete. The fabric is then rinsed with clean water, dried, then re-wetted; it is wound onto the maki ginuta (fulling cylinder) and slowly beaten with small strokes, which gives the fabric a sheen, which is then dyed in various shades, after which it is stretched by means of the sii-si (1), and a coat of nori, a primer composed of 10 momme (37 gr. 50) of Kudzu ko (Kudzu starch) and 400 me (1 kil. 500) of water, then the Kudzu cloth is finished. (1) A dyeing instrument designed to remove wrinkles from a fabric; it consists of several bows of elastic bamboo that hold the fabric taut across its width. This instrument is also known as a mogari (thief). The bamboo generally used for this purpose is ma-daké (B. Quilioi), which has earned it the syuonym mogari take. "This fabric does not soften under the action of water; and, as once wet, it dries quickly, it is used for kappa (1), kakama (2), etc. The pieces being woven in large widths, it is easy to weave them. The pieces, woven in large widths, are also used for fusuma (3) interlinings, and this type of production has developed considerably in recent years. "The first manufacturer of Kudzu yarn at the Kake gava post house is Sudzuki gen pe. The main manufacturers of this fabric in the same place are Naru hira Kiu meï, Sató Kuni yosi, Matsu moto yosi naga, etc. The main house for Kudzu cloth is Sató Kuni yosi. The main manufacturer of Kudzu cloth is Hyo-do, in the village of Taka-mura. "A total of 60,000 tan (a tan is worth 8m, 50) of this cloth (500,000 meters), with a gold value of 49,200 yen (263,809 fr. 65), is manufactured in the places we have mentioned, in equal quantities in the three types, upper, middle and lower." Imperial era, mei dzi, 5th year. Winter. M. Carrière published a note in the Revue Horticole, 1891, p. 31, in which he quotes the opinion of M. Paul de Mortillet, from La Tronche, near Grenoble (Isère), who says he can certify, from experience, that the starch obtained from the roots of Pueraria Thunbergiana (fig. 41) is excellent and makes soups comparable to tapioca. The same author recommends Kudzu as a fodder plant for its leaves, which are much sought-after by livestock. In a letter to the president of the Comice agricole d'Alger (see Revue des Sciences naturelles appliquées, 1895, p. 810), Mr. J. Poisson, sitting (1) Manteau pour la pluie; one of the few words the Japanese have borrowed from the Portuguese language. (2) Species of very loose-fitting pants. (3) This name refers to the sliding doors that separate Japanese appaitements; they are usually lined with paper on both sides, and also with cloth, particularly Kudzu cloth, which is wider than ordinary cloth. " .. A m etant at the Muséum, stresses the importance of cultivating Kudzu as a forage plant in Algeria and southern France. Horses, cows and sheep are said to have eaten the leaves with obvious satisfaction. As the leaves are large and abundant, it would undoubtedly be worthwhile to continue experimenting with this use of the plant. KUMARA (1) BATATAS EDULIS Chois. var; Ipomxa Batatas Poir. var; Ipomæa chrysorrhiza Hook. f. Family Convolvulaceae. Closely related to the common potato, Ipomxa Batatas Lamk. of which it is merely a variety; cullivated since ancient times by the Maoris of New Zealand. In 1884, Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cte received Kumara tubers from Mr. J. Hooker, harvested at Kew. Unfortunately, these tubers arrived in such a state of decomposition that it was impossible to plant them. This is a very unfortunate accident; as the climate of New Zealand is more or less the same as that of central France, the Kumara would have been a great potato for us. There are between twenty and thirty varieties of this Ipomoea. (1) Notes taken almost entirely from a report published by Mr. Schomburgk, Director of the Adelaide Botanical Garden in South Australia.) Its tubers differ from one another like those of our potatoes; some have red skin, others purple, others white. Some are smooth and cylindrical, others deeply furrowed or regularly fluted; others are short and thick, obtuse at the tip; but there is never any mixing between these varieties. All reproduce exactly the types planted. The only sign of degeneration, caused by soil or drought, is in the volume of the tuber. All the varieties are ancient and have been perpetuated by the perfect preservation of the tubers. In the memoirs of the New Zealand Institute, Mr. W. Colenso gives a very interesting report on this favorite vegetable of the Maoris: "They have been using it," he says, "since prehistoric times, as many legends show. "When the seasons and soil are favorable, its yield is considerable. However, it has a powerful insect enemy in the form of a large larva, which devours the leaves of young plants long before the roots or tubers have developed. "Each plant is visited by elderly women, using a planter or pointed instrument, to select and pull out some of the season's most beautiful new tubers. The soil is loosened around the plants, and then mounded again, not unlike the hoeing of potatoes, but with much greater care. "The young tubers from this first uprooting are scraped and half-dried in the sun on clean mats, carefully protected from the dew. When dry, they are either eaten or stored in baskets as a kind of candy or candied tuber. They are held in high esteem by the Maoris and eaten raw, or soaked and crushed in a little hot water. "During the general uprooting, which takes place late in autumn, but always before the frost, great care is taken to collect the roots. They are carefully sorted according to volume. Any that are bruised, broken or slightly injured are set aside for prompt consumption. The rest are collected in large flat baskets, always new, and placed in good time in suitable stores, taking great care not to do so

Colenso says, "In my opinion, one of the most remarkable things about this useful tuber is how the first varieties were obtained. Mr. Colenso further says: "In my opinion, one of the most remarkable things about this useful tuber is still to be noted: how were the first varieties obtained?" On this subject, he could learn nothing to his satisfaction from the Maoris themselves, except that all the varieties came to them from their ancestors. He tried to find out if the old Maoris had ever seen the Kumara in flower. "No, they had never known anything like it," he said, and they never brought in their crops until the leaves had dried out. Mr. Colenso also often wanted to know if any new kind or variety had recently been obtained by the Maoris or their immediate ancestors; to which they also replied: "No." "Is it not possible," says Mr. Colenso, "that in remote times the plant flowered and that ancient cultivators, voluntarily or accidentally, obtained roots from sown seeds? Is it not also possible that the plant, after artificial, persevering, assiduous cultivation, tending to obtain early varieties, and continued for centuries, came to flower definitively, as happened in England with potato varieties, after repeated cultivation? The earliest varieties give neither flowers nor seeds. Professor Kirk of Wellington, New Zealand, has twice sent Kumara tubers to Mr. Schomburgk, and has enclosed the most interesting information: "The Maoris," he writes, "cultivate about twenty varieties, all of which are said to have been brought to them by the mystic 'Hawaiki'. "The one with the most delicate taste is a small pink-fleshed variety. Its cultivation is almost abandoned, but it deserves to be grown as a delicacy. I haven't seen it for twelve or thirteen years, but I'll try to send it to you next spring with other varieties. I intend to visit the north, and there I'll be able to make arrangements. Mr. Kirk continues: "I have written to a Maori friend of mine, asking for information on the vegetation, cultivation and cooking of Kumara, and will send it to you when I receive his reply. For the moment, I'll limit myself to saying that Kumara is planted on small mounds arranged in staggered rows, about 18 inches apart. The soil should be light rather than compact and rich. Once the piece of land has been planted, it is strictly forbidden to women. When ripe, the crop is harvested with great ceremony. It's best baked in the oven, in the Maori way. The planting season begins in October and continues until December. The soil is ploughed or spaded, and small mounds are formed after finely breaking up the clods. The mounds are 8 to 10 inches high, and a tuber is planted in each one, barely covered with soil. The plantation then requires no further care other than careful weeding. Harvesting takes place in March and April, with the crop ripening around mid-March. To preserve the tubers, we use the Maori rua method. The rua is a shallow pit, dug in an easily drained area and in soil of sufficient consistency, the excavated earth being used to raise the sides and cover the tubers to form the roof. The sides of the rua are built without using water, the earth simply being beaten with the hand. A post is placed at each end of the pit, and these posts support a ridge from which fascines and pieces of wood are stretched to the wall, tightly packed together and covered with earth. Tubers are also kept in shallow pits with a good layer of branches at the bottom and a good covering of the same nature at the top, before the soil is thrown on top. If they are exposed to the air for long periods, they are lost. They are removed with sharp-tipped sticks, about a foot long, a job that must be done with care to avoid injuring them, as those damaged will soon perish. If the tubers are left in the ground, they quickly rot during the winter rains. The Maoris prefer to cook them in their ovens, although they often boil them like potatoes. Some types of Kumara are quite watery. These are not good boiled, as this method of cooking makes them even more watery. All are even better when baked or roasted. It will be noted that Mr. Colenso, speaking of an initial uprooting, says that it is done by elderly women, whereas Professor Kirk says that women are absolutely forbidden to enter Kumara plantations; but there is no contradiction here. This is obviously a belief shared by many of our gardeners, who at certain times attribute a pernicious influence to the presence of women, particularly on Melons and Mushrooms. In 1884, the Kumara had not yet been fully acclimatized in South Australia, but its cultivation seemed likely to succeed, and Mr. Schomburgk hoped to distribute tubers in 1885. The plant had recently been introduced to the East Indies. It had produced first-rate harvests there. Mr. Duthie, Director of the Saharanpur Botanical Gardens, said in his last report: "I consider Kumara a very valuable addition to our vegetable varieties. In his work entitled Origine des plantes cultivées, M. Alph. de Candolle, in his search for the potato's native country, states that considerations of roughly equal value would allow either America or the East Indies to be attributed the plant's paternity. However, the Kumara, which is certainly only a variety of the Potato, is found neither in America, where it does not yet appear to exist, nor in the East Indies, which recently received it from New Zealand. According to this hypothesis, this primitive type of Potato should have been carried from America or India to Oceania, where it would have been modified to form a distinct race. Moreover, this introduction would have had to go back a very long way, since the plant seems to have existed among the Maoris since prehistoric times. In addition, Alph. de Candolle states: "The plant is cultivated in Taïli, the neighboring islands and New Zealand under the names : Umarra, Gumarra and Gumalla, described by Forster as Convolvulus chrysorrhizus, is Batate according to Sir Joseph Hooker. Seeman points out that these names resemble the Quichuen name for Batate in America, which, he says, is Cumar." Until now, we were unaware that Kumara was cultivated in Taîti and the neighbouring islands. We believe it would be a useful acquisition. 21 LEWISIA Chita, Spatulum or Spœtlum of the Indians. Canadian bitter root. White Lewisia. Bitter Root. Mountain rose. LEWISIA REDIVIVA Pursh. Fam. Portulaceae. Our attention was drawn to this plant by a report from the Commissioner of Agriculture (1), which states: The California Indians give Lewisia the name "Spatulum". Its root is compact and fusiform, dark on the outside, white and mealy on the inside. It provides an abundant supply of concentrated food, of which a single ounce is enough for a meal. The plant is worth cultivating." We'll say later what we think of the extraordinary nutritional value attributed by the report to Lewisia and affirmed successively by several botanists, who seem to have repeated, without further examination, what their predecessors had said; but this is not the only merit of the plant: it is also very ornamental, and, with its spring flowers, pink and relatively large, is quite worthy of taking its place in our gardens. And that's not all: its vitality is quite astonishing, making it a real plant curiosity. We are going to present the information we (1) Report of the Commissionner of Agriculture for the year 1870. Food products of the North American Indians, Washington; Printing office, 1871. on its habitat, its nutritional properties, its vitality and its hitherto little-known cultivation as a decorative plant. HABITAT "The plant is found on the summit of Mount Diablo, looking north to Colombia, east to Montana, Utah and Arizona (1)." "It is found everywhere in Oregon, near mountains, in arid prairies, along rivers (2), among them the Lewis and Têteplate rivers (3), as well as on the banks of Clark's river (4)." FOOD PROPERTIES "The natives use it extensively as a food. Stripped of its bark, the inner white part of the root is boiled in water to produce a substance similar to boiled Salep or Arrow-root. The dried root is almost converted to starch by maceration in cold water (5). "It is a favorite food among aborigines. With the bark removed, a handful of roots, boiled with meat, forms a considerable quantity of nutritious mucilage. According to Douglas, thanks to their powerfully nutritious quality, Lewisia roots are an admirable resource for camps during (1) Geological survey of California, Botany, vol. I, p. 78. (2) Torrey and Gray, Flora of North America, vol. I, p. 677. (3) Nuttall, Journal of the Academy of natural Sciences of Philadelphia. 4) Hooker, Botanical miscellany, vol. Ier, p. 344. (5) Torrey and Gray, loc. cit. long journeys, two or three ounces a day is enough for a man, even when he has to endure long fatigue (1)." VITALITY "The roots of Lewisia have such vital energy that the specimen in Lewis's herbarium, as Pursh notes, showing some signs of vegetation, was planted in a garden in Philadelphia, where it lived for a year; and Douglas's specimens, in the same conditions, vegetated for some time in the garden of the Horticultural Society in London (2)." "In June 1826, Douglas had collected specimens in flower, but they had fallen from the boat into the water while descending a rapid; in March 1827, those that recovered to live, after having been compressed in the herbarium, were planted as said above (3)." "We have had desiccated specimens, kept for two years, or more, which still gave fresh harvests of leaves. "The specimen on which our figure was taken at Kew, collected in English Columbia, to be preserved in the herbarium, by Mr. Lyall, R. N. of the delimitation expedition, had been plunged into boiling water because of its well-known obstinate vitality. More than a year and a half later, however, it was showing signs of life and producing its beautiful flowers in (1) Nuttall, loc. cit. (2) Torrey and Gray, loc. cit. (3) Drummond. in all their perfection, in May, in the Royal Gardens at Kew (1)." DECORATIVE CULTIVATION "Lewisia rediviva (Spatulum). A very remarkable and beautiful rock garden plant, resembling Purslane. "It is very dwarfed, only about an inch high, and has two small tufts of narrow leaves, from the center of which rise flowering stems. "The flowers are large relative to the dimensions of the plant, measuring from 1 inch to 2 1/2 inches in diameter, and varying from dark pink to white. The roots are succulent and have the property of retaining their vile principle under the most unfavorable conditions. "It sometimes fails to develop its annual leaves, with the result that it is often thought to be dead and difficult to treat, although this is not the case. "When grown in pots, it should be planted in broken stones and its roots plunged into a light, sandy loam (2) with peat. "After flowering, the plant curls up and looks like a heap of dried-out, twisted bits of string; but such is the nature of the plant and hence its name (3)." (1) Botanical Magazine, pl. 5395. Our drawing is taken from the colored figure published in this work. (2) English loam is an excellent quality free soil. (3) Robinson, The English flouer garden, London, 1883. Our kind and learned correspondent, Mr. Havard, United States Army Surgeon, wrote to us on June 14 1888: "I have mailed you a small Fig. 42. - Lewisia rediviva. packet of roots of Lewisia rediviva (Portulaceae), one of the most sought-after native plants of the Oregon Indians. I received these roots from one of my correspondents and it is quite likely that, if you wish, I can send you another package. "The plant was in full bloom at the time of removal, which probably explains the thinness of the roots. They must be much fleshier in spring, when the first leaves sprout, which is when the Indians pull them out. It's a very hardy plant, as its name suggests, and so I hope that, despite the adverse circumstances, the roots will retain their vitality until you can get them into the ground." We planted these roots at the reception, and by autumn, although absolutely deprived of water, they were showing budding leaves. They gave us flowers in May. Another letter from Mr. Havard, dated September 1st: "I will answer as many of your questions about Lewisia rediviva as I can. The Indians do not cultivate this plant; they pull it from uncultivated land in spring (April), as soon as the first rosette of leaves allows them to recognize it, i.e. before it flowers. They eat the root dried or baked in an oven, which simply consists of an earthen hole lined with stones. The result, after removal of the bark, is what you see in the enclosed small package received from Washington territory. These cooked roots will give you the answer to your question about their maximum size. Of all the samples I have received, I have not seen any larger. The Indians eat them as they are, or make flour from them, which they eat either as bread or in soup. "No one has ever ventured to sow Lewisia seeds. Although a perennial plant, it is more than likely that medium-sized roots would be produced in the first year. It remains to be seen whether the starch, which forms the main part of these roots, would be accumulated in sufficient quantities to make them excellent. "Does the plant have divisible stumps? I believe that the many branches of the mother stock could be separated without their vitality suffering. "The whites of Oregon and Washington territory are not fond of it; it is not an ordinary article of their cuisine. "In short, these roots are nourishing, but their mealy flavor has nothing to recommend them in any special way, and they seem far too small to be profitably cultivated, unless cultivation can modify them, which is quite possible. "If Lewisia is a disappointment as a vegetable plant, it deserves to be grown as an ornamental. I expect to receive a parcel of it before long, so that I can send you a few more roots and probably some seeds too." We received this package; it contained seeds which were sown immediately. Wishing to ascertain the nutritional properties of Lewisia, we used the cooked roots we received for this purpose, and gave them to Mr. Arnaud, chemist at the Muséum (1), who very kindly offered to examine them. We didn't put enough roots at his disposal for him to make a quantitative analysis, but enough for him to give us this (1) Chevreul's successor as Professor of Norganic Chemistry. reply: "The root of Lewisia rediviva contains no nitrogenous matter and, consequently, no albuminoids or alkaloids whose presence could explain the nutritional value attributed to it. It can therefore only be considered as a starchy material, analogous to many other roots or tubers. As we have just said, Mr. Arnaud did not have a large enough quantity of roots to make a complete analysis; but we have since received from Mr. Havard the following analysis, published by Mr. H. Trimble, Professor at the College of Pharmacy, Philadelphia: Fatty matter, resin and wax............ 4.98 Mucilage gum.................... 14.80 Albuminoids.......................... 3.58 Starch.............................. 8.57 Water................................... 12.17 Ash............................. 2.53 Woody fiber and indeterminate matter.. 53.37 100.00 and the American chemist accompanies his analysis with the following observation, approved by M. Arnaud: "The quantity of starch found may seem low when one considers the use made of the Lewisia root, but the large quantity of gum and mucilage makes up for what is lacking. We can therefore believe, without taking on the task of resolving the question, that the Indians really feel nourished by the "spatulum" and that the nutritional power they attribute to it is not imaginary. We conclude by recommending the cultivation of Lewisia, made easy by its extraordinary vitality, either with the aim of obtaining larger roots than the wild plant, or to add a very pretty flower to the current riches of our gardens. LIS COMESTIBLES La Flore des serres et des jardins de l'Europe published (vol. VI, 1850-1851, p. 145) a very interesting note by the learned botanist Fischer, as follows: "Sur les Liliacées alimentaires de la Sibérie. The disaster that has struck the potato harvest in recent years has focused the attention of botanists and farmers on plants that are supposed to be able to replace, in some way, this precious plant. Unfortunately, none of the species proposed to growers combines all the valuable qualities of the potato: ease of cultivation, rapid and fertile multiplication, abundance of nutritive matter, pleasant flavour, easy digestion. Yam, Batate douce and Manioc require tropical temperatures, and their cultivation, which alone could be on a par with that of the Solanée, is strictly excluded from northern latitudes. "Tuberous nasturtiums have too strong a taste; Topinambur, whose merit in other respects is indisputable, and Oxalis are too watery; Apios requires a large area for cultivation, and soon becomes hard and inedible; Psoralea esculenta scarcely lives up to the expectations we had of it; Camassia esculenta has perhaps more right to the protection of agriculture than the last two of these plants, if, however, its multiplication is prompt and easy. It is the only one of all the plants mentioned that can be compared with the Liliaceae of Siberia, which have always served as food for the inhabitants and which deserve to be better known in this respect. "Erythronium Dens-canis, the beautiful large-flowered variety of which is widespread in the south of western Siberia, is sought after and harvested there as an excellent food, of which a certain supply used to be sent annually to the court of St. Petersburg. Propagation by seed is very reliable, and the plant produces many of them; sown as soon as they are ripe, these seeds all sprout, but it takes three years for the bulb to reach its normal size. The local name is Kandyk. "In Siberia, lilies are known as Sarana, and Lilium tenuifolium L. and Sarana kamtschatica Fisch (Lilium kamtschaticum, Fritillaria kamtschatica by the authors) are the edible species par excellence. L. spectabile Fisch. is also used as food. These three plants multiply with extraordinary ease: L. tenuifolium L. reproduces almost exclusively by seed, but also, like the other two, by cloves, and it seems that each of the bulb scales, elongated and pointed in L. spectabile, large, short and rounded in the shape of a tuber in the Kamtschatha Sarana, forms a new plant; this mode of propagation is even essential for the Kamtschatka Sarana, as it rarely bears seed, a large number of flowers becoming sterile through abortion of the pistil. In Kamtschatka, there is a lily very similar to L. canadense, which I call L. avenaceum, after the name it goes by in the country and because of the shape of the bulb scales, which resemble large oat seeds; this species has not yet been introduced into our gardens; in its native country, it is eaten like the ordinary Sarana, which is nevertheless preferred. "Nowhere in Siberia are these useful plants cultivated; everywhere, it is the bulb of the wild plant that is harvested, and harvested in abundance. Lilium tenuifolium and Lilium spectabile are found in the eastern part of the Tomsk government and are widespread around Baikal and throughout trans-Baikal Siberia (Daury), as far as the eastern ocean. The Kamtschatka Sarana can be found along the Eastern Ocean coastline, in Kamtschatka itself and on the islands off the west coast of America. "It is not impossible that, when cultivation, and especially careful cultivation, ad hoc cultivation is involved, satisfactory results of improvement will be obtained. "The southern steppes of Russia are covered in spring by a brilliant flowering of Tulips; among these Tulips, there is a species fairly well known on the Don which does not differ essentially from T. suaveolens (1) and which is avidly sought after and eaten by (1) Aitchison, Notes on Products of Western Afghanistan and Northeastern Persia, says that Tulipa montana covers the arid plains of Afghanistan. The bulbs are collected and eaten; stripped of their outer skins, they are said to be sold in Bombay under the name Salep. The same traveler cites Eremurus aurantiacus and Olgæ, other Liliaceae, whose young leaves are cooked and eaten as a vegetable in the Kuran Valley districts of Afghanistan. Dr. Aitchison and his travel companions say that it is a vegetable that the inhabitants know perfectly well how to distinguish from others, which they do not touch. We have also extracted the following information Fig. 43 - Golden lily (Lilium auratum) from Dr. Mène's Des productions végétales du Japon, pages 295 et seq. Another Liliacea, Smilacina oleracea Hook. f. et Th. (Tovaria oleracea Baker, is reported in Botanical Magazine, pl. 6313, as the favorite vegetable of the Lapchas of the Sikkim Himalayas, under the name Chakli-bi. It is the young inflorescences, still surrounded by the most tender leaves, that are sought after for this use. Described by Clarke in the report of his trip from Darjeling to Tonglo. Dusets (1) under the name Horaiji-Yuri and in the Phonzo-Zoufou (2) under those of Yochino and Tametomo. This magnicum lily grows wild in bushes, in rock crevices, in woods and on mountains, up to a fairly high altitude; it is resistant to temperatures of 8 and 10 degrees above zero, and flowers from June to July. It is common throughout most of Nippon Island, especially near the cities of Yokohama and Yokoska. Its edible bulbs are S Fig. 44 - Litium speciosum. used in Japanese cuisine. It is widely cultivated by Japanese horticulturists for its beautiful flowers, which adorn gardens and are often placed in vases inside apartments; it is reproduced on Japanese drawings, paintings and porcelain. "Lilium speciosum Thunberg. Mentioned in (1) So-Mokou-Zoussetz (Botanical treatise with plates), by Yenan-Si and Razan ono Kiakou Ibou, 1856. (2) Phonzo-Zoufou (Botanical treatise with plates), by Iwasaki Tsounemassa; Yédo, 1828. Somoku-Dusets under the names Shiratama-Yuri, Okina-Yuri and Kanoho-Yuri. Phonzo-Zoufoule marks under the names Liu-Kiu-Yuri and KanokoYuri. It may not be indigenous, but is frequently cultivated in gardens for its edible bulbs; it is continually reproduced on Japanese paintings, porcelains, lacquers, cloisonné enamels and embroidery. "Lilium Thunbergianum Rœmer et Schultes is referred to in the Somoku-Dusets as NatsuSukashi-Yuri, Haru-Suhashi-Yuri and HiratoriYuri, and in the Phonzo-Zoufou as Skachi and Hogaku. It can be found in fields, mainly on Parry Island. It is also found on Nippon Island and is common around the city of Yokohama, where its edible bulbs are used in Japanese food. "Lilium tigrinum Gawler, classified in SomokuDusets and Phonzo-Zoufou as Oni-Yuri. Very common on the islands of Nippon and Yeso. The edible bulbs of the Tiger Lily are eaten by the Japanese, cooked, boiled and candied. "Lilium callosum Sieb. et Zucc. Hime-Yuri or L. pomponium Thunb. According to Kæmpfer and Siebold, this species is common, in the wild, in the sparsely wooded mountainous regions of Japan, at an altitude of 165 to 650 meters. Mr. Maximowicz says it is commonly cultivated on the island of Kiusiu, near the city of Nagasaki. The Japanese use the edible bulbs of L. callosum in their food, and eat them cooked, boiled and candied. They extract a white starch from these bulbs, which was represented at the 1878 World's Fair, class 69 (Cereals, floury products from Iwaté prefecture, Rikuchiu province). This species is also called Yama-Yuri by the Japanese". Dr. Mène also cites the following Japanese Liliaceae: "Erythronium grandiflorum (which is only a variety of E. Dens-canis, as Fischer points out in the note above). This plant appears in the Somoku-Dusets and Phonzo-Zoufou under the names Katahuri and Katako-Yuri. According to Dr. Kramer and Dr. Savatier, it is found in the wooded hills of the northern provinces of Nippon Island. The Japanese botanist Keiske marked it as existing on the island of Yeso. The bulbs contain a starch that is used in Japanese food. Flasks of this starch were on display at the World's Fair. "Orythia edulis Miquel, cited in Somoku-Dusets, Phonzo-Zoufon and Kwa-wi (1), under the names Amana and Mugi-guwai. "Hemerocallis minor Mill; synonym H. graminea Andr. according to Baker, listed in Somoku-Dusets as Beni-Kuwandzo. Dried flowers of this species are sometimes used in Japanese food; but it is mainly in China that they are used in food, and they are a favorite dish of the Chinese. The Chinese exhibition, no. 3098, featured samples from the Chinese customs at Chinkiang. The province of Shantung exports a considerable quantity of dried Hemerocallis graminea flowers. In the Note explicative des objets exposés par l'École agricole et forestière de Komaba à l'Exposition univer(1) Kwa-ui (choix de plantes), 1759. sellede 1889 (Ministère de l'Agriculture et du Commerce, Tokio, Japon), we find the following: "The Lily: OuRi (Lilium). It is usually grown as an ornamental plant, but its bulbs are also used in cooking. They have an excellent taste, so some growers cultivate them specially. There are over twenty varieties of the lily, but only two or three whose bulbs are used. Lilies are planted around the farm, and the bulbs are harvested after two or three years. Some bulbs have a circumference of almost 33 centimeters. The lily flowers are sold to flower merchants. As for the bulbs that we like to taste, growers reserve them for themselves, either to eat or to sell". In 1878, Dr. H*** sent us bulbs of Yama-Yuri (Lilium callosum) and Wasei-Yuri, with the following note: "Yama-Yuri is the species of Lily most cultivated as a vegetable in Japan, at least in the center and south. I believe that in the north, L. auratum is grown as a food plant, but I'm not sure, as I haven't travelled there. "The Japanese name for Wasei-Yuri means early lily; it is grown less than the other; in Japan, it is planted in autumn and Yama-Yuri in spring. On several occasions, our kind correspondent has given us interesting information on Japanese edible lilies. We reproduce them below: "Most Japanese lilies are edible, but 22 not all. In the part of Japan I lived in, only Yama-Yuri and WaseiYuri are grown for the table. Both are very good; I ate them all winter, once or twice a week, and they really are a very good vegetable. "The poor people gather from the wild the bulbs of L. japonicum Thunb. (in Japanese SassaYuri, i.e. with a small Bamboo leaf), very common in the mountains; it's a mediocre eater. "They also sometimes eat L. tigrinum (OniYuri, i.e. Devil's Lily), but this is a detestable, extremely bitter food. It is, however, quite abundant in Japanese markets, at least in Yedo and Yokohama. While I was in Japan, I grew L. tigrinum in my garden and, despite the protests of my Japanese cook, who told me it wasn't good for a rich man like me, I wanted to try it. It's very bad and frankly bitter, despite having been blanched twice in boiling water beforehand. I'm not suspected of being too severe about this dish, as I declare L. callosum an excellent floury vegetable, equal to our best. "In the far south, in the Liou Kiou islands, we are said to eat the bulbs of L. longiflorum, which grows wild there; but I can only speak of it by hearsay. "The preparation of lily bulbs for the table is very simple. They are separated scale by scale, then carefully washed and lightly blanched in boiling salted water. They are then served either sautéed in fresh butter, in a red sauce with meat juice, or in a white sauce. Now that's European-Japanese cuisine. "The true Japanese recipe is as follows: after blanching them as above, they are cooked for a few minutes in a sauce composed solely of water, Shoyou and a little grated dry fish. They are quite tasty this way; but at first sight, a European palate finds fat-free sauces strange." In the Bulletin of micellaneous information from the Royal Garden of Kew, 1889, page 116, we find the following additional details on lily flowers and bulbs used as food: "It is well known that, in countries where lilies are indigenous and abundant, they are sometimes used as food plants. For some years, the dried flowers of certain Lilies have been an important article of trade in China, and in the consular report on Chinkiang trade for the year 1886, page 10, it is stated: "The export of Lily flowers has increased from 7,033,000 pounds to 7,677,622 pounds; this is the most considerable export of many years. The harvest was very good, and prices were remunerative for most of the year. No more than two-tenths is consumed here; the rest goes south, where it is used to flavour soup. The cultivation of this plant increases annually in the north of this province." In a letter to Kew from Mr. Pelham L. Warren, Consul in Taiwan, dated August 16, 1883, the following indicalions are given, relating to the provenance of the lily flowers used in China: "The lily flowers mentioned in Mr. Watter's consular report, about which you ask for information, are the dried flowers of Hemerocallis graminea and Lilium bulbiferum. They are used by the Chinese to flavor soup; they also eat them as a vegetable. Lily flowers are also said to be effective for lung ailments, and to have tonic properties. Enclosed is a small sample of those imported here. Hankow is China's leading export city; large quantities also come from Japan." The sample sent by Mr. Warren was evidently a Hemerocallis flower, and Mr. Baker said that it could indeed be H. graminea Andr. (H. minor Mill.), the Asphodete Lily. There were no samples of Lilium bulbiferum flowers. The Japanese make much use of lilies as food, according to Professor Penhallow, who gives the following interesting account of their use in the American Naturalist, volume XVI, page 119: "Various species of Lilium abound in the forests and are used as a source of floury food. At the beginning of autumn, women can be seen returning to their villages, laden with bulbs. They are completely crushed in a large wooden mortar, after which the starch is separated from the cell mass by repeated washing. The starch is then hung up in sacks for winter use, while the cell mass is dried in round, perforated cakes, somewhat resembling miniature millstones, and hung up to dry." Efforts were made by Kew's Museum of Applied Botany to obtain lily cakes from Japan. Here is a copy of a letter addressed to this establishment by Mr. Power Le Poer Trench, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Tokio: "I have made the utmost efforts to obtain, for the Director of the Royal Garden, Kew, samples of lily bulb cakes, said to be used as food by the Japanese; but, in spite of all the researches I have made, I have not been able to find any in Tokio or Yokohama. "However, Mr. Wooley, who was passing through Yokohama last December on his way back to his post, took it upon himself to inquire whether any could be obtained in any village or town in the northern part of Japan, and, the month before last, he wrote that he could not get any in Hokodate, and that the Japanese said they had never seen any. "He was inclined to believe that Professor Penhallow had confused them with Fu cakes, which are made from wheat and hung up in stores to be sold, and that the ones he refers to are found only in the Aïno region. He had, however, written to Mr. Brooks, botanist attached to the Agriculturau College, Sapporo, and asked him to try to obtain the requested samples. "Later, I received another letter from Mr. Wooley, saying that he had at last succeeded in obtaining the requested cakes, and he sent me a small package containing a specimen of the smallest kind, the larger ones being, he said, of an awkward size for transport and running a greater risk of being broken." Here is the description of the samples explaining the economic use of Lilium cordifolium bulbs: Uba-Yuri (Japanese name), Kiu (Aino-name), sent to the Royal Garden Museum, Kew: "1° Fibre from which the starch has been partly extracted. "After the bulbs have been thoroughly washed and soaked in water for two days and two nights, they are pounded in a wooden mortar, then transferred to a vat filled with water. The whole mass is kneaded with the hands, and left to rest overnight to allow the starch to settle, after which the cell mass is removed and dried. "2° Cakes are made from the above fibers, by pounding them in a mortar with a little water, then kneading the mass and shaping it with the hands. The cakes are hung to dry in the Ainos' huts. The coloring is caused by smoke. The cakes are not eaten by the Japanese. The Ainos boil them and eat them, either plain or mixed with rice (the cakes vary in size, the largest being over a foot in diameter). "3° Starch made by the Japanese from UbaYuri bulbs. The starch made by the Ainos is similar, but coarser. "4° Uba-Yuri confectionery made by the Japanese. Of the various species of edible lily reviewed in the course of this study, Lilium tigrinum is the only one that grows vigorously in our gardens, and we might even add that it stands up perfectly to our harshest winters. But, as we have seen from the information supplied by our correspondent Dr. H***, its bulbs are only a mediocre source of food. Even if it were otherwise, its cultivation as a food plant could only be recommended as a curiosity. It takes far too long to obtain Lis bulbs that are sufficiently developed to be used. The same observation applies to Erythronium grandiflorum, Sarana kamtschatica and a large number of other bulbous plants, some of which offer considerable resources in regions where they grow naturally and can be harvested abundantly around the home. We thought it would be interesting to show that, nonetheless, certain Lilies, which we generally only know to be of high value for the decoration of our flowerbeds, could, in a pinch, provide us with a vegetable that would not be to be scorned. MACA (Native name in Quichua language.) LEPIDIUM MEYENH WALPERS. Cruciferae family. In September 1893, Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cit kindly associated us with the trial they were about to carry out on a new food plant: "One of our customers has come to offer us," they wrote, "seeds of a plant cultivated and indigenous to Upper Peru, called Maca in the old Peruvian dialect (Quichua language), and which would be used for human nutrition. It is said to produce an edible tuberous root, similar in shape to the turnip and in taste to the potato. "Just looking at the seed and tasting it, we think it's a cruciferous plant, and that the seed is shaped like that of the Alen cress; but what it really is, we'll have to find out in a trial. "We think it would be of interest to you to do the same, and to this end we enclose a sample of these seeds. Please keep us informed of the results you obtain. Shortly afterwards, Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cle received a letter from the same person, providing them with valuable information: "A few days ago, we gave you a packet of Peruvian Maca seeds. "We have just received some information about this plant and how to grow it. "Maca: Quichua name. "This plant belongs to the Cruciferae family. It has many points of resemblance with the Cresson alénois, grown in our gardens. Its leaves are cut and give off a strong odor. "The stem does not rise when flowering, but branches out and spreads over the surface of the soil. "The taproot is fleshy and sweet. It is used as food by the Indians of the high plateaus of the Andes. "The seeds were harvested in the Pampa de Junin, at altitudes ranging from 4,000 to 4,100 metres above sea level, where it freezes like in France. "The Indians grow Maca in blackish, peaty soil, which must not contain limestone. In France, this soil is replaced by a mixture of loam and heather. The plant is grown on humpback lines. It is thought that this procedure is necessary over there, because the soil is peaty and at the same time very marshy. If the roots are raised above the ground, it's probably to protect them from humidity. "We sowed some in Dauphiné, in August 1885, and the harvest would have been satisfactory, had this crop not been neglected at the onset of winter. "The Indians say that the roots should be left in the ground for two years. This was not the simplest of trials. The letter does not say when the Indians sow Maca; the seasons in the Andes are reversed relative to ours; our altitude above sea level is insignificant; the soil around Paris is neither peaty nor humid. We first sowed under glass, cold, in October 1893. The seeds germinated quickly and produced small, spindly plants, most of which resisted the frosts, albeit with little protection. In spring, these plants developed little. spread out on the ground, flowered early and gave fertile seeds, but their roots were so tenuous that they were not usable. In 1894, we sowed seeds from our harvest and the result was the same: some plants had a slightly thicker stump, about the size of a walnut, but too hard to be eaten. In 1895, new seedlings were sown in the open air. The plants stood up perfectly to the rigors of winter; although they were partly eaten by flea beetles, they flowered in spring and disappeared after ripening their seeds, without giving us the results we had hoped for in the letter reproduced above. We attribute our failure to invasions of flea beetles, which make it almost impossible to grow crucifers in the Crosnes garden. Maca seems perfectly suited to our climate. TWO-HORNED MACRA Ling-Kio. TRAPA BICORNIS L. fil. Family Onagrariaceae. Annual aquatic plant. Slender stem; leaves, some submerged, reduced to linear strips, others in rosettes floating on the surface of the water, with fairly long petioles, cylindrical at first, then vesicular towards their middle, at flowering time, with diamond-shaped blades, entire or only slightly toothed. Flowers white, small, briefly pedunculate, set in the axils of the upper leaves; calyx with two accrescent divisions, later becoming the horns of the fruit; corolla with four petals; stamens four; style small, ending in a captive stigma. Fruit woody, with two opposite, thick, obtuse horns, curved at the top. "The great Lake Talo is famous for its Linkio aquatic fruit. This fruit resembles the Tribulus "ad instar triangularis pyramidis undequaque prominens". Its rind is green, thick and reddish at the tips, turning black as it dries. Its subsFig. 45. - Trapa bicornis. inside is very white; its flavor is that of the Chestnut "magnitudine tres quatuorve castaneas xquat". The plant is cultivated in stagnant waters throughout China." (Martini, Novus atlas sinensis, 1655). "It has small leaves that float on the surface of the water, at the end of very long stems. The numerous fruits remain hidden underwater. Cultivated on a large scale in the lakes and rivers of northern China." (Roxburgh, Flora indica). Robert Fortune reports that he saw Ling-Kio fruit being harvested: "Having returned for some time to Shanghal, I resolved to penetrate, if possible, into the district of Kwey-chow-Foo. Going up the river in a south-westerly direction, I arrived, shortly after passing Kea-Hing-Fo, a city of some 270,000 inhabitants, at an immense pond which, I presume, communicates with the famous Taï-Ko. The water was very shallow and covered with Trapa bicornis, which the Chinese call Ling, and whose fruit, of rather bizarre shape, as is well known, resembling an ox's head armed with its two horns, is highly prized in China. I observed three very distinct varieties, one of which produces fruit of a beautiful red color. "A large number of women and children, in small circular boats much like our laundry tubs, were busy fishing the Ling. In fact, nothing could be more suitable for this kind of work than these singular boats, which, large enough to hold the fisherman and all the catch, steer gently through all the plants without breaking them. The sight of this immense quantity of individuals thus navigating this marsh, each in his own vat, formed for me a most entertaining sight." The Trapa bicornis," says another traveller, M. Marchal, from Lunéville (1), "is highly esteemed in China. It forms the food of populations where the rice harvest is insufficient. Harvesting them is reminiscent of the grape harvest in France. Ling is sown at the end of autumn, in those parts of ponds where the water is shallow and clear, and in those places most exposed to the south. (1) See De l'amidon du Marron d'Inde, Ad. Thibierge et Dr Remilly, 1857. The Chinese claim that this crop absorbs the putrid emanations rising from the surface of stagnant water. If the harvest is very abundant, Trapa is fed to barnyard birds, which quickly fatten and acquire an exquisite taste. A hundred years have passed since Abbé Grosier, whom we quote below on the subject of the Pitsi, Heleocharis tuberosa, to which, like Duncan, he gave the name of Water Chestnut, recommended the cultivation of Ling-Kio (Trapa bicornis). We have and we neglect," he said, "in some provinces of France, a species of water chestnut that the Latins have named Tribulus. The missionaries believe that this plant could be the one the Chinese call Ling-Kio, from which they derive great benefit; if this identity were confirmed, it would be easy to extend its cultivation everywhere, which would offer a new resource in times of shortage: "1° This other water chestnut, Ling-Kio, is a refreshing fruit, pleasant in summer. When it is green, it is sold in Peking, on the markets, like hazelnuts in Europe; " 2° Dried and ground into flour, it makes a very good porridge, especially when a little wheat flour is added; you can even mix a third of it into the flour used to make bread; " 3° Baked in the oven, candied with sugar or honey, it becomes a healthy and pleasant food; " 4° It provides a suitable food for geese, ducks and other farmyard birds. "The cultivation of Ling-Kio requires no care. The plant reproduces itself wherever it is found. When you want to throw it into a pond or stream, throw the seed in late autumn into the part of the pond where the water is shallow. Choose a spot where the water is clear and the shore faces south. The more heat the Ling-Kio receives, the healthier and tastier it is, and the more fruit it produces. TWO-PINTED MACKER Singhara. TRAPA BISPINOSA Roxb, Pl. of the Coast of Coromandel, pl. 234. This species differs from the previous one in having a fruit with straight, sharp-pointed horns and toothed leaves. It grows in central and southern Asia, where it is Fig. 46. - Trapa bispinosa. called Singhara, as far as Ceylon and Japan; it is also found in southern Africa, as far as Zambezia. Its fruits are often converted into starch, and can be used to make excellent-tasting cakes and soups, or stored and preserved as food. Production is abundant and economical, as the plant reseeds itself spontaneously. It lives for several years. In some regions, such as Kashmir, Trapa fruit is an important food source for the local population. This species probably includes Trapa cochinchinensis Lour. and Trapa incisa Sieb. et Zucc. M. L. Bouley, director of the gardens of the Maharadja of Kashmir, in Srinagar, published the following interesting note in the Revue horticole (March 16, 1884): "Trapa natans and bicornis (1) are so abundant in the lakes of Kashmir, and grow there with such vigor, that the parts where these plants are found look more like immense meadows than lakes; it is therefore impossible to navigate there, even with the frailest boat. "The products of these two plants are considerable; in autumn, the harvest occupies thousands of people. "Before being delivered for consumption, the chestnuts are crushed to remove their woody, pungent husks, and then ground. The coarse flour obtained is eaten as porridge. "This flour is sold very cheaply, which can be explained by the absence of cultivation costs, and its consumption throughout the winter is enormous. Every day, large ships loaded with Trapa fruit arrive in Srinagar. Mr. Ermens, Mr. Bouley's predecessor in the position of (1) This must be Trapa bispinosa. the Maharadja's Director of Cultivation and a long-time resident of Kashmir, has kindly provided us with the following additional details on Singhara cultivation: "After a great famine, the governor of the district in which the Woorlake is located introduced Trapa cultivation. This lake, which measures at least 2,000 hectares, is so full of it that navigation is impossible. The fruit is harvested by the boatload, and the governor profits greatly from it, as each grower pays him a royalty. It is widely consumed, and in the recent famines, this harvest saved the lives of a large number of inhabitants. "Fresh Trapa fruit is eaten like walnuts, cooked in water; it is a common food. It is very indigestible, and the Hindus, to obviate this inconvenience, place on their stomachs a heater called a kangreiï, which, according to the country's doctors, facilitates digestion; hence it follows that their stomachs are blackened and as if smoked by this process." The preceding notes were published by us, in 1888, in the Bulletin de la Société nationale d'Acclimatation; shortly afterwards, Mr. P.-L. Simmonds, F. L. S., whose name is known to all those concerned with applied botany, sent us a copy of the Journal of the Society of the Arts, issue of August 31, 1888, containing an article signed by him and entitled: Edible aquatic plants. In it, we found some details that we think it would be useful to reproduce: "In the last issue of the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation de Paris, an article appeared on aquatic food plants, which deserves attention for the novelty of the information it provides, and to which, while taking one or two passages, I can add a few additional details that will be of interest. "It is said that Trapa natans formed a large part of the diet of the ancient Thracians, just as Trapa bispinosa does for the inhabitants of Kashmir and T. bicornis for the Chinese. Dr. Royle says that the former produced up to 12,000 pounds a year in revenue to the Runje Singh government, the tax being levied on 96,000 to 128, 000 donkey loads, from the great lake of Oaller..... " In Gugerat, its fruits form an important food item. On feast days, it is made into a red tincture, which is mixed with a yellow color derived from the flowers of the Butea frondosa. "Colonel Sleeman gave the following interesting account of Trapa bispinosa in his Travels in the South-West Provinces: "Here, as in most other parts of India, the reservoirs are spoiled by the Water Chestnut (Singhara), which is everywhere planted and cultivated in water-covered fields of great extent, as regularly as Wheat or Barley is on dry plains. It is cultivated by a class of men called "Dheemurs", who are everywhere fishermen and palanquin bearers. They have boats to plant, weed and harvest Singhara. The tenures of each cultivator are carefully indicated by long Bamboos driven into the water, and they pay so much per acre for the part they cultivate. "The long stems of the plant reach the surface of the water, over which their green leaves float, and their pure white flowers bloom pleasantly in their midst in the latter part of the afternoon. The nuts grow underwater, after the flowers have wilted. They are triangular in shape and covered with a coarse, brown tegument, adhering strongly to the kernel, which is white, edible and of a fine, tight texture. "These nuts are highly prized. They are carried to market on the backs of oxen, often 200 or 300 miles away. They ripen at the end of the September rains and can be eaten until the end of November. "The rent paid for an ordinary tank is about 100 rupees (L. 10) a year. I have known of a very large one for which 200 rupees and even 300 (L. 30) a year were paid; but the silt grows so rapidly by cultivation, that it promptly destroys any tank in which it is allowed; and, where it is thought desirable to conserve the tank for use of the water, it must be expressly prohibited." Necklaces made from Singhara nuts are sold in Benares and considered sacred. "A few years ago, Captain J.-P. Pogson of Simla advocated more extensive cultivation and use of this plant: "Having the example of Kashmir before our eyes," he says, "it is very singular that the much-vaunted reservoirs, the great lakes and the inland sea of fresh water of the Madras Presidency, and also the immense 'Vheels' of the north-west and west provinces, are not regularly employed in a more profitable manner by the cultivation of Singhara. The dried nuts would keep, I believe, for many years, and would still be sold in England as Arrow-root or Singhara starch, for food or industrial uses. Any old Singhara store could be processed and sold in this way. "Like Wheat grain, Singhara kernels can sustain human life for a definite time and are pleasant to the taste, seasoned with salt and pepper, or in soup (porridge) with sugar, "ghoor or jaggery" (1). If the almonds are broken into small pieces, they can be ground into flour using a hand mill, and the product kneaded into a dough for making small "chuppaties" or cakes. "By soaking almonds overnight in cold water, they can be boiled the following morning to make food. Steaming them might be just as good, maybe better, but I've only tried soaked almonds boiled. A few years ago, I ate a "Hulwa" made with Singhara flour, and it was more pleasant than the one made with wheat flour flowers. "The Madras Presidency boasts some ancient and magnificent hydraulic works: the Viranum reservoir (2), 35 square miles in extent, with 12 miles of dikes; the Cauverypank reservoir, whose 4-mile dikes are consolidated with stones throughout their length; the Chembrumhankam reservoir, similar to a picturesque inland sea, a work whose execution dates back to unknown times. The first of these artificial lakes has a surface area of 22,400 acres, and the third, compared to an inland sea, is ten times as large. (1) "Ghoor" is the sugar residue of India; "jaggery" is the sugar residue of China. (2) The English word tank can only be translated by reservoir, which however is not applicable, in French, to ponds, lakes, inland seas, i.e. the vast bodies of water referred to here. However, we know that in Kashmir 30,000 human creatures feed on the Singhara nut for five months of the year, and if the picturesque inland sea we're talking about deserves its name, its bed and water surface could be put to profitable use by Singhara cultivation. The 35-square-mile reservoir could become a first-class nursery to supply Madras with nuts for seed. "The yield of the Water Nut, per acre, is, as yet, unknown; but, assuming the harvest of 4 quarters (480 pounds) each of walnut kernels per acre, the 22,400 acres would yield 43,800,000 pounds of food, and, reckoning 60 pounds per adult per month, the above quantity would suffice to feed 716, 800 people for one month, or 143,360 for five months. "The cost of this abundant and permanent food supply would be insignificant. There are 4,000 square yards in an acre, and by allowing one nut of seed per yard, the price of nuts and rail transport could easily be calculated. The first year's harvest would more than cover the costs, and we would then have a harvest in perpetuity that would only have to cover the costs of supervision, care and harvesting. "As the harvest belongs to the State, a considerable income would be obtained from the sale of the nuts, even if the almonds were only sold at half the price of rice or another grain. "In good years, the farming population would make ample use of this nourishing and economical food, and sell and export their harvests of Rice, etc., and in bad years of famine, the walnut harvest would be a resource; finally, their presence would have a great influence in preventing the artificial production of local famine. "Walnuts, once sown, resow themselves, so that the square yard could soon produce nine plants or more. The inland sea, when covered with these nuts, will be a source of wealth for the state and profit for the public. As the annual, spontaneous or artificial exlension of the crop is a very simple thing, the government of Madras would in a few years find itself the owner of a Singhara plantation of great value." Captain Pogson, writing from Simla, goes on to say: "The Singhara Nut of India and Europe being a perennial aquatic plant, the old roots bear fruit annually. If they grow in water 2 feet deep, we enter it to collect them, going from one to the other, and deposit them in a floating container, such as, for example, a 5-gallon barrel. If the water is deeper, we'll have to use any raft or canoe and pick the nuts." "In this country (India), they are gathered several times during the season, and the last ones to be harvested, i.e. those that are the largest and have hard kernels, are eaten boiled. Others are peeled, dried and ground into flour, while others are buried whole, to be used as seed the following year. For example, the pond or depression in the ground which has provided a crop of walnuts may dry out in hot weather; at the start of the rains, this place will become a pond again; the walnuts for seed will then be dug up and sown 12 inches apart in the still slightly deep water, placing each walnut about 2 inches deep in the submerged soil, and sowing is continued in this way every day, as the waters rise. The nuts will germinate in due course and provide the year's harvest. "Naturally, if the water didn't dry up, the old roots would live and, within the season, give a new shoot of stems that would bear fruit as usual. It follows that, when a perpetual harvest is desired, the nuts should be sown in the bed of a shallow, freshwater pond that never dries out." MACRE VERBANAISE (1) Lagana. TRAPA NATANS L., var. verbanensis Jaggi. Under the name Trapa verbanensis, De Notaris described a plant that grows in Lake Maggiore and whose fruit has only two obtuse, unbarbed horns. Mr. Jaggi, in a note he has published on Macres (2), makes it very clear that this is simply a variety of Trapa natans with aborted median horns. (1) We presented the fruits of this species at one of the meetings of the Société botanique de France (Bull. Soc. Bot., 1888), in comparison with fruits of Trapa natans with only three horns. 6) Die Vassernus (Trana notms L.) und der Tribadues der Allen Zurich, 1883. We can't reproduce here all the reasons he gives in support of his thesis, but one of the most convincing is certainly the fact that in the same lake, fruit with two or three horns can be found mixed with the four-horned Trapa natans. All gradations of abortion are thus to be found. Fig. 47 - Trapa verbanensis. Professor Gibelli of Bologna, who transplanted T. verbanensis to Modena, obtained fruit with two or three horns. Leysser, Mertens and Koch, in their flora of Halle; Boehling, in his flora of Germany, say that Trapa natans sometimes has two-horned fruits. They did not think there was any reason to create a species of this variety. The fact that the horns are obtuse is also of little importance, as we sometimes find Macres with four horns that are more or less rounded at the top. Cultivation trials carried out in Modena prove that the Fig. 48. - Trapa verbanensis. Leaf seen from below, and young fruit, natural size. Trapa verbanensis reproduces at least for some time. Here is the information we have gathered on this variety. We are indebted to Mr. Rovelli, President of the Verban Horticultural Society of Pallanza; to Mr. D. Lampertico, Secretary of the Vicenza Agricultural Show, who was kind enough to consult Professor Saccardo, of the University of Padua, and to Dr. Mattirolo, of the University of Turin. Trapa verbanensis is known as Lagana on Lake Maggiore and Lake Varese, and is also commonly known as Castagna del lago and Castagna d'acqua. It is found in large quantities in the Bay of Angera, Lake Maggiore, where the bottom is visible. It vegetates admirably without any care in botanical jardius; it is a little less productive than Trapa natans. Its fruit ripens at the end of October, a time when it is easy to obtain. They are eaten either green, like hazelnuts, or cooked, requiring a fairly long cooking time. They are not much sought-after, and are rarely seen on the market. The same fruit is used to make rosaries, which are frequently sold in Arona, Varese and other towns. We immersed some rooted Verbanese mackerel plants in a pond, as a gift from Mr. Latour-Marliac of Temple-sur-Lot. They vegetated well and gave us a few green fruits on September 15, the time when M. Latour-Marliac obtained his first green fruit. Latour-Marliac, for his part, obtained a certain quantity of ripe fruit. Trapa verbanensis has larger leaves than T. natans, which is well known in our western regions. Its petioles are red; the variety is more beautiful than the type. There is another variety of Trapa natans that Areschoug has named T. natans, var conocarpa (1). It originates from Lake Immeln, in Shonen, Sweden, and differs from the type in the way the horns are inserted, which are not very coherent, the lateral ones detaching from the fruit at mid-height, the median ones at the lower quarter: the fruit is therefore naked over a large part of its height. MANGARIDE Taye, Tayove, Chou Caraibe. Mangareto (Brazil). - Toya, Ouaheu (Caribbean). - Tayo (Arouage). - Tayoba (Brazilian Indian). - Toloman (West Indies). - Qualusa (Peru). XANTHOSOMA SAGITTIFOLIUM Schott. Bot. Mag. tab. 4989; Engler, Flora brasiliensis, p. 191; Arum sagittifolium L.; Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles, 8, t. 553; Arum xanthorrhizon Jacq, Hort. Vindob, 11, 73, tab. 157; Hortus Schœnbr, 11, 32, tab. 188; Caladium xanthorrhizon Willd; Caladium sagittæfolium Vent; Caladium utile Hort; Yanthosoma utile C. Koch et Bouché; Yanthosoma xanthorrhizon C. Koch (Engler, Monographiæ phanerogamarum, vol. II, Araceæ, p. 469). Aroidae family. At the request of the Société nationale d'Acclimatation, M. D. Albuquerque has kindly sent us (1) Mémoires de l'Académie royale des Sciences de Stoekholm, 1874. tubers of Mangareto branco, with a promise to research the violet variety for our use. Vigneron-Jousserandier cites Mangaride as being cultivated in Brazil and yielding from twenty to thirty small tubers, and V.-L. Baril, comte de Lahure, in a work entitled L'Empire du Brésil, has this to say about it: "The Aroidea called Mangareto branco grows in small clumps. The main tuber is about the size of an apple. It is surrounded by several other small tubers as big as Walnuts, and often smaller. It is these small tubers that are edible. They have a pleasant taste and are floury, though less so than potatoes. Mangareto branco is one of the varieties of Xanthosoma sagittifolium, an aroidea which, in tropical America, plays the same role, but to a much lesser degree, as Taros (Colocasia) in India, Egypt, and mainly in Oceania. In warmer regions, the plant is easy to grow, but not very productive; it has been cultivated by the indigenous Indians from time immemorial. In the Journal de la Société nationale d'Horticulture, 1871, pages 506-514, Dr. P. Sagot published a note on Tayes or Tayoves in French Guiana, from which we extract the following: "The American species (Xanthosoma) are distinguished by their milky juice and by the fact that the petiole is inserted at the edge of the leaf and not inside the leaf blade, from below the leaf, at a certain distance from the lower edge. "In the Asian and Oceanian species (Colocasia antiquorum and C. esculenta), Kouchou (India), Kulcas (Egypt), Alcolcalz (southern Spain), Tallus (Java), Tallo, Taro (Oceania), the juice is limpid and the leaves are pellate, i.e. borne by a petiole that is inserted from below, inside the leaf blade. "The varieties grown in French Guiana are : Taye banana, Taye white, Taye violet, Touca, Grande Tayove. "There may be other races in French Guiana, which I have not seen; but, in general, I think I can say that Tayes are inferior, in abundance and quality, to the products of the Taros. "The tubers, of good quality, boiled and cooked, are healthy and pleasant. They are considered more nutritious than other floury roots. The most delicate are those that are young and have grown well hidden underground: for example, the lateral tubers of the rhizome, which form rounded outgrowths around the main root. "The leaves, chosen young and tender, blanched and cooked in boiling water, are good to eat, but have little taste. A few are often added to various dishes frequently used in the colonies. I confess, however, that this way of using them seems to me only a very incomplete justification for the pretentious name of Caribbean cabbage, which has been given to these plants". In the first days of April, we planted the Mangareto branco tubers sent by Mr. Albuquerque, on a bed and under glass. The plants vegetated vigorously, were abundantly watered throughout the season, which was quite warm, and were only uprooted on October 6, after a heavy white frost. We only found a small number of tubers, as big as peas. Cultivation of the American Aroidea is therefore impossible in the Paris climate, even with the help of layers and frames. We were similarly unsuccessful with all the Taros from New Caledonia and India, of which we had received numerous varieties, differing in quality, tuber shape, fertility and earliness, some requiring flooded soils, others being able to be planted in dry soil. However, it seems that the tubers harvested would have reached their full development under the influence of one more month of heat. MARANTA ARUNDINACÉ (HERBE A LA FLÈCHE) MARANTA ARUNDINACEA L., Redouté, Liliac, I, tab. 57; Bot. Mag., tab. 2307; Maranta indica Tussac, Flore des Antilles, I, tab. 26. Scitaminaceae family. Stump producing underground, fleshy, cylindrical, scaly suckers, about 30 cm long and 2 to 3 cm in diameter. Stems about 1 metre high. Leaves glabrous, oval-lanceolate, sheathing petiole. Loose panicle; white flowers. According to Tussac, this species was introduced from India to the West Indies, where it is widely cultivated as a food plant. The starch known as Arrow-root is extracted from its fleshy suckers. These suckers can also be eaten plain, either boiled or prepared in a variety of ways. Arrow-root starch from Maranta arundinacea is also known as A. de la Jamaïgue, A. des Antilles, A. des Bermudes, A. de Saint-Vincent. This starchy product comes to us mainly from America; it is also widely cultivated in India and in certain parts of Africa, notably on Bourbon Island or Reunion Island. Its name derives from its use by the natives to heal arrow wounds. M. arundinacea is the Toulola of the Caribbean. It is grown in the West Indies in Jamaica, in South America where it is called Anvert, in Guadeloupe, Reunion, Guyana and India. The starch contained in its rhizome is known as West Indian Arrowroot. This starch exists there in the proportion of 22 0/0. There are two varieties of Maranta in Brazil and Jamaica: one called White Anvert and the other Red Anvert. In Brazil, the elongated-root variety is more highly regarded in the province of Para than the rounded-rhizome variety. In French Guiana, the Caribs eat the root after cooking it under ashes. The rhizomes are acrid and rubefacient, but cooking makes them edible. Marantas require deep soil that is always cool but not damp. They can be propagated using their creeping, perennial rhizomes. Sections should be planted on divided, stony ground. They should be spaced 1 m to 1.20 m apart. During their growth, these plants only require hoeing, and their rhizomes are removed at the end of the first or second year. An average hectare yields 500 to 600 kilograms of arrowroot and 1,500 to 2,000 kilograms of couac or pulpy residue. Arrowroot is a light, nutritious food. It is especially suitable for delicate people and children. In Cuba, Maranta starch is used to make excellent creams that keep for a long time in bottles. In England, large quantities of arrowroot are imported every year from Ceylon, Hindustan, the West Indies, Bermuda, Nicaragua and Melanesia. Couac, or coarse flour, is used to feed domestic animals. In Botanical Magazine, loc. cit. Maranta arundinacea is a plant of considerable interest, furnishing for the table a distinguished food, sold under the name of Arrow-root of India, extracted from its roots, not as has been said by drying and grinding them, but by macerating them in water, in the same manner as starch is extracted from Wheat, Potato and other starchy substances. "In recent years, Maranta starch has been imported in large quantities from the West Indies to England, and recommended as a food for young children, and as light nourishment for the sick. "The plant is native to South America and is grown in all the islands of the West Indies. Here, it must be kept in greenhouses, where in July and August it produces its flowers, which fade very quickly." Introduced by Dr. William Houston, before 1732. We have tried unsuccessfully to grow Maranta arundinacea. MARGOSE A PIQUANTS Pandipane, Gatole, Caïqua du Pérou, Momordique à feuilles de Vigue. Momordique Papareh, Papareh Herya, Melon de San-Gaëtano. Karela (Hindostani), Karala (Bengali), Khu qua (China). MOMORDICA CHARANTIA L., Spec. ed. 1, p. 1009. DC, Prodr. III, p. 331; Naud, Ann. se. nat. ser. 4, vol. XII, p. 131; Revue hort. 1859, p. 620, figs. 134 and 135; Flore des serres, X, p. 193, tab. 1047; The Garden, XII, p. 161; Cogniaux, CUCURBIT, Monogr. Phanerogam, vol. III, p. 436. Synonyms: M. Balsamina Descourt (non Linné), Fl. des Antilles, III, p. 62, tab. 164; M. operculata Vell, Fl. flum. X, tab. 980 (non Linné); Momordica jagorana C. Koch, Belgique horticole, XI, p. 92. Family Cucurbitaceae. Plant native to Asia and Africa, naturalized in tropical regions of both worlds; annual, with spindly, climbing stems, up to 2 meters high, twining, hairy, with usually simple tendrils. Leaves alternate, deeply 5-7-lobed, dark green above, pale green below, sometimes almost glabrous except at the veins, more often pubescent on both sides; lobes oval, acute, toothed. Flowers yellowish, monoecious, borne on equally long, deflexed peduncles; male flower peduncles bearing a heart-shaped, entire bract inserted towards their middle or at the base; female flower peduncles hanging after anthesis. Male flowers grouped or solitary, larger than females; calyx with five divisions half as short as those of the corolla. Female flowers solitary, with slightly shorter pedicel, quite large, pale yellow. Fruit pendant, oblong, 10 to 15 cm long, thinned at both ends. Fig. 49 - Spiked margosa (Momordica Charantia). ends, obscurely trigonal, covered with tubers arranged in regular lines or ridges between which 25 are other lines of smaller teeth of unequal size. This fruit, which is green at first, Fig.150. - Fruit of the prickly Margose. becomes a beautiful orange-yellow when ripe. Its thick, fleshy rind is torn into three irregular shreds, to which the seeds adhere, enveloped in a pulpy tunic of a brilliant sanguine hue. The seeds are flat, scalloped at both ends and covered on both sides with a perfectly chinoiserie relief pattern. It is this structure of the seed, which appears to be gnawed and bitten, that has given the genus the name Momordica. PETITE MARGOSE A PIQUANTS MOMORDICA CHARANTIA L., var. abbreviata Ser. in DC, Prodr. III, p. 311; M. zeylanica Miller, Dict. des jardiniers, n° 3; M. senegalensis Lamk, Encyclop. méth. IV, p. 239; M. muricata Willd, Spec. IV, p. 602; Belgique hort, XI, p. 93; M. Roxburghiana Don, Gen. syst. gard. III, p. 35; M. Charantia, var. minor Naudin, Ann. sc. nat.; M. Charantia, var. muricata Griseb, Fl. Brit. W. ind. isl. p. 287. This plant is a simple variety of the preceding one, from which it differs only in that it is a little smaller in all its parts. It is native to the same regions. M. Charantia is a vegetable plant cultivated under various names in China, Cochinchina, Malabar, Peru, Mauritius, Reunion, etc. It is known in Reunion under the name M. Charantia. It is known in Réunion under the name of Margose, and is mainly cultivated there in the small-volume variety named by M. Naudin M. Charuntia, var. minor. It is grown in the same way as the Melon de châssis, except for pruning; however, when a large number of fruits have formed, the stems should be pinched, part of the leaves cut off to aerate the plant, and watering should be moderated to avoid rotting. Margose vegetation is very active, and fruiting, right up to the end of the season, is all the more abundant as the fruit is never left to ripen and is used green. In a pinch, after having raised the seeds in a frame, the plant can be placed in the open air, around June 1st, near a wall facing south; but the fruit obtained is often short and misshapen. We cannot recommend outdoor cultivation in the Paris climate. M. Charantia is sometimes grown in France as a curious plant. Its ripe fruits are a beautiful yellow-orange, open on their own and reveal rows of seeds wrapped in a very appetizing cherry-red pulp. This is undoubtedly a wonderful dessert dish, and the seeds are happily sucked; unfortunately, the pulp that covers them is sparse and tasteless. The use made of Margoses in warmer countries is quite different and much more interesting. We do not know how they are prepared for the table in China, Peru, etc.; but we owe to the kindness of Mr. Édouard Wilmann, member of the Société des Botanistes français, precise information on their use in Réunion: "This fruit, which reaches an average length of Om, 07 to Om, 10, is always picked and used before maturity. Once ripe, it is worthless for culinary purposes. Some like it very tender, others prefer it when it has already reached a certain consistency; it is, in any case, excellent until ripe. "For the table, it is prepared: "As achards: Simply remove the seeds and place the fruit, split in half lengthwise, in the sauce prepared for this purpose: vinegar, olive oil, ginger, garlic, chili pepper, salt, etc. It is usually added: cucumber, garlic, garlic, salt, etc. Cucumbers, cabbages, carrots, mangoes, etc. are usually added; "In rougaille: the fruit is cut into rougaille pieces, always after removing the seeds, and seasoned with lemon juice, chili pepper, ginger, etc.; "In curry: the fruit is cooked, halved, with fresh or salted bacon, fresh or salted fish; with or without curry powder, but with the ordinary condiments of Creole cuisine. In India, the fruit is eaten sliced and fried, but must first be cooked in water to remove all its bitterness. We have to say that we have tried unsuccessfully to introduce the fruit of the little prickly Margose into our Pickles. Their extreme bitterness makes them unsuitable for this use. MARGOSE POMME DE MERVEILLE MOMORDICA BALSAMINA Lin, Spec. ed. 1, p. 1009; Lamk, Encycl. meth. IV, p. 237, tab. 794, fig. 1; Dict, se. nat. tab. 208, 209; Revue hort. 1857, p. 180, fig. 75; Naudin, in Ann. sc. nat. ser. 4, vol. XII, p. 132; ser. 5, vol. V, p. 20; Cogniaux, CUCURB., Monographiæ Phanerog., vol. III, p. 237. M. vulgaris Tournef, Inst. p. 103, tab. 29; Cucumis agrestis Miller, Dict. des jardiniers; Neurosperma cuspidata Raf, Journ. phys. 1819, p. 101; Momordica Charantia Descourt, non L., Fl. des Antilles, VIII, p. 335, tab. 594. Cucurbitaceae family. This species differs from M. Charantia in its leaves, which are glabrous and glossy green, and in the bracts of the male flowers, which are toothed and inserted at the top of the peduncles. The whole plant is smaller in all its parts. The fruit is oval-rounded and never larger than a pigeon's egg. "Momordica fruits have balsamic and vulnerary properties, which earned them a reputation all the greater for coming from India, the land of jugglers and miracles. "They are, strictly speaking, edible like cucumbers". (Dic. sc. nat., t. V, p. 387.). We have no information on the use of Pomme de merveille as a vegetable. It could undoubtedly be used for the same purposes as other Margoses. Momordica dioica Roxb. known in India as Gol Kandra, is a perennial species with a tuberous stem. The young fruit is eaten by Hindus. The root is also edible, but that of the female plant is larger than that of the male. MATAMBALA PLECTRANTHUS TERNATUS Sims; Botanical Magazine, tab. 2460; Bojer, Hort, maurit. p. 253; DC. Prodr. XII, p. 65. Labiatae family. On July 15, 1884, our correspondent in the Transvaal, Mr. Mingard, wrote to us: "With this letter, I am sending you some tubers of the Potato fade or wild, called by the Magwamba: Matambala. It has the same cultivation and uses as the ordinary potato. The natives appreciate it very much and prefer it to any other tuber. They keep the seeds (1) in the sand, or hanging in their huts. They plant it at the same time as corn. On October 20 1884, Mr. Mingard wrote again: "I'm sending a small bag of Matambala to the post office. These will be the last ones I can send you. The natives planted them a fortnight ago. It likes light soils, has the same vegetation period as the Potato, but the stems are noticeably different; they widen as soon as they are born. (1) Read tubers. The flower is small, yellow or blue (1). A tuber planted in its entirety yields from ten to twenty to one. Matambala is prepared like potatoes. No flavor. "I delivered the letter and package to the post office on October 29th. The tubers are starting to sprout. According to your advice, I chose the ripest and hardest. However, the tubers from this last shipment rotted on the way; but, fortunately, those sent to us the previous July preserved well in the sand, and we were able to plant four of them on a bed and under glass, on the following March 15th. Three plants thrived admirably; only one died at the end of June. We pulled it out on July 1, and found, to our great surprise, a dozen small tubers forming a tight cluster immediately below the plant's collar. These tubers appeared to be ripe and preserved well in the sand. The other three plants vegetated vigorously, spreading out their numerous stems on the ground, which marcelled spontaneously, and filled the trunk in which they were planted; but, when we pulled them out in autumn, they gave us only an almost insignificant harvest. The plant recovers very easily from cuttings, which has enabled us to obtain a large number of plants that have been distributed to the Muséum and to various per(1) M. Mingard has certainly confused the flowers of several species. In fact, on the east coast of Africa, there are several Coleus and Plectranthus with edible tubers, some with blue flowers, others with yellow. The one we collected had blue flowers. sonnes. They flowered the following winter in the greenhouses of the Muséum and the Jardin Bolanique of the École Vétérinaire d'Alfort. Dr Sagot, in his Manuel des cultures tropicales, p. 84, says he saw Matambala in Mr Paillieux's garden at Crosnes, but only in leaf. It was after examining a flowering specimen, which we showed him the year after his visit to Crosnes, that he applied the name Solenostemon den siflorus Benth. to it, a name written in Bentham's own hand on the label accompanying a specimen kept in the Muséum herbarium, and which he considered to be comparable in every way to our plant. The Museum specimen appeared to us to be merely a compact inflorescence form of Coleus tuberosus, the name by which we referred to Matambala in the second edition of Potager d'un Curieux, and which we now rectify after comparing our plant with live specimens of Plectranthus ternatus grown in the Museum's glasshouses and the figure of this plant published in Botanical Magazine, plate 2460. Plectranthus ternatus is native to the Comoros Islands and Madagascar, from where it was introduced to Mauritius and probably to other countries, since Mr. Mingard sent it to us from the Transvaal. Mr. Daruty de Grandpré, President of the Mauritius Acclimatization Society, wrote to us from Port-Louis: "I read with great interest your notes in the Potager d'un Curieux. I did not see any mention of a plant in which I am interested because of its edible qualities. I'm referring to Plectranethus madagascariensis, known here as Oumime (1). "Oumime produces a tuber that we eat in exactly the same way as potatoes, although it has a distinctive taste that may not appeal at first to European palates. However, I'm sure that it would be easy, through cultivation, to completely remove this particular taste, at the same time as increasing the volume of the tubers. "I'm mailing you some Oumime tubers, so that you can try growing them in France. In his Histoire de la grande Isle de Madagascar, De Flacourt speaks of Houmimes or Voamitza: "These are," he says, "small roots as big as octopus, which multiply extremely, for from one plant more than two hundred will grow". Matambala requires too much heat for it to be cultivated profitably in our climate. But if our kind correspondent's shipment has not produced any useful results for France proper, it has provided our colony of Gabon-Congo with an excellent and much-appreciated vegetable, which will spread from there to all regions with a similar climate. (1) Mr. N.-E. Brown, author of a note entitled: Tuberous Labiatæ, published in the Kew Bulletin, January 1894 issue, establishes that the Oumime is not the Plectranthus madagascariensis, but the P. ternatus Sims. The name applied by Mr. Daruty de Grandpré refers to the Oumime bá̂tard or wild Oumime, which does not produce tubers. The tubers we had donated to the Muséum were multiplied, and two of them were given by Professor Max Cornu to Mr. Pierre, who was leaving to take up the post of Director of the Colonial Garden in Libreville (Gabon-Congo). Mr. Pierre cultivated Matambala, and was so successful that he actively propagated the plant in the colony. He gave some tubers to Mr. Thollou, attached to the Brazza mission, who transported them to Brazzaville, where they multiplied and spread rapidly. During a trip to Paris, Mr. Thollon gave us the following information on our Labiatae: "Matambala grows extremely vigorously during the rainy season. During the dry season (June to October), the plant vegetates, but needs watering to produce tubers. It is during this period that the flowers appear. "Harvesting takes place from December to January. Each clump produces a dozen tubers the size of walnuts, and many smaller ones. "To date, the plant has not been subjected to rational cultivation. We are content to detach twigs which, when placed in the ground, take root with the greatest of ease and which, left to their own devices, without any care, nevertheless give the result indicated above." Mr. Thollon considers the Matambala to be one of the most useful vegetables to propagate in our equatorial African possessions; it would take the place of the potato, whose cultivation is impracticable, the yield being almost nil. He fed it to a large number of travelers, who were extremely pleased, as its flavor is so similar to that of the precious Solanée, that they thought they were back to their favorite vegetable, the absence of which in tropical regions is one of the harshest hardships for Europeans. Finally, here's some new information that Mr. Pierre sent to one of us: "Back from a trip to the interior and south of Loango, I've just found your letter, which has followed me here. "It was in 1887 that I brought to the colony two Matambala tubers, as big as large peas, which Mr. Cornu had entrusted to me. I gave one to Mr. Thollon, who transported it to the interior of the Ogoué, in Brazzaville. There are now some in the Oubanghi at latitude 6° north and longitude 17° east. The plant has spread in these countries with extraordinary rapidity. "The Crampel mission, which is said to have found some around 4° north latitude, has eaten the tubers and may import it as far as Lake Chad. When he left Gabon, I gave Mr. Crampel some Basella alba seeds, a plant that will also be imported into central Africa. "Matambala also exists in Loango, where Mgr Carrie introduced it from Brazzaville. "The plant has improved in the interior. We've obtained tubers as big as Walnuts, and I'm certain that, if cultivation were better done, we'd obtain even better results. Plant in well-prepared, not too dry, moist soil, and above all leave more distance between plants. "The taste of the tuber is very similar to that of the potato. It's a plant of the future, especially in the interior of our colony. In Libreville, where we are 5° further north, I have obtained only mediocre results. "The plant is known throughout the interior and on the coast by the name Pomme de terre de Madagascar, which must have been given to it by M. Thollon. As this name is inappropriate, I am doing my utmost to combat it. The existence of several Labiatae with edible tubers is now known to us, namely : CROSNE (Stachys affinis); Marambala or Oumime (Piectranthus ternatus Sims); COLEUS TUBEROSUS Benth. to which Mr. N.-E. Brown (1) links C. parviflorus Benth. (DC. Prodr. XII, p. 72; Hook. fil. Flora of Brit. India, IV. p. 625), a species whose origin is somewhat uncertain. This plant is cultivated in Java, Amboine, other islands of the Malay Archipelago and Ceylon, where, according to a note by Gardner, of the Kew Herbarium, it is "cultivated by the natives like Potatoes". Thwaites also says that the Sinhalese cultivate it for its tubers, which are eaten as a vegetable. Rumphius speaks of this plant at some length; he says that it has recently been introduced from Java and Baly to Amboine, and that the tubers are eaten (1) N.-E. Brown, Tuberous Labiatæ, Bulletin of miscellaneous information. Royal Gardens Kewo, 1894, p. 10. cules boiled or roasted. He adds that it was probably introduced to the island from the Malay Peninsula. On the other hand, he says that the vulgar name used by the Portuguese for this plant is Gotte Keligam or Gotte Kelim, probably because it is widely cultivated on the Coromandel coast, whose inhabitants are called Kelin or Quellin. Neither Roxburgh, nor Wight and Arnot, however, mention this plant in their works, although there are specimens in the Kew herbarium, collected by Wight and Quilon (number 2105, Wight, Kew distribution), but the labels do not say whether it was wild or cullivorous. Dr. Treub, director of the Botanical Garden at Buitenzorg (Java), was kind enough to send us tubers of this species. Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain the flowering of this interesting plant, which has once again disappeared from our cultivations; COLEUS EDULIS Vatke (Linnæa XXXVII, p. 319), which Richard had designated as C. tuberosus (Flore d'Abyssinie, 11, p. 185) but which is distinct from the one to which Bentham had already given this name. C. edulis is the Daunech of the Abyssinians; according to Richard (1). it grows in mountainous areas, near the village of Kouaieta, in the provinces of Chiré and Godjam. Its fleshy tubers are quite similar to those of the potato, not only in shape but also in flavor. This plant is abundantly cultivated in the many gardens surrounding Kouaieta, situated at an altitude of 6,000 to (1) Paillieux et Bois, Revue des Sciences Naturelles appliqués (Bulletin de la Soc. nat d'Acclimatation, 20 aout 1890): De quelques plantes alimentaires de l'Abyssinie. 7,000 pieds au-dessus du niveau de la mer. Schimper (Vatke, loc. cit.), is said to have collected the plant at an altitude of 8,200 feet. We have requested C. edulis from various sources, and to date our efforts to obtain it have been to no avail. In the present state of relations opening up between Ethiopia and Europe, we may not be long in receiving this interesting Labiatae; COLEUS BARBATUS Benth. (Plectranthus barbatus Andr.), from India, Arabia and the tropical east coast of Africa. According to the Flora of Dalzell and Gibson, and a label by Dr. Ritchie of the Kew Herbarium, this plant is cultivated in the Deccan for its fleshy roots, which the natives marinate; PLECTRANTHUS ESCULENTUS N.-E. Brown, a species with a tuberous root and yellow flowers. Samples of this plant were first sent to Kew by Mr. J.-M. Wood, curator of the Durban Botanical Garden, Natal (number 3633), in November 1886, under the name Umbondive or Kaffir Potato, with a note saying that the natives are very fond of tubers. The plant was cultivated at Kew. Mr. Medley Wood, curator of the Colonial Garden at Natal, was kind enough to send us some tubers of this plant, which rotted in the ground before giving any sign of vegetation; PLECTRANTHUS FLORIBUNDUS N.-E. Brown, a yellow-flowered species closely related to P. esculentus, the type of which is native to Natal, but of which a variety (longipes) grows in various parts of tropical Africa: Manganja Hills, Lake Nyassa, Blantyre, Umzingwani river valley, Angola, etc. Mr. N.-E. Brown believes that the roots of this species are tubercular like those of P. esculentus, but he has no proof of this; Lycopus lucius Turcz. or Inou Sirône of the Japanese, a perennial somewhat reminiscent of our Lycopus europæus, but with a stem giving rise to numerous stolons. This plant was sent from Japan to the Museum by Abbé Faurie, and Mr. Maxime Cornu was kind enough to offer us a seedling. The tuberous rhizomes grow up to 20 centimetres long and 1? to 2 centimetres in diameter, and are quite reminiscent of those of Stachys palustris, whose cultivation Mr. Chappellier has sought to propagate as a food plant; but, although their flavour is better, and they are produced in large numbers, there is no reason to recommend their use, as their fibrous consistency makes them unpalatable. Lycopus lucidus has proven to be absolutely hardy in our climate; it is regrettable that we cannot make better use of it. MELON DUDAIM Queen Anne's melon, Canary Island melon, Sweet melon, Fragrant pumpkin, Brahma apple. CUCUMS MELO L., var. DubAÏM Ndn. (Melo rotundus parvus G. Bauhin; C. Dudaim L.; C. sativus Schemmam Forsk; C. pictus Jacq; C. pedatifidus et C. reginæ Schrad; C. Schraderianus Rœm.; C. odoratissimus Mœnch). Vélins du Muséum, t. LXI, tab. 24, 25, 26, 28; Morr. Belg. hort. t. Il, p. 205. Cucurbitaceae family. "The Dudaïms, if we stick to the type form, constitute one of the best characterized and most stable races in the Melon species; but, as they cross easily with all the others, they soon degenerate and lose their character when cultivated a few years in a row in their vicinity. We

The fruit is spherical, slightly depressed at the front and back, more or less bright orange-yellow in color, with longitudinal macules or bariolures of a reddish hue. "The type of this variety has a spherical fruit, slightly depressed from front to back, more or less bright orange-yellow when ripe, with longitudinal macules or bariolures of a dull red, exhaling an extremely pronounced melon odor. This odor is sometimes so strong that some people find themselves bothered by the presence of one or two fruits of this variety in an apartment. Its size varies from that of a small apricot to that of an orange. It detaches from the stalk at the first signs of 25 ripeness. The flesh is thin, yellowish-white or slightly pink, not very sweet, and always leaves an aftertaste that is enough to make it inedible. "This aftertaste is found in all Dudaïm mixtures with other melons, no matter how excellent the variety. It should therefore be kept away from melons if the qualities that distinguish good varieties are to be preserved. 4 Fig. 51 - Dudaïm melon. "The frank Dudaïm deserves a place in some remote corner of the garden, for the kindness of its fruit, which can be used to decorate desserts; but it can never be for us an object of simple pleasure or curiosity. "Probably because of its highly developed aroma, the Dudaim is highly prized in most Muslim countries. It abounds in Persia, Egypt and throughout North Africa. I've even seen it sold in the markets of Algeria. The Spaniards have long carried it to their colonies in America, where they call it Melonsito de olor, as Gilii and Xuares tell us. Various authors give fairly good illustrations of it". (Naudin, Espèces et variétés du genre Cucumis. Extract from Ann. des sciences naturelles). We have just cultivated for the second time a Melon whose seeds were sent from Peking, without any particular observation, by M. le D' E. Bretschneider. The doctor had previously sent them to M. Decaisne, who considered them to belong to the Cucumis Dudaïm. We harvested fruit of the shape and volume of a large orange, with smooth rind, streaked with ten dark-green stripes against a yellow-orange background, running from the stalk to the umbilicus. Fruit height, approx. Om,8; width of stripes varying from Om,01 and 0m,015 to Om,02; average weight, 310 grams. The small volume of the fruit would make it one of those portable melons to which we have given the name of Pocket Melon or Hunter Melon, if it could have the same use; but it lacks sugar and can only be eaten for dessert. In China, it is tasty, sweet and fragrant. M. Naudin acknowledges that it can be used as a dessert garnish. He tells us that it is highly prized in most Muslim countries, that it abounds in Persia, Egypt and the whole of North Africa; that he has found it on the markets of Algeria; that it has long existed in the Spanish colonies of America. So it's not inedible. Its flesh is white, juicy and fragrant when very ripe. We suggest using it as follows: For a table of twenty place settings, arrange twelve to fifteen pieces of fruit in a pyramid or basket, forming a beautiful middle course that will charm the eyes of the guests. For dessert, the maître d'hôlel will remove the dish, cut the fruit in half, quickly replace the seeds with powdered sugar and serve each person half a fruit in the shape of a cup, to be eaten with a spoon like an ice cream. This dessert will be good and very elegant; we've made sure of that. One of our correspondents confirms our assessment. He writes us from Setubal (Portugal): "Yesterday, I got my hands on a Melon zébré de Chine, which I had been displaying for a fortnight on a shelf; it had turned almost all yellow, even in its green part, which had taken on this hue: it was just right for what I wanted to do with it. I divided it up, tasted it and found that it tasted a little like pineapple. I ate half of it, thinking that it could be used for something else. Continuing the experiment, I emptied the other half of its seeds, and, in this empty space, I put sugar, then a very good liqueur wine, called bastardo here. I left it to infuse for a quarter of an hour, and then, using a teaspoon, I started to make it like ice-cream, and the paste looked very much like it. It was delicious. It occurred to me that these melon halves could be glazed in a variety of ways. "I'll give you my test; it's by these random means that discoveries are made. I'm a convert, and I hasten to confess it. If only to eat this little melon, I'll grow it. The C. Dudaim produces only twelve to fifteen fruits per panel; its price would still be quite high. We recognize that in the Paris area, it will not be fruitfully cultivated, and that it will remain what it has been until now, an amateur plant. JAPANESE WHITE MELON Shiro uri. CUCUMIS MELO L., var. Cucurbitaceae family. By way of description, this melon bears a striking resemblance to the large white Paris cucumber. We've been growing it for several years under glass. We don't prune it, for fear of deforming it by making it bigger. In fact, its shape lends itself perfectly to the use we make of it. We pick them when they are very ripe, when they are pleasantly fragrant. Unfortunately, it lacks sugar, like all the melons we have received from China and Japan; but when cut into thin slices, dipped in doughnut batter, fried by a skilled hand and liberally sprinkled with sugar, it makes an excellent dessert, which retains a light pineapple flavour and is very well received by everyone. This is not the only use for Shiro uri. In 1879, at the Horticultural Exhibition in Brie-Comte-Robert, gardener Veniat presented this melon, which he had been growing for two years under glass, in the same way as the Cantaloupe, except for pruning. In a note on this presentation published in the Journal de la Société nationale d'Horticulture, we said: "Each plant gives an average of four fruits, the shape and color of which are those of white Paris cucumbers. The Shiro uri is slightly larger, however. Its skin is thin, its seeds are small, and it is all flesh. "This flesh lacks sugar, so this Japanese melon should not be eaten after soup, but as a dessert, sliced like a pineapple and accompanied by powdered sugar. "Shiro uri confit is very good. In 1879, confectioner Mamoz made an excellent dessert. Later. M. Robineau-Boissier ordered two hundred fruits from M. Millet, a distinguished horticulturist in Bourg-la-Reine, who delivered them exactly as ordered. The famous confectioner diced the flesh, candied it and graciously offered us a certain quantity of this delicacy, which was tasted with sensitive pleasure by twenty members of the plant section (Société d'Acclimatation). "We consider the Shiro uri to be preferable to most melons from the Far East. It can render services and be fruitfully cultivated in the Midi. "As it requires as much care and expense as Cantaloupes, we do not expect its cultivation to spread to the Paris area." MELON BELLE ANGEVINE CUCUMIS MELO L., var. Cucurbitaceae family. Fruits pear-shaped, green, dotted with yellow, marked with longitudinal stripes of a darker green than the rind. Length, Om, 15; circumference at most developed point, Om. 29. This melon, whose seeds were sent from China to Mr. A. Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire by Mr. E. Bretschneider, is shaped and colored like a large pear. Its rind is very thin; its flesh is green, juicy, melting and fragrant; but it has the defect of all its Chinese and Japanese congeners: it lacks sugar. It should therefore be picked ripe, served for dessert and eaten only when sprinkled generously with sugar. We won't repeat here what we said about the Chayote melon. Like Chayote, Melon Belle Angevine is an amateur plant, inferior to the varieties we grow. MELON CHAYOTE CUCUmHS MELo L., var. Cucurbitaceae family. Fruit small, pear-shaped, with smooth, apple-green rind, divided into ten ribs barely indicated by lines darker green than the rind. Length, Om, 16; circumference on stalk side, Om, 20; on umbilicus side, Om, 27. Weight, 370 grams. Very thin rind; flesh thick, white, fragrant, juicy and very melting. This melon is one of the best we have received from the Far East. The seeds were sent to Mr. A. Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire by Dr. E. Bretschneider, without any particular mention. Cultivated under a frame, they have successively given us a dozen ruits, on which we will make our opinion known. These melons from China and Japan have a special flavor, which can in no way be compared to that of melons grown in Europe. We wouldn't accept them in France, after soup, like Cantaloups, Sucrins, etc. We can't, in our opinion, accept them in the same way. In our opinion, they can only be eaten for dessert. Melon Chayole should be picked very ripe, and only eaten when it has softened a little and yields to finger pressure. Then, for dessert, after having been peeled like a pear and cut into two or four parts, it is eaten with a generous sprinkling of sugar. Presented in this way, it looks like a bouquet to many people, but it should be considered as a fruit in its own right, forgetting that it's called a melon, and not wishing at all costs, as is commonly done, that it resemble what we already have. Oriental melons lend themselves better to confectionery than our own, which are watery. Nevertheless, with the possible exception of the Japanese Shiro uri, they are amateur plants that require as much care as the finest Cantaloupes. They are therefore not generally cultivated. Their singular shape may give rise to hybridization trials. MELON DE NOUMÉA OU DE LA DUMBÉA CUCUMIS PANCHERIANUS Ndn, Ann. des se. nat. ser. 4, vol. XII, p. 112, tab. 8, and ser. 5, vol. XVI, p. 161 Cucurbitaceae family. Found in New Caledonia by the late Pancher. Cultivated, but degenerated, in botanical gardens. Ordinary cultivation of melons. Of all known species, this one has the smallest fruits. On average, they don't exceed the size of a large olive. This plant grows wild in New Caledonia, where its fruit is eaten by the children of the natives. We asked Mr. Naudin for some seeds, and he replied: "I would be delighted to be able to provide you with seeds of the Cucumis Pancherianus, which I cultivated at the Jardin des Plantes many years ago; but this curious species, whose fruits are no larger than olives, and which, despite this, crosses most easily with melons, giving fertile hybrids, has disappeared everywhere. It could only be found in New Caledonia, from where the botanist Pancher had sent the seeds. It might not be difficult to obtain new ones by writing to New Caledonia. This is what we did, and our kind correspondent, Mr. Perret, wrote to us on August 25 1886: "I have sent for Cucumis Pancherianus. A few years ago, there was a lot of it in Dumbéa. Grazing and fires have almost entirely destroyed it in this locality. However, we did find one plant bearing two young fruits. Unfortunately, I have to leave next week for a trip that will last about three months. I'll be touring the colony, inspecting all the prisons. I have recommended that these samples be carefully monitored and the seeds collected. As I'll be back in December, it will be soon enough to send them to you. We did, indeed, receive them and sow them. The crop was not very successful. We obtained a few small fruits that we preserved in vinegar and presented to the Société d'Acclimatation. Although these small melons deserve to be sought after for their attractive shape and extreme smallness, we doubt that confectioners or vinegar-makers will be able to offer them at a price that would allow their cultivation. MELOTHRIA PENDULA L., Pluk, tab. 85, fig. 5. Fam. Cucurbitaceae. Annual, climbing plant, common in parts of North America, reported even in Guiana and Brazil by travelers who have visited these countries. Also found in China. M. Fontanier, French consul in Macao, sent some seeds to the Museum. This plant reaches 3 to 4 feet in height; its leaves are cordate, five-lobed or angular, and scabrous. The fertile (hermaphrodite) flowers are borne on simple, thread-like, pendulous stalks that are longer than the leaves. Male flowers are borne in clusters on peduncles about 6 cm long. The calyx teeth are tubular. Petals are obovate, deeply indented. The fruit is green, hairless, ellipsoidal and olive-shaped. Sloane says that the inhabitants of the regions where this plant grows sometimes pickle its fruits while they are still green. We have cultivated Melothrie pendante with complete success. We sowed it on a bed and under a frame, and put it in place at the end of May. Set up on a coarse, very wide-meshed trellis, it covered itself with abundant foliage and a multitude of pretty white-dotted fruits, the color, shape and volume of an Olive. We have put these fruits in vinegar, like gherkins; but we cannot recommend them for this use. Only more or less crunchy fruits should be used in pickles. Melothrie fruits are hollow and soft. They are pleasing in shape, color and abundance, but are of no real use. Mélothrie is an amateur plant. MIOGA ZINGIBER MIOGA ROSC. - Amonum Mioga Kæmpfer. Family Zingiberaceae. Perennial plant. Scaly, horizontally spreading rhizomes. Annual aerial stems, Om 50 to 0m, 60 high, simple, covered by leaf sheaths. Stem leaves alternate, distichous, simple, about Om, 20 long and Om, 5 to Om, 6 wide, lanceolate acuminate, light green, scarcely petiolate, ligulate; lateral veins extend from the median rib of the leaf blade. Peduncle arising from the stump, rising subterraneously, bearing an ovoid inflorescence composed of overlapping bracts, dotted with reddish-brown, unfolding five or six flowers at ground level; calyx tubular, split on one side and transparent; corolla with short tube, formed of three equal, lanceolate outer lobes, about Om, 3 long; labellum three-lobed, obovate, Om, 2 1/2 long. Stamen single, filleted, bearing a two-located lateral anther enveloping the style. Ovary inferere, three-located, enclosing several ovules, surmounted by a slender style, extended beyond the anther into a long, arched beak; stigma funnel-shaped. Blooms in August-September. Mioga is native to Japan. It was described by Kæmpter in his book Amænitatum exoticarum..... fascicule V, page 826. It was collected by Thunberg, Siebold, Buerger and Mohnike (1), near Nangasaki. It grows spontaneously, but is generally cultivated. (1) Thunberg, Flora japonica, p. 24; Miquel, Prolusio Roræ Japonicæ, p. 304. In the book Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878, we read: "Mioga is a plant whose young stems and flowers are eaten. The fibers of its stems can also be used to make ropes". Fig. 52 - Zingiber Mioga. In the Note explicative des objets exposés par l'École agricole de Komaba, à l'Exposition universelle de 1889, (Ministère de l'Agriculture et du Commerce, Tokio, Japon) we find the following details: "Le Mioga (Amomum Mioga). Mioga flowers are harvested from the roots on the ground around June or July; they are shaped like spinning pins. The young stems, brewed in spring, are tender and taste just like the flowers". Dr. H*** wrote to us on April 11, 1879: "I am sending you a small root of a species of ginger called Mioga in Japan, and Amonum Mioga by Thunberg. The inflorescences are eaten before the flowers bloom; it's quite good. Although all Zingiberaceae are considered to be greenhouse plants, this plant has spent the winters perfectly at my place for the last three years, in the open ground, planted 0.10 m deep and covered in winter with a few dry leaves. It flowered well last summer. If the piece I'm sending you is a little small, it's because I haven't multiplied it much yet. The doctor wrote again on June 7 of the same year: "My Mioga plants have spent the winter perfectly in the open ground and are growing on all sides. If the too-small plant I sent you did not grow, I could send you as many as you would like next winter." We did not ask our kind correspondent for a second shipment. The section he had sent us had vegetated so well that we could plant it the following spring. As we can see from the date we received it, our Mioga withstood the harsh winter. It was, it must be said, protected by a thick blanket of snow; but in 1891, nothing defended it against the cold. We believe there is no plant hardier than the Mioga, nor one that multiplies more rapidly. We have not seen it affected by any disease, or attacked by any insect. We plant the rhizome sections in a garden bed 1.30 m wide, in two parallel lines, Om.50 apart, leaving a space of Om.40 between the lines and the paths, which does not prevent the plants from bearing their stems and inflorescences under them. There are very few weeds in the bed, and a hoeing or two does justice. Watering optional. Do not hoe after July 31st: you risk cutting off shoots and inflorescences. Weeding can be done by hand. Harvesting begins around August 15. Planting is monitored in the same way as for Asparagus; like Asparagus shoots, we cut close to the rhizome, as soon as the inflorescence shows its sharp tip on the surface of the soil. We've never cut off the shoots, except for a few to taste them, for fear of reducing propagation. They are harvested like the inflorescences, and we have found no appreciable difference between the flavor of one and the other. We assume that you should wait two years before harvesting shoots from a plantation, and only cut them in spring, although they are also produced in autumn. We would therefore regularly harvest inflorescences from August to September, and shoots from late April to late May. It would probably not be wise to extend the cutting beyond this period. We won't insist on Mioga's hardiness and rapid multiplication. We will talk about the uses to which its shoots and inflorescences can be put. Our correspondent wrote to us on August 18, 1880: "If you want to try tasting these Miogas, wash them carefully to remove any dust or earth that may have remained between the bracts, blanch them in boiling water with a little salt, pass them through cold water, then cook them for a moment in a sauce au jus, like onions, leeks or celery. It tastes very different from what we're used to eating; but, in my opinion at least, it's not bad." We tasted Mioga inflorescences prepared au gratin like macaroni, with alternating layers of vegetable and grated Parmesan: it's quite good. We ate them as a salad, after simply blanching them in boiling water. We found them very tasty. A slight resinous taste disappears after the second or third bite, and the slightly spicy flavor of the vegetable blends quite well with that of the oil. Finally, to make pickles, we combined Mioga inflorescences with West Indian Angouries, Catawissa Onion bulbs and Spanish Sweet Peppers. We were delighted with the result, and particularly recommend this use. We hope that people will persevere in trying out various culinary preparations; there's still a lot to do. To those who ask us if our vegetable resembles any of the others we use, we say: No, Mioga doesn't taste like cabbage, cardoon, artichoke or any of our other vegetables... it tastes like Mioga. 401 CRYPTOTÆNIA CANADENSIS DC; Chœrophyllum canadense Pers; Myrrhis canadensis Moris; Sium canadense Lamk; Conopodium canadense Koch. Umbelliferae family. Perennial native to North America, Japan and China (1); erect, Om, 30 to Om, 40 high, glabrous; leaves three-segmented, oval, broad, toothed; flowers small, white, united in paniculate umbels, with few, unequal rays; no involucre; involucellum with few leaflets; calyx entire; petals obovate, almost entire, with a narrow, inflected tongue; fruit laterally compressed, linear oblong, crowned by a short stylopod and two straight styles; carpels with five filiform ribs, We sowed Mitsuba in April, under a frame, and transplanted it into the field as soon as the plant was ready. The following spring, these clumps gave us several successive cuttings of young leaves. The plant is very hardy, but emergence is slow, and it was to speed it up that we sowed it under a frame, a precaution that is in no way necessary. In Japan at the 1878 Universal Exhibition, we read: "Mitsuba or Mitsuba seri is an edible plant which is obtained in the following way: when winter comes, its roots are covered with earth and plant detritus; the shoots that appear are then picked, cooked and eaten. We first tasted the young leaves we had put through the wringer as a salad. We were not satisfied with the result. The salad we obtained was inferior to the Capuchin Beard; but its non-etiolated leaves, chopped and prepared like Spinach, Chicory, etc., gave us a very good vegetable dish, with a special, slightly aromatic flavor, pleasant enough in our opinion, for us to recommend the cultivation of Mitsuba to amateurs. Another umbelliferous plant, Phellopterus littoralis Benth. is sometimes cultivated in Japan. The Muséum received seeds from Abbé Faurie, and this rare species flowers and fruits every year in our great national establishment. It is a perennial plant, Om, 50 in height; it has proved to be very hardy, having withstood the rigorous winter of 1890-1891 perfectly. Phellopterus leaves are prized in Japan as a condiment. They have a very pronounced aromatic flavor, reminiscent of both Angelica and Tarragon. Cannibal nightshade. Borodina. SOLANUM ANTHROPOPHAGORUM Seeman. Solanaceae family. 403 The correspondence relating to the Fiji Islands, presented to both Houses of the English Parliament by order of His Majesty, in May 1862, is accompanied by an interesting appendix, consisting of a report by Doctor Seeman on the vegetable productions and resources of the Viti or Fiji Islands, in which a chapter, on page 58, is devoted to vegetables eaten with human flesh, a report from which we give the following extract: "Since, thanks to the influence of trade, Christian teaching and the presence of a British consul, cannibalism survives in only a small number of localities and is becoming every day, and more and more, a mere historical subject, it may be important to know this: human flesh, Fijians have repeatedly assured me, is extremely difficult to digest, and the healthiest men suffer for two or three days after eating it. No doubt to aid digestion, bokola, the technical name given to the flesh of the dead man, is always eaten with added vegetables. There are three main types of vegetable that Fijians believe should accompany bokola: Malawari leaves (Trophis anthropophagorum Seem.), Tudana (Omalanthus pedicellatus Benth.) and Borodina (Solanum anthropophagorum Seem.). The first two are medium-sized trees, growing spontaneously in many parts of the archipelago; but the Borodina is cultivated, and there are usually several large clumps near each "buré" (or foreigners' house), where the bodies of men killed in battle are always carried. "Borodina is a bushy shrub, rarely more than 6 feet tall, with dark, glossy foliage and berries the shape and color of tomatoes. This fruit has a slight aromatic odor and is accidentally prepared as Tomato sauce. The leaves of these three plants are rolled around the bokola, like those of Taro around pork, and cooked with it on heated stones. Salt is not forgotten. "While all other kinds of vegetables and meat are eaten with the fingers, cannibals' food is only touched with forks, generally made from the wood of the Nokonoko (Casuarina equisetifolia) or the Vesi (Afzelia bijuga A. Gray), bearing curious names and having three or four long tines. The reason given for this departure from the usual way of eating is the widespread belief that fingers that have touched the bokola can cause skin diseases when in contact with the delicate skin of children, and, as Fijians love their offspring dearly, they scrupulously make use of forks on the occasions indicated. "The Borodina mentioned above is the subject of today's plate (1). Our plants were obtained(1) Botanical Magazine, 3rd ser. t. XX, p. 5424. from seeds brought back by Dr. Seeman, and flowered in the greenhouse of the Royal Gardens in July. Except when bearing fruit, this species of Solanum has nothing to encourage cultivation. It is only of historical interest, linked to a practice that is falling further and further into disuse with each passing year". In 1878, we sowed Solanum anthropophagorum on a bed and under a frame. On June 2, we planted it outdoors on an old bed. At the beginning of September, quite a few fruits began to turn red. In October, these fruits not being ripe, we enclosed the plant in a glass cage, and shortly afterwards harvested its berries. They were dry, or at least not juicy enough to make a tomato-like sauce out of them. In our opinion, it would be a waste of time and effort to cultivate S. anthropophagorum in the Paris climate; but Mr. Rantonnet (1), a horticulturist in Hyères, has found that it can withstand winter in the open air, and he harvested ripe fruit in February. In his opinion, this new type of tomato could become widely available, especially in southern France. (1) Revue horticole, 1867, p. 326. BALBIS MORELLE SOLANUM SISYMBRHFOLIUM Lamk, Illustr. no. 2386. S. Balbisii Dunal, Solan. 232, no. 195, t. III, fasc. 2; Bot. Magtab. 2568, 2828 and 3954; S. decurrens Balb, ic. et descript. fasc. 1, p. 16, t. Ier; S. inflatum Horn, hort. Hafn, I, p. 221; S. viscosum DC, ic. pict. facult. se. monsp.; Lag. gen et sp. 10, no. 145; S. brancæfolium Jacq, Eclog. 14, vol. VII; S. formosum Cat. Dorp. p. 145, nec H. B. et Kth; S. mauritianum Vélins du Mus, Paris, t. XXI, t. LXVI; S. viscidum Schweigg, Enum. h. region, 67, Mart. en H. Erlang. 64; S. edule Vellozo, Flor. flum. 2, t. CXXI; S. opulifolium Portensch. mss. in h. Vindob. e Sendtn; S. Thouini Gmel, Cat. Carlsruhe, 254. Family Solanaceae. Annual plant, native to southern America, reaching about 1 meter in height, hairy, glandular, bearing yellowish spines on all parts. Stem woody at base. Leaves pinnatifid, five- or seven-lobed, irregularly toothed, bristling with coarse hairs, very thorny, decurrent. Flowers fairly large, white, lilac or violet depending on variety, in terminal cymes; calyx unequally divided, spiny; corolla closely resembling that of the potato. Stamens with yellow anthers; short style. Fruit (berry) as large as a large cherry, partly covered by calyx divisions, saffron-red in color, with sweet, slightly acidic flesh when ripe. What we have to say about Morelle de Balbis will take up less space than its description and synonyms. The plant is more ornamental than edible and should not detain us for long. It acquires great proportions in rich soil. We obtained plants bearing both blue and white flowers, and it seemed to us that the fruits following the blue flowers were of a more beautiful red than those of the white-flowered plants. We measured the diameter and circumference of one planted on an old bed, and we regret not having kept the figures; the dimensions were enormous. The cultivation of S. Balbisii is the same as for tomatoes. It is sown in trays and under beds, planted at the end of May and ripens in September and October. Harvesting is difficult. The plant is equipped with innumerable thorns, which defend its approaches. We try to pick its pretty red berries, but usually give up. We do remember, however, seeing a Morelle de Balbis plant near the Museum's greenhouses, stripped of its fruit by passers-by as it ripened; but surely this innocent petty theft was not accomplished without spilling blood. The taste of S. Balbisii are quite insignificant. They could be preserved in caramel and fondant, like those of Physalis peruviana, which are much better; what we can say is that the plant is very beautiful and worthy of the attention of connoisseurs. MORELLE DE SALTA Small Salta Tomato. Under the name of Petite Tomate de Salta, Dr. Weber has given us seeds of a variety of Morelle de Balbis (Solanum sisymbriifolium). The description we have given of the latter is in every way applicable to the Petite Tomate de Salta. Its fruits are smaller and less abundant, but its leaves are more finely cut and of a brighter green. It's easy to grow, and its development is such that three plants are enough to form a large basket. It should therefore be grown exclusively as an ornamental plant. In this respect, we would prefer it to Morelle de Balbis; we thank Dr. Weber for introducing us to it. BIRD'S MORELLE SOLANUM AVICULARE Forst. (Syn.: S. laciniatum Ait.) Solanaceae family. This species is native to Australia and New Zealand. It is a shrub that can reach 3 meters in height and is cultivated in our European gardens for its ample, laciniated, highly ornamental foliage, as well as for its rather large, purplish-blue flowers. Dr. Kirk, from Wellington, New Zealand, author of important publications on the flora of New Zealand, was kind enough to send us seeds of this plant, which, he told us, the Maoris cultivate to eat the large berries, yellow, orange or violet in color, depending on the variety. Our kind correspondent also told us that these fruits are eaten either raw or cooked, but mostly in the first state. We have grown the plant in Crosnes, but have only harvested a very small number of fruits, absolutely comparable, incidentally, to those of Solanum laciniatum, which our gardeners use to form baskets in the gardens. The flavor of these fruits is nil. Morelle des Oiseaux deserves to be recommended as an ornamental plant, but does not seem to us to be of any interest as a food plant. MORELLE NODIFLORE SOLANUM NODIFLORUM Jacq. Icones rar. 2, tab. 326; Dunal, in DC. Prodr., XIII, 46; S. nigrum, var. patulum Lin. Solanaceae family. Very widespread in Mauritius and Rodriguez, and cultivated in vegetable gardens. Found throughout the tropics. Brède malgache (Flora of Mauritius and the Seychelles, Baker.) Annual plant, reaching 6 to 7 decimeters in height, with sub-frulescent, stalked, almost cylindrical, glabrous stems, with thickened nodes; leaves alternate, petiolate, ovate, acute, a little decurrent on the petioles, entire, glabrous and green on both sides; peduncle simple at the base, dividing at the top to form a kind of umbel composed of five or six flowers, small, whitish, with obtuse sepals; corolla deeply divided, lanceolate, acute, very open; berry round, small, black, shiny; seeds white. Grows in all tropical parts of the old and new continents. Morelle nodiflore seeds were brought to us from Nouméa by our correspondent, Mr. V. Perret. Sown in trays and planted in the ground in mid-May, they produce the most vigorous vegetation. The tops of the plant are edible, but we believe it prudent not to eat the fruit; several Solanum plants in this section have poisonous fruit. Is Solanum nodiflorum spontaneous or introduced to New Caledonia? We can't say, but it is found in the parts of the island furthest from the points occupied by Europeans. The plant is widely used in tropical regions, where it is used in calalou and vegetable soups. Several species of Solanum, such as S. oleraceum Dunal and S. nigrum L., are used in the same way. We tasted Nodiflora nightshade, chopped and prepared like spinach. We didn't like it; it had no flavor other than a slight bitterness. We're too rich in edible herbs - Spinach, Tetragona, Glacial, etc. - to recommend a plant that, in our opinion, is inferior. We felt, however, that a morello that is universally esteemed in warmer countries and easy to cultivate in our climate deserved a place in a curious gardener's kitchen garden. Our taste is not the law. MORELLE DE WALLIS Guayavo, Pepino, Melon Pear, Melon Shrub. SOLANUM MURICATUM Ait, var; S. Wallisii Carr; S. quatemalense Eisen. Solanaceae family. "Plant of great vigor, bushy, compact and very branched from its base, which becomes subfrutescent or even subligneous, nigrescent or better black in all its branches; branches and twigs numerous, slightly angular or subaligned. Leaves very long lanceolate, entire, very rarely and slightly lobed, about 12 centimeters long, 4 centimeters wide, regularly attenuated at the tip; petioles 5-7 centimeters long, purple-black, as are the veins. Flowers gathered in a kind of scorpioid corymb, solitary on a pedicel of about 15-20 millimeters, black, strongly villeinous. Calyx with short oval divisions, very long-lasting. Corolla spreading, 25-30 millimeters wide, glossy dark violet, divisions abruptly narrowed and acuminate at the tip; stamens included, with threads shorter than the anthers. Fruits elongated, heart-shaped, reaching about 6 cm long by 4 cm, sometimes more, in Fig. 53 - Wallis nightshade. diameter, regularly attenuated at the apex, which is abruptly rounded, slightly narrowed at the base, on which the calyx divisions are applied; skin smooth and very plain, shiny, of a very beautiful mottled violet, dotted, often here and there banded or widely spotted. Flesh yellowish-white, thick, melting, very juicy, slightly pungent flavor, reminiscent of melon, slightly sweet, but with a peppery, pungent aftertaste. Seeds borne on a sort of fleshy central placenta, erect in the center of the fruit". E.-A. Carrière (1). After giving this description, Mr. Carrière continues: "The qualities we have just mentioned are those we have observed in fruit that ripened in our greenhouse, and which consequently could not reach the perfection they should acquire in equatorial climates. In Nice, the fruit already appears to be of superior quality, judging by what Mr. Ch. Huber has told us. In a letter from Nice, dated January 13 1877, he says: "I have just eaten another Solanum Wallisii fruit, and I am extremely satisfied with its good taste; the flesh, very melting, yellow in color, like that of a Prune ReineClaude, is very sweet. For the fruit to acquire this quality, you need to wait until it has reached a tender consistency, leave it to rest and avoid squeezing it by hand, as is often done, which detracts from the good taste. The plants I left in the ground did not suffer from the cold of December, and are growing as well as if they were in a greenhouse. For northern countries, I think a cold greenhouse will suffice to overwinter them... I also made some (] Note on the S. Wallisit, colored figure (Revue horticole, 1877). p. 291). prepare them cooked, and I have found that they make a delicious dish". The Wallis nightshade was introduced to Europe by Mr. Wallis, who bought the fruit at the market in Guayaquil (Ecuador), where it is sold under the name of Guayavos. The fruit is highly prized by the locals, who eat it raw or cooked. Mr. Ch. Huber received the seeds from Mr. Ortgies, sowed them on December 12 1875, and, provided with numerous plants, put the plant on the market. We then tried its cultivation, and one of us, in a letter of which we reproduce a part, informed M. Carrière of the results he had obtained: "Cuttings of Morelle de Wallis are taken outdoors as easily as those of Pelargoniums, and the plant provides them abundantly. I took a good number of them last August; they spent the winter under glass, side by side with the Pelargoniums. Only the mother plant died. "When spring came, I kept eight of them, four of which were kept in pots. The other four were planted in the ground, poorly protected by a frame that was constantly raised 25 or 30 centimetres above the trunk. This allowed air to circulate under the trunk. It had to be lifted to straighten the plant, which doesn't rise much, but whose stems I didn't want to drag along the ground, as they would have immediately taken root, which I wanted to avoid. "The plants vegetated vigorously, and were constantly disbudded. Only three or four branches were retained, and they were continually crowned with charming bouquets of flowers. Cuttings kept in pots, also placed under a well-ventilated frame, produced many flowers, but did not set a single fruit. "Of the four plants planted in the open ground, only one set three fruits. Two of these fruits are already much larger than the one shown in our Revue; the third is still growing and looks set to reach the same size. These fruits are of rare beauty. They have been tied since July 1st (1). "The details I've just gone into make it clear where I went wrong. The season having been colder than usual, I should have given my plants a little more warmth. I didn't, and I was wrong. Now let's look to the future. "Wallis nightshade is extremely hardy, in the sense that its cuttings take root in the open air, that its vegetation is always very active, and that no disease or insect seems to be able to compromise its cultivation. "What does it need? A little more heat than I've been giving it. This is no problem for gardeners or market gardeners. Take cuttings in August, keep them over winter in a frame, bring them forward a little in spring on a warm bed, disbud them carefully, remove half the flowers from each bunch - these are the tips I can give today. We are convinced that Wallis nightshade can be grown without difficulty. However, it (1) One of these fruits, fully ripe on September 2, measured 9 centimetres in height and 27 in circumference. Its shape was reminiscent of an unflattened ox heart; its smooth, shiny skin was marbled with violet pink; it was indeed of rare beauty (Rédaction de la Revue horticole). will always require more care in our climate than it deserves. We tasted the fruit we obtained. They were superb, perfectly ripe, fleshy, juicy and appetizing. We were full of illusions about the result. The curious will understand the bitterness of our disappointment; our fruit tasted like cucumbers and left an unpleasant tingle on the tongue. We put them in compote, and they were no better. So why did we just talk about them at length? It's because these beautiful fruits, certainly very good in Guayaquil, could be a useful acquisition for the Mediterranean coast and for Algeria; it's because, after all, we don't just write for the outskirts of Paris. In a note published in the Revue horticole, 1892, page 155, Mr. Ed. André describes the fruits of a variety of Solanum muricatum sent to him by Mr. Naudin from Antibes, which differ from Morelle de Wallis in their creamy-white color with purple streaks and dots. MOTSIJI BIDENS PILOSA Lin; Ceratocephalus pilosus Rich; Kerneria dubia Coss; Kerneria tetragona Mœnch. Family Compositae. Annual plant with erect stems, 1.80 to 1 m high, quadrangular, branching at the top. Leaves opposite, petiolate, glabrescent, blackish-green, upper ones triseriate, lower ones imparipennate, with acute oval segments, toothed at the margins. Petioles ciliate at base. Flowers in discoid capitula; involucre with scales almost equal to each other, about the same length as the disc flowers. Fruit (achain) linear, angular, ending with two more or less divergent ridges, spreading slightly as it ripens. This plant grows in all warm parts of the globe. Our correspondent in Transvaal, Mr. Mingard, an agronomist attached to the Waldensian mission, sent us the seeds, and we extract the following passage from his letter of dispatch: "From today, as you advise, I shall make it a habit to enclose a few seeds with each letter to complete the postage; I therefore enclose some Motsiji seeds, a plant that I eat young and fresh, boiled like lettuce and chopped like spinach. Naturals usually mix it with peanut flour. We sowed our Motsiji seeds on March 20 (1884) in pots, under a frame; they sprouted well, and we put the plants in place on May 20, in the open air. They developed well and gave us ripe seeds at the beginning of July. On May 26, we sowed Motsiji in the open ground, and by July 12 we were tasting the tops of the stems, chopped like spinach; the result satisfied us. We agree that the plant is easy to grow and makes a good summer vegetable, without any particular recommendation. 27 TUBEROUS MUSTARD SINAPIS JUNCEA L., var, napiformis. Cruciferae family. Biennial plant, glabrous, reaching 1 m to 1m,50 in height. Root swollen, napiform, closely resembling common parsnip, white, about Om.17 long and Om.20 in circumference. Lower leaves oblong, lanceolate, toothed, sometimes lyrate; upper narrow, linear, lanceolate, whole or toothed. Flowers light yellow, in terminal clusters. Sepals divergent. Siliques erect, bumpy; beak fairly long, aspermous, somewhat compressed; valves keeled, trinervate, with sinuous lateral veins. In the Bulletin de la Société d'Aclimatation, 3e série, tome IX, page 579, we read the letter dated Peking, November 20 1881, in which Dr. E. Bretschneider, physician to the Russian Legation, announced to the Society a consignment of seeds and tubers comprising no fewer than 112 plants, shrubs or trees, for utility or ornament. Tuberous mustard was part of this rich collection, and its seeds were given to us for experimentation. We reported on our trials in the Bulletin de la Société, 3rd series, Volume X, page 21. Sown in the spring of 1882, the plant went to seed extremely quickly, and did not form a tuberous root. Sown on August 1, it gave us the roots described above in two and a half months. We informed Dr Bretschneider of the favorable results we had obtained, and he wrote to us from Peking, dated February 28 1883: "The Chinese sow this plant in midsummer and collect the roots in winter. These roots play a very Fig. 54. - Tuberous mustard. in China, and are widely cultivated in the North. The Chinese eat them salted and preserved with the fruits of Zanthoxylon Bungei and Illicium anisatum. I find their taste quite pleasant. Cultivation of the Moularde tubéreuse is in no way different from that of the Navet. Like turnips, it should be classified as a catch crop. Its roots, introduced into stews, give the broth a very good taste; prepared in juice, like celeriac, they are tender and slightly spicy. We consider Dr. Bretschneider's gift of this variety of Sinapis juncea, absolutely new to us, to be invaluable. Among the Cruciferae used as food plants in Japan, there is one, Wasabi (Eutrema Wasabi Maximowicz), that we wanted to know about. We found it mentioned in the Note explicative des objêts exposés par l'École agricole et forestière de Komaba (Japon), à l'Exposition universelle de Paris, en 1889. The brochure reads: "Wasabi. To grow this horseradish, choose a plot of land in a valley blocked by a stream. The roots are harvested. There is a variety also called Wasabi, whose leaves, prepared with vinegar, are exquisitely tasty." We asked for this plant in Japan and received rhizomes in 1896, which unfortunately rotted during the trip. Another species of Wasabi (Ainu-Wasabi, Rises- seri or Nisesseri) (Cardamine yesoensis Maximowicz) is cited by Messrs Batchelor and Miyabe: Ainu Economic plants (Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, 1893, p. 215). At the beginning of spring," say these authors, "the young leaves and new rhizomes are collected as food; the older parts of the roots are discarded. To increase their pungent flavor, the Ainos in some places have learned to put the leaves and rhizomes together in bottles, which they keep well corked for a day or so before using. Risesseri is usually boiled before eating." Tsurigane-ninjin or Nunoba. ADENOPHORA VERTICILLATA Fisch. Family Campanulaceae. 421 This plant (fig. 55) is often cultivated in botanical gardens; it is quite ornamental. In Japan, its roots are eaten either fresh, as soon as they are harvested, or dried, which makes it possible to stock up on them: they are eaten after boiling, sometimes mixed with broad beans. The leaves are often added to soup... (Batchelor and Kingo Miyabe, Ainu Economic plants. Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, p. 224). We sowed Mukekashi seeds in the spring of 1896. The young plants were transplanted into beds, spaced about 40 centimetres apart, and covered with glass trunks at the onset of winter. (In the Paris climate, the plant is absolutely hardy, and we recognized the futility of this precaution). By spring, the clumps had become quite voluminous, and we pulled up a few to see for ourselves just how valuable they were as food. The roots, quite numerous, thick and fleshy, have more or less the same flavor as Rapunzel. Cooked in slightly salted water, the youngest were tender, a little aromatic, but edible, while the thickest had an accentuated aromatic flavor. The cooked leaves were tender, with almost no flavor, but pleasant. 7 Fig. 55. - Adenophora verticillata. The young stems were a little stringy, and had a faint Laituc flavor. Egyptian bean, Egyptian pink lily. Pytagorian Bean. NELUMBIUM SPECIOSUM Willd. ; Nelumbo nucifera Gærtn. Family Nelombonaceae. 423 Perennial aquatic plant, native to southern Asia, once widespread in Egypt, where it was introduced and from which it has long since disappeared. It was one of the Lotus species of the Nile; the Egyptians deified it and depicted its flowers and fruits on most of their monuments. Later, they searched in vain for it in the waters of the Nile, and for a long time it was known only from medals and hieroglyphics. The descriptions given of it were all imaginary and erroneous, and only served to confuse the question of its identification. In 1602, the plant was finally discovered in its native India, and the learned botanist Lécluse (Clusius) was able to recognize that Nelumbo and the famous Egyptian plant belonged to one and the same species. This aquatic plant, one of the most beautiful known, is composed of a tracer rhizome, underground, more or less branched, equipped with swellings or nodosities from which the leaves are born, with cylindrical, needled petioles; some with a floating, peeled, flat blade; others rising up to 75 centimetres above the surface of the water, orbicular, with cup-shaped raised edges, about 25 centimetres wide. The upper surface of the leaves is rough, and water rolls over them like crystal globules. The flower blooms in July-August. It rises on a peduncle that starts on the stump and reaches or even exceeds the highest leaves. It is around 25 centimetres wide, with some twenty petals, whitish at the base and pink at the top. The stamens are numerous and have Fig. 56 - Indian Nelumbo (Nelumbium speciosum). extrinsic anthers, whereas in the Nymphaea they are introrsic. The fruit, shaped like an inverted cone, has a flat upper surface with some twenty cells, each containing a seed the size of a small hazelnut. The fruit resembles a watering can apple with large holes. This is the most famous and beautiful of all aquatic food plants. It could have been the subject of a long and interesting article, if, fortunately for the reader, we hadn't been pre-empted by the Bulletin de la Société nationale d'Acclimatation. In his work entitled Les Productions végétales du Japon, Dr. Mène says it all, without prolixity or omission, about Nelumbo nucifera. On pages 376 et seq. of the separate edition, you'll find all you need to know about the plant's nutritional and medicinal uses. The author reminds us that, among the Egyptians, the Nelumbo flower, under the name Lotus, was a sacred flower, and that today it still occupies the same rank in India, China, Japan, etc. We recommend reading the entire chapter devoted to Nelumbo, borrowing only what the author has to say about its food uses: "Its rhizomes and seeds are used in Japanese cuisine. Mounds of Lotus rhizomes, known as Hasu-none, can be found on the markets of Japan, as well as in China, Cochinchina and the kingdom of Siam. The taste of these rhizomes, when cooked, is reminiscent of that of turnip, cardoon and celery; they are eaten raw, boiled in water and ashes, boiled or fried like salsify; they are also ground to a powder, dried and used especially in soups; they yield a pinkish-white starch, which was featured in the Japanese section of the World's Fair and is used in soups. "As for the seeds, which taste a little like hazelnuts and sweet almonds, they are edible and the Japanese eat them with their meals as sweet dishes; they are used to make cakes and pastries. Dr. E. Bretschneider wrote to us on June 7, 1887: "The Chinese eat the rhizomes of this plant raw or cooked, but a starch is prepared from them which is an excellent food for small children; it makes a good porridge in water and milk. Rhizomes are harvested in autumn, when they are very rich in starch. It is widely consumed in China, and tastes excellent. "Nelumbium seeds are eaten both green and ripe, but taste better when green. They are also eaten toasted, and are widely used in China. "The starch is sold everywhere under the name Ngeonfen. R. P. David, for his part, gives information that shows the usefulness of Nelumbo: "I have seen that, throughout China, the magnificent Nelombonée with its large purpurinous flowers, known as Nelumbium speciosum, is highly esteemed, not only for its beauty, but as a food and medicinal plant. But until now, I've only seen the roots and seeds used as they are, or seasoned with sugar. In Tzitan, and perhaps elsewhere, we know how to extract a white starch from this large root, which is said to be very corroborating. To prepare a bowl, a single spoonful of this flour is placed at the bottom of the vase, and boiling water is poured over it, while a small stick is used to shake it rapidly. "This white material loses its color almost immediately, to resemble gelatin, and all the water in the bowl is transformed into a beautiful, transparent, consistent mass, but on cooling it becomes brown and solid. Mixed with a little sugar, Ngeon-fen is excellent for those who are ill, and also for those who are not." When in bloom, Nelumbium speciosum forms one of the most beautiful adornments of the Srinagar lake (Kashmir); its cheerful green foliage completely covers the waters, and from this green surface emerge myriads of peduncles terminating in enormous pink flowers reminiscent of our most beautiful Peonies. These flowers of a sacred plant are placed in temples and in the private oratories of the Hindus and renewed every morning for the duration of the flowering period. The leaves, which are of a very strong fabric, measure 45 centimetres or more in diameter. In the edge of these leaves, a rush is passed which serves as a lace and is intended to raise them so as to hold liquid food. This type of vegetable crockery, unknown in France, is then placed in the shade to dry. It is on these leaves that the great lords of Kashmir have their food served, and as these improvised vessels are only used once, they are assured that their dishes are always clean. Nelumbium seed is very good when fresh, and its taste is reminiscent of hazelnut. Consumption is low, as the flowers are cut to decorate temples. In autumn, when vegetation ceases, the young, undeveloped leaves forming a kind of turion are harvested by the natives, bundled and sold on the Srinagar market. These shoots have the length and appearance of beautiful asparagus and are called Nadrou. The natives, who are very fond of them, eat them cooked. Europeans make no use of them; however, Mr. L. Bouley, Director of Cultivation for H.H. the Maharadja of Kashmir, has eaten them with kari, and assures us that this dish is not to be despised. We have gathered the above curious information from the dictation of Mr. Ermens, the Maharadja's former Director of Cultivation, and from an article by his successor, Mr. L. Bouley, published in the Revue Horticole, March 16 1884. In August 1835, Raffeneau-Delile, Professor of Botany at the Montpellier Academy of Medicine and Director of the Jardin des Plantes, published a paper in the Bulletin de la Société d'Agriculture du département de l'Hérault, entitled: Acclimatization du Nelumbium speciosum dans le midi de la France. In it, he dwelt on the plant's historical interest and its uses as an architectural ornament and religious attribute, but made light of its nutritional properties: "The Lotus of ancient Egypt," he said, "grew in lakes on which people sailed in boats. Its broad leaves rose out of the water enough to shelter the boats, or perhaps to cover them. They were the size of Thessalian hats and conveniently served as dishes and cups, so that Alexandria's stores were well stocked with them...". He reported on the culling processes he had applied to the Nélumbo and the happy results he had obtained. He concluded by saying: "Our plant, because of its rarity, had the privilege of being much visited and much admired, attracting a number of people who learned with interest that it is useful for its seeds and roots, which are good for food in India; but this quality of food is base, without merit, in comparison with the elegance, color and pleasantly aniseed fragrance of its flowers". At the time, Nélumbo was being cultivated for the first time in the open air, and Raffeneau-Delile took infinite precautions to ensure its success; but today this cultivation is well known and no longer presents any difficulties. M. Planchon, professor of botany and director of the Jardin des plantes de Montpellier, wrote to us: "We didn't need to hybridize Nelumbium to cultivate these beautiful plants in the Midi and even in central France. The rough-leaved form, called by Delile asperifolium, can withstand our harshest winters here. It's probably the same variety that flourished, before 1880, in a large pond in the Parc de Baleine, in the Allier region, then belonging to the uncle of Mr. Doumet-Adanson, the current owner. "All the plants were killed by the exceptional winter of 1880. I suppose you could also grow the plant at Crosnes; but I fear that, for want of light, even more than heat, these splendid plants will not flower as easily as they do under our sun." In 1887, we immersed a few Nelumbium plants in Crosnes. They soon disappeared. M. Planchon's letter shows that Lotus cultivation is easy in the south of France and practical in central France. Farther north, however, it would be pointless to try it with the aim of harvesting rhizomes and seeds; this would be a luxury crop, the procedures for which have been known for a long time. In this respect, Nelumbium cannot be grown in the Paris climate. If necessary, our readers may refer to publications, old or recent, in which the uses or cultivation methods of the Lotus are described, notably in: article by Jesuit Father Cibot, on the cultivation of Nelumbo). - Du Halde, La Chine, vol. I, p. 27 - Grosier, De la Chine, 1819, vol. III, p. 263. - R. Fortune, Journey to the tea countries of China in 1819, p. 350, 352 - Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cte, Fleurs de pleine terre. - Journal Le Jardin, 1887. - Revue horticole, 1887. - D. Bois, Atlas des Plantes de jardins, pl. 18. NELUMBO JAUNE NELUMBIUM LUTEUM Willd. Nelumbo lutea Caspary. West Indies and North America, where it is found as far north as 44° latitude. This beautiful aquatic plant has the same habit as the previous species, but is distinguished by its yellow flowers. According to Mueller (Select extra tropical Plants, p. 206), "it seems to be hardier and better adapted to extra-tropical latitudes, the Nelumbo of India not naturally descending, in Australia, lower than 23°. "The tuberous roots of this species resemble sweet potatoes and are starchy. The seeds have a particularly pleasant taste. FOOD NYMPHEACEA EURYALE FEROX Salisb. Ti-teou-mi. "Cullivated in China and Japan for its rhizomes and seeds, from which a kind of flour has been extracted." (Naudin and Mueller, Manuel de l'Acclimateur.)" This substance is only eaten cooked and is less appreciated than its congeners; however, the lower class of Peking does not disdain it" (A. Billequin, Professor of Chemistry at Peking College.) NUPHAR AUVENUM Ait. Ta-wah-pah. Northern American species. Its roots grow 4 or 5 feet deep in water, and Indian women pull them up and collect large quantities. The roots are 1 to 2 feet long, porous, sweet-tasting and glutinous; they are usually eaten boiled with wild birds, but often roasted. Large quantities of these roots are kept in homes as winter provisions. The plant is called Ta-wah-pah by the Dakota Indians. The seeds are an important foodstuff for the Klamath Indians of California, who pulverize them to make bread; they are also eaten toasted (1). NUPHAR MULTISEPALUM Engelm. Native to western North America. Mueller (Select extra tropical Plants) says it produces nutritious seeds with a taste reminiscent of broom seeds, which are used locally as food, but are particularly useful for feeding water fowl. NYMPHÆA LOTUS L. Castalia mystica Salisb. The ancient Egyptians made bread from its seeds. Its rhizome, sweet-tasting and very starchy, is eaten like a potato. NYMPHÆA EDULIS DC. N. esculenta Roxb. ; Castalia edulis Salisb. Indian species, with edible roots. NYMPHÆA RUBRA Roxb. Castalia magnifica Salisb. Indian species, with edible seeds and roots. (1) Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for the year 1870; Washington. NYMPHÆA CŒERULEA Savign. Castalia cœrulea Tratt. In Senegal, the seeds of this species provide healthy food for the natives, especially in times of famine. They eat them raw, or boiled in the same way as millet flour, but after roasting them to give them a pleasant flavor. Floury rhizomes are also eaten after being cooked under ashes. Their flavor is reminiscent of the potato (De Lanessan, Les Plantes utiles des colonies françaises). N. rubescens Guill. et Perr., micrantha Guill. et Perr. and abbreviata Guill. et Perr. from the same region are sought after for the same uses. NYMPHÆA RUDGEANA Mey Guadeloupe. The starch contained in its strain and embryo is nutritious and analeptic (De Lanessan, loc. cit.). 28 COQ EGGS Huevos de Gallo. SALPICHROA RHOMBOIDEA Miers, in Hook, Lond. journ. of bot. 1845, Ivol. IV, p. 326 (Salpichroa rhomboidea Miers, in Hook, Lond. journ., 1848, 2, p. 233). Busbeckia radicans Mart. in Cat. Hort, reg. mon., p. 69; Planchonia arbutifolia Dunal, ic. pict. in vel. fac. sc. monsp., t. IX, tab 836; Atropa rhomboidea Hook., Bot., I, p. 135, t. XXXII; Physalis origanifolia Lam., Ill. 2398; Atropa origanifolia Desf., Cat. ed. 3, p. 396. Fam. des Solanées Perennial plant, with spindly, sarmentose or recumbent stems, the lower ones radicating; leaves small, unequal, petiolate; flowers white, solitary, rarely geminate, pendant. Calyx 2 to 3 millimeters in diameter, cupuliform, with five narrow divisions that persist at the base of the fruit; corolla tubular, white, 2 to 3 1/2 millimeters long by 2 to 3 wide, glabrous, with oblong linear divisions having their tips curved; berry oblong oval, 2 to 3 centimeters long by 1 centimeter wide, first green, then white, finally rust-colored near the stalk. This plant is found in Magella, in the pampas of Buenos-Ayres, Montevideo, southern Brazil. According to Dombey, the fruit is sour and can be eaten. Mr. Charles Barbier harvested the plant in the Buenos-Ayres pampas and was kind enough to give us the seed. Here is the information he gave us: "The fruits of the plant are perfectly edible. In La Plata, children seek them out and Fig. 57. - Rooster eggs (Salpichroa rhomboidea.) are feasted on. They are also made into a popular household jam, with the addition of sugar and herbs to make them more tasty. I enjoyed eating it. This plant is very hardy and productive. It's worth trying to improve it. The plant has long existed at the Muséum, but does not bear fruit there. To obtain fruit, it must be trellised against a wall at midday; it is then covered with thousands of small white berries resembling swallow eggs. Perennial because of its roots, it grows back each spring, and it's quite difficult to clear the soil of it. In August 1877, we presented Oufs de Coq to the Société d'Horticulture, under the name Withania origanifolia (1); in October of the same year, we exhibited (Henri Véniat, gardener) a Salpichroa plant laden with a multitude of its pretty white berries, and jams made from these fruits. Here's the recipe for these jams (Mamoz): "Cook the fruit in as many liters of water as kilograms of fruit, boiling for fifteen or twenty minutes. "Remove, strain through cheesecloth while hot; weigh and add equal weight of sugar, set on fire. "Add 20 to 50 grams of Japanese glue, depending on the consistency you wish to give the jam. "Cook until a drop placed on a plate holds together halfway. (1) This is the name under which the plant was cultivated in the botanical garden of the Muséum at the time. It was recommended as an ornamental plant, see Revue Horticole, 1893, p. 525; 1887, p. 328, then under the name Muguet des pampas (same journal, 1897, p. 504 and 529). "The grating of a Lemon is enough for 5 pounds of fruit; it is obtained by rubbing sugar on the Lemon: the sugar is then crushed, dissolved in a spoonful of water, which is poured over the jam at the last moment. It's important that the lemon doesn't cook. In our opinion, Rooster Eggs are more of a curiosity than a useful plant. This is also the conclusion of the notes published on this plant by Mr. Ed. André (see Revue horticole, 1883, p. 525, and 1887, p. 328). CONGO OLIVE SOLANUM OLIVARE Paill. et Bois. A close relative of S. Zuccagnianum, 1 m to 1r.50 high, non-spiny, with cylindrical, green, slightly rough stems, branched from the base; leaves oval, attenuated at both ends, with petiole about 3 cm long; blade 10 to 12 cm long by 5 to 6 cm wide, with uneven base, sinuous margins, covered over all its parts with star-shaped hairs. Peduncles 1-4 florets; calyx tubular, blade divided into 5 acute lanceolate sepals, externally covered with star-shaped hairs. Petals 5, white, once longer than the sepals. Flower 2 1/2 cm in diameter. Anthers coherent, opening at the apex with 2 pores; stigma slightly exceeding the stamens. Berry piriform, pendulous, slightly depressed at the apex and fitted with a small nipple, mostly smooth, sometimes with longitudinal grooves, coccine red, 6 centimeters long, measuring 2 centimeters at its widest diameter; white seed reminiscent of Piment in shape and color. Fig. 58. - Olivaria del Congo (Solanum olivare). This plant is mainly ornamental; the numerous red fruits it bears give it a strong resemblance to certain chillies grown in flowerbeds. The seeds were given to us by Mr. Pobéguin, attached to the Brazza mission, who told us that the fruits are eaten like peppers in the Congo. For us, the Olivaire is of no interest from a food point of view. OLLUCO Ulluco, Melloco, Papa lisa; Uyuca or Rouba (Venezuela). ULLUCUS TUBEROSUS Lozano. Chenopoda family. Perennial plant. Tubers rounded, hardly exceeding, in our climate, the volume of a large Walnut, pink, very smooth, with yellowish flesh, mucilaginous or starchy when the tuber reaches full maturity, developing on rhizomes which originate at the base of the stems; these, branched and creeping, take root at every point where they touch the ground; the leaves are alternate, thick, spatulate, shiny green, with a fairly long, reddish petiole. Flowers are small, greenish, axillary and do not ripen their seeds in our climate. Native to the Andes. It is with regret that we devote a chapter of this book to a plant whose cultivation has been experimented for three years, with great care, at the Muséum, by M. Louis Vilmorin, in the garden of the Société nationale d'Horticulture, etc., and whose rare tubers have been unanimously declared inedible. But Ulluco belongs to the history of attempts to introduce exotic food plants, and it is for this reason alone that it has a place here. We shall therefore limit ourselves to indicating the sources from which we can, if the desire arises, draw all possible information on the Chilean Chenopodea. Mr. Ed. André has kindly sent us the following note on the plant he observed at the Pasto market (New Granada): "Ollocos (Ullucus tuberosus). This vegetable, generally detestable, is represented here by several varieties: violet, white, yellow, green and salmon pink, among which several are really not bad and can almost equal Ocas." In 1895, Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cte sent us tubers of a plant they had received from Mr. Bourgoin, of Merida (Venezuela), under the name Uyuca or Rouba, accompanied by the following letter: "I have the pleasure of sending you some tubers of Uyuca or Rouba. These tubers are edible and, when cultivated, quite floury; they taste more or less like potatoes, but the family to which they belong is different; it's an Oxalidae. They are mainly used candied in vinegar with chillies. "I believe that this crop would be perfectly successful in France, as the plant is only found here on the high mountains, in what we call the cold country (average temperature of -10 to 12°)". We planted these tubers in the spring of 1896, and they developed leafy stems which enabled us to recognize them as Olluco. The tubers were so much larger and of such a different shape to those we had grown up until then, that we had not had the idea of attaching them to this plant when they came to us. Publications to consult: Annales des se. phys. et nat. de la Soc. d'Agr. de Lyon, t. XI, p. 66. 1848. Détails sur la culture de l'Ulluco, by M. E. Masson. Bull. de la Soc. centrale d'Hort. de France, vol. XXXIX, p. 259. - Ullucus tuberosus, with figure, by J. Decaisne. Revue horticole, 1848, p. 441 - De l'Ulluco et de sa culture, by E. Masson. Bull. de la Soc. centrale d'Hort. de France, vol. XXXIX, p. 485. - New details on Ulluco, published by M. Pentland. Gardeners' Chronicle, no. December 30, p. 862. 1849. Note by M. L. Vilmorin, Revue horticole, 1849, p. 22. 1852. Remarks on some edible tubers, by M. Weddell, assistant naturalist at the Museum. Revue horticole, 1852, p. 148. GABON OLOMBE SOLANUM PIERREANUM Paill. et Bois. Solanaceae family. Annual plant, erect, about 1 meter high, completely inert, covered with white starry hairs on all parts: stems, leaves, peduncles, calyx, outer part of corolla. Stem cylindrical, branched, blackish-purple. Leaves alternate, first purple, then green, except for the veins, which retain their primilive color; petiole about 5 centimeters long; blade oval, acuminate, 10 to 15 centimeters long, measuring 6 to 8 centimeters at its widest point, almost entire or sinewy, with very prominent veins on the underside. Peduncles opposite the leaves or most often arising from the internodes, about 2 centimeters long, sometimes uniflorous, usually bifurcated and bearing two flowers, rarely triflores. Calyx campanulate, 7 to 8 millimeters long, with 5 or 6 shallow, triangular divisions, accrescent after anthesis; corolla about 2 centimeters in diameter, with 5 or 6 spreading, slightly purplish-white divisions; stamens with very short threads, linear anthers, opening at the apex with two pores, about two-thirds the length of the corolla; pistil the same length as the stamens, with a straight style ending in an obliquely inserted stigma. Fruits sometimes solitary, more often geminate, rarely grouped in threes, borne on swollen pedicels Fig. 59. - Olombé from Gabon (Solanum Pierreanum) conical, pendulous, ribbed like those of S. Gilo Raddi, spherical, depressed at the bottom and top, 3 to 4 centimeters in diameter and 2 to 2 1/2 centimeters thick, colored greenish-red and flamed purple-brown. Olombé seeds were sent to the Museum by Mr. Pierre, Director of the Colonial Garden in Libreville (Gabon). They have been sent to us by Mr. Maxime Cornu. The fruits of this Solanum are apparently eaten by the Pahouins. In 1888, we first sowed the plants in March, under a frame. The plants vegetated well, flowered abundantly, but did not set fruit. In 1889, we sowed again, under the same conditions, but transplanted most of the plants outdoors. This time we obtained a few bright red fruits, flamed black, which we tasted and which did not seem usable to us; but we must say that the plant, sent by us to Mr. Latour-Marliac, of Temple-sur-Lot, was covered at his place with pretty fruits and showed itself, under the climate of Lot-et-Garonne, decidedly ornamental. Olombé is a new Solanum that will be cultivated beyond the Loire, if not for the table, at least for garden decoration. RUMEX ABYSSINICUS Jacq. ? Fam. Polygonaceae. 445 The seeds of this plant were entrusted to us by Mr. Maxime Cornu, professor-administrator at the Muséum, who had received them from Mr. Blaise, a ship's lieutenant, with the following indication: "Oseille Pahouine. Large size. Excellent for eating. From around Donguilah (Gabon)". M. Cornu presented four plants to the Sociélé nationale d'Horticulture de France on July 2, 1896. We sowed these seeds under a frame in the spring of 1896. The resulting young plants were planted outdoors in the first days of June. They grew vigorously, so much so that by autumn they had reached over 1 metre in height and produced abundant, ample, tender, slightly acidic leaves. The plants were ready to bloom, but the first cold spells came before the flower stems could develop. By this time, the clumps had become very large. We lifted some of them into pots to overwinter under glass; unfortunately, they died before the warm weather returned. In 1897, Mr Grosdemange, head of the nursery and vegetable garden, took cuttings from them, which took root without difficulty. Pahouine sorrel is a plant which, thanks to its abundant production of leaves that can be used like ordinary sorrel, is destined to be of great service in hot climates. It is particularly worthy of our colonists' attention. We cannot guarantee the specific identification of this plant, of which we have only been able to observe the leaves and seed. However, from what we have been able to see, Pahouine sorrel is, if not Rumex abyssinicus, at least a very close relative. R. abyssinicus Jacq. (R. arifolius Ait.) is native to Abyssinia, but exists, naturalized (?) in Réunion; according to M. Cordemoy (Flore de la Réunion, p. 285), it abounds in the Plaine des Palmistes and is common in the middle region. On Reunion Island, the plant is known as Oseille sauvage, and its leaves are used as a vegetable. Canaigre sorrel RUMEX HYMENOSEPALUS Torr. Another species of sorrel, Canaigre (Rumex hymenosepalus Torr.), deserves the attention of growers in the Mediterranean region. Dr. Trabut, Government Botanist, Algiers, has published a note on this plant in the Journal de la Société nationale d'Horticulture de France, 1896, p. 383, in which he highlights its industrial and nutritional merits. Canaigre is a Patience native to southern California, Arizona and northern Texas. In these regions, this large sorrel covers immense areas; it vegetates during the winter, then disappears during the dry season. Its tuberous root is reminiscent of that of the Dahlia; it contains very high proportions of tannin, and factories are already preparing highly esteemed tannin extracts on the spot. Mr. Trabut has continued to study the acclimatization of Canaigre in Algeria, where this Polygonaea seems to have found a suitable climate. Struck by the extent of the plant's foliage and its abundance, he had the leaves prepared in the manner of sorrel and, he says, obtained a very acceptable dish, reminiscent of ordinary Patience (Rumex Patientia), which, in his opinion, is too little used. I don't think," he adds, "that this new vegetable is destined to take a major place in consumption, but it should be mentioned; and, because of its hardiness, it deserves a place in the gardens of growers in southern countries. Canaigre is slightly laxative; in this respect, it can be sought after as a hygienic food. Canaigre is grown at the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, where it flowered and fructified in 1897. For more complete information on this plant, please consult the following works: Christy, New commercial plants, n° 5 (1882), p. 29-35; Bulletin of miscellaneous information, Gardens Kew, 1892, p. 63-69; id. 1894, p. 167-168; Botanical Magazine, sept. 1895. upo ARalla coRpaTA Thunb., Fl. Jap., p. 127. A. edulis Sieb. et Zucc, Fl. jap. i, p. 57, tab. 25. Japanese name: Udo; Chinese names: Dotooki, Doku quatz, Dosjen, Udo, (Kæmpf. amænit.). Arahaceae family. Root perennial, long, fleshy, thick; stems numerous, herbaceous, often reaching over I meter in height, adults glabrous, young pubescent; petioles sheathing, with dilated, gutter-shaped base; compound leaves, with oval or heart-shaped, acuminate, saw-toothed, pubescent leaflets; small, greenish flowers in globose umbels with a small oligophyll involucre, arranged in a compound cluster. Calyx adherent to ovary, with very short, 5-toothed blade; corolla with 5 petals; 5 stamens; ovary inferere, with 5-10 lodges; 5 divergent styles; fruit drupaceous, blackish-brown, crowned by calyx and styles, with 5-10 monosperm pits. "Udô flowers in August; its fruit ripens in November. Its herbaceous stems perish with the first frosts of winter. "This plant probably comes from China, where it is used as a sudorific remedy; it is cultivated throughout Japan, in gardens and fields. "It is mainly cultivated for its root, which has a pleasant, aromatic and bitter taste, and is eaten in winter seasoned in the manner of our Scorsonères. The young stems serve as a delicious vegetable. "As the plant thrives throughout Japan, it would acclimatize just as well in our gardens; it would therefore be desirable that, cultivated here, it should increase the number of our vegetable foods by a pleasant, fine and nourishing dish". (Siebold and Zuccarini, Flora Japonica, I, p. 57). In the Note explicative des objets exposés par l'École agricole et forestière de Komaba à l'Exposition universelle de 1889 (Ministry of Agriculture and Trade, Tokio, Japan), we read: "Oudô (Aralia cordata). To cultivate it, we make pits and put its roots in them, after having given the fertilizer of horse dung, spread on the surface of the earth. This operation takes place during the very cold season. The roots sprout white buds. It's a vegetable with a delicate taste and a pleasant smell." Our excellent correspondent, Dr. H***, wrote to us on April 25 1879: "The only vegetable I regret not having brought with me is an Araliaceae called Oudô, Aralia cordata de Thunberg, in Japan. The young shoots are harvested wild in spring and eaten cooked, just as we eat celery and cardoons. It is very strong and very bad, as is unbleached Celery; but Oudô, cultivated and blanched under leaves or litter, is very good, and is eaten in the spring." It will be noted that our correspondent does not mention, as Siebold did, the use of Oudo roots in cooking. 28 As early as 1879, we asked Japan for Aralia cordata seedlings. We received seeds, not plants, in the spring of 1883; but to obtain germination of Aralia seeds, they must be sown immediately after the harvest, so ours did not germinate. Thanks to the kind assistance of MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie, we received, a few years later, ten perfectly healthy plants of the Japanese variety. The Oudò thrived perfectly at Crosnes, proving just as hardy and easy to grow as the North American Aralia racemosa, from which it hardly differs, grown in all botanical gardens, where it is so invasive that it is difficult to keep clumps to a minimum. We stretched the plant, and the shoots obtained had the appearance of medium-sized asparagus; they were white and very appetizing. Unfortunately, the tasting was not favorable; we found them to have a turpentine flavor, admittedly weak, but too pronounced for this vegetable to be adopted in Europe. This failure is all the more regrettable as the plant is very productive and would come to our gardens almost care-free. Chopped and cooked young leaves have given us an acceptable aromatic vegetable, but of no particular merit. Another Araliaceae, Stilbocarpa polaris Decaisne et Planchon (Aralia polaris Hombron et Jacquinot), deserves experimental cultivation in our climate. This perennial plant is native to New Zealand and the Auckland and Campbell Islands. Its long rhizomes are fleshy, sweet and edible. Information on this plant can be found in Flore de la Nouvelle-Zélande, by Hooker f., vol. I, p. 95, and Mueller, Select extra-tropical Plants, p. 324. OXALIS CRENATA Jacq. Family Oxalidae. Perennial; roots tuberous, the shape and diameter of a large walnut; stems ascending, succulent, twining; leaves trifoliate, with obovate leaflets, a little thick; in May-September, flowers large, Fig. 60 - Crenellated Oxalis (Oxalis crenata). yellow, in umbels longer than the leaves; petals crenate. Oxalis crenata was imported from Lima to England around 1829, from where it soon spread to France. In Peru, it is known as Oca. In 1850, Mr. Boursier, French consul in Quito, sent the Museum the red Oca, a variety considered in Peru to be much preferable to the yellow Oca. We remember growing Oxalis crenata in the Landes department of France, and obtaining very good harvests without difficulty. We punctually followed the instructions provided to us by the Maison rustique and by Le Bon Jardinier. We have borrowed from the latter the cultivation methods that have worked well for us: "When properly cultivated, the plant produces a quantity of small yellow tubers that rarely reach the volume of a hen's egg, but whose number is sometimes enormous. This large-scale multiplication is achieved by ridging, or rather by continuous layering, as we'll explain shortly. The tubers contain 10 to 12% starch, but differ essentially in quality from those of the potato, to which Oxalis has been inappropriately compared; they are easy to cook and provide a healthy, light, fairly pleasant food, with a slightly acid taste, which can be removed by cooking them three-quarters of the way through in water. The leaves and tops of the shoots can be used in place of sorrel, of which they have the same flavor; in Lima, they are also eaten in salads. Cultivation is not difficult; the tubers can be brought forward in layers in March, for planting at the beginning of May, or planted permanently around mid-April, or planted by cuttings, which take root with great ease. Soft, light, well-amended soil is best. The distance between plants should be around 1 metre; a single row in a 1n.30 bed is enough to fill the soil at the end of the season. According to Mr. Guesnet, you should start buttering as soon as the shoots are Om, 08 to Om, 10 in length; you first mound in the center, spreading them apart, to force them into a horizontal direction; then, as they lengthen, you refill them moderately with new soil and continue regularly until September, when the tubers start to form.The tubers are pulled out as late as possible, when the stems have been destroyed by frost; the tops can then be cut off and the clumps covered with dry leaves; the tubers keep and even thrive under this covering, as M. Redouté has found. Torn up, they keep very well through the winter, kept in a healthy place and buried in very dry sand. "The red Oca, received by the Museum in 1850 from Mr. Boursier, French consul in Quito, is a variety of Oxalis crenata, from which it differs in the color of the tuber, whose skin is a bright carmine red, and in its slightly spindlier stems, colored reddish purple and remarkable for their extreme flexibility. Its tubers seem to us to be neither larger nor more abundant than those of the old yellow variety, although, according to M. Boursier, the red Oca is considered in Peru to be far superior to the yellow Oca". We have said that we have grown Oxalis crenata in the Landes department, and that we have done so with great success. We must add that the tasting had not been favorable to it and that we had given up its cultivation; but we had tried it in 1849, and Weddell's Note, which is of such keen interest and which we are going to reproduce, had not yet appeared. We therefore absolutely reserve our opinion. Weddell's note (1). - I hasten to say that, to my taste, this vegetable is almost the equal of the potato when properly prepared. The way to grow Oxalis is well known, so I'll deal without preamble with the question of the treatment the tubers require to become edible: "When Ocas are pulled, they are always more or less acidic; however, their degree of acidity differs with the varieties. As a general rule, white varieties are much less acidic than red varieties. Whatever the variety in question, sufficiently prolonged exposure to the sun constantly leads to the disappearance or more or less complete metamorphosis of its acidic principle. In a word, something quite analogous to the ripening of fruit takes place. A white Oca (Oca bianca) treated in this way no longer retains any trace of acidity, and is in no way inferior to a good potato. "Exposure to the sun, whose sole purpose is to destroy the acidic principle of Ocas, should last from six to ten days, and even a little longer, depending on the variety of Oca. The operation is best performed in large woolen bags. The changes that take place in the tissue of the tubers seem to be facilitated by this means, and they can be turned over more conveniently; but the bag must contain few enough tubers that, when spread out on the ground, they form only a very thin layer under their envelope. (1) Remarks on some edible tubers, by M. Weddell, assistant naturalist at the Muséum (Revue horticole, 1852, p. 148). "When exposure to the sun is prolonged much longer, for several months for example, tuber ripening goes much further. The Oca then loses most of its juices and takes on the consistency of a prune, while acquiring a very pronounced sweet taste; this is what is known as Caui." I don't need to tell you that, in the two preparations just mentioned, you must be careful not to let the tubers freeze. "On the contrary, jelly is the main agent in the preparation known as Caia, which I'd like to talk about. Caia or Chuno de Oca is made in the same way as Chuno blanc des Pommes de terre, with the difference that after the tubers have been frozen, they are not macerated in running water, but in still water. Under these circumstances, the Oca becomes partially corrupted and, when dried out, retains an odor and taste that I will simply compare to those of some cheeses. The Indians consume a great deal of Caia, which they no doubt find very tasty. As for me, I can in no way recommend it. I've already stated my opinion on the other forms of Oca, and I won't go into them again. However, I think it useful to point out that in Bolivia, the tubers of this Oxalis, in addition to their intrinsic qualities, have another which is of no small importance: they are multiplied more abundantly than potatoes themselves in La Paz; they cost at most half as much as potatoes. On the one hand, in the Paris climate, Oralis crenata can only be harvested in October, and its tubers are unpleasantly acidic. On the other hand, the only way we are taught to eliminate this acidity is to expose the crop to the sun for at least six to ten days. How can we count on good weather and sufficient warmth in October? It seems clear to us that the experiment should have been carried out on the Mediterranean coast and not elsewhere, and that time and effort were wasted in carrying it out on the outskirts of Paris. It's true that in 1835 we learned that a skilled English gardener named Pringle had found a cultivation method that enabled Oxalis to be harvested in August, and Poiteau, the eminent gardener, botanist and painter, not concealing the jealousy he felt as a French horticulturist, exclaimed: "As for me, I won't sleep again until I've found Mr. Pringle's secret, or at least obtained a result similar to his". What has become of gardener Pringle's discovery? Do the English accept the acidity of Oxalis? The English sun, whose reputation is well established, certainly can't make it go away. Mr. Ed. André, on his trip to New Granada, collected some interesting information on Oxalis crenata. He kindly shared with us the following lines from his travel notes: "Ocas de Pasto are widely cultivated and consumed in these cold regions, and there are more than ten varieties. They should be cultivated more seriously here than is usually the case; don't forget to dry them in the sun to develop their sweetness. Cooked in water, they are very good; they are peeled by turning them by hand in a servielte. Their starch is very fine and they have a pleasant, tangy taste. Varieties are round or long, pink, white, violet, yellow, wine-red, etc. ". Every year, a few tubers of crenellated Oxalis can be seen on the shelves of exotic produce retailers and a few grocers. The red variety is offered as an excellent vegetable. One of us saw some beautiful red tubers on the market in Pau. In the country, they are eaten simply boiled or fried whole in the pan. We don't expect the sale of Oxalis to expand much in Paris. The price will always be too high for its merit. We have read what Messrs. Weddell and Ed. André have to say about sun-drying Oxalis tubers. In our trials, instead of the sun, we used the oven, as is done for prunes. We ate Oxalide fresh, in compote and cooked salad; then, dry, in the same two ways. We found no appreciable difference. If pruned tubers are soaked in water for a few hours, they regain their original volume. They can then be used in compote with wine and sugar, like Prunes, which they taste a little like; or in salad, with a slightly spicy seasoning. In both cases, they are absolutely tender. Publications to consult: 1835. Culture de l'Oxalis à feuilles crénelées, by Poiteau. Revue Horticole, 1835-1838, p. 13 - Analyse chimique des tubercules et des tiges de l'Oxalis crenata, by M. Payen. Bull. de la Soc. centrale d'Hort. de France, vol. XVI, p. 200. 1836. Extract from a letter from M. Moreau on the cultivation and product of Oxalis crenata. Rev. horticole, vol. III, p. 493. 1838. Extract from a letter on Oralis crenata. Journal de la Soc. nationale d'Hort. de France, vol. XXII, p. 40 - Notice sur les feuilles de l'Oxalis crenata considérées comme aliment, by MM. Quiclet and Mérat. Ibid,

vol. XXII, p. 41 - Result of a cultivation of Oxalis crenata. Ibid, vol. XXII, p. 77. - Note on Oxalis crenata, by M. Batereau d'Anet. Ibid. vol. XXII, p. 178. - Notice sur la culture de l'Oxalis crenata, by Viscount Débonnaire de Gif. Ibid. vol. XXII, p. 178. 1839. Note on Oxalis crenata, by M. C. Uterhart. Ibid. vol. XXIII, p. 138. 1846. Note by M. de Bellemain. Rev. horticole, vol. VIII, p. 336. 1848. Note by M. d'Hombres-Firmas, correspondent of the Institut. Annales des sc. phys. et nat. de la Soc. d'Agriculture de Lyon, p. 755. 1852. Remarques sur quelques tubercules comestibles, by M. Weddell, aide-naturaliste au Muséum, Rev, horticole, 1852, p. 148. OXALIDE DE DEPPE OXALIS TETRAPHYLLA Cav. var. Deppei; O. Deppei Sweet. Family Oxalidae. Perennial plant. Root tuberous, napiform, surmounted by small bulbiform buds; petioles 12 to 15 cm long, pubescent in youth, glabrous thereafter, bearing four wedge-shaped, obcordate leaflets, 3 R Fig. Gl. - Deppe's Oxalid. sessile, ciliate, glabrous and purple-zoned above, pubescent below; from May to September, umbels of eight to ten cherry-red flowers, whereas they are purplish pink in the species type, higher than the leaves; petals rounded at the apex. Deppe's Oxalis is native to Mexico. It was brought to England in 1827 by Mr. Barclay, and six years later, towards the end of 1833, Mr. Jacquin aîné introduced it to France, seeing it flower for the first time in 1834. Growing it is not difficult. According to Le Bon Jardinier, it requires rich, well-tilled soil; it multiplies easily, producing bulblets in large numbers around the root collar, which, when planted in April in light soil, become new individuals. We have cultivated Deppe's Oxali le on the assumption that it could be considered a useful vegetable plant, but from this point of view, it seems worthless. The roots are barely edible. We have prepared the leaves as sorrel, and, if this distinction is possible, we have found them to be rather sour than acidic, and in short not very pleasant; but you will see, from the extracts we are about to read from a letter from Mr. Morren, director of the garden at the University of Liège, dated January 10, 1845, to what extent we can differ in opinion. For eight years now," says Mr. Morren, "Deppe's Oxalis has appeared with honor on our tables in more than one form... We use its leaves in sorrel, its flowers in salads and its roots in asparagus. "The young leaves, taken from the center of the clumps, make excellent sorrel, with a pure taste and no crackling of calcareous salts (lime oxalate); their use in soups and sauces cannot be faulted by the most discerning palate. When mixed with lettuce, the cut flowers, even with the tips of their stems, make a substitute for vinegar, with a more exquisite and frank acidity that is even preferred by a delicate palate; this is for the use of the plant during the summer. "Around mid-October, or even in November, we remove the plant from the ground and find around sixty bulbils at its collar, which, when stored, serve to propagate Oxalis; below these bulbils, we discover two to four large roots, 10 to 20 centimetres long and varying from 2 to 5 in diameter. These roots, fusiform like young carrots, have a certain transparency that brings to mind the Salep of the Turks. I cannot share the opinion that these roots are similar to Topinambours and Scorsonères; but, in these matters, it is very difficult to agree: de gustibus non est disputandum. Oxalis is similar to asparagus and young white carrots, but the taste is more delicate and, if you'll pardon the expression, a little oriental. We cook these roots in water and salt, and eat them Dutch-style, with a sauce of fresh melted butter and egg yolks. Friends of mine have assured me that these roots have had a similar effect on their bodies to that experienced when Salep is taken after a debilitating diet. I can assure you, moreover, that I have always found myself enjoying the use of this excellent plant at all my meals. Faced with these assertions, made with such assurance and conviction, one remains disconcerted and can only repeat the de gustibus that the author of the letter opposes in advance to his contradicts. Enthusiasts will appreciate. We have no hesitation in recommending the cultivation of Deppe's Oxalis as a border plant. The plant will be right at home in the gardens of the curious. Publications to consult: O. Deppei. Lodd. Bot. cab. n° 1500; Hénon, Ann. des se. phys. et natur. de la Soc. d'Agr. de Lyon, 1838-1839, vol. I, p. 82. Letter from M. Morren, director of the garden at the University of Liège, Revue horticole, 1845, vol. VI, p. 277. Note on O. Deppei, by M. Rachoux. Journ. de la Soc. centrale d'Hort. de France, vol. XXIII, p. 141. Note by Dr. Mérat. Ibid. 1839, vol. XXIV, p. 90. PAPILLA PRIVA LÆVIS Juss. Castelia cuneato-ovata Cavanilles. Icones, 6, p. 61, tab. 583. Family Verbenaceae. Dr. R.-A. Philippi sent us some tubers of this plant, which grows wild in Chile and the Argentine Republic. In Chile, the tubers are eaten under the vernacular name Papilla, a diminutive of Papa (Potato). The plant grew vigorously and its long, trailing rhizomes soon completely invaded the frame in which it had been planted. By midsummer, it had given birth to numerous pretty lilac flowers with a very pleasant fragrance. In autumn, we harvested a good number of small, rounded tubers, as big as small potatoes, but with a strong, unpleasant flavor. CUSPID LEAVES Siebold's Knotweed. Cuspid knotweed. POLYGONUM CUSPIDATUM Sieb. et Zucc, Fam. nat. 731; P. Sieboldi Hort (not Meissn.); P. multiflorum Buerg. Fam. Polygonaceae. Japanese perennial, cheerful green, with a very tracing stump. Stems 1 m to 1.50 m and over high, initially simple and straight, then branched, arching and spreading horizontally towards the tip, streaked and washed with reddish; branchlets distichous, spreading or flexuous, also streaked or washed with reddish, as are the petioles. Leaves alternate, distichous, petiolate, broadly ovate or ovate-oblong, acute, truncated at the base. Flowers white, arranged in axillary clusters, spindly, forming upright, spreading or nodding paniculate fascicles. These are followed by elegant, pinkish-white fruits, usually sterile. Flowers from July to August. Polygonum cuspidatum has tempted several tasters. Mr. J. Weber was the first to recommend this plant for its food uses (1). In spring, when he had the leaves removed, he discovered a dozen beautiful white shoots, about the size of a finger. He found them so appetizing that he had the idea of having them prepared like asparagus, and, he says: "My hope was (1) Revue horticole, 1873, p. 393. in no way disappointed; they were sweet and very pleasant-tasting. However, as they are very tender, they only need to be cooked for a moment". L. Van Houtte was not so satisfied; he writes in La Flore des serres, XVI, page 16: "Let's say it very quickly, for the sake of our conscience, the trial we did was disastrous. We needed God knows what reagents to stun our palates with the detestable taste of this famous Knotweed! We etiolated the young shoots of Cuspid-leaved Loosestrife and obtained many pretty, asparagus-shaped etiolates, full, tender and slightly acidic in flavor. Polygonum sacchalinense gave us a similar result. We have, however, relegated these plants to the third series of our etiolate experiments (1), and we don't think they can make any higher claims. PE-TSAI Chinese cabbage. BRASSICA CHINENSIS L. Cruciferae family. Annual plant. Lower leaves oblong, almost entire, obtuse, glabrous; stems lanceolate, amplexicaul. Calyx larger than petal tabs. (1) Nouveaux légumes d'hiver, by A. Paillieux and D. Bois. Paris, Librairie agricole de la Maison rustique, rue Jacob, 26. In 1840, M. Pépin, head gardener of the botanical school at the Muséum, published a fairly extensive memoir on the cultivation and use of Pé-tsai, in which he reports on the results of his multiplied seedlings grown under various conditions. He reports on the opinion he formed of the plant, considered as a vegetable, through repeated tastings. Fig. 62 - Pe-tsai (Chinese cabbage). This memoir was presented by its author to the Société d'Horticulture. We refer the reader to it, and reproduce only a small part of it: "It was some twenty years ago," says M. Pépin, "that Pé-tsai was known under the name Brassica sinensis in botanical gardens, and was considered a simple collector's plant; but for the last three years that M. l'abbé Voisin, a specialist in the cultivation of Chinese cabbage, has been working on it. Abbé Voisin, Attorney General for Foreign Missions, has informed us that this species of cabbage is highly cultivated and esteemed in China, its 30 reputation as a culinary plant has been rehabilitated in France, and M. Ducros de Sixt, lawyer at the Royal Court of Paris, was the first to give us some details on Pé-tsai, its cultivation and uses in China. We believe this to be an error, and that our missionaries had been publicizing the importance of Pe-tsai cultivation in the Chinese empire for over a hundred years. Fig. 63. - Pak-choi, a variety of Pé-tsai. Mr. Pépin goes on to say: "In the spring of 1838, a large number of seedlings were sown, and I know from many people who were interested in studying this new cruciferous plant that, in general, they were not very satisfied, and that nowhere did Pé-tsai peel, a quality that is said to be constant in China". Here, the error is serious, and the results obtained by the author of the memoir must have made him despair by enlightening him. Indeed, the Pé-tsai does not apple, nor does it show any inclination to do so, either in China or in France. In his work entitled Description de l'empire de la Chine, published in 1735, Father J.-B. du Halde pointed out, as a peculiarity of Chinese cabbage, that it does not form an apple like European cabbage. Mr. Pépin goes on to say: "As spring sowing did not give me any different results from those I had already obtained in previous attempts to grow Pe-tsai, I thought I should try autumn sowing; only, this first attempt had already shown me that Pe-tsai is annual and not biennial, and even less perennial, as it is said to be in China". As we can see, the author's information on Pe-tsai was highly inaccurate, which in no way detracts from the experimenter's merit. Shortly after the publication of the above-mentioned memoir, an unsigned note appeared in the Revue Horticole, volume IV, 1838-41, page 112, which we believe must be attributed to Poiteau, then editor-in-chief of the Revue. This note is so complete, so interesting and so probably forgotten today, that we have no hesitation in reproducing most of it: ".... Mme Bréon, wife of M. Bréon, horticulturist-grain grower, who lived on Bourbon Island, where Pé-tsai is grown, told us that it was a resource during the hot, dry season, which it withstood more easily than other plants of the same use. During the rest of the year, Pé-tsai is used, not because it is preferable to other plants, but simply as a change of food, even when its quality is inferior. In Bourbon, you'll never see it eaten. "On the subject of Chinese cabbage, we have researched and read extensively in works on China; we will report what we have found most explicit on this subject in the writings of missionaries and travelers. "Rice, cabbage and a little garlic or onion instead of meat, with a common tea beverage, are often all that make up the meals of Chinese peasants and workers. Although our Lettuces and Romaines are well known to them, preference is given to Pe-tsai, which holds a distinguished place among Chinese vegetables. "The best Pe-tsai are found in the northern province, where the first frosts make them very tender; their abundance is almost unbelievable. During the months of October and November, in the morning, it is sometimes difficult to pass through the immense number of small carts and wheelbarrows loaded with them, which crowd the gates of Peking and Hang-tchou-fou. The Chinese custom is to preserve them in salt, or to marinate them and cook them with Rice, which is naturally fortinsipid. "There are three types of Pé-tsai (1): 1° Pé-tsai, with white, thin, very tender leaves, which tingle like Roman lettuces when a little help is given; 2° Nisontou, i.e. beef strawberry, because its leaves are crenate, very large, fleshy, full of juice and quite mild; 3° Purplish, whose leaves are very loose, smooth, very tender and of a pleasant taste, but mixed with a hint of bitterness, like some species of Lettuce. Among these three species, we also distinguish those (1) This is a missionary speaking. whose leaves are elongated like a snake's tongue, or rounded, cut or plain, with flat ribs like Beets (Poirées), blond or with rounded ribs like Lettuces, etc. (1). We won't insist on the details of these differences. Our cabbages, chicories and so many other vegetable plants long ago taught us in the West that the same plant appears in a prodigious number of forms, sometimes changing beyond recognition. It is inevitable that Pétsai, being grown in such a vast empire and cultivated so diversely, should change from place to place and take on different forms. "The climate, the season and the nature of the land make a big difference between Pé-tsai and Pé-tsai in terms of taste, quality and size. Some always taste bland and almost insipid, while others have a very pleasant taste and a kind of natural perfume. Some are healthy and wholesome, while others are not. In some places, they cannot be eaten young, or even before the first frost, while in others, they can be eaten at any time, depending on how long you want to wait for them. The most careful cultivation always leaves them mediocre in some cantons, whereas in others they come into their own. They grow visibly and swell to weigh from 10 to 12 pounds, to 18 and 20. (1) Pé means white, tsai means vegetable; thus, Pé-tsai is a white vegetable. Of the three species of Pé-tsai cited in the leaflet, two are not worth accepting. The third differs from our Cardes-Poirées only in that the Chinese variety is more tender and less bland, wider and longer than ours. This species has been successful in France; the other two would be equally successful if they were worth trying to cultivate. (These observations are not ours. - P. B.). "The Pé-tsai most esteemed in Peking are those from the area around the small town of Ngan-sun; they are, in fact, the ones preferred for the table of the emperor and his entire family. European gourmets would like to cook and season cabbage in a way that would flatter their delicacy; Chinese gourmets, on the other hand, either through prejudice or finesse of taste, reason about Pe-tsai as they do about venison and game, claiming that the more seasoning you give them, the more they lose their own flavour. We will candidly confess our profound incapacity and ignorance on this serious subject, and confine ourselves to recounting that, while on duty at the palace, we found Ngan-sun's Pé-tsai very good and very delicate, cooked simply in broth and with no seasoning other than salt. Our testimony will undoubtedly prove nothing, but we give it for what it is worth. "Our Europeans in Canton call Pé-tsai Chinese cabbage. Let them say why. It seems to us that it requires less smoky soil than our cabbages. When you want to grow good Pé-tsai rather than big Pé-tsai, and to grow them in their own time rather than pushing their growth, you need to choose an uncovered soil that's damp rather than dry. Low-lying soils that are not too swampy are very favorable. When it comes to choosing fertilizers, ashes of various grasses and powder are best suited to them. "Pé-tsai trees only set seed the year after they are planted. The Chinese take the same precautions to obtain seeds as we do for cabbages. They keep a few selected plants in a greenhouse or other sheltered spot, and when spring comes, they replant them in a sunny spot, watering them until they bloom and set seed. The seed is usually ripe by June or July. Gardeners here are divided on what to sow. Some want the new seed to produce stronger, more vigorous and easier-to-grow Pétsai; others claim that those sown from the previous year's seed, well preserved in the air, in an open, north-facing spot, produce more tender, more delicate Pé-tsai that are easier to peel (1). "In the southern provinces, we sow Pétsai in all seasons, and they come in well. When you want to have them in late spring, summer and all autumn, you need to choose well-watered soil and, as far as possible, an eastern exposure. In the northern provinces, such as Chan-tong and Pétché-li, where they are incomparably better and more delicate, they are sown on a bed in mid-July or August, in the same way as cabbages. Once the heat wave has passed, they are transplanted with a string into holes made with a large planter, so that a little poudrette can be added. Those who are only interested in profit plant them in a checkerboard pattern, 7 or 8 inches apart, because Pé-Isai can be eaten at any period of growth. They split the rows as they grow, choosing those they want to leave behind and keeping only those they see are well on the way to reaching their best size. Those who only want to have beautiful Pe-tsai plant them, as we do cabbages, 1 1/2 feet apart. Whichever way they are planted, they should be watered as soon as possible to bind the roots and facilitate recovery. (1) This probably involves binding the leaves, a rather delicate operation due to their extreme fragility. - P. B. then plough, weed and boot them until they are in full flood and have reached the dews and cool nights of autumn. Autumn is admirable here (1) and almost as beautiful as in our Béarn region. The fine, mild weather is undoubtedly the main cause of the charming way in which the Pé-tsai grow at this time, as if at a glance; as long as the soil is not too parched, we don't bother watering them, and this does them no harm; however faded and withered they may appear in the high noon, the next morning we find their leaves erect, fresh and full of vigor, but they remain green or at most blond until the first cold. "On the other hand, when the first cold weather arrives, their broad ribs soften, and the rest of the leaf gradually turns a perfect white. "Some people tie their Pé-Isai like our Roman lettuces, to obtain a larger head and softer leaf ribs; but others leave them to their own devices and claim that Pé-tsai thereby lose in flavor, taste and fragrance what they gain in whiteness and tenderness. The truth is that in Ngan-sun and other places where they are so good, so tender and so excellent, they are not bound at all. "When the Pé-tsai are fully grown, they are from 2 to 3 feet high, and weigh, as we said, from 15 to 20 pounds. We wait until the frosts have macerated them a little before harvesting. Their first outer leaves suffer a little, but we don't worry about that, as they must remain in the field to form compost. (1) In Peking, no doubt. "As the Chinese are great herb eaters, Pé-tsai are a real harvest, especially for the northern provinces; for, although more southerly than Provence, the cold is so rigorous that gardening there is absolutely closed from mid-November to mid-February; free to our physicists to explain as they see fit, much more closed than in the most northerly parts of France. "We have found several ways of preserving the Pé-tsai harvest and making it last throughout the winter; some preserve them in salt and vinegar; others cook them halfway in the steam of boiling water or wilt them in the cold northern air, after removing the leaves, then pass them through mustard or ginger water, cutting them into pieces. "However, as these sparing or household inventions, which are perhaps not sufficiently well known in our countryside, always take away something of the good taste of Pé-tsai, a large quantity is kept fresh until spring. "There are two ways of doing this: the first is to expose them to the sun for a while to remove any excess moisture that might cause them to turn yellow, and then pile them up in a greenhouse or in specially dug ditches; the second is to plant them en masse in damp river sand, at the bottom of a greenhouse. Those who don't want to keep them that long lay them flat on soil that's neither too dry nor too damp, and, after throwing a bit of chopped straw over them, cover them with a foot of dry earth; those who have a convenient place for it hang them by the foot, like cabbages, and as close together as possible. Moreover, the industry benefits so well from all these ways of preserving Pe-tsai, that they are available in Peking all winter, and at good prices. Consumption is so prodigious in this immense city that we don't dare say what the total must be. We will now say what we think of Pétsai. Our personal experiments have not given us satisfactory results, but they have served to form our opinion. First of all, we shall rule out any summer cultivation. The rapidity with which the plant goes to seed before it is fully developed, the heat of the sun which prevents its ribs and leaves from becoming tender and white, the abundance of fresh vegetables preferable to Chinese cabbage, these various causes would make it unsuccessful to grow Pé-tsai during the summer. The obstacles are different, but equally serious, if you sow in August, to harvest in winter. From the end of September, vegetation and plant development slow down, and the cold soon comes to a complete halt. However, Pé-tsai should be sown at the end of summer, but it must be able to vegetate for a long time, and frosts must not prevent it from reaching the extraordinary size it acquires in China before winter. Roscoff, Cavaillon and Hyères all seem to lend themselves to winter cultivation of Chinese cabbage. We are inclined to believe that Roscoff and the whole of the region where the Gulf stream draws the temperature down would be particularly favorable. In this privileged, truly temperate region, the grower fears neither sunlight nor the rigors of winter. Pé-tsai would develop slowly and widely, and perhaps take an important place in the Paris consumer market. Our streets are often clogged with the immense quantity of cauliflowers sent to us from Finistère; but these, with their strong flavor and difficult digestion, are not suitable for everyone, and would often give way to the milder and lighter Pé-tsai. It would be desirable for the cultivation of the latter vegetable to be seriously experimented with in Brittany. According to Messrs Sagot and Raoul, Manuel des cultures tropicales, Pé-tsai could be of great service in hot countries, where it produces tender leaves that are a valuable resource. Various varieties of Chinese cabbage are said to have been introduced into the English and Dutch colonies in China and the Malay Archipelago. Publications to consult: BULLETIN DE LA SOCIÉTÉ CENTRALE D'HORTICULTURE DE FRANCE Note sur le Pé-tsai, par Pépin, vol. XXIII, 1838, p. 105. Note sur le Pé-tsai, by Bossin, vol. XXIII, p. 154. Report on Pé-tsai, by a Special Commission, vol. XXIII, p. 156. Note on Pé-tsai, by Dr. Mérat, vol. XXIII, p. 159. Pé-tsai salad, vol. XXIII, p. 229. Note sur la culture du Pé-tsai aux iles Maurice et de Bourbon, by M. Bréon, vol. XXIII, p. 142. Mémoire sur la culture du Chou Pé-tsai, by Pépin, vol. XXVI, 1840, p. 18. BULLETIN DE LA SOCIÉTÉ D'ACCLIMATATION Schang-ton cabbage, 2nd series, vol. V, p. 755. Productions de la Chine, by M. l'abbé David, 2nd ser. t. Il p. 237. On the subject of Pé-tsai, this memoir contains the following statement: "As food plants, we find in our gardens... Pe-tsai, of which the Chinese consume an enormous quantity, and which is worth more than all the other vegetables put together; the Europeans also find it very good and of better digestion than the various cabbages of the West". Gardeners' chronicle, 1886, p. 40. Bulletin of miscellaneous information (Royal gardens Kew, 1888, p. 138). PHYSALIS DU PÉROU Peruvian cockroach. PHYSALIS PERUVIANA L., var. foliis subintegris; P. edulis Sims, Bot. Mag. tab. 1068; Alkekingi virginianum, fructu luteo. Feuillée, Pér. 3, p. 5, tab. 1. Solanaceae family. Perennial herb, Om, 50 to 0m, 70 high, covered with a dense down composed of simple hairs; stems erect, a little stiff; leaves tomentose, cordate, acuminate, entire; in April-October, yellow flowers, mottled with purple; violet anthers; calyx accrescent, vesicular, pale in color, more or less uniform, enveloping a berry the size of a Cherry, orange-yellow when ripe (1). We consider Physalis peruviana to be very (1) Miller, Dictionnaire des Jardiniers, 2nd ed. V, p. 604, describes, under the name Physalis peruviana, Nicandra physaloides, which is quite distinct from it. It is an annual plant, reaching heights of 1 m or more, glabrous, with campanulate, blue flowers and non-fleshy fruit. Nicandra is grown as a garden ornamental. It is superior to all other species of the genus, and we have pursued its propagation with all possible zeal. Its seeds came to us in 1878 from New Caledonia (1). Our excellent correspondent, Mr. V. Perret, director of the Dumbéa agricultural penitentiary, did not know the name of the plant and simply referred to it as a Solanea with Fig. 64. edible fruits. - Physalis du Pérou. but it seems that it had long been introduced into Oceania. In his interesting 1875 publication, Mémoires de la Société des sciences naturelles de Cherbourg, tome XIX, of which he kindly gave us one of the reprinted copies, Captain Jouan cites Physalis peruviana L. among the medicinal plants. Our Physalis is called Konini in the Marquesas Islands, and, according to Jardin, is used by the natives in compresses against headaches. But it is as an edible fruit, suitable for making pies, syrups, jams and various confectionery items, that the berries of P. peruviana are sought after and that the plant that produces them is cultivated in Peru, Cape Town, India, etc.. In a memoir entitled: Enumeracion de los generos y especes de plantas, etc., M. Martinet, professor of natural history in Lima, says: "We eat the fragrant fruits of Physalis peruviana". In the Manuel de jardinage pour le Bengale, which we sometimes quote, we find a chapter devoted to our plant, which we reproduce in full. Physalis peruviana is known in English as Peruvian cherry, Cape gooseberry. The manual states: "A perennial herbaceous plant native to Peru, naturalized in Cape Town and widely cultivated there. "The fruit, which exactly resembles that of the Alkekenge of English gardens, of which it is undoubtedly the closest relative, is enclosed in an appendix of dry leaves (1). "It is of a light amber color, of the exact volume and shape of the Cherry, and as delicious and useful as any of the products of the countryside. There is perhaps no fruit in the world that provides a more exquisite jam. "The seeds should be sown in May or June, and the plant put in place, in the open ground, in lines (1) The calyx develops at the same time as the fruit, covering it entirely and drying out before harvest. 4 feet apart and 2 feet apart. "The plants can thrive in ordinary garden soil, but preferably in soil that has received a little fertilizer. When they are about 8 inches tall, they should be buttressed at half their height. When they flower, it's a good idea to pinch the tips of the sprays so they don't spread out too much, and also to provide more food for the fruit. "The berries ripen in January and February. Although perennial, Physalis should be grown as an annual, and old plants, after bearing fruit once, should be uprooted and discarded. When the season is ripe, seed should be sown to make a new plantation. "The plant is delicate and doesn't tolerate much cold. I tried several times to grow it at Ferozepore, but without success. It grew vigorously throughout the warm season, but the cold would destroy my abundant harvest before it was ripe." The last paragraph of the English author's book is applicable to Physalis cultivation in the Paris climate, and just recently, a plantation that promised us 80-100,000 fruits gave us only 2,000 perfectly ripe. All the rest were destroyed by a 2-degree frost. It's in the South of France that Physalis cultivation will be most fruitful. If growers on the Mediterranean coast would be so kind, they could, with a few precautions, preserve the fruit throughout the winter, ship it to Paris in unlimited quantities and obtain a handsome price. Berries picked on March 7th in Antibes were sent to a member of the Société d'Acclimatation, who gave them to us. Their ripeness and freshness were impeccable. We'll briefly describe our cultivation methods. It should be noted that they are specific to the climate around Paris, and will have to be modified to the north and south of this region: We sow in March on a bed and under a frame. When the plant is ready, we put it into cups, still on a bed and under a frame, one plant per cup. Towards the end of May, we plant in the ground, 1.10 m apart in all directions. The plantation is hoeed twice during the season. We remove all the lower buds and keep only the upper shoots. We pinch off the shoots as soon as they start to flower. Harvesting begins in September and continues until the frosts. The fruit is not ripe until the calyx enveloping it has completely dried out. In our northern departments, Physalis peruviana cuttings should be taken at the same time as Pelargonium cuttings, overwintered alongside the latter and planted at the same time, when there are no more frosts to worry about. South of the Loire, they can be sown in nurseries in the open ground. On the Mediterranean coast, harvest throughout the winter, protecting the plants from frost. Harvested berries should be stored in a cool, dry place. They keep perfectly well for four months. Harvested in the South of France at the end of October, they will provide the basis for a very lucrative trade until March; we say very lucrative, because a good price will always be obtained for a fruit that keeps fresh throughout the winter. Physalis peruviana is extremely productive; we have seen vines loaded with over a hundred fruits. We are not exaggerating when we estimate that 400,000 berries will be produced per hectare in the Alpes-Maritimes, Var, Bouches-du-Rhône and Hérault departments. These berries travel well and arrive in Paris in perfect condition. Confectioners and confectioners will buy them, and once the competition has lowered prices, the working-class population, always eager for fruit, will take their turn. The ripe berries of P. peruviana, eaten in their natural state, are pleasant, but inferior to strawberries, cherries, etc. They are good in compotes. They are good in compotes, but the confectioner's and confectioner's industry makes them excellent. The confectioner prepares them with fondant and caramel. They make exquisite jams and syrups. The confectioner uses them to make flans and tarts. The T... house has made jams and syrup that are second to none in Paris. Maison B... sold 30,000 berries candied in fondant and caramel in the space of a season. The fruit used by these houses had been delivered to them by a friend of ours, an enlightened horticultural enthusiast, to whom we had supplied seeds. As we finish preparing the third edition of Potager d'un curieux, they continue to be sought after by confectioners, who run out every winter. 31 We believe that Physalis peruviana should be cultivated and propagated, and we are happy to see that our efforts to bring it into consumption have not been in vain. PURPLE PHYSALIS (1). SMALL MEXICAN TOMATO; COCKROACH WITH ANSERINE LEAVES. PHYSALIS PHILADELPHICA Lamk, Dict. II, p. 101, no. 10; Dunal, Prodromus syst. regn. veget. vol. XIII, pars.1, p. 450; P. chenopodifolia Willd, non Lamk; P. atriplicifolia Jacq, Fragmenta, p. 85; P. megistocarpos Zuccagn; P. violacea Carr, Revue hort. 1882. Fam. des Solanées Annual plant, native to Virginia and Mexico, flowering throughout most of the summer, glabrous on all parts, which, when examined with a magnifying glass, appear slightly pubescent. Stem branched, angular, erect, about 1 meter high, swollen at (1) The seeds of this plant were given to the Société nationale d'Acclimatation around 1873-1874, by Mr. Balarce, Minister of the Argentine Republic in Paris. They were distributed under the name Petite Tomate du Mexique. M. Bossin, having cultivated the plant, considered it a new species and described it under the name Physalis edulis, already applied to an absolutely distinct species (Bull. Soc. d'Acclimat., 1875, vol. Il, p. 69). It was this same plant that M. Carrière saw, without any indication of origin, in the garden of the Société d'Horticulture d'Étampes, which he listed and described in the May 16, 1882 issue of the Revue horticole, calling it P. violacea. Now, the plant was not new; Jacquin (loc. cit.) gave an insertion of the branches, purpurine in its lower part. Leaves alternate, sometimes opposite on the branches, oval, petiolate, scarcely toothed, sinuous at the edges, usually 10 cm long. Short, uniflorous peduncles. Flowers pendant, odorless. Calyx campanulate, five-lobed, with 10 striae, saturated with violet at the base, with oval, pointed divisions. Corolla rone-shaped, pleated, twice the length of the calyx when unfolded, yellow, mottled violet in the center. Stamens short-netted, subulate, erect, purple, with oblong, didymous, erect, obtuse, brownish-purple anthers, with ashy pollen, dehiscing longitudinally on the sides. Style filiform; stigma oblong. The calyx, which is accrescent as in all other Physalis, becomes, at maturity, large, almost spherical, hanging, salc-green, as if varnished; it bears 10 violet streaks running from the base, which is completely saturated with violet, to the apex. The berry is highly developed, almost as large as a Prune de Monsieur (1), filling the entire calyx and often tearing it open when it cannot contain it; it is almost round, hairless and blackish-green. The seeds are yellow. Mr. Carrière has indicated with great precision the cultivation method applicable to the violet Physalis. "It's an excellent colored figure and corresponds exactly to the description of P. philadelphica in the Prodromus. It is therefore to P. philadelphica that we must refer all of Mr. Bossin's comments on its uses. P. edulis Sims (not Bossin), Botanical Mag wine, pl. 1068, is the plant represented under the name Capuli by P. Feuillée, and which is widespread in our ja dins under that of Coqueret du Pérou Dunal links it to P. peruviana, as a variety (P. peruviana L., var. foliis subintegris, Prodr., vol. XIII, pars I. p. 440). (See the special article we have devoted to it.) (1) On each plant, several fruits are the size of a Pomme d'api. - P. B. Fig. 65. - Physalis violet. more or less, he says, the Aubergine culture that suits it best. In the Paris climate, it's a good idea to bring the plants forward by raising them on a bed and under a frame. Sown in the open ground, early and with good exposure, and planted in a sheltered spot, they develop well and produce fruit that reaches maturity. As this species is vigorous and highly branched, it's a good idea to remove a few branches here and there, to aerate the remaining foliage, which will then develop and bear fruit better. To hasten flowering and keep the plants lower, you could also use pruning and pinching". From what we have just read, we will contest only one point. We believe that sowing in the open ground in the Paris climate will yield almost nothing, unless the season is exceptionally hot. In the Midi, on the other hand, the yield from a plantation of Physalis violet would be enormous. We'd now like to talk about the uses to which the plant's berries can be put. In their raw state, they are slightly acidic, with little or no fragrance of their own. We find them insignificant. In fritters, they are extremely acidic and unpleasant. In green sauce, after prolonged cooking, they are acidic but not excessively so, and as they can easily be kept on the board until January, and even well beyond, they could, during the winter, replace the tomato, which they are far from being worth. The Mexicans are said to make an excellent syrup from them, which they use against diseases of the respiratory tract. M. Balarce gave the formula to M. Bossin, after having experimented with it successfully (Bull. Soc. d'Acclimat., 1875, vol. Il, p. 69). In the Paris climate, the Petite Tomate du Mexique can only be found in the gardens of the curious. PHYSALIS DU COSTA-RICA PHYSALIS LAFONII Paill. et Bois. Solanaceae family. Annual plant, from Om40 to 0m50 centimeters high, covered on all its parts with a grayish pubescence formed of numerous, simple, short hairs. Stem erect, strongly angled, twiggy. Leaves alternate, sometimes opposite, very variable in shape, sometimes broadly oval, with a truncated or rounded base, sometimes obovate, more or less long attenuated, entire, irregularly denticulate or slightly sinuous at the edges, those of the main branches varying from 15 to 18 centimeters long by 10 to 12 wide, those of the secondary branches smaller; petioles 4 or 5 centimeters long. Hairy peduncle, about 1/2 centimetre long at anthesis, reaching 1 1/2 centimetres when the fruit is developed. Calyx campanulate, hairy, with 5 acute divisions. Corolla very small, yellow, campanulate, twice as long as the calyx, externally hairy, 5 to 7 millimeters in diameter. Stamens equal; anthers linear, purple, same length as the netting. Captive stigma. Fruit formed by an oval fruiting calyx, 5 or 6 cm long by 4 cm wide, 5-angled, slightly pubescent, especially on the veins that criss-cross it, inside which is a rounded, greenish berry the size of that of P. peruviana. We owe this new species to M. de Lafon, retired deputy commissioner of the navy, who brought it back from Costa Rica and kindly gave us some seeds, along with those of several food plants from that country. This Physalis had already been collected in Nicaragua by M. Lévy; it bears no. 244 in his collection and is in the herbarium of the Muséum d'histoire naturelle in Paris. Mr. Hemsley (Biologia Centrali-Americana, Botany, vol. Il, p. 419) has associated it with P. villosa Dunal (Prodromus, vol. XII, pars 1, p. 445); however, in this species, the corolla is rotaceous, yellow, spotted with brown, and much larger than that of our plant, which is campanulate and immaculate. Our Physalis has much more in common with P. lanceifolia Nees (Linnæa, 1831, p. 473), (DC. Prodr., XIII, 1, p. 447); it differs, however, in the shape of its leaves and the pubescence covering all its parts. We have grown P. Lafonii in the same way as P. peruviana, and at first admired its powerful vegetation; but this initial impetus came to a halt, and the plant was covered with fruits so abundant that their number exceeded that of the leaves. These fruits have not yet ripened, and we don't yet know whether it will be possible to harvest them in the open air in the Paris climate. PHYSALIS MINIMA LINNÉ M. Martin, from Saigon, sent us seeds of a Physalis that was none other than Linné's Physalis minima. We found this plant to be of no interest. We have also cultivated Physalis pubescens L. (sweet yellow Alkekenge), an annual species, native to India and tropical America, with edible, acidic fruit, sometimes grown in gardens, but much inferior to the Peruvian Coqueret. In the list of fruits and vegetables observed by Mr. Ed. André at the Bogota (New Grenada) market, which he was kind enough to send us, we found the fruit of Physalis fœtens Poir, an annual species widespread throughout tropical America, listed under the name Ochuba. We tried to obtain the plant for experimentation, and contacted various botanical gardens in whose catalogs it appeared. To date, we have only received species under this name that are absolutely distinct and of no interest from our point of view. 489 PHYSALIS FRANCHETI MAST. (Rev. hort. 1897, p. 376 (col. pl.). Fam. Solanaceae. This remarkable species was introduced from Japan by Mr. J. H. Veitch, of James Veitch & Son, Chelsea. It was dedicated to Mr. Franchet by Dr. Masters. Messrs Veitch sent us three plants of this Physalis, which have vegetated to perfection, both externally and underground. The plant seems to be as dangerously tracerous as the common cockroach, P. Alkekengi, which infests the vines of several communes around Paris, and especially those of Yerres. Multiplication will therefore be extremely easy. In the description published in the Gardeners' Chronicle, October 13 1894, Dr. Masters observes that, botanically, there can be no doubt that this is a variety of Physalis Alkekengi, and the plant is presented as such in MM. Franchet et Savatier's Enumeratio plantarum in Japonia sponte crescentium, vol. II, p. 454; but the effect obtained in gardens is quite different and truly admirable. P. Francheti (fig. 4) is not only decorative in summer; a branch of the plant, garnished with its red calyxes and introduced into winter bouquets, is enough to give them a special value, particularly in so-called perpetual bouquets. The berries dry without corrupting, and the calyx covering them retains its brilliant Fig. 66. red color until spring. - Physalis Francheti. scarlet red. These berries are large and red when ripe, but have no edible value. The fruit is edible, though some practice is wanted to make it palatable (1). (1) The fruit is edible, though some practice is wanted to make it palatable. -1- In a letter he wrote to us about this plant, Dr. Masters said: "I tasted the fruit once, I don't want to taste it again. Indeed, once you've tasted a berry, you'll never be tempted to come back for more. PHYTOLACCA DECANDRA L. Fam. Phytolaccaceae. Perennial, 2 to 3 meters high, with thick, fleshy roots, cylindrical, glabrous, furrowed stems; broad, oval-lanceolate, acute, barely mucronate, soft leaves. In August-September, flowers are first white, then purple, arranged in fairly long clusters, longer than the leaves; pedicels twice as long as the calyx, which has 5 deep divisions; stamens 10; single ovary, surmounted by 10 styles; fleshy fruit, often with 10 ribs. "The word Phytolacca, given by Linné to this plant, derives from a Greek word meaning plant, and from lacca, lacquer; and, indeed, all species of this genus have a red tint. Their leaves become red in the late season, as do their fruits, which are then full of a lacquer-red juice that dyers can fix to a certain extent with alumina sulfate and liquid ammonia. It is grown in Europe... D. °... It is native to North America, particularly Virginia. It has become naturalized in the southern parts of Europe, and even in France, in the West Indies, in the colonies of Martinique and Guadeloupe, in Santo Domingo (Haiti), and so on. "Spinach is eaten in place of Phytolacca, which Creole ladies seek out for their calalous. Some fraudsters color wine with the juice of its berries, which gives it a sharp, unpleasant taste (1)." Descourtilz is not the only one to present Phytolacca as a common food plant. William Darlington, in his Agricultural Botany (Philadelphia 1847), tells us that the young shoots of Phytolacca are a good substitute for Asparagus; that its ripe berries have even been used by confectioners to make pies of dubious merit. He adds, however, that the plant is treated as a weed by careful farmers. Pépin, in the Revue horticole, 1847, volume IX, page 218, claims that during the months of January and March, several Paris edible merchants sold bleached Phytolacca decandra stems. These stems, quite similar to Asparagus, are sold," he says, "in large quantities in the markets of the United States, where this plant has long been regarded as edible. M. Lakanal, who lived in Kentucky for over twenty years, assured him that it was considered an excellent vegetable (2). (1) Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles, vol. V, p. 32. (2) According to Nuttall, The genera of North America, t. I, p. 293, "the young shoots of the Thytotacca, previously boiled, are edible." "Several people in Paris have experimented with it, and have not found the dish to their taste; but it seems that this opinion is not general, since Phytolacca has become, momentarily at least, a culinary plant among our leading restaurateurs." In the Revue horticole, 1868, page 440, Mr. Jean Sisley published a note translated from the American Agriculturist, same year: "The sight of the long clusters of blackish-purple berries on this beautiful plant, ripening at the moment, reminds us of the excellence of its spring shoots. They are numerous, the size of a finger, with undeveloped leaves. These shoots, cut while still young and cooked like asparagus, are so delicate that anyone who has tasted them wants to eat more. "Since the shoots are good, taken from plants growing on the edges of paths and hedges, without cultivation, it is likely that they will be better when the plant is grown in gardens. We therefore recommend that instead of treating it as a weed, we cultivate it with care, and advise those who would like to try it out to transplant the roots in autumn, divide the large clumps and plant them 1 meter apart in well-tilled, smoked soil. "We are well aware that this plant is reputed for its medicinal qualities; but, in any case, the young shoots lose their medicinal properties when cooked, and we know a good number of people who have been eating them for years without the slightest inconvenience." The editor of the Revue adds: "We remind our readers, as we reported in our Chronique (1868, p. 283), that Phytolacca, thanks to the recommendations of M. Lacalm, is used in certain parts of Aveyron, the leaves as spinach, the stems as asparagus. "We should also point out that, in China, Phytolacca edulis, a dwarf plant which appears to have originated in that country, is used for the same purposes. M. Braconnot, from Nancy, has carried out experiments on P. decandra. He concluded from his experiments: "l° that potash exists in enormous proportions in this plant; 2° that its molten ashes can be used commercially as a fairly rich alkali; 3° that potash is saturated in the plant by an acid analogous to malic acid, but which differs in some respects; 4° that the berries can be fermented and distilled to produce a certain quantity of alcohol; 5° that the coloring matter can be used as a reagent; 6° that the lees can be used as food; 7° that the cultivation of Phytolakia can become a branch of industry for the production of potash. 100 pounds of ashes out provided 66 pounds 10 ounces 5 coarse of dried salt, containing 42 pounds of pure, caustic potash." (Annales de chimie, t. LXII, p. 71 ff.) After reproducing what our predecessors have said about P. decandra, we will briefly discuss our personal experiences. The plant is hardy. It is sown in nurseries and planted out when the young plants are mature. The clumps are divided in autumn, and planted 1 metre apart in all directions. In spring, when vegetation begins, place upside-down pots over the plants, after having blinded the holes, and harvest the shoots as soon as they have reached 15 to 20 centimetres in height. Cooked and served like asparagus, they are fleshy and tender, but bland. We ate them, albeit in small quantities, with no ill effects. The red juice of the Phytolacae berry is a popular purgative in the United States, but used in very small quantities, it is completely harmless. In our village, it has sometimes been used to give wine an artificial color. It is used in the same way in various countries. In Germany, it is used to make a preservable syrup for coloring various dishes. According to Madame Davidis, this syrup is prepared as follows (1): "The bunches of ripe Phytolacus berries, the cultivation of which is described in my Vegetable and Florist Garden (2), in the ornamental shrubs section, contain this admirable red juice which is sold as an expensive commodity in Berlin and other large cities, to color frothy sauces, white jellies and milk dishes, and which is prepared as follows: in late autumn, when the bunches have ripened to a glossy black, they are de-stemmed and pressed. To clarify the juice, it is left to stand for six to twelve hours in a narrow porcelain vase, then drawn off. Then put it in an earthenware pot that has contained no fat, with a third of its weight in crushed sugar, and let it boil a few times, while skimming, since longer cooking would turn its beautiful red color brown. When (1) Mme Henriette Davidis, Praktisches Kochbuch, p. 536, 21st edition; Bielefield and Leipzig, 1876. (2) Ouvrage de Mme Davidis. cold, it is poured into properly washed, dried and sulphured medicine bottles, corked, sealed and kept in a cool place. A few drops of juice are all that's needed to color a dish." EDIBLE PLANT YAMA GOBO, FI TO RADZUKA. Japan. PHYTOLACCA ACINOSA, var. ESCULENTA Maxim, Suppl. ad indicem seminum, anni 1868, quæ hortus botanicus imperialis petropolitanus, 1869, p. 23; P. esculenta Van Houtte, Flore des serres, IV, 1848, p. 398 bis; Picurnia esculenta Moq. in Van Houtte, loc. cit., IX, 1854, p. 236; P. pekinensis Hance, in Seem. Journ. of Bot. 1869, p. 166; Phytolacca Kæmpferi A. Gray. On the bot. of Jap. in Journ. of the Amer. Acad. 1859, april, p. 404; Miquel, Prol. fl. jap. p. 125, 301; P. octandra L., Spec. p. 631; Thunb. fl. jap. p. 189. Family Phytolaccacees. Perennial, 1 metre or more high, with erect stems, a little woody at the base, marked with warty lines; leaves briefly petiolate, lanceolate, acute, mucronate, narrowed at both ends, decurrent on the petiole; in June-September, hermaphrodite flowers, greenish-white, pedicellate, arranged in shortened clusters, briefly pedunculated, much shorter or as long as the leaves, with straight rachis, a little rough to the touch; stamens 7-8; carpels 5-7, inferiorly fused together. Convinced that Phytolacca esculenta justified its name, or that its natural pungency would disappear under the influence of weathering, we made a fine plantation of it, which we treated like Maritime Crambe. At the end of February, we milled each plant to a sufficient height and obtained beautiful shoots, pink, full, tender like Asparagus; but it was enough for us to eat two or three of them to have our mouths and throats on fire. Note published by Van Houtte in the Revue horticole (1851, vol. XIII p. 76): "For some years now, people have been striving to find substitutes for the old Spinach of our gardens, and the plants proposed have met with varying degrees of success. Here's one that more than meets our culinary needs, and that will replace the old Spinach. It's a Phytolacca whose seeds were sent to me from India, under the name P. esculenta (1). The plant grows to a height of around 1 meter; it is robust and highly branched. Its leaves are large; cooked and prepared in the usual way, these leaves have the advantage of melting half as much as spinach leaves; their flavor, extremely pleasant to the taste, has something aromatic about it, it is more pronounced and does not need to be enhanced by spices. This is the opinion of all the people who ate them at my house during the summer. "Phytolacca esculenta is perennial and multiplies abundantly. I remove the roots as cold weather approaches and keep them frost-free for replanting in March. I'm convinced that, warmed up, they will produce abundantly in less than a month. It will be, (1) The plant was cultivated in Glascow from 1836. 32 in any case, an excellent vegetable plant, which market gardeners will be able to make good use of." We have a large number of spinach substitutes, and the edible Phytolakia, considered as such, is of little interest to us. It would have been different if its shoots had provided us with a winter vegetable like those of Crambé maritime. We have seen above that there is nothing to be expected from them in this respect. PIPENGAIL LUFFA ACUTANGULA Seringe. Cucurbitaceae family. The plant is usually cultivated in tropical regions; it is native to India, where it bears the names Torui (Hindustan), Jhinga (Bengalese). According to Roxburgh, the fruit, half-developed, boiled and prepared with butter and salt, is not inferior to green peas. It is also considered a foodstuff on the west coast of Africa. Mr. Pierre, director of the Colonial Garden in Libreville, has sent us some seeds under the name Long Okra, which is given to him in Sierra Leone and Liberia. The plant is called M'Counive in Gabon. We received seeds from our colleague Mr. E. Harel, and from Dr. de Cordemoy. We sowed it on March 15 on a bed and under a frame, and kept only one plant in a single-panel box. The plant filled the box well and its stems spread outwards. We then raised them on large poles and we believe they would have easily reached a height of 4 meters, if we had been able to provide them with supports of that size. The first fruit appeared on July 18, four months after sowing, and many more followed until September 10, when a strong wind destroyed everything. We believe that four feet of Pipengaille, properly cared for, would be enough to provide a weekly dish for a family's table. We had some difficulty in getting the vegetable properly prepared, although Dr de Cordemoy had kindly given us the following recipe, which is in use in Réunion: "Peel the fruit. "Leave or remove the seeds, depending on how hard they are. "Brown half an onion, then fry everything together. "If necessary, add a dash of vinegar at the end. Three times, when we followed this recipe, we found that the cook had used too much onion and too much butter. It was only by successively reducing the quantity of these two ingredients that we arrived at a satisfactory result. We harvested the fruit at half size, and cut it into one-inch-thick slices. We omitted the vinegar drizzle. Pipengaille is a highly sought-after vegetable in Réunion, and would be very useful in our Midi and in those of our colonies that do not yet have it. It's good, delicate, but weak in flavor. It would travel unaltered between Provence and Paris. It could even be shipped from our African colony. 6 Fig. 67. - Luffa acutangula. When the fruit is ripe, it contains a central, fibrous mass which is used as a sponge, giving the Fig. 68. - Luffa cylindrica. plant the name "Torchon squash". Luffa acutangula (fig. 67) is often confused with Luffa cylindrica (fig. 68). Both plants are used for the same purposes, either at the table or in the home. M. Naudin has this to say about the Luffa genus: "In two species, L. cylindrica and acutangula, the fruit is edible when it is young and the fibers have not yet had time to harden. In our colonies, L. cylindrica goes by the Indian name of Petole, while L. acutangula is known as Papengaye. "These two species are distinct, though related. The fruit is smooth in L. cylindrica, and raised with very prominent ribs in L. acutangula. PI-T'SI ELEOCHARIS TUBEROSA Schult. Scirpus tuberosus Roxb, Plants of the coast of Coromandel, pl. 231; Cyperus dulcis Rumph, Herb. Amb. 6, p. 7, tab. 3; Bossai, vulgo Qaai, Kæmpfer, Amænitatum exoticarum, fasc. V, p. 827. Cyperaceae family. A tuberous form of Eleocharis plantaginea Retz. Aquatic plant, perennial, native to the Far East. Fibrous, stoloniferous root produces rounded tubers the size of small walnuts. Stem erect, gnarled, aphyllous, with one or two short sheaths at the base. Flowers in terminal, solitary, cylindrical spikes. Scales oblong, membranous, margined. 3 stamens. Style trifid, rarely bifid, thickened at base, compressed. Achains obcordiform, surrounded by small curved bristles. Around 1655, Martinus Martini, in his Novus Atlas sinensis, wrote: "City of Kia-hing (Prov. Che Kiang). The Chinese call Pe ci a plant with round fruits (1) that grows in stagnant waters throughout this region. The volume of these fruits hardly exceeds that of a chestnut. The kernel is covered with a very thin, brown skin, and the pulp is pure white, full of juice, with a pleasant flavor, harsher than that of ordinary fruit and somewhat acidic. If, at the same time as the fruit, you put a copper coin in your mouth, you will break it with your teeth as easily as the fruit, and you will reduce it to edible pulp by a marvellous force of nature, which I have often experienced myself." In 1696, the R. P. Louis Le Comte, in his Nouveaux mémoires sur l'état de la Chine, speaking of the Pe ci, reported what Martini had said, that, when these fruits are chewed at the same time as a copper coin, the latter is easily crushed with the teeth, a tale also found in Chinese books; but Le Comte refutes this assertion by invoking his own experience (Notes taken from the work entitled: Early European researches in to the Flora of China, by E. Bretschneider, D. M. London, 1881). Dr. Bretschneider wrote to us from Saint-Péters(1) Les misionnaires ont eru voir un fruit dans ce qui m'etait qu'on tubercule. - P. B. bourg, November 20 1885: "The Chinese name for Eleocharis tuberosa is Pi t'si. The plant is cultivated all over China, in Peking as well as in Shang-Hai, Canton, etc. "I have sent some tubers of it to you. "I sent tubers the size of chestnuts to the late Mr. Decaisne, but they did not arrive in good condition. Eleocharis tuberosa would be a good acquisition for our crops, because its tubers are very good to eat. To send them from China to France, we'd have to put them in a pot filled with vase and water. Someone would have to take care of this pot on the boat and renew the water that evaporates. In this way, young plants would be brought to Marseille. "The plant is grown in water, like rice. I'm not in a position to point you in the right direction in China, but I would advise you to go and see my friend Mr. Dévéria, first Chinese interpreter at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, he will tell you what to do." Our learned correspondent wrote again, dated June 7 1887: "The plant is widely cultivated around Peking, in submerged areas. It never flowers. It is grown for its tubers, which do not form until very late in the autumn. They are harvested in spring and eaten raw or cooked, or candied in vinegar. Europeans don't eat much Pi t'si; however, it has a rather pleasant taste. There is no need, as we have been told, to reject the residue after chewing the tuber." In the same letter, the doctor renewed his recommendations for transporting chi noises aquatic plants. We read in Roxburgh, Flora indica, volume I, page 210: "The plant is cited by Abbé Grosier under the name Pi t'si. Under the names Maatai, Pu-tsai or Pe t'si, or Chinese water chestnut. Mr. Duncan, in compliance with the Governor General's wishes, sent it from Canton to the Company's Botanical Garden in Calcutta, where it flowers towards the end of the rains, in September. "For the economic uses of its tuberous roots, I beg permission," says Roxburgh, "to refer, on the one hand, to Abbé Grosier and other historians who have had occasion to observe how they are employed by the Chinese, and, on the other, to the following extract from Mr. Duncan's letter which accompanied the plants: 'Maa tai, Pu tsai or Pi t'si, according to Abbé Grosier, Châtaigne d'eau. Cullive in tanks that are smoked for planting, towards the end of March. The water in the tank is then drained, and small cavities are made in the bottom, filled with human fertilizer and left exposed to the sun for two weeks. Their contents are soon mixed with the muddy bottom of the reservoir, and the splinters or roots are deposited. The water is then returned, and the new crop reaches perfection on September 1st. This nut is highly esteemed by Chinese of all classes, not only as a root for the pot, but also as a remedy. It is eaten boiled or raw. I wouldn't vouch for the singular virtues attributed to Maatai, but I'll just mention one of the most plausible. Children here play with coins in their mouths, which sometimes slip into their stomachs and cause alarming symptoms. The nut, raw or boiled, is then immediately given to them in quantity; it never fails to relieve them and is always considered a specific. It is claimed to decompose metal." We could, like Roxburgh, refer to the Description générale de la Chine, Paris, 1785, by Abbé Grosier, but this work is not available to everyone, and the reader would be deprived of the information it contains, which is most interesting. We therefore reproduce here the passages relating to aquatic edible plants: "In Europe, people have dared to suggest that the Chinese leave part of their land uncultivated; they were unaware, no doubt, that they cultivate the very bottom of waters and that the soil of lakes, ponds and streams provides them with harvests that are still unknown to us. Their industriousness has led them to find resources in a large number of aquatic plants, many of which, such as Pi t'si and Lien hoa, are the delights of the best Chinese tables. "In order to give the people an example of this culture, the government takes care to have them planted in ponds, in bodies of water and in all waters belonging to the State. The emperor himself has them planted in the ponds that adorn his gardens, and almost all his palace moats are filled with them. The flowers and greenery of these useful plants also almost entirely cover the two immense bodies of water in the center of Peking, which are separated only by a single bridge where everyone passes and from which the magnificent gardens of the emperor's palace can be seen. The Pi t'si or true Water Chestnut (1) (1) For us, the Trapa natans is the true Water Chestnut, and grows only in the southern provinces of China; it withers away in Peking. Its leaves are long like those of the Joncus, but hollow and tubular like those of the Chives. The extraordinary thing about this plant is that its fruit is enclosed in an envelope formed by its roots, like a chestnut in its thorny shell; this shell can be broken and the fruit removed without damaging the plant. This water chestnut is very healthy and has a very delicate taste; it is given to sick people to chew on to refresh their mouths". So far, we have made vain efforts to obtain Pi t'si. We received several tubers of Eleocharis tuberosa from R. P. Heude, of Shang-Haï, which arrived in Paris too tired from the journey for us to be able to vegetate them. Dr Bretschneider tells us what to do, but where can we find a complaisant traveller who will agree to transport the roots, give them the necessary water, and add the precious pot to his travel impedimenta? We're not discouraged, but we are extremely embarrassed. What may console enthusiasts in the Paris area is that the climate there would not allow cultivation of Pi t'si; not because it has anything to fear from the cold under the water with which it would be covered, but because the harvest of its tubers takes place late in autumn, and we don't have, as in Peking, after winters where the Pi t'si is the only one; but the Chinese have the Pi tst and the Ling io, and, for them, the piv'est is the true water Châtrigne. thermometer falls to 20°, six months of tropical heat. Abbé David observed 40° in the shade as early as May. The Chinese water chestnut is therefore confined to a few of our southernmost départements. This is the place to mention two Eleocharis, neighbors of the Pi t'si. To our great regret, we have so far been unable to obtain them, and cannot therefore devote a separate article to them. We would be grateful if anyone receiving tubers of these plants would inform us: ELEOCHARIS ESCULENTA Vieillard (Herb. de la Nouvelle-Calédonie, n° 1456). Herbaceous, bushy, stoloniferous plant; stolons with mealy tubers, closely resembling those of Cyperus esculentus L.; stems erect, aphyllic, 40 to 50 cm high, jonciform, smooth, green, divided internally by numerous diaphragms that are barely visible when fresh; pellucid sheaths, membranous, short, terminated by an acute triangular ligule. Flowers in elongated spikes, greenish, hermaphrodite, the lower ones sterile; scales greenish, membranous, broad, concave, scarious at the edges, striate in the center; perigone silky; bristles 8, unequal, white and scabrous; stamens 3; anthers elongated, mucronate, twice as long as the netting; ovary compressed, surmounted by a persistent style; seed black, shiny. This Cyperaceae is very common in flooded areas; its tubers are edible and quite sought-after (1). In the light of the above description and its accompanying indications, we thought it would be easy to find Eleocharis esculenta. We have written to our correspondent on several occasions. We pointed out to him the marshes around Balade as the plant's definite habitat; we tired him with our repeated requests. He always replied that Eleocharis esculenta could not be found. ELEOCHARIS PLANTAGINEA F. Mueller. Local name, Caya. Scirpus sphacelatus Spreng. The Sphacelia Eleocharis inhabits the lagoons, creeks and ponds of Australia. Each plant produces six to eight small, almost spherical tubers. These tubers, cooked and crushed between two stones, are prepared like almond cakes. In Australia (Queensland), we asked in vain for the Sphacelia Eleocharidae. We have only received the brochure that describes it: (1) Revue maritime et coloniale, December 6, 1862, 24th issue, p. 623. Essay on New Caledonia, by Vieillard, naval surgeon. Notes on some of the roots, tubers, bulbs and fruits, used as vegetable food by the aboriginals of northern Queensland, Australia, by A. Thozet; Rockhampton, 1866. COCHET EARTH PEAR POLYMNIA EDULIS Weddell, Ann. se. nat. 4th ser. vol. VII, p. 111. Family Compositae. Root tuberous; stem stout, branched, fluted, angular, more or less bristly at base; upper part, branches (especially near nodes) and peduncles hairy tomentose; leaves opposite, broad, ovate, weakly acuminate, cuneate-based, unevenly sinuate-dentate, upper surface briefly bristly and slightly rough, pubescent beneath and paler green; involucral leaves oval, subacuminate, with a more or less connate base, ciliated; spangles oblong, the same length as the flowers, denticulate at the apex; corolla with rays shorter than the involucre; ligule oval, with a deeply tridentate apex; base and tube short, very bristly. Notice sur l'Ahipa et l'Aricoma, plantes alimentaires du haut Pérou, by A. Weddell (Ann. des se. nat., loc. cit.): "Few countries offer as great a diversity of climates as Bolivia or high Peru; some points of their territory are even situated in such a special way that the inhabitants, on leaving their temperate skies, can reach in a few hours and at will the zone of perpetual snow or that of tropical vegetation. Such, in particular, is the position of the city of La Paz, built at the bottom of a ravine that connects it, on the one hand, with the tropical valleys of the eastern slopes of the Andes and, on the other, with the glaciers of the great Cordillera that rise majestically above it. It's easy to understand the advantages of such a location in terms of plant foodstuffs, which must almost inevitably be far more varied than in less favourably-placed locations. This is indeed the case; so when, on my last trip to America, I wanted to take stock of the edible plants on sale at the La Paz market, I was not surprised to find, alongside Strawberries, Apples and Peaches, Bananas, Pomegranates and Pineapples; But the products that particularly attracted my attention were those that seemed to have some analogy with the potato, for which a substitute was being sought at the time, and I was all the more interested in this examination as, alongside the tubers of Oxalis tuberosa, Ullucus and Tropxolum tuberosum, which were much talked about in Europe, I noticed two others that were still unknown to me and which had more or less the same appearance as the swollen roots of the Dahlia. However, like the Dahlia and the Potato, they were no longer products of the temperate or cold parts of the Andes, since they both originated from the subtropical zone, and as such, they could be seen in the company of the starchy roots or tubers of Manioc, Arracacha, Canna edulis or Colocasia esculenta. "One of these tubers, 10 to 15 centimeters long, tapering at both ends and yellowish in color, is known in La Paz as Ahipa (or Ajipa); the other, larger, stockier and darker in color, is known there as Yacon or Aricoma. Both are brought in considerable quantities from the warmer parts of the ravine, where they appear to have been cultivated since time immemorial. "At the time of my visit, the season was unfortunately too advanced for me to obtain the materials that would have enabled me to learn about their botanical origins; I therefore regretted leaving the country without having been able to satisfy my curiosity; and, despite numerous requests, it is only recently that I have obtained samples (1) that enable me to shed light on the question. "Now, those I received from the plant that provides the first of these tubers, Ahipa, although devoid of flowers and fruit, nevertheless allow me to affirm that it belongs to the Leguminosae family and the Phaseolae tribe, and I thought at first that it must be a species of Dolichos, perhaps the Dolichos tuberosus Lamk, which is claimed (Lamk.. Encycl, Encycl., Il, 295) to have been brought from South America to the West Indies by the Caribs. However, I soon had to give up this idea, for although I found fairly close relationships between the leaves of Ahipa and those of the (1) I am indebted for these samples, as well as for precious material for my Flore des hautes Cordillères, to the extreme kindness of my friend M. Gilbert Mandon, who has just spent several years in Bolivia. Although the plant was represented by Plumier and cultivated at the Muséum under the name Dolichos tuberosus, I also noted differences between the underground parts that made it impossible to confuse them; In fact, the Bolivian plant is usually equipped with a considerable number of tubers of the type I have described, and each of its main roots often has two or three; whereas, in the West Indian plant, on the other hand, not only is there usually only one tuber, but it sometimes reaches enormous dimensions (1). "In order to compare these two plants, I assumed that they belonged to the same genus, which has not yet been demonstrated; I would even add that Mr. Bentham, to whom I sent some of the leaves I had just received from Bolivia, told me that they could very well be those of a species of Stenolobium. It was also suggested that my plant might be one of the Rhynchosia species, which are currently cultivated in India for their tuberous roots. "But if it is true, as the inhabitants of La Paz claim, that the cultivation of Ahipa dates back to the time of the Incas (2), we could hardly have (1) M. Belanger, director of the Jardin botanique de Saint-Pierre, Martinique, assured me that the tubers of Dolichos tuberosus sometimes acquired the enormous weight of 30 kilograms. Their flavor, he told me, is quite comparable to that of beet. The plant is not cultivated, but is found in the wild in the Trois-Islets commune, where the negroes sometimes seek out its tuber to grate it and mix the raw flour with that of cassava. (2) A place is shown at the foot of the Ellimani, where the ancients had the patience to bring water from three leagues away, by means of a gutter, to water the slopes of the mountain on which this vegetable was cultivated. The plant is only an American species. The searches I have made in books and herbariums, following Mr. Bentham's indications, have not led me to any positive results, and, although it seems probable to me that the species has not yet been described, I will wait for further information to confirm this (1). "Samples of the plant that produces the second tuber, the one known in La Paz as Yacon or Aricoma, are much more complete than those of Ahipa, so I had no difficulty in recognizing a completely new species. As I said, the tubers are generally more voluminous and stockier than those of the preceding plant; like them and like those of Dahlia, they result from a particular development of the roots, and they are all the more comparable to the latter as they are the product of a plant of the same family. This plant is a species of the genus Polymnia, for which I propose the name P. edulis, and which I will describe as follows: "It grows spontaneously near Quitame, on the eastern slopes of the Audes de Bogola, at an altitude of 2,000 meters (Triana). It is cultivated in the subtropical region of Peru and New Granada, where, according to Triana, it goes by the names of Jiquima and Jiguimilla. "The tubers I saw for sale at the La Paz market averaged about the size of a fist, but I was assured that some weighed close to 2 kilograms; each strain produced an average of (1) More complete samples were recently sent by Dr. Ernst and established that Ahipa is nothing other than Dolichos tuberosus Lamk. (Pachyrrhizus tuberosus Spreng.) See note on this plant, under Tuberous Dotic. 33 4 or 5: there are some, however, which apparently provide 15 or 20. To complete what I have to say about these two vegetables, it remains for me to talk about their nutritional qualities and flavor. We'll start by saying that both are eaten raw like apples, and that they are held in the same high esteem as apples by the lower classes of the population. Should we conclude from this that their flavor is just as pleasant? "The Aricoma, which I prefer, seems to me more like a bad pear in this respect. Moreover, it contains only a very small amount of starch, whereas Ahipa contains a fairly significant proportion and could be compared, in terms of its nutritional properties, to the tuber of Ullucus tuberosus, while Aricoma would be the analogue of Topinambour, from which it differs, however, by a much higher proportion of sugar. "To sum up, what I have seen of these two tubers has convinced me that, if there could be any advantage in trying to introduce them into our crops - and I have no doubt that they would thrive in Algeria's climate - it would not be as food plants for man, but rather as industrial plants, intended for use either in the manufacture of 'alcohol, or as cattle feed; In both respects, Polymnia edulis would undoubtedly be the preferred plant, both because of the greater quantity of saccharine matter in its lubercules and because of its high yield. I would add that this plant, considered as a successor to the Topinambour, would have one advantage over the latter, namely that it doesn't stalk and is therefore much easier to eradicate from the land where it is grown. Its green parts are, moreover, even more abundant and, above all, more tender than those of the Topinambour and, for this reason, would undoubtedly be more sought-after by livestock. Cultivation of Polymnia edulis failed to produce any useful results, and the plant joined the list of dismal failures in the quest to eventually replace the potato. However, as the story of the discovery of two new food plants is not without interest, we think it will meet with approval to have reproduced Mr. Weddell's note in extenso. We conclude by indicating the sources from which further information on the Cochet earth pear may be obtained. Potymnia edulis. Bull. Soc. d'Accl., vol. VII, 1860, p. 357. Sur la Poire de terre Cochet, Polymnia edulis, by M. Quihou, Bull. Soc. d'Accl., vol. XX, 1863, p. 344. Sur la Poire de terre Cochet, by M. Quihou. Bull. Soc. d'Accl. 2° série, vol. I, 1864, p. 530. Floraison de la Poire de terre Cochet, by M. Quihou. Bull. Soc. d'Acel., 2e série. vol. Il, 1865, p. 652. BIG-FLOWERED PERPET PORTULACA GRANDIFLORA Hook. Bot. Mag. t. 2885. Family Portulacaceae. "Tuberous root. Stem branched, 20 to 25 cm long, round, smooth, fleshy, reddish; leaves fairly wide apart and 4 to 5 cm long, cylindrical, pointed, sessile, contracted at the base so as to appear petiolate, fleshy and glaucous green; axils alone with numerous, long, tangled hairs. Terminal flowers, sessile, grouped in threes or fours at the tip of the twigs and surrounded by an involucre whose leaflets resemble stem leaves and are interspersed with hairs at the base. Calyx with two elongated, oval, green divisions, scarred at the tip and hairy at the point of insertion. Corolla large, beautiful, much longer than the calyx, orange or bright purple-red. Petals 5, fused at the base and seemingly fused with the base of the calyx at the point of insertion on the ovary. Stamens numerous, united at the base of the calyx and corolla and to a lesser degree between them. Dark purple netting. Anthers round, bilocular, purple. Pollen bright yellow. Ovary supere, conical, plurilocular; seeds numerous. Style as long as stamens, filiform. Stigmas 7 to 9, radiating, tenuous, pubescent, curved at tip." (Hook., loc. cit.) In June 1879, we said: This plant grows spontaneously, unknown or neglected, at the foot of the Cordilleras, and we can do no better than to reproduce what relates to it in the letters of one of our correspondents (January 26, 1878): "I have been obliged to wait for POURPIER A GRANDES FLEURS Fig. 69. - Large-flowered Purslane (Portulaca grandiflora). January 26th to send you a variety of Tuberous Purslane, wild near the Andes mountains. Here's its story: I was struck by the sight of a field covered with a violet flower, very large for a dwarf plant. I collected a few vines in 1875 and planted them as ornamental plants. What a surprise when, in April, I found tubers of elongated shape, Om, 06 in length and about the size of a finger. I cut one of them, whose flesh seemed fatty. I cooked some tubers in ash and found them to have an exquisite taste. I cultivated Tuberous Purslane in 1877 and had the satisfaction of obtaining much larger tubers than the first ones harvested. "This Purslane thrives in dry, hot sand. The worst siliceous soils are suitable. The same correspondent, in a letter dated April 1878, adds the following: "This year I obtained some very fine Purslane tubers. Some have reached a length of Om, 12 by Om, 08 in circumference. So I have a very noticeable improvement on my crops, since I have doubled the volume of tubers in a single year. I cooked them for a quarter of an hour in boiling water; I sautéed them in butter: it's an excellent dish. I cook them in ash, which I eat only with salt; the taste is exquisite. I'm sending you some seeds from my cultivation and some from the spontaneous plant. Here are a few explanations: Purslane grows in dry sand. So I recommend sowing in pure sand or very sandy soil. I think this plant prefers bad soil to potting soil. In potting soil, it vegetates with admirable vigor, but its tubers remain small. I give you these details from my experiments. The best results are obtained in sand, kept slightly cool (1). Exposure to full sun. (1) Our correspondent had originally said: in dry, breezy sand. We sowed the seeds we received in buckets, under a cold frame. We obtained only a small number of plants, which we put in place, in the open air, on a piece of old bedding. We could certainly have planted in sand, but our main aim was to have vigorous plants and to harvest the seeds, even if the tubers were less developed. We didn't stick to sowing, and as soon as we had strong enough plants, we took cuttings, all of which sprouted easily. This means that both sowing and taking cuttings can be practised, but mainly taking cuttings. We had hoped to obtain tubers which we had planted and which we assumed would give us stronger plants and an earlier, more abundant harvest. This was not the case; after six consecutive years of careful cultivation, we were no further ahead than the first day. We have only obtained tubers that are insignificant in number and volume. The harshness of our winters, however, is no obstacle to the cultivation of Purslane, since it is an annual and summer crop; the habitat of the spontaneous plant is not free of frosts, and the thermometer sometimes falls to 6 or 7 degrees below zero. Since we are concerned exclusively with vegetable plants, we have said nothing about the Purslane flower, which is the subject of this chapter. It is very large, with a warm, vivid purplish-pink color, close to violet. Enthusiasts who have seen it agree that it is larger than in any other variety of large-flowered Purslane. PROVATZA STATICE SINUATA L. Fam. Plumbaginea. Statice sinuata is a perennial that grows wild throughout the Mediterranean region, but in France is found only on the Hyères islands. The stem reaches 10 to 30 centimetres in height. The radical, rosette-shaped leaves are cut into rounded lobes and bear sparse hairs. The flowers, in dense, terminal clusters, are large, blue, with pale yellow petals. This species was brought to our attention by Dr. de Heldreich, Director of the Botanical Garden of Athens, on the occasion of the publication of the second edition of Potager d'un Curieux. In a letter received on June 10 1892, he wrote: "If I had known you were preparing a new edition of your interesting work, I would have been able to offer you some more material from this country, in particular Provatza (a young plant of Statice sinuata, excellent in cooked salads)." We cultivated Statice sinuata, sowing it thickly in autumn; the following summer, we obtained abundant, very tender leaves, with an excellent cooked flavor. Raw, in salads, the young leaves are very acceptable. The flavor is mild and pleasant. PSORALEA COMESTIBLE, PICOTIANE Tipsina of the Iowa Indians; Taagu of the Osages, according to M. Trécul. PSORALEA ESCULENTA Pursh. Family Papilionaceae. Perennial, hairy, tuberous-rooted, simple, edible; stem from Om, 30 to Om, 35; palmate leaves, with 5 elliptical oval leaflets, glabrous below; in June-July, blue flowers, in axillary spikes, pedunculated; corolla the length of the calyx. This plant, native to Missouri, was introduced in 1846 by M. Lamare-Picot (1) and was proposed as a replacement for the potato. It is only in this capacity that it appears here, as we have not grown it and experimentation has been absolutely unfavorable. We know that the same was true of all the plants we had imagined replacing the potato, if the latter had succumbed to the disease it was suffering from. It's good to know that, with the exception of the Dioscorea, there is as yet no plant that can take the place of the Andean Solanea, and that if there were, the place would be empty. It is reasonable to believe that, in our Midi departments, several types of lgnames could fill this (4) Gaudichaud, Rapport sur un mémoire de M. Lamare-Picot, relatif à l'introduction d'une nouvelle plante alimentaire (Comptes rendus de l'Académie des sciences, 1846, t. XXVI, p. 326; ibid, 1849, t. XXIX, p. 709; ibid., 1850, t. XXX, p. 393). We are convinced that the Picotiane plant has its place, and we urge friends of horticulture to seek out, among the many existing varieties, those that might thrive in our climate. Returning to the Picotiane, here are the conclusions of an article in Le Bon Jardinier (1873, p. 649), to which we refer the reader: "It can be seen that, in its present state, the Psoralea esculenta is far removed from the conditions one should look for in an agricultural plant. It is not impossible, however, that cultivation could modify it more or less profoundly. Trials of this kind are always interesting, as much for their own sake as for the purpose to which they may lead; but they may have to be followed for a long time before bringing about a result, which itself remains doubtful; so that they should be recommended, in the present state of the question, rather to public educational establishments and experimenters, than to growers themselves." As Picotiane is not a resource for agriculture, and even less so for vegetable growing, we won't talk about it any further. Anserine Quinoa. Small Peruvian rice. CHENOPODIUM QUINOA Willd. Family Salsolaceae. 323 Annual plant. Stem straight, twiggy, 1m, 80 high: leaves alternate, triangular, with two sagittate extensions at the base, cut by very obtuse teeth, blond-green, pulverulent when young; flowers whitish, very small, in tight, compact clusters. Compressed, yellowish-white seeds. There are varieties with green, reddish or reddish stems and leaves. Quinoa has been much talked about in the past, but is now forgotten. We are familiar with all the published notes on this plant, which we have grown ourselves. They all agree on the benefits of growing it in France as a successor to spinach. It is in this capacity that it appears in the 1839 issue of Le Bon Jardinier, where it is the subject of a note by M. Vilmorin, instructive and complete enough that, having reproduced it, we have nothing left to say: "In 1836, trials multiplied; everywhere Quinoa succeeded well. The plant is very vigorous, almost impervious to the cold; it produces, in good soil, an extraordinary abundance of seeds, but the seed has so far not been used in a satisfactory way; either it does not acquire in France the same quality as in America, or, more probably, our palates are not shaped to its strange flavor; few people have found it to their taste. It has the real disadvantage of being quite bitter and pungent, which can only be removed by repeated washing. With repeated care, I can make very good cakes and passable soups from it, but preparation is a tricky business; the seed is very small and requires a long cooking time, so it won't meet with the approval of cooks. As for the mistresses of the house, perhaps some of them will judge it like the ladies of Lima, for whom, it is said, Quinoa is a favorite dish; in this case, it would be classified, in France, among those secondary products of which one wants a little for the variety, but not, as in America, among the economic plants of first utility. This would only happen if we could find a way of preparing the seed that would make it easy to use and pleasant tasting for the greatest number of people. "As a vegetable crop, Quinoa will be more readily adopted, because it is a good summer substitute for spinach. "If you want to harvest it as grain, you can sow it either on a bed in March, or even in a sheltered bed, and plant it in April or early May, or in the open ground, in rows, during April. As the plants become very large and strong, they should be spaced about 50 centimetres apart. They require fertile, light rather than compact soil, and exposure to full sun if they are to be harvested for seed. On a plantation that looks able, you can cut off the secondary shoots, which develop in large numbers, to take the leaves; but if you are only thinking of this last product, you should sow in closer rows and cut the stem at the time of the first harvest, to make it branch out. "A Quinoa bed established in this way will provide a succession of constantly renewed products throughout the summer, if watered regularly. In our opinion, Quinoa is a good substitute for Spinach. Enthusiasts will do well, however, to try the other substitutes for this vegetable, which we lack during the summer, i.e. Tetragona, Claytone, Safflower...".

Baselle, Glaciale, etc. Glaciale and Tetragone are our favorites. Publications to consult: Journal des observations botaniques faites sur les côtes orientales de l'Amérique méridionale et aux Indes occidentales, by R. P. Feuillée. Revue horticole, vol. IV, 1838-1841, p. 139. Bulletin de la Soc. centrate d'Hort. de France, vol. XVII, 1835, p. 197; vol. XXII, 1838, p. 182. Bulletin de la Soc. d'Acclimatation, vol. IX, 1862, p.226. Note sur le Quinoa, par Son Excellence le maréchal de Santa Cruz, vol. IV, 2nd series, 1867, p. 444. Food plants, by Heuzé. We have also cultivated Chenopodium auricomum F. Muell, a plant introduced under the name of Australian Spinach, about which information can be found in the Bulletin de la Société nationate d'Acclimatation, 2° série, volume III, page 634; and volume IV, pages 34 and 106. Australian Spinach is not superior to Arroche or Belle-Dame in terms of quality, and as it is less productive, there is no reason to recommend its cultivation. Two other Salsolaceae are particularly sought-after in the deserts of Central Asia, for their edible seeds. These are Agriophyllum gobicum and arenarium. Prjevalski mentions them in the relabon of his third voyage (in Russian), and we reproduce below the translation (1) of the passages that the learned Russian traveler devoted to them: "Soulhhir is a Chenopodea (Salsolaceae). frequent in the whole of Central Asia, up to 48° degrees of northern latitude. It grows only on bare sand. There are two species: Agriophyllum gobicum and A. arenarium. "The former dominates the Ala-Chan, Ordos and, in general, the southern and eastern parts of the Gobi Desert; the latter occupies the western region and grows as far as Turkestan and the Caspian Sea. "Soulkhir is also found in the upper KhouanKhe (river) and in the Tzaidamme (I spent the winter there: I was unable to pick any of the plants, and therefore cannot say which of the two species it was). This plant is absent from northern Thibet. "I said earlier that Soulhhir grows on bare sand. Like other local plants, it makes do with rainwater, which filters through the sand and then (. We owe this translation to Tobhigeance by M. Vilbouche- vitch. rises to the upper layers through evaporation. "To take advantage of this moisture, the Soulkhir has incredibly long roots, as do all plants growing in the same conditions; they are able to draw water from a considerable depth. It goes without saying that sand vegetation is all the richer the more abundant the rainfall. "Soulkhir is an annual plant. In the Ala-Chan region, it grows up to 1 metre in height in good conditions, and its stem can be up to 5 centimetres (?) thick; on average, however, these dimensions are half that. "Not only is Soulkhir superb fodder for Mongolian livestock, but its seeds, which are as small as those of the poppy, are an essential food for the indigenous population. "The saying, 'You have to have sown to reap', does not hold true in Ala-Chan; every year, at the end of September and especially in rainy years, they reap an abundant harvest of Soulkhir from their sands. "The exposed areas of loess clay subsoil are used as threshing floors; the seeds are then roasted and ground to flour using hand mills. "Birds from the northern Gobi that winter in the Tingueri sands also feed on them. Prjevalski gives the following details of the Tungueri sands in the Ala-Chan desert, where these plants grow. They give an exact idea of the environment in which they thrive. "These sands present a sea of mounds, reaching from 10 to 20, rarely up to 30 meters high; they are arranged in complete disorder; long sand ribs divide the mounds. "The mounds themselves are strongly compressed by the wind on one of their slopes, so that the foot does not sink deep into them. The opposite slope, on the other hand, is very steep, and the sand has no consistency. "Between the mounds of sand there are funnel-shaped holes or valleys that often expose the very bottom of the plain, which is, as in most of these sandy deserts, salty clay, smooth and hard as a parquet floor. Water is generally lacking. It is rare to find a spring. "There are also few places where bad salt water can be obtained, by digging 3-4 feet into the loamy subsoil of the sands. "As a general rule, the sands are bare and some vegetation only appears on the edges of sandy places and, from time to time, on the bottoms of the above-mentioned valleys and funnels; the desert flora is, moreover, quite varied in these parts; we collected seventeen species in the Tungueri sands, which had not yet appeared in the year's herbarium. "Two plants are particularly remarkable and characteristic of the Ala-Chan. They are Soulkhir and Pugionium. RAPHANUS SATIVUS L., var. Fam. Cruciferae. 528 "Root elongated, cylindrical, swollen at its lower end and terminated abruptly by a fine, loose tail, about Om.11 long by Om.05 in diameter; skin fairly thin, bright red in color, marked with lines, in the form of paler folds in the circumferential direction; flesh firm, with a fairly pungent flavor; leaves fairly ample, with a bright pink petiole; maturity intermediate between that of the Summer Grey Radish and that of the Black Radish." (Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie). "The pink winter radish from China was introduced by missionaries and spread by Abbé Voisin. This variety is excellent and one of the most advanced that has come to us from China". (Le BoJardinier, 1873.) We have little to add to the above. We sow in the first days of August in rows spaced Om,30 apart, and thin out the sowing so that there is Om,12 to om,15 space between plants. The ordinary use of Chinese Pink Winter Radish is that of all Radishes; but we know a housewife who uses it, in place of Turnips, as a garnish. She finds that this root, with its 34 regularity of shape and volume, lends itself better than any other to this use; our readers will appreciate. MONSTER RED RADISH FROM KASHGAR BAN-TCHOUNG-TSI FROM KASHGAR. In the spring of 1890, Mr. N. Zolotnitski, president of the botanical section of the Imperial Acclimatization Society of Russia, based in Moscow, sent us a large collection of seeds from Kashgaria and Pamir. Included in this collection were seeds of Ban-tchoung-tsi, Kashgar's monstrous red radish. We applied to this species the cultivation required by the extraordinary development of its roots. The seeds were sown in rows, and the plant was thinned out to give each plant fifty centimetres of space in all directions. We'll mention the Radishes we obtained in 1893. They were enormous. The largest weighed 3 kilos 700 grams. Given by our gardener to a Paris delicatessen, it appeared in the display under the name of Russian Radish. After attracting the admiration of passers-by, it was served in slices to the establishment's customers, who were very satisfied. We have given many Kashgar Radishes to friends and neighbors; they have been declared excellent. The flesh is crisp without being hard, and piquant without excess. Its fault is that it's too big to be served whole, which is a pity, because it's a splendid root. It sets seed quickly, and we have found that in the Paris climate, it should not be sown before July. M. Edouard Blanc gave the Muséum the seeds of a voluminous Radish he brought back from a trip to Turkestan, which we consider identical to ours. Professor Maxime Cornu, rightly believing that it could be used by farmers, presented some fine specimens to the Société nationale d'agriculture. From this point of view, we won't deal with it here. We must say, however, that in 1891 and 1892, we received from Moscow, under the name Dong-la-bout (?), a variety of long, red, monstrous Radish from Kashgar, which we feel could be presented to growers. Like the Japanese Daikon, its flesh is almost tasteless, but its skin is excessively pungent and could doubtless be served on its own as an appetizer. RAPHANUS CAUDATUS L. Cruciferae family. Annual herb, cullivated in Java, where it is probably spontaneous and its candied siliques, known as Mougri, are eaten. It is also cultivated in the Punjab and in western and northern India. Fusiform root, from which rises a stem the size of a goose feather, from Om, 33 to Om, 50 high, sparsely branched, initially straight and eventually receding; the leaves, alternate, very spreading, with two short petioles, are divided, up to the middle, into a small number of triangular lobes, acute and saw-toothed, as is the terminal lobe, which is larger and ovalelanceolate; as they rise on the plant, their shape simplifies, but even the tallest of them is sinuous rather than simply toothed; flowers gathered in small numbers in leafy terminal clusters, each emerging (according to the figure given by Linné fils) from the axil of a floral leaf; white petals, four in number, with purple veins and an inverted heart-shaped blade; siliques 4 to 5 feet long (1.33 to 1.65 m), thicker than a thumb at the bottom, gradually narrowing from base to tip, more or less curved, reddish in color, roughly rounded in cross-section and containing numerous, oblong, purple seeds in their single chamber. We find the above description in a Note by M. P. Duchartre (1869), made necessary by the confusion that tended to arise between Linnaeus' Raphahauscer 112 2- "Orenine Fig. 70. - Snake Radish (Raphanus caudatus). nus caudatus and a plant from India, called Madras Radish, which M. Courtois-Gérard had encountered in the Botanical Garden of Edinburgh, and from which he had brought seeds to France (1). Seven years later, M. Ed. André published, with figures, in the Revue Horticole, an extensive and most interesting Note, to which we refer the reader (2). Growing Raphanus caudatus is like growing any other large radish, and requires no description. It is as simple and easy as can be. The plant is distinguished from all the other Radishes we have by the extraordinary size of its siliques. Although degenerated, a few years ago it was still producing siliques in our garden that were 40 to 50 centimetres long, alongside others that were shorter; in other words, some of the siliques were longer than the whole plant, as Linnaeus pointed out, and when they reached the ground they spread out in sinuosities, like a snake. Our cultivation was considerably hampered by the ravages wrought by flea beetles and a large grey aphid. The latter, which would certainly not have resisted a spray of labac juice, devoured our plants in a matter of days. (1) Note sur une Crucifère à siliques comestibles, récemment introduite en France (Journ. de la Soc. impériale et centrale d'Horticulture, 1859, vol. V, p. 57 to 63). (2) Le Radis serpent (Revue horticole, 1866, p. 471). 9380 Fig. 71 - Snake radish, flowers and siliques. 535 We cooked them and ate them, either as a salad or prepared like green beans. For this purpose, they must be picked very young; they are then very acceptable, but are far from being as good as green beans. Pickled in vinegar, they are good and preferable to most of the vegetables usually associated with gherkins. They have the merit of retaining their piquant flavor for a long time, attenuated but still sensitive. It's probably when they've been preserved in vinegar that they're called Mougri in Java. Mr. Ed. André has heard that in England, fifty years before the publication of his Note, and when Raphanus caudatus was being cultivated as a new plant, the juice was squeezed out of it, and that it made an excellent sauce, a very palatable juice. The plant is undoubtedly very interesting, and those who are curious will make room for it in their gardens. ROMAINE GIGOGNE O Soune, from Pamir. LACTUCA SATIVA L., var. On February 22, 1891, we received from Mr. N. Zolotnitski, President of the Botany Section of the Imperial Acclimatization Society of Russia, a collection of vegetable seeds collected in the Pamir and Kashgarie regions. Among these seeds were those of a Romaine that we feel deserves particular attention. The figure shown here is an exact representation of the plant. However, we must not wait until Fig. 72. - Romaine Gigogne. the adventitious seedlings and consume them, until they have acquired all the development shown in our drawing. Sown on May 4, our Romaine did not flower at Crosnes until the end of August. Its main stem rose slowly, slowed by the birth of numerous buds which surrounded it and which, successively harvested as they developed, provided an abundance of excellent cooking vegetables and a perfect salad. We believe that this curious variety, very slow to grow and very productive, is a valuable acquisition for our vegetable gardens. Its name is justified by the large family it produces. It requires more space than the ordinary Romaine, but it makes liberal use of the space it is given. We are very grateful for the gift made to us by the Imperial Society of Acclimatization of Russia, and hope to repay it with seed shipments. The letter of dispatch sent to Mr. Paillieux by Mr. Zolotnitski read: "At the same time, I have the pleasure of informing you that, at the last annual meeting of the Imperial Society of Acclimatization of Russia, you were awarded the great medal of encouragement for your useful attempts in the field of acclimatization of new vegetable species." PAMIR O SOUNE ROMAINE. ROMAINE ASPARAGUS. In the bag of O Soune seeds we received from the Société Impériale d'Acclimatation de Russie (1), we found, mixed with the white seeds of Romaine Gigoyne, brown seeds mo ROMAINE DU PAMIR Fig. 73. - Romaine du Pamir. which gave us a very distinct and interesting plant (fig. 73). We consider it to be (1) See Romaine Gigogne, p. 536. identical to the one listed under the name Romaine Asperge in the book entitled "Les plantes potagères", 2nd ed. p. 361, published by Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie, but it is not included in their catalog. It is not an early plant. Sown in the first days of March, it only reaches maturity at the end of June. Successive sowings mean that it can be harvested until the end of September. It does not apple. Its stalk reaches a height of 50 centimetres, and the edible part, reduced to around 30 centimetres, stripped of its bark and cooked for half an hour in a light juice, makes an excellent-looking and tasty vegetable dish. In our families, it's customary simply to cook the stems in stock, leaving the vegetable its natural flavor. Nothing could be easier, as you can see, but the cordon bleu cooks of our village don't stop there, and one of their most successful preparations is with cream and cheese. In 1892 and 1893, we unwisely gave O Soune the name Romaine-Asperge, which induced consumers to boil the stalks and eat them with white sauce. They were tasteless and the name almost killed the plant; we've changed it to Romaine du Pamir. Gardeners should be warned that our Romaine does not apple. Many have pulled it out, thinking they'd been laughed at. Romaine stems seem to be widely used in China. M. Maurice de Vilmorin received from ShangHaï seeds of four varieties of this species, and kindly allotted us a share of each. These bags were labelled: Ou Sen, Romaine whose stems are eaten. One of them bore the words: Ou Sen odoriférant. These seeds did not germinate. Another variety, presented as early, seemed negligible to us. We consider two varieties, one red, the other white, to be very interesting. The red one is earlier than Romaine du Pamir. Its stems grow less high. We eat 20 centimeters of them. They are very tender and have a very strong flavor. They are very fragrant in the kitchen. They could probably be blanched before cooking. Cooked in broth, they are good. The white variety is a late bloomer. It has the merit of being very white, of being surrounded by small adventitious Romaines like the R. Gigogne, of consequently providing a pretty salad, and, finally, of giving tender stalks, of fairly strong flavor, which can be used over a length of 20 centimeters. Our gardens are therefore now in possession of three varieties of a hitherto forgotten or unknown Romaine, which all our friends have served on their tables and with which they are very satisfied. Every day, we receive new testimonials. SAFRAN COMESTIBLE CROCUS CANCELLATUS Herb, var. persicus Chappellier. Iridae family. This Crocus was collected in Persia in 1881 and distributed in March 1892, by M. Pissard, former head gardener to the Shah of Persia. Mr. P. Chappellier received bulbs at the same time as we did, and published a note on the plant which we are authorized to reproduce in full. We don't expect anything from the bulbs we have, and we must confess in all humility that we have had no success with bulbous plants. We therefore consider ourselves very fortunate not to be obliged to pass over in silence an interesting plant, and to be able to present it to the reader in the name of the enlightened amateur who, as we know, has made a special study of Crocus. Note from M. Chappellier: "The crate in which these bulbs made the journey from Persia to Paris remained en route during the autumn of 1881 and the winter of 1881-1882; they came into vegetation and flowered there. "As far as the abnormal condition of these specimens allows me to judge, I am inclined to believe that this Crocus belongs to the C. cancellatus group. "Under the type cancellatus, created by Herbert, authors have grouped the following subtypes, considered by some as species, by others as varieties or synonyms: "C. cancellatus Herb; "C. Schimperi Gay; syn. C. Spruneri Boiss. et Held. "C. damascenus Herb; syn. C. edulis Boiss. et Blanche. " C. Kotschyanus Herb; C. cilicicus Kotschy; C. pylarum Gay; C. mazziaricus Herb. "Here are the main characteristics of C. cancellatus that I found in the Persian Crocus: " Autumn flowering; " Yellow pollen; " Multifid style; " Synanthous leaf; " No involucre (at the scape); " Bivalve bract (at the ovary); " Strongly reticulated tunics, with persistent star at the base; perianth varying from lilac-white to violet. "In C. cancellatus, the throat is yellowish-white or yellow; in Crocus persan, it is lilac-white or violet. "In the latter, I've also noticed a disproportionately long scape. I don't think these peculiarities are due to abnormal flowering in closed, dry boxes. "The geographical distribution of the varieties of C. cancellatus known to date extends from the Ionian Islands to Syria, where C. edulis grows, and Armenia. "M. Pissard's Crocus was collected at an altitude of around 1,300 meters, in the plains and hills of a locality called Sultabatt, in the province of IrathFérahan, southeast of Amadan, about 120 kilometers from Teheran. "Until now, only C. speciosus had been found in Persia. "Here is the information Mr. Pissard gives on the use of this plant. "The onion is edible; it tastes like chestnuts; the natives eat a lot of it. "In July 1881, these onions, boiled and grilled, were presented at an official dinner at the home of the Minister of Telegraphs; several Europeans attending the meal found them exquisite, and the Shah of Persia ordered a large supply for his table. "Until a new contribution from the place of origin or a normal flowering of the recently introduced bulbs allows a more mature examination, I think that it is with the C. edulis Boiss. et Blanche, subtype of the C. cancellatus Herb. that the new Persian Crocus has the most analogy, and I propose to annex it to the cancellatus type, under the name of C. posrieus" (Paris, April 2, 1882). Jeetcice According to M. de Heldreich (Plantes utiles de la Grèce), the bulbs of Crocus Aucheri Boiss. and C. Sieberi Gay, often found in the mountains of Greece, are eaten raw by shepherds. They have, he says, about the same taste as hazelnuts. Dserlin-lobin. PUGIONIUM CORNUTUM Gærtn. 545 Our attention was drawn to this plant by four lines in the Manuel de l'Acclimateur, by Messrs. Naudin and Mueller: "Herbaceous plant of the Cruciferae family, from Central Asia, from the Caspian Sea to China (1). It is used as a vegetable by the Mongols, and is perhaps cultivated in a few places. Pugionium is not only rare, it's impossible to find. We don't think it exists in any botanical garden today. At our request, the Société nationale d'Acclimatation approached His Excellency Mr. Regel, Director of the Imperial Garden in St. Petersburg, who was kind enough to send us some seeds. We owe him our warmest thanks for this customary gesture of kindness. These rather large seeds, armed with horns that make them a real curiosity, were first sown in Crosnes, under glass, on May 15. They took around three weeks to germinate. To give the young plants some air, we had to raise the frame a little and the flea beetle devoured them, barely 6 centimetres high. We sowed them again, this time in a (1) This is obviously a mistake; the plant has only been seen in Mongolia to date. 38 wire mesh-lined cage. However, the same enemy killed our plants. The flea beetle was in the soil and hatched after sowing. The insect usually disappears in the first days of September, destroyed by rain or cold. We therefore felt that we could sow again, under a frame, on September 6. Winters being very cold in Mongolia, we thought that the Pugionium, with a little protection, could overwinter in the vicinity of Paris; but we suffered a third setback. We had sent some Pugionium seeds to Mr. Ch. Naudin, who was no happier than we were and wrote to us: "Our dry and perhaps too hot climate does not suit it". On July 17 1889, Mr. Alexandre Bataline of the Imperial Garden, St. Petersburg, wrote to us: "Pugionium cornutum Gærtn. is a perennial plant native to Mongolia, where it is cultivated. "It is fairly widespread on the Mongolian steppes, but does not grow in Siberia. It goes by the name of Sagaï, according to a report by the learned Russian traveller, Gregoire Potanine. What part of this plant is eaten? I can't tell you. Its leaves have an unpleasant odor. Twice we received silicas of this species and the seeds germinated, but the plants only lived for a few months. Now we have neither seeds nor plants. Seeds distributed in Italy by our Botanical Garden gave the same negative results. A detailed description of this little-known plant can be found in Diagnoses plantarum novarum asiaticarum, fasc. III, by C.-J. Maximowicz, mélanges biologiques tirés du Bulletin de l'Académie impériale des sciences de Saint Pétersbourg, tome X, 1880. A related species, Pugionium dolabratum Maxim, is a biennial also native to Mongolia. This species has given us ripe seeds in St. Petersburg. I have studied the mode of fertilization of the flowers of this plant, and have published a short article on the subject, which I am sending you today. In the report on his third voyage, Prjevalski, the learned Russian traveller, gives a figure of the Pugionium cornutum, and we reproduce below the translation (1) of the interesting details that accompany it: "The Pugionium, which the Mongols call Dserlinlobine, which means Wild Radish, is much inferior to the Soulkhir (2), from the point of view of the role it plays in the economy of the nomads. "The Chinese prefer the plant itself, of which they collect the young (first-year) plants to make salted meats, which they eat as a vegetable. "Pugionium was, until recently, a rarity in herbariums, since it was known only from two branches that the naturalist Gmelin had in the last century, probably through the kindness of pilgrims returning to Northern Mongolia from a trip to Thibet. "In 1861, I had the good fortune to meet and (1) We owe this translation to the kindness of M. Vilbouchevitch. (2) Agriophyllum gobicum et arenarium. pick the plant in the Ordos country. Mr. Maximowicz considered the specimens I had brought back as belonging to two different species. One was the one Gmelin had described as Pugionium cornutum; the other, a new species to which Maximowicz gave the name Pugionium dolabratum. "Both species appear to be biennial. They are Cruciferae and their habit is that of a small shrub. "The stem does not exceed 1 foot in height, and it usually lies in the sand. In the second year, a thick, spherical or rather oval head is born at the top of the stem, made up of spindly, fragile twigs that are very close together and tangled; at the end of the twigs, small, insignificant flowers appear; they are white or pinkish. This green head of Pugionium has a maximum diameter of 3-4 feet, a minimum diameter of 2-3 feet and a height of 2 feet. In the Ordos region, the plants were much larger in places. "In the Tingueri, we had only one species, P. dolabratum. It was fairly common and formed isolated bushes on the edges of quicksand, more rarely in the interior of the sands. It was late August; flowering had finished, but the fruits were still green. We only collected ripe seeds from one subject. These were the seeds we delivered to the Botanical Garden in St. Petersburg. In the note on the Soulkhir (Agriophyllum gobicum et arenarium) (1), we have reproduced Prjevalski's des(1) See page 526. cription of the Tingueri sands, in the Ala-Chan desert, where the Pugionium grows. We can see that it is a salt-growing plant, and this explains the difficulty of cultivating it. COMESTIBLE SAGITTARIUS SAGITTARIUS FROM CHINA AND JAPAN Tsz'Au (in China). - Kuwai (in Japan). SAGITTARIA SAGITTÆFOLIA L., var, diversifolia Micheli, Monogr. phanerog., vol. III, p. 67; S. sinensis Sims, Bot. Mag. tab. 1631; S. macrophylla Bunge; S. alpina Willd.; S. hirundacea Blume; S. hastata Don; S. porriana Sweet; S. heterophylla Miller; S. acuminata Smith; S. natans Pallas; S. obtusa Thunb. Family Alismaceae. This plant grows in stagnant waters and on the banks of rivers and lakes in the temperate regions of Europe and Asia. Its shape and leaf volume vary according to whether the water is stagnant or running, or more or less abundant and deep. Authors have made species of the various forms it presents; but it is quite certain that these are merely modifications due to the influence of the environment, as one and the same plant may present wider or narrower, acute or obtuse, sagittate or entire leaves, etc. In the typical form, the leaf is flattened, and in the typical form, the leaf is flattened. In the typical form, the leaf is sagittate, with a variable blade, sometimes narrow, sometimes acute, with divided base lobes, sometimes broader, sometimes with obtuse middle lobes, those at the base almost straight. In running water, stems and petioles are spindly and sinuous; the leaf is oblong, with a rounded, emarginate base, more rarely briefly lobed, with divergent, acute lobes (S. alpina Willd.), or the leaf is limbless, translucent, weakly membranous, up to 2 meters long (S. sagit- tæfolia, var. valisneriïfolia Coss. et Germ.; Vallisneria bulbosa Poir.). In warmer regions, mainly China, where this plant is cultivated as a foodstuff, we find subjects with larger leaves, 20 to 22 centimeters long and 14 to 15 centimeters wide, with a rounded, briefly acuminate median lobe, long acuminate base lobes, very acute, often with a twiggy stem (S. macrophylla Bunge; S. chinensis Sims and S. hirundacea Blume). Kæmpfer (Amœnitatum exotic., fasc. V. p. 827) cites the Sagittaria used as a food in Japan: Siko Omodaha, Sagittaria aquatica minor latifolia, with an edible root called Bossai, whose real name is Siro quai. In the book entitled: Note explicative des objets exposés à l'Exposition universelle de 1889, by the Komaba Agricultural and Forestry School (Ministry of Agriculture and Trade, Tokio, Japan), we read: "Kouwai. The tuberous roots are harvested in autumn and used in cooking; a single plant produces twelve or thirteen tubers, which makes production abundant; the tubers have a particular aromatic smell when eaten in culinary preparations. They are therefore highly prized. One variety (Scirpus articulatus), called Kouwai or ShuitaKouwa, is botanically quite different from the first; but its roots are similar to those of the other, and only slightly smaller. They are eaten fresh. Dr. E. Bretschneider, in his Early European researches, tells us: "We know two species of Chinese Sagittaria, i.e. S. chinensis Sims and S. cordifolia Roxb. I believe it is the former that is widely cultivated in China for its edible roots, under the name Tsz'ku. Sagittaria trifolia L. (China) could be, according to Kunth, S. chinensis. Kunth also believes that S. sagittæfolia L., cited by Loureiro, is S. chinensis. However, the doctor wrote to us from St. Petersburg on June 7, 1887: "The Sagittaria cultivated in Peking for its tubers is S. macrophylla Bunge, distinguished by its enormous leaves. It is probably only a variety of S. chinensis. Sagittaria does not appear to be widely cultivated in China. Its tubers are harvested in autumn, from which a starch is extracted that is used in the same way as Nelumbium rhizomes. "It is said that the Kalmyks of the Volga have recourse to this food when they go hunting in the watery areas inhabited by Sagittarius. They rely so heavily on this resource that they don't bother with any mouth supplies. Its tubers can be eaten raw or cooked. Martius compares the starch they provide to that which we know as Arrowroot, which speaks highly in favor of this nutritious substance." (Mouchon, Bromatotogie végétate, p. 281). In his Histoire des plantes, volume II, Poiret says of our common Sagittaria: "Its leaves are eagerly sought after by goats, horses and especially pigs. The numerous bulbs of its underground stems make it a precious plant, too neglected by us, which the Chinese have long cultivated as a food plant. These bulbs contain a firm, white flesh, similar to that of the Chestnut; they are good to eat, even raw, as I have experienced. If man were to disdain them, he could at least feed them to several of the animals he raises. "You can see how advantageous it would be to multiply this plant on the banks of ponds and rivers, wherever it can grow without harming other crops. The Muséum has given us Sagittaria macrophylla. M. Latour-Marliac has given us a species he received from Leiden, under the name S. chinensis latifolia, and also the charming ornamental plant known as S. chinensis flore pleno. We have not yet obtained tubers from either of these plants. ARROW-HEAD SAGITTARIA SAGITTÆFOLIA L., var. variabilis Micheli Monogr. phan. loc. cit. p. 68. S. gracilis Pursh; S. hastata Pursh; S. latifolia Willd. ; S. latifolia Pursh; S. obtusa Willd.; S. simplex Pursh; S. longiloba Engelm. et Torrey. This species inhabits damp places, marshes, etc., almost everywhere in boreal America, from 4 Fig. 74 - Arrow-Head Sagittaria sagittæfolia, var. variabilis (tubers). Newfoundland and Canada to Florida, Louisiana and Texas. "This Sagittaria is sometimes called swan or swamp potato. Its Chippewa name is Wab-es-i-pinig. It grows on the muddy shores of northwestern lakes and rivers, and its tuberous roots are an important part of the diet. "Waterfowl are greedy for them and, to feast on them, gather in spring in these favorite spots, where the Indians kill them for their own feasts. The roots (fig.74) are generally as large as hen's eggs. They are highly prized when raw, but contain a bitter milky juice that is not to the liking of civilized man. This defect, however, disappears when they are boiled, and cooking makes them sweet and pleasant. They are considered excellent when cooked with fresh or salted meat. "To collect them, the Indians enter the water and detach them with their feet so that they float and can be harvested. "Their shape is oblong; their color is a whitish yellow, striped with four black circles. "The plant is also common in the Atlantic States" (1). Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cle were kind enough to request Sagittaria variabilis for us in America. The plant arrived in very poor condition; only two plants survived, and both were taken to the infirmary at Reuilly, where they recovered their health. These two plants, placed in tubs at Crosnes, developed vigorously and produced a large number(1) Extract from the report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for the year 1870, Washington. Government printing office, 1870. so that they soon invaded the space we had available. The plant flowered and we were able to collect the seeds. At the onset of winter, we proceeded to pull up the American Sagittaria and had the pleasure of harvesting a good number of tubers as large as small eggs, containing abundant, light starch. Cooked in water, these tubers have given us a vegetable that is, if not first-rate, at least very acceptable, and we have no doubt that they could be put to good use if cultivation were attempted on a larger scale. This interesting plant has proved absolutely hardy in the Paris climate. SCOLYME D'ESPAGNE Commonly Cardillo or Tagarninas. Scolymus hispanicus L. Fam. Compositae. Indigenous. Biennial. White, taproot, fairly fleshy. Radical leaves oblong, usually mottled pale green on a dark green background, very thorny, narrowed at the base to form a stalk; stem very stalky, reaching about 60 to 80 centimetres in height, lined with sessile, decurrent, very thorny leaves; flowers in sessile heads, grouped in twos or threes, with bright yellow florets. Achenes flattened, yellowish, surrounded by a whitish, scaly appendage. 1 gram contains around 200 seeds, and a liter weighs 125 grams. Germination lasts three years. When we come across an article in a little-known publication, almost impossible to find for most of our readers, written in perfect agreement with our opinion on the cultivation and merit Fig. 75. - Scolyme d'Espagne. of one of the plants in our kitchen garden, we have no hesitation in reproducing it in full. This is what we'll do for the Scolyme d'Espagne. In the Bulletin de la Société d'Horticulture de l'Aube, Volume I, page 217: Culture du Scolyme d'Espagne. "If there is one vegetable that deserves to be cullivated with care and which is, on the contrary, neglected and almost abandoned in certain localities, it is certainly the Scolyme. No vegetable, old or new, seems to me to possess as many qualities as this one. Its delicate taste, long shelf life, rapid growth and the time it appears on our tables mean that it can compete without too much disadvantage, not with Scorsonera or Salsify, with which it is most closely related, but with Cardoons and Cauliflowers, the vegetables to which gardeners devote all their care; But, unfortunately, Scolyma doesn't always succeed when left to its own devices, and its seeds, whether poorly chosen or preserved, or sown in unfavorable conditions, don't always grow very well. I will indicate, as best I can, the procedures that I have found suitable up to now, and which have been fairly successful. I do not claim to have brought cultivation to any great perfection, but I am convinced that amateurs who have succeeded and appreciated the value of this vegetable once will not abandon it, despite the occasional setbacks they may experience. "The Scolyma seed is small and enclosed in a membranous or foliaceous envelope. This envelope, which hides it from the eye of the examiner, makes it very difficult for him to appreciate its quality by sight. "It is sown from June 20 to July 15; earlier, the plants rise, flower and produce roots that are perhaps a little larger, but which lack the qualities of those that have not flowered. Sown later, the yield may be low. The seeds are placed in furrows 4 to 5 centimetres deep, about 20 centimetres apart. Don't be afraid of sowing a little too thickly in the furrow. "At this time of year, the soil is usually dry, and when worked, it dries out quickly to the depth where the seeds go. Watering, unless excessively abundant, is not always a remedy. To remedy this dryness of the soil, when the furrows that are to receive the seeds are made, they are watered to the point of becoming almost muddy; we sow on this wet ground and cover with the soil from the edges of the furrow, which has also been wet. "This moisture in the soil is maintained fairly well, and a few sprinklings, if the temperature is too dry, are enough to make the seeds stand up; because with this cultivation method, it will rarely happen that the seeds don't stand up in sufficient quantity. In general, summer sowings are not very successful, because the seeds may be a little dried out by the high temperature of the season, and because the soil contains much less moisture than in spring and autumn. If, to these differences in germination conditions, we add the separation of the soil from the seed by the membranous envelope that surrounds the latter, we will understand perfectly why this seed often lifts very poorly, and it is, I believe, this disadvantage that makes it abandon cultivation. "The leaves of this plant, with the exception of the seminal ones, bear a strong resemblance to a thistle. "When all the seeds have risen and the plants have already gained some strength (four to five leaves, not including the seminals), thin them out, leaving a distance of about 10 centimetres between the plants in the furrow. Plants that have been carefully removed can be permanently replanted. I say carefully uprooted; as far as possible, the root tip, which is not long at this time of year, should not be broken, and care should be taken when replanting not to go around it or crumple it. Once the plant has been transplanted, the soil must be kept wet to help it recover. "The rest of the work, during the year, consists of keeping the soil clean and weeding it once or twice, and above all watering it well if the weather is dry. A little manure water, not too strong so as not to burn the leaves, sprinkled on these vegetables will give them rapid growth and ensure a beautiful, good product. Very often, Scolymes don't reach full growth until the end of September and during October. "Scolymes are good to eat from late October or early November. The root is the only part of this vegetable that has so far been recognized as worthy of appearing on the table. In the middle of each root is a hard, woody part; this center, which its hardness prevents from being good to eat, only separates from the edible part when they have been cooked for preparation. This separation is easy to achieve. As far as I know, cultivation trials have not yet succeeded in making this woody part softer that it does not need to be removed for preparation. However, some people believe that this is the result that market gardening can achieve. "When winters are mild, Scolymes can remain in the garden until spring, when they will grow again; but when we fear that they will start growing again, we pull them out, cut off the upper part of the root that holds the leaves and bury them in sand in the cellar. They keep well until June, but in general, when winter approaches, it's a good idea to pull some of them out, prepare them as I've said, take them down to the cellar and cover the plants left in the garden with straw or straw mats. Although the cold only seems to kill the top of the root, the damage is always greater than it seems, because the frozen part causes the part that touches it to rot when it thaws. When weeding, either in spring or autumn, we choose the prettiest plants to bear seed. Place them in spring, 30 or 40 centimetres apart, in a good, well-ventilated spot away from the garden. "In June and July, the plants come up and give yellow flowers; but these flowers, which are born in the leaf axils, follow one another incessantly, and some have already ripened their seeds when the others bloom. "If the plants were not bristling with leaves more prickly than those of the Holly, one could try to collect the seeds as they ripen; I don't know of any amateur zealous enough to have wanted to do this. You seize the moment when the plants seem to have the greatest quantity of ripe seeds; you cut them, then place them on a cloth, in a basket, in a very dry place. After a few days, they are threshed and the seeds collected, which need to be winnowed in order to separate the bad ones. This operation must be carried out with care; many seeds that seem incapable of germinating do, however, germinate very well, as I was able to ascertain by winnowing them one year, in spring, before sowing them. Seeds which had fallen, as bad, in a position not very favorable to their germination have however risen well and in quantity." The note we have just read teaches us everything we need to know about growing Scolyme d'Espagne. It attributes, probably with good reason, the neglect in which this vegetable has remained to the irregularity of seed germination, and indicates the means to overcome this difficulty. But it may not be the only reason. One of the main obstacles to the success of a vegetable, however good it may be, comes from cooks and their routine habits. They probably reject Scolyma because, after cooking in salt water, they have to remove the central part of the roots, which is almost always woody and inedible. However, all vegetables give them at least as much trouble. Don't you have to remove the hay from artichokes, strain purees, shell broad beans, peas, beans, chop spinach, etc.? What's more laborious than removing the Scolyma cord? We hope that housewives, having recognized the superiority of the Scolyma root over all similar roots, will succeed in overcoming the resistance of their blue cords. Scolyme, once up, is a hardy plant. It occupies the soil for only three and a half months; the flavor of its roots is, in our opinion, infinitely more pleasant than that of Scorsonères and Salsifis, which occupy the soil two and three times longer. We can't recommend its cultivation enough. 36 In Spain, Scolyme is used differently from France, where only its roots are eaten. We didn't know this until we read a note by E. Bourgeau, botanist and traveler. Bourgeau, botanist-traveler, inserted in the Revue horticole, year 1852, page 60, a note which we feel we must reproduce: "Edible plant, vegetable, spontaneous in the southern part of Spain, which means that it is hardly cultivated there; but it is not the same in the vicinity of Madrid. It is the petioles and the middle rib of the leaf that are used in Spanish cooking, either in small packets put into stews, or prepared in different ways and combined with meat, or added to eggs, omelettes, etc. "Around January 1st, the fields are harvested, and the leaves are used for cooking. "Around January 1st, fields are almost universally covered with rosettes of leaves, which farmers harvest in the manner of dandelion, i.e. 1 or 2 inches from the taproot. The leaf blade is removed, leaving only the entire length of the rib, which is joined together and tied like a Romaine lettuce. Everyone prepares this vegetable as they see fit, either retaining a little of the root or eliminating it altogether. In January and February, a dozen are sold at the market for 30 centimes; in March and April, a dozen are only worth 15 centimes. "The markets are covered with it for five months of the year, and because it is so widely consumed in the country, the plant produces a fairly good income for country people every year. Sales end in May, by which time the leaves have become too hard and prickly to eat. "Scolyme's long, fleshy root is used as a vegetable in Provence and Languedoc, where the plant grows abundantly; in Montpellier, it's called Cardouille. It is not cultivated there; it is gathered wild in the fields, and, as the central axis is usually woody, the root is split longitudinally, removed, and it is the cortical part, bound in small bundles, that is sold" (1). In closing, we reiterate our advice to grow Scolyme d'Espagne. SCORZONERA DELICIOSA Gussone. Index seminum horto Boccadifalco, 1825, p. 11; Floræ siculæ synopsis, II, p. 389; DC. Prodr. VII, p. 118. Compositae family. Sicily. Tuberous-rooted perennial, cylindrical, oblong or almost globose, brown on the outside, white on the inside; stem simple, rarely twining at the base; leaves linear lanceolate, acuminate, flat, glabrous, a little tomentose at the base; capitula solitary at the tip of the twigs; involucral scales glabrous, acute, the outer ones lanceolate, ending in an acute point. Purple flowers. Here's what Gussone says about Scorsonera délicieuse: "The roots of this species are used (1) Le Bon Jardinier. in Sicily, candied in sugar, then dissolved in cold water; they are also used to make refreshing sorbets, iced and perfumed with large-flowered Jasmine, an aromatic that makes them very pleasant; finally, they are classified among those that provide refreshing decoctions." This plant does not seem to us to justify the ambitious qualification given to it by the Italian botanist. We received it from Mr. E. Morelli, engineer, and from Mr. Todaro, our colleague, eminent jurisconsult and director of the Palermo Botanical Garden. The latter wrote to us on April 27 1886: "With regard to the four plants requested, the Scorsonère délicieuse is the only one of them that we have in the garden and that grows spontaneously in the Palermo area... This species, which is widely used in Sicily, either in decoctions, juleps or sorbets, cultivated in pots, perishes if watered after flowering." In the course of the same year, we received several letters from Mr. E. Morelli, from which we extract the following: "I have never heard of Scorzonera outside Sicily, and even there it is only used by confectioners, who make a syrup that is consumed either as a drink in the same way as orgeat, lemon or other syrups, or for making ice cream... " ... In Sicily, plants are not sown, but propagated by simply separating the roots, which is done in October and November. As the plant is completely wild, no care is taken. The roots, which are the only part of the plant that is used, can be harvested at any time by pulling them up as soon as they have reached their normal size. "To use them, we crush them as best we can, then throw them into an aqueous sugar syrup, boil until concentrated and strain through a cloth. They can also be candied in the syrup, taking care to boil them first to remove the rind... " ... In Palermo, they are used to make refreshing decoctions, syrup and jam. The syrup is sold by the best confectioner in the area for 1 fr. 10 per bottle of about 400 grams, the jam for 3 fr. 20 per kilogram; both contain enough, even too much sugar, so there's nothing to fear from the journey. "The plant tolerates the cold perfectly. In Sicily, it is even found on mountains, where it overwinters under the snow. "My gardener claims that some of the roots are harvested when the leaves start to wilt, i.e. around the middle of August; some are left to avoid destroying the plants, which is all the more important as, in a new plantation, you can only harvest in the second year, whereas once the plants are well established you can pull out roots every year. "In fact, however, this plant is not cultivated here; it grows spontaneously in the mountains, without any care. It is therefore probable that, in cultivated land, it could produce more abundantly. The same observation applies to the question of whether the roots can be eaten as a vegetable. Here, the fiber is very hard; to use it to prepare herbal teas, it is grated after being scalded to remove the outer shell. It is not unlikely that, in your climate and in better soil, it will be softer. We have little to add to the information provided by the letters from which we have just given extracts. We can hardly expect the roots of Scorzonera deliciosa to become tender enough to be used as a vegetable. That they make refreshing decoctions; that they provide the material for syrups, jams and frozen sorbets, is a given, since, in these various forms, they are in general use in Sicily; but we are obliged to contradict the learned Dr. Baron von Mueller, who, in his Select extra tropical Plants, presents Scorzonera deliciosa as a purple-flowered species, equal, if not superior in its culinary uses, to Salsify, to which it is closely related. We planted Scorzonera deliciosa roots in the ground, and they thrived. We covered them for the winter with frames and leaves. Although they overwinter under the snow in the mountains of Sicily, this fact does not allow us to believe that they can withstand the cold in the vicinity of Paris; precautions are necessary. Mr. E. Morelli sent us syrup and jams from Scorzonera. The latter arrived in the most unfortunate condition. All the liquid had drained out of the crate in which they were stored, and all that remained in the jars was a tasteless paste. The syrup was excellent. 567 MALaBaila SEKAKUL Russell; Alepp. II, p. 249 (Syn.: M. platyptera Boiss; Pastinaca dissecta Vent; Pastinaca Sekakul Rauw; Leiotulus alexandrinus Ehrenb.). Umbelliferae family. Perennial, indigenous and cultivated in Anatolia, Armenia, Svrie, Palestine, etc. (Boissier, Flora orientalis, vol. 2, p. 1057). The root is tuberous and oblong; the leaves are bipinnate, with toothed or incised segments. The whole plant reaches 30 centimetres in height or a little more. In a note published in the Journal de l'Académie d'Horticulture, 2nd edition, tome I (1831), p. 134, De Candolle regrets that the cultivation of this Oriental umbellifer has not been given more attention in Europe. Its root, says Rauwolf (Travels, vol. I, p. 66, ed. Rai, London 1693), is cylindrical, swiveling, grayish on the outside, white on the inside, of delicate consistency and as if medullary, an inch thick and an inch and a half long. Instead of fibrils, it has wart-like nodules. Its flavor is mild and not unlike that of the carrot. Jean Bauhin and Morison gave crude figures of it, and from then on the plant was almost forgotten by European naturalists. Miller mentioned it briefly in his dictionary under the inaccurate name of Tordylium Sekakul. Russell, in the report of his trip to Aleppo, vol. II, p. 249, refers to it as Pastinaca Sekakut, praising it as a food plant. Olivier and Bruguières harvested it near Aleppo and sent seeds to Cels. The resulting plants were described and illustrated by Ventenat, Jardin de Cels, tab. 78, under the name Pastinaca dissecta. Sekakul is reminiscent of parsnip in its yellow flowers and fruit, but is easily distinguished at first glance by its sharply dissected leaves with toothed lobes. In the note we quote, published over sixty years ago, De Candolle said: "The root seems to me to have more in common with the parsnip than with the carrot, and if to the delicacy of the former, it joins the flavor of the latter, it would seem to deserve to be introduced into our vegetable gardens." In our research into experiments to cultivate new food plants in European gardens, we have found no trace of trials with Sekakul. We regret to add that, despite the requests we have made in the East, it has not yet been possible to obtain seeds of this Umbelliferous plant, the value of which we would nevertheless have liked to know. We would also like to mention another Umbellifera that we were keen to cultivate, but were unable to obtain; this is Sium Helenianum Hook. f., Icones plantarum, pl. 1032, a plant native to the island of St. Helena, whose green stems are sold in markets under the name Jellico, and eaten raw (Official guide of the Museums of Economic Botany (Dicotyledons aud Gymnosperms), 2nd ed. 1886, p. 83). SERI Panturasee (Bengalese.) OENANTHE STOLONIFERA DC. Phellandrium stoloniferum Roxb; Dasycoma subpinnatum Miq. Umbelliferae family. Perennial, native to marshy areas of Japan, China and India. "This marsh herb is used as a spinach. (Mueller, Select, etc.). "Seri or Œnanthe stolonifera grows wild in wetlands and marshes; however, that which is sold commercially is the result of cultivation and is eaten cooked." (Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878, vol. Il, p. 137). "According to the Japanese Commission, Seri is frequently cultivated, used in food and eaten boiled and salted". (Dr Mène, Des productions végétales du Japon). A note kindly sent to us illustrates the cultivation method used in Japan. It is dated Yokohama, October 22 1886. "The plant does not reproduce by seed; it reproduces in the following way: the soil must be muddy and constantly covered with water. The rice fields here are very suitable for growing Seri. First, the soil is stirred well to obtain a liquid, even mud, which is left to stand for about a week. Then take the roots, cut into small pieces of about 2 cm, and sow them in prepared soil. The seedbed should be fairly light. The roots are then pressed lightly into the mud. After four or five days, you'll start to see the leaves grow. It's a good idea then, as far as possible, to increase the quantity of water in proportion to the plant's growth, but always leaving the leaves above the water. "This culture can be tried out in a crate, provided the bottom of the vase is 8 to 10 centimetres deep. The above-mentioned note accompanied a shipment of well-packed Seri plants, which, according to the experienced Japanese shipping agent, were due to arrive safely in Paris; however, the plants had died during the journey, and a new request was sent to Yokohama. OENANTHE SARMENTOSA Nutt. We have cultivated this species, which was sent to us from North America. Its young stems and leaves are eaten by the Oregon Indians. The plant has grown vigorously in our basins, and its long, creeping stems have spread out in all directions. But, as the genus Œnanthe contains a good number of poisonous species, we didn't want to taste the American herb until we were sure it was harmless. To this end, we turned to Dr. Gréhant, director of the physiology laboratory at the Muséum, who injected guinea pigs with a concentrated extract. The experiment having been favorable, we had a dish of Œnanthe sarmentosa prepared; but we must declare that, apart from a slight aromatic flavor, analogous to that of Celery, it seemed to us to have no particular merit. COMESTIBLE SOUCHET Souchet Sultan. Ground almond. CYPERUS ESCULENTUS L. Family Cyperaceae. Creeping plant. Rhizomes producing slender fibers, each ending in an ovoid tuber, marked with circular impressions, yellowish-brown on the outside, white on the inside, with a pleasant, sweet flavor. Stem triqueterous, glabrous, leafy at the bottom; leaves as long as or longer than the stem, flat, canaliculate and keeled, rough towards their tips on the margins and keel. Umbel simple or compound, with 7-10 unequal rays, the longest of which branch at the apex, with an involucre of 4-6 leaves longer than the inflorescence; on each ray attach 10-14 lanceolate or linear spikes, compressed, with 10-18 flowers; the scales are elliptical, almost obovate, keeled-navicular, 7-9-veined, yellowish-brown, with a green midline. Yellow nutsedge grows spontaneously in southern Europe, the Orient and northern Africa. Its rhizomes are lined with tubers the size of hazelnuts, with a pleasant, sweet flavor reminiscent of chestnuts. Fig. 76. - Yellow nutsedge (Cyperus esculentus). Easy to grow. Tubers are planted on May 1st, in clumps spaced 25 to 30 centimetres apart in all directions, and first soaked in water. A forty-eight-hour immersion is necessary. If the season is warm, vegetation is very active. The single culm clumps, produced by just five or six tubers, give rise to a multitude of new shoots, spread out and join together, turning the plantation into a meadow. Weed by hand, if possible, to avoid cutting the young shoots; water abundantly when the weather is hot and refrain from doing so when it's cold. Not watering does not compromise the harvest, but it is much less. In Spain, we irrigate the plantation as soon as it is established, and repeat every eight to ten days. Harvesting takes place in October. If it doesn't freeze, we can wait until the first days of November. Valencian growers cut the stems before flowering to encourage the development of the roots and tubers; but in the Paris climate, you don't get flowers, and we remember growing Souchet, not without success, in the Landes department, without our plantation having produced a single flower. Moreover, Souchet is grown in Spain not by sowing seeds, but by planting tubers. Harvesting is carried out by pulling up the clumps, which are knocked against a reed rack over a wicker sieve to separate the tubers from the roots. The tubers are then carefully washed and, when clean, laid out on mats in the sun to dry and preserve them. In this process, they lose around a third of their weight (1). Dried tubers retain their germanative properties for a full year. Chufa, the Spaniards' favorite refreshment, is made with tubers from the last harvest, not from the current crop. Chufa (1) Bulletin de la Société impériale d'Acclimatation, t. X, n° 12. Note presented by Mr. Ch. Barbier, civil engineer. is an orgeat that lends itself admirably to making ice creams, which are widely consumed in Madrid. To prove its merit, we ourselves served it to a gathering of twenty people, who found it very good. Here's the recipe for Chufa: Soak 250 grams of tubers for 48 hours; grind; add 1 liter of water and 150 grams of sugar; strain. Serve as orgeat, or use to make ice cream. It cannot be preserved. We didn't stick to this recipe, and knowing that the Israelites of Oran make Souchet cakes, we managed to have some made that were not significantly inferior in quality to ordinary almond cakes (1). However, we would like to point out a few precautions to be taken. The skin of ordinary almonds is easily removed with boiling water; but the tuber of the Souchet resists, and it is impossible to remove the film that envelops it. This film is so thin that, after careful grinding, there is absolutely nothing left of it; but there is a sort of callus at the point where the tuber attaches to the rhizome, and, to get rid of it, the ground almonds must be placed in a sieve of suitable fineness. The calluses remain there. There is no need to give a recipe for these cakes here. Proceed as for ordinary almond cakes. Instead of bitter almonds (1) Journal de la Société centrale d'Horticulture, 1877, t. XI, p. 40. you can add a little cinnamon to enhance the taste. Yellow nutsedge makes an excellent oil and a good brandy, but we would be going too far if we were to consider it as an economic plant. In this respect, however, we consider it to be extremely important, and recommend to those of our readers who are concerned with agriculture and industrial plants, the Note we published in the Journal de la Société centrale d'Horticulture, 1878, tome XII, 2nd series, page 341. As a limited-use vegetable plant, Yellow Nutsedge nevertheless has a marked place in amateur gardens. SOYA (1) Mame and Daizu, in Japan; Yeou-teou in China. GLYCINE SOIA Sieb. et Zucc; Dolichos Soja L.; Soja hispida Mœnch; Glycine hispida Miquel. Legume family. Soya is native to Japan and probably also to Cochinchina and Java; it is cultivated not only in Japan, but in India, where it bears the Bengali name of Gari-Kulay and the Hindostani name of Bhat, Bhatwan in the island of Ceylon, in the Malacca peninsula, in the Philippine Islands, in Borneo, in Java, in (1) For further details, see Le Soya, sa composition chimique, sa culture et ses usages, by A. Paillieux; Paris, Librairie agricole, 26, rue lacob. -- in the Kingdom of Siam, Cochinchina, Tonkin and especially in China, Thibet, Mongolia and the provinces of Honan, Shengking, Shangtung and Chan-si. 4 Fig. 77. - Soya (Glycine Soja). Kæmpfer describes the plant in his Amœnitatum exoticarum politico-physico-medicarum, fascicule V, 1792: "Sorte de Haricot à pods velues comme celles du Lupin, à graines arronées et blanches comme celles du Pois; haut d'environ 4 pieds. "It has a hairy, unevenly round stem. "Its leaves resemble those of the common bean, but with coarser hairs on the underside. In August, in the leaf axils, it blooms bluish-white, very small flowers on a common stalk, similar to those of the Lentil, with straight, barely spread out standards and wings, followed by numerous pods, barely 2 inches long, covered with rough, long hair, similar to Lupin pods with yellow flowers, containing two seeds, rarely three, similar in shape and flavor to Garden Pea, a little compressed though, with brown umbilicus. " Kæmpfer seems to have known only one type of Soya, with white seeds and a brown umbilicus; but we know that there are at least thirty varieties with yellow, black, white, grey with white spots, greenish, red or variegated red seeds, some with a white hilum and others with a red hilum. In addition, depending on the variety, the leaflets may be rounded or lanceolate, barely hispid or very hispid; the flowers may be blue, white or purple; and the fruits, round or flattened, may contain 5 or 6 seeds. The quality of these seeds is mainly due to their high nitrogen content and the large quantity of oil they contain. Soya is one of the most widely used plants in China and Japan, for both food and industrial purposes. 37 I. - Soya in Japan. The famous traveller and naturalist Kæmpfer (1) was one of the first, if not the first, to make known the plant we are concerned with. We cannot resist recounting the journey during which he saw Soya and was taught its uses. Kæmpfer arrived in Batavia in September 1689, which he left the following May, and embarked as physician to the embassy which the Dutch Company sent to Japan every year. He obtained permission to go on board the ship that was to reach Siam, and finally, on September 25, he went ashore in the small town of Desima, near Nangasaki. By the services he rendered the Japanese, by his complaisance, by his liberality, he insinuated himself into the friendship and familiarity of the interpreters and officers, and won them over so well that they refused to answer any of his questions and, when he was alone with them, revealed to him even those things about which they are bound to inviolable secrecy. A young man who had been given to him for service, and at the same time to study medicine and surgery under him, having successfully treated Desima's principal officer under his direction, received permission not to leave Kæmpfer's side. Kæmpfer taught Dutch to his pupil, who, out of gratitude, brought him all the books he could wish for. So, despite the jealousy and mistrust of the Japanese government, Kæmpfer was able to (1) Kæmpfer Engelbert, physician and famous traveler, born September 16, 1651, at Lemgo, in the county of Lippe, Westphalia; died November 2, 1716. satisfy his curiosity on most of the points he wished to know. When the director of Dutch trade left for Yedo on February 10, 1691, Kæmpfer accompanied him, and thus had the opportunity to see the interior of the empire. The following year, he made the same trip with another director. He left Nangasaki on October 31. Following these trips, he published his Histoire naturelle du Japon. Miso, according to Kæmpfer. "To obtain Miso, we take a measure of Mame or Daeds beans (Soya), which we cook for a very long time in water, until completely softened, and which we reduce to a soft pulp by crushing them. This method of crushing is continued to mix the pulp with four measures of salt in summer, a number reduced to three in winter, as the product is all the more irreproachable the less salt is added; I would add, however, that it keeps less long. "We then add and mix in a measure (of volume equal to that of the beans) of Koos or husked rice, slightly steamed with fresh water; then, after cooling, we place in a warm cellar for twenty-four and forty-eight hours, until it cools and contracts. "This mixture, which has the consistency of porridge, is introduced into a wooden vase that has contained the beer commonly known as Sacki. Before use, this product is kept for one or two months. "Koos gives the pulp a sweet flavor, and its manufacture requires, like the Italians' polenta, the skill of a master. For this reason, there are those who only prepare it, and then purify the resulting product. SOOJU, according to Kæmpfer. "To make Sooju, we take Daeds beans cooked to the same point and an equal quantity of Muggi, or Wheat, and as much roughly pulverized Barley or Rye; the latter seed gives a blacker product. In short, one measure of each substance is used. The beans are mixed with the crushed wheat, covered with a cloth and left to ferment for twenty-four hours. The mixture is then covered with the prescribed salt and placed in a clay pot, where two measures of ordinary water are mixed with half the dose. The next day, the mixture is stirred with a spatula, covered and stirred several days in a row, at least once and preferably two or three times. "After three months' preparation, the mass is filtered and the liqueur is expressed and stored in wooden vases; the clarity and quality of this liqueur are in keeping with its age. Nothing has changed in the last two hundred years in the way Miso and Shoyu are made, and their consumption has not diminished. In Japan, these products are still an absolute necessity. The information we receive from those of our nationals who visit or live in Japan does not differ appreciably from that collected by Kæmpfer in 1689; but the learned traveler said nothing about To-fu (Daizu), a cheese made from Soya seeds; we have to fill this gap. He paid particular attention to the species used to make Miso and Shoyu, citing only three or four varieties, whereas there are probably some thirty. Among these varieties, some are early, others late. The latter cannot be usefully cultivated in central France. Some are used as vegetables for direct human consumption, such as beans, broad beans, peas, lentils, etc., etc.; others are prepared in more or less complicated ways, making them veritable industrial plants. The choice to be made among these varieties is impracticable by far. You would have to take them all in, grow them all, taste them all, and only reject those that should not be kept after complete experience. To help with the introduction of these varieties, we list those whose names we possess: 1. Go guwatu no mame (1).... Fifth-month bean. 2. Use mame................ - early. 3. Nakate mame............. - mid-season. 3 bis. Okute mame........... - late season. 4. Maru mame............... - round. 8. Siro teppó mame.......... - white, bullet-shaped. 6. Kuro mame............... - black. 7. Kuro teppô mame......... - black, in pistol ball. 8. Ao isi mame.............. - small stone (Ko or g0). 9. Awo mame................ - green. 10. kage mame............... - pointed. (1) Pronounce go-gats no mame. 11. Akamame................ Kidney bean. 12. - ............... - same species. 13. - ................ - other species. 14. -............... - other species. 15. - ................ - other species. 16. Tsyamame................ - tea (Tcha). 17. - ................ - same species. 18. - ................ - other species. 19. Kuro-Kura-Kake mame..... - black saddle. 20. Aka-Kura-Kake mame...... - Red saddle. 21. Fu isi mame.............. - variegated (Udura mame, quail). 22. - ................ - same species. 23. ............... - same species. This nomenclature is taken from a Japanese work entitled: Explication, avec figures, des arbres et des plantes nouvellement déterminés. 24. Ki mame................. Yellow mame bean. 25. Konrinza............ - 26. Ichia mame............... - mame tea. These last three names are taken from a book entitled Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878. We have extracted the following passage from a letter sent to us by an Orientalist about one of the Mame listed above. It concerns the Nakate mame (n° 3): "The seed in the middle (of the pod) is of a yellowish-white color. In general, its shape and color are similar to those of the previous Mame. It is, however, larger and looser than this other variety. Although, depending on whether the seed comes early or late, the shape and color differ, it is nothing other than what is shown above (1). Mame is grown extensively in all provinces. It is used to make Miso, which is why it is also called Miso mame. Mame no. 9 on our list is not without merit: "Ordinary Soyas," we write, "at least the yellowish-white variety, most commonly used to make Shoyu, To-fu and Miso, are not usually eaten in the wild. Black and green Soyas are sometimes eaten in the same way as dried beans. A variety with large green beans is eaten quite often in Japan after being roasted, ground and mixed with sugar. Children love this kind of racahout or revalescière and eat it by the handful. As far as I know, no pastry or cake is made from soybeans. Mame tea is also eaten plain. It's likely that several other varieties are eaten the same way, but we don't know. What we can say is that all Mame can be used to make Miso, Shoyu and To-fu. Our kind correspondent, Dr. H***, brought us a large, yellowish-white Mame, the most widely grown for making Miso, Shoyu and To-fu (2), but unfortunately too late for our country, where summer is too short, and he had to stick to growing the small, round-grained, yellowish Chinese Mame. The latter is much less beautiful, but ripens perfectly. This is the variety most cultivated in France, and to which we have given the name Soya d'Étampes. We regret to add that all the varieties that the (1) We said that our list was taken from a work with figures. (2) Probably Nakate mame (no. 3). Dr H**T has seen in Japan seem to him to be too late for France. Mame is grown in Japan in the same way as beans, but the plants need to be spaced much farther apart and are more resistant to autumn frosts. The Japanese don't make Soya oil. They use only sesame oil for cooking and rapeseed oil for lighting. Other oils, extracted from the fruits of different trees, are used for industrial purposes. In the part of Japan where our correspondent lived, Soya straw was fed to animals. In Satsouma, in the far south, fine horses were given rations of Daizu seeds, which were said to be a much better, but more expensive, food than naked barley. Horses eat Daizu very well, both raw and cooked. According to Krasnow (1), early Soyas, sown in early to mid-May, require between 2,300 and 3,000 degrees of heat, but most perish as soon as the thermometer drops to 2 degrees below zero. Thanks to the warmth of Japanese summers, the general cultivation of this plant has spread to the northern part of the island of Yeso. It was Eurotium Orizæ, the fermenting agent in Saké or rice brandy, that determined the fermentation process in the making of Shoyu. Here's what the book Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878 has to say about Mame: (1) Krasnow, Les régions théières de l'Asie subtropicale (1er vol., Japon), St. Petersburg 1897, (in Russian). "Mame has many uses, as it can not only be eaten cooked and ground into flour, but also used to make Shoyu, Miso and To-fu. Mame, its husk, leaves and stalk are used to feed horses; they have also been used recently, on a trial basis, to feed sheep, and the results obtained have proved that they are the best food that can be given to them. "To-fu is made from two types of boiled mame (1): Shiro mame and Ki mame; once pressed and hardened, it can be kept for a long time. Yuba is a similar paste (2), made with the same ingredients." MISO Our correspondent professes deep contempt for Miso. He does, however, give us a recipe for its preparation, which we reproduce because it is very simple and does not, like Kæmpfer's, prescribe the use of Koos, or husked rice mixed with Daizu. Miso," he says, "is a more or less fermented paste made with Daizu (Soya). It's used to make a kind of soup, which is almost every Japanese person's lunch. It's very bad, and I've eaten some on my travels, not having anything else to hand, but it's by no means a desirable acquisition. As for making Miso, it's very simple. Daizu are boiled, or rather steamed, then pounded, with a little salt added. This (1) Mame milk is boiled. 2) We haven't managed to learn what Fuba is. paste in a barrel, and after two months it's as ready as possible. The only difficulty here (in France) with all Daizu preparations is obtaining non-calcareous water. You have to collect rainwater or use distilled water, whereas in Japan, at least in the part I lived in, the water from streams, wells and rivers contains no trace of lime." THE SHOYU In a letter published in the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation, 1862, page 690, Mr. Eugène Simon describes the processes used today by industry to manufacture Shoyu. We reproduce it below: "Soya is a condiment which is consumed in considerable quantities in Japan, and which, a few years ago, enjoyed marked success in America, England and Holland, as well as in India, where it was first introduced. Today, its popularity is limited to America; exports are low to India, where it is replaced by another product, and almost nil to Europe, which has given up on it because of the difficulty of getting it through the warm latitudes of the tropics without corrupting it. "It is nonetheless an excellent product, which would offer culinary art resources of more than one kind, if it could be obtained as good as it is in the country from which it comes. But nothing could be easier; all you have to do is make it locally. "There are more than ten factories in the city of Nangasaki, each occupying an average area of 700 to 800 square meters, and delivering more than 1,200,000 kilograms for consumption every year. "Two types of grain are needed to make Soya: one is a special bean called Haricot Soja, about fifteen kilograms of which are included under No. 5 in the shipment I have just sent to France; the other is ordinary barley. "We make two equal parts of Beans and Barley; we cook the former in the same volume of water and roast the latter; then we put them together in large tubs, into which we pour them little by little, mixing them as much as possible with large wooden spatulas. "When the whole has the consistency of a fairly thick dough, it is placed in wooden molds 1 1/2 inches high, 18 inches long and 8 inches wide. In arranging the loaf or brick in the mold, the top surface should be slightly concave. "These loaves are then transported to hermetically sealed chambers, where they must ferment on shelves arranged around and in the center of the chamber. All walls and openings, with the exception of two panes of glass placed at man-height, so that fermentation can be monitored from the outside, must be carefully padded with straw, secured with Bamboo or other wood. "Fermentation takes place after very few hours; but, if the temperature of the room is too low to decide, it can be provoked by placing a small brazier in the room. "However, this method should only be used as a last resort, as its usual effect is to brown the bread. Fermentation lasts about seven days, during which time we are allowed to enter the room once or twice, to ensure that it is taking place under the right conditions. "When properly done, the loaves should have a uniform golden-yellow hue. "They are then removed and thrown into large vats 6 feet high and 4 1/2 feet wide. Water saturated with salt is added in the proportion of 2 kilograms to 1 kilogram of bread. Stir and mix as the vats fill. "The vats should then be left to rest for at least a year; but when extra-fine qualities of soybean are required, this rest is extended to three years. Whatever the length of time, the paste is finally removed from the vats, placed in sacks made of hemp or, better still, palm twine, and put under the press. "The Soya that runs off during the first few turns of the press is of the highest quality, but because of the price that would have to be charged for it, it would not be sold in any way. This quality is not used, except in the factories of the two capitals of Yeddo and Miaco, where there are a large number of princes and wealthy people who can pay a decent price for it. "Most generally, only two qualities are made: the first from all the juice extracted by the press, which is then of a good average quality, and the second [which is obtained by making a second mixture of press residue with salted water that is left to stand for six months: this is sold only to the poor. "A jar of soya, weighing 214 kilos, 500 grams, sells in Japan for 16 to 17 francs. "Ordinary first-quality Soya is a syrupy, dark-brown liquor. It is almost the sole sauce for all Japanese dishes, rich or poor. It's especially good with fish. "Europeans in China and Japan, who use it to a greater or lesser extent, add it to beef and beef broth, to which it imparts a most pleasing color and flavor. "Case No. 10 of miscellaneous products, which will be part of my shipment, contains three qualities under Nos. 18, 19, 20. No. 18 comes from Miaco, but it is possible that the journey may alter it a little." The importance of Shoyu is such that we have to mention two more recipes: one, because it is much simpler than that of the special manufacturers, and because our correspondent uses it for his own house; the other, because it prescribes a particular preparation of the salt intended for the manufacture of Shoyu, a prescription not represented by the other recipes. Our correspondent tells us: "I make quite good Shoyu, replacing Daizu with Peas if necessary, as is often done in Japan. The Japanese even often substitute Broad Beans, but they give an inferior product. "Here's the recipe for the sauce, as I learned it in Japan: take, by volume, two parts of naked Barley or Wheat and three parts of Daizu. Macerate for a day and a night in non-calcareous water, then steam until completely cooked. The beans should not fall apart, but should be tender. The two grains are mixed together, then spread out in layers 2 to 3 centimetres thick in crates kept in a warm place, neither too dry nor too damp. The grains take twelve or fifteen days to mature, depending on the season. The best time is spring or autumn. The mold should be greenish-blue, thick and velvet-like. "Large white or black molds are worthless, and should be removed as soon as they appear. When the grains are completely covered with mold and form a single mass, expose them to the sun. When dry, they are rubbed between the hands, then winnowed to remove the dust produced by the mould debris. At this point, two parts salt to three parts moldy grains are taken, still by volume; they are placed in barrels or earthen vases, with a sufficient quantity of water to cover the whole with three or four fingers of liquid. All you have to do is stir the mixture from time to time and wait three to six months, after which the sauce can be drained through a sieve. It can be kept in barrels or bottles for several years and, to my taste, is a good substitute for broth or roasted meat juice in dishes. Our correspondent adds: "I don't know how much Shoyu is exported, nor do I have any figures for domestic consumption, but it's a staple of Japanese cuisine. It replaces butter, oil, fat and gravy. Everything - vegetables, fish, pasta - is usually prepared with Shoyu. There's not a village, however small, that doesn't have its own Shoyu makers, and a lot of them are made in private homes. "During my stay in Japan, the price of Shoyu varied, depending on its quality, from 8 to 12 sen (40 to 50 centimes) a mas (1 liter 80). "Please take my information as relating only to the part of Japan between To-Kio (Yedo) and the south-western tip of the large island that Europeans insist on calling Nippon. It's in this part, and especially in the divisions called San yo do and San yu do, that I've been able to see things for myself. When, by chance, I tell you about the north and the southern end, it's from information and not from sight." Recipe taken from the volume entitled: Le Japon à l'Exposition universelle de 1878: "Shoyu, which is one of the indispensable condiments in Japanese food, is prepared in the following way: first, the hulled wheat is separated from the grains that are unripe or spoiled, and any small stones or other foreign bodies mixed in are removed. The grain is then toasted, coarsely ground and a quantity of boiled and cooled Soya (peas) is added. Left in a warm chamber, the mixture turns to yeast after three or four days, and salt is added. "These three substances enter the mixture in equal proportions. According to the old processes, one to of Barley, three sho of Wheat and one to of Pea were mixed, or one to of Pea, three sho of Barley and seven sho of Wheat. In either case, the mixture was toasted and mixed with two to of water and one to of salt. "The best salt is that from Dako, in the province of Havima. To be suitable for making Shoyu, salt is processed in the following way: the best possible salt is taken and placed in a box, where it is left to stand for five to seven months. A sort of brine is then formed at the bottom of the tin, which is left aside; the top layer of salt is then removed and boiled in a boiler, then the liquid is decanted and left to stand. When all impurities have settled to the bottom, the liquid is decanted and the yeast described above is added. The whole process is stirred two or three times a day, from June to September. "After a while, the mixture becomes pasty, but we continue to stir it, and after fifteen, twenty and sometimes even thirty months, we obtain Shoyu. "The mixture is then poured into cotton bags and pressed, which completes the operation. "Once filtered, the Shoyu is boiled, then cooled; any remaining lees are removed, then stored in barrels. "The residue from pressing first-quality Shoyu is used as follows: take five to of this residue, add one to of water, then shake it, press it, boil it, add two to of salt, let it stand and decant it. This new mixture is then added, in greater or lesser quantities, to the different qualities of Shoyu." TO-FU (DAIZU CHEESE) Daizu are soaked for twenty-four hours in lime-free water. Rainwater or distilled water is the only water available for this purpose. In Japan, river water contains no trace of lime. The softened grains are ground in a small, hardstone hand mill, much like the mill used by our Algerian Arabs. This produces a coarse paste, which is diluted in non-calcareous water, giving it a milky appearance. This mixture is passed through a cloth to retain the insoluble parts. The residue is used to feed domestic animals, all of which, from cattle to rabbits, are very fond of it. The albuminous liquid containing most of the emulsified fat is put on the stove. When it is a little more than attified, a few spoonfuls of the mother liquor draining from the piles of sea salt are added to determine coagulation. This mother water probably acts through the calcium and magnesium chlorides it contains, which make it very bitter. What is certain is that it causes the curds to separate, just as rennet does with milk. It also has the same disadvantages: if too much is added, the curd becomes hard and dry. It is drained into molds, where it takes on the desired shape, and then placed in the basin of running water with which every house is equipped. To-fu is usually eaten fresh, very often cooked with shoyu and dry fish, sometimes fried38 , more often grilled. In winter, it is sometimes frozen and then dried, giving it a spongy consistency. In this state, it keeps for a very long time and can be prepared in a variety of ways. In its fresh state, vegetable cheese has a very delicate consistency, but retains a certain raw bean taste, which is not pleasant. II. - Soya in Cochinchina. The plant is grown in Cochinchina. How important is this crop? What are the preferred varieties? Do Soya seeds have any other use in the country than in Japan or China? We don't know, but in the Bulletin du Comité agricole et industriel de la Cochinchine, 2e série, tome Ier, page 456, we come across an article by M. Corroy, which is most interesting. Corroy's most interesting article, and in keeping with our plan, which is to place before the reader's eyes all the documents relating to the issue at hand, we reproduce it below: "We brought back from Manchuria, at the same time as Sorghum, 3,000 kilos of Black Peas, which are generally used as animal feed in northern China, but can only be given as a supplement to rations; the essential oil they contain is said to stimulate the digestive organs; the restorative action of these grains is said to be sovereign on animals emaciated as a result of hard work and long walks! From November 25th to April 7th, we gave 250 grams of these Peas per day to each animal, and we have to declare that, if at times the animals sought them out greedily, it often happened, on the contrary, that they left them at the bottom of the manger, despite the precaution we took to mix them as exactly as possible with Sorghum and Paddy (1). Nor did we find that they provoked, in tired animals, the kind of resurrection of exhausted strength attributed to them by the Chinese and Manchurians. "What's more, these grains are very bitter when taken dry, so they have to be cooked to rid them of the bitter principle contained in the epidermis. The result is great difficulties in administering rafion, difficulties which do not seem to us to be outweighed by the problematic virtues we were told about. We therefore believe that there is no reason to repeat the trial (2). "Nevertheless, as this plant can be used for human food and industry, we have submitted a sample to the Cochinchine Agricultural and Industrial Committee, which has asked Mr. Pierre to examine it and give his assessment of this legume. "Here are the results of Mr. Pierre's observations: "I sowed the seeds reported by Mr. Corroy. The seeds belong to Glycine Soja Sieb. et Zucc., and I am deliberately establishing a synonymy, with the help of Bentham, to show the various forms this species takes, depending on the climate in which it is cultivated. (1) Unhulled rice. (2) Experiments carried out

in Europe show that Mr. Corroy's conclusions are unfounded. - P. B. "There is a noticeable difference between the black-seeded variety and the white-seeded variety; but when we compare the plant from Mr. Corroy's seeds and the variety cultivated in Cochinchina, India and Java, we understand why Miquel was able to make a distinct species of it, under the name Soja angustifolia. "Indeed, the hispid character of the species is barely accentuated in the plants from my seedlings, the leaflets are oval and, in the majority of cases, there are hardly any acuminate leaflets. The flowers are blue and not reddish, as Baker describes them; they are exactly those of Loureiro's description. The fruits are shorter than in the species cultivated near Saigon, wider, flatter and a little falciform. "All these characteristics have been described by several authors, depending on the variety. So far, the following races have been identified: A. Race with white flowers. B. - Blue. C. - purple. D. - with oval lanceolate leaflets, very hispid. E. - rounded, barely hispid. F. - round, elongated fruits with several seeds (5 or 6). G. - - flattened, with one or two seeds. H. - with black seeds. I. - white (1). "These differences in a plant, one of the oldest cultivated by man, and in a family where the cultivated species have acquired the most variable forms, should not surprise; they are much (1) We have seen above that the seeds present other colors. - P. B. more considerable in Vigna Catiang, for example, by the character of straight stems or that of climbing stems and by the multiple shape of the fruits and seeds. "Glycine Soja is grown in China, Japan, India, from the Himalayas to Ceylon, on the Malacca peninsula, in Tonkin, Lower Cochinchina and Siam. It is also cultivated in the Philippines, Borneo, Java and elsewhere. The seeds, lightly boiled or roasted, are eaten by humans, like those of Vigna, Dolichos and Phaseolus. But they are often used to make a brine that is widely used in Japan, China and Cochinchina, and is mixed with all kinds of dishes to enhance their taste. They are also used to make a tasteless porridge, which is nevertheless considered a very pleasant dish once a few condiments have been added. "Like beans, dolics, peas, Embrevades (Cajanus indicus DC.), lentils and Grahm (chickpeas), Soya seeds are also used to feed draught animals and horned cattle. Its green or dry fodder is also much sought-after by animals. "This plant can be grown in lower Cochinchina, with advantage, from May to October, and is used in many crop rotations. It prepares the soil well for growing tobacco, indigo and cotton, but should be fertilized first or grown before these plants. III. - Soya in China In China, we find the same food plants and culinary practices as in Japan. Soya occupies a considerable place here. Its generic name is Yeou-teou. We have been unable to obtain a nomenclature of the varieties, let alone the names of the earliest ones. They are probably no less numerous than in Japan, where there are around thirty. In China, all leguminous plants with pods and edible seeds are called Teou. Whether they are beans or dolics, peas or broad beans, chickpeas or cajans, lentils or soyas, the name is the same, and the qualifier only indicates their color, shape or use, without allowing us to distinguish the genus. As a result, the seed shipments and notes of Mgr Guillemin, M. l'abbé Perny, MM. de Montigny, Dabry, Eugène Simon, etc., could not provide us with the elements of a sufficient nomenclature. We can therefore only present with certainty a very small number of Yeou-teou: Houang-teou.......... Yellow soy. Houang-ta-teou....... Large yellow Soya. He-teou.............. Black Soya. Pe-teou.............. White soybean. Ho-teou.............. Grey soybean. Thsing-pan-teou....... White spotted soybean. However, at the Vienna Universal Exhibition in 1873, there were 13 varieties: 5 yellow, 3 black, 3 green, 2 brown and, among them, 2 early varieties, one yellow and one brown. We don't know their Chinese names. In China, Soybeans are grown like beans. Large-scale cultivation is virtually non-existent. The land is so fragmented that there are hardly any fields larger than one hectare. This is clear from the following letter sent to us by Mr. Eugène Simon, former French consul in China: "There are no large-scale crops in China, neither for Soya nor for other plants. Everyone makes his own cheese. Very often, too, everyone makes his own oil, if not at home, at least at one of his relatives', all of whom are neighbors and more regularly grouped and distributed around the head of the family's estate. "Oil production only becomes the object of a special industry in cantons where there is a very large number of small fields cultivated annually with Soya. "The fields have hardly more than 4 to 5 meous (about 13 meous per hectare). A field of one hectare can hardly be found anywhere except in the north, and, having re-read my Notes, I find that the largest fields that came into view did not exceed 8 to 9 meous. "There are certainly large landholdings in China, but they are smaller and less numerous than in France, except in Mongolia, in the land of grasses and pastures. "Properties larger than 1,000 hectares are exceedingly rare and virtually non-existent. "In the whole province of Tché-Kiang, which has a population of 20 or 24 million, I know of only three or four owners with 250 to 500 hectares. The most common properties among those already considered large are those of 15 to 20 hectares, and the most common absolutely are 3 hectares and below. "Land and wealth are therefore more divided and more evenly distributed than in France. "In the northern provinces, where the victorious Manchu had tried to establish a territorial aristocracy when they entered China two hundred and sixty years ago, there are more numerous estates of 500 to 1,000 hectares, still in the hands of these so-called nobles, who are, for the most part, miserable, some of whom even beg, while the Chinese farmers are rich and continue to exploit the soil without being able to be expelled. "The law and morals that favor work do not allow them to be evicted and, on the contrary, want to ensure them the profit and added value due to their work. To get rid of them, you'd have to give them compensation, a condition that Mongol lords have never been able to meet. But in any case, whatever the value of the property, it's always small-scale farming. "A 20-hectare farmer is rare; 10 to 12 hectares, rare. 3 to 4 hectares form a normal crop, where all the members of the family find advantageous employment at all times, and one can even have a buffalo to do the heavy work. "There are a number of families who live very well and save with 1 hectare, and even less: and there are many who are forced to live with the small field that surrounds the house of the inheritance that the law and customs make inalienable, non-transferable and unseizable. "Most often, this field does not exceed 8 to 10 meous. Garden cultivation is therefore universally applied to Soya. Like other edible legumes, all varieties of soybean are used for direct human consumption. We would only exclude the black variety, which is rarely used for eating, if we didn't know that in times of famine, a handful of its seeds is enough to sustain the life of an unfortunate starving person. Their chemical composition proves it. Yeou-teou are eaten with fat or pork meat, or simply grilled. Black soy is the main animal food throughout northern China and Manchuria. Horses and mules, of which there are many, receive it whole or crushed, mixed with chopped millet straw and a little water. We never see thin or sick horses. It's the most precious and fortifying of feeds. It's also given to sheep. Green Soya is sometimes used for the same purpose. In the southern provinces, cattle are not given Soya seeds, but are fed the oil cakes produced by oil extraction, some of which are also used as fertilizer. The trade in these cakes is considerable. In several ports, they form the cargo of numerous junks, and give an idea of the importance of the plant in cultivation. Pe-teou or white Soya is more particularly used for oil production. The yield of this variety is remarkable. It is estimated at 40 hectolitres per hectare. We'd like to make an observation here that we may repeat: all Yeou-teou are suitable for all uses. Certainly, the Chinese have not, without reason, chosen certain varieties for the table, others to feed livestock, still others for industrial uses, oil extraction, the manufacture of Teoufou, Tsiang-yeou, the ferment for spirits and fake wines, Teou-che, etc.; but we are justified in believing that the chemical composition of all Soya is more or less identical and that they can be used in all ways. It is undoubtedly regrettable that the black variety is late and requires more heat than our climate can provide; but this consideration should not stop our farmers. In the absence of black Soya, they will grow the yellow and brown varieties, and their livestock will do well. SOYA OIL This oil fuels a huge trade. It ranks first among the fifteen or twenty types of oil that the Chinese possess. Europeans reproach it with an unpleasant raw bean aftertaste. Apart from this point, it is of excellent quality; the Société d'Acclimatation has received some several times. Three samples analyzed by the German chemist Seuff showed an average fat content of 18.71%. M. Pellet's analysis of three samples of Yellow Soya from China, Hungary and Étampes, supplied by us, gave more or less the same results. Already in 1855, M. Frémy, a learned chemist and former director of the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, had expressed a most favorable opinion of this product, in a letter inserted in the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation, Volume II, page 388, and which we reproduce below: "Oil from oleaginous Peas presents a great analogy with our edible oils; its odor and flavor are pleasant; it is also suitable for combustion. Exposed to a cold temperature of 0°, it becomes pasty; atmospheric oxygen quickly resinsifies it. It therefore belongs to the class of drying oils and could, in this respect, replace linseed oil in some of its applications. "I knew that the Chinese extract 17 0/0 oil from their oleaginous Peas; it was interesting to assess, by analysis, the exact proportion of oil that exists in these Peas. "My analysis shows that the oil peas brought back from China by Mr. Montigny contain 180/0 oil. "If these peas are identical to those harvested in China, you can see, Mr. Chairman, that the Chinese are skilful industrialists, as they lose only one hundredth of the oil. "To sum up, the oilseed pea, whose importance you have already appreciated, should, through its richness in fats and the quality of the oil it supplies, give consumers a new foodstuff and the industrial arts a useful product." TEOU-FOU (SOYA CHEESE) Only the Tartars, scattered throughout the empire, have retained the use of milk; the Chinese do not consume it; Soya takes its place. Its seed is solid milk. No leguminous plant contains so much legumin (a substance chemically analogous to casein); almost none is so rich in fat. Simply crush the Soya seed, spread with water and pass the liquid through a sieve to obtain a product with the qualities of milk, usable like cow's, goat's or sheep's milk. In the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation, 1855, Volume II, page 16, Baron de Montgaudry published a note from which we extract the following passage, relating to Teou-fou: "In China, oil peas are transformed into a food for the poor and a highly appreciated seasoning for the rich. For the poor, the flour of these peas is used to make a paste similar to the white cheese known in France as fromage a la pie, which is sold in public squares in portions of a few centimes, cut from the mass using archal wire, according to the buyer's request. Most often, the Chinese fry this paste or cheese in the very oil that comes from the Pea; they value this frying highly. "For the rich, the seasoning is prepared with greater care and culinary skill. The pea paste is fermented, after adding salt, pepper, laurel leaf powder, thyme powder and other aromatics. During the fermentation process, the preparer sprinkles Pea oil over the paste. After a few days' fermentation, this preparation has reached the desired point. This paste or cheese becomes a powerful digestive and an aperitif no stomach can resist. In Calfong, Honan, Tsi-Nan, Chang-ton, Thay-Yeun and Chan-nsi, oil and pastes made from oil-peas are produced in huge quantities and consumed in these provinces; but the city of Ning-Po, capital of Che-Kiang, is the place where the various products made from oil-peas are centralized, manufactured and shipped. The port of Ning-Po is difficult for large vessels to access, but they can stop at the island of Tcheou-Chan, where there is a very good harbor. Thousands of Chinese junks set sail from Ning-Po, along the coasts of China, with no cargo other than the products of the Oil Pea, which they carry to all parts of the Celestial Empire, to Japan and to all lands that know them." Here is a description of Teou-fou production, as given by Stanislas Julien and Paul Champion in their work entitled Industries anciennes et modernes de l'Empire chinois, etc., pages 185 et seq. "Making pea cheese is simple, but requires a great deal of care. First, the peas are soaked in water for around twenty-four hours, then left to drain in a wicker basket. They are then ground to a fine powder, mixed with the water used for maceration. The millstone used for this purpose is made up of horizontal hard stone disks. The upper disk is pierced by a conical hole; the device is set in motion by an articulated connecting rod which a worker moves with one hand, while with the other he throws Peas with a spoon into the cavity of the upper disk. "To each addition of Peas, a certain quantity of the maceration water is added. The Peas, crushed by the action of the millstone, are transformed into a liquid slurry which flows between the millstones, into a circular gutter and accumulates in a tub. This slurry is poured onto a filter formed from a cloth attached to a frame, and, when filtration is too slow, the material is agitated; to make this operation easy, the frame is suspended from the ceiling, at man-height. "The filtered liquid, stirred by hand, is collected in a wooden tub and poured into a boiler, where it undergoes a slow cooking process. This boiler consists of a cast-iron basin, surrounded by a sort of wooden tub; the metal surface, with its small surface area, enables the liquid to be heated without fear of developing a sudden rise in temperature that could alter the material. This device is almost always used by the Chinese for cooking organic materials. A second boiler is placed alongside the first in the same parallelepiped-shaped furnace, and receives the direct action of the hearth. The liquid drained from the millstone begins to foam abundantly at around 100° Celsius; it is kept at boiling point for about ten minutes and then transferred to the second boiler, which is subjected to a lower temperature, due to the layout of the furnace. Once the first boiler has been emptied, it is immediately filled with a new quantity of filtered liquor; the pulp drained on the cloth filter is washed with water, and the liquid that runs off is used to moisten the Peas that are being ground; this washing water still carries a significant quantity of useful matter. "When the liquor has been heated for a few moments in the second boiler, it is poured into large tubs, where it cools. The foam that forms gathers in the middle of the surface, and is removed with a copper spoon. After a few minutes' rest, the liquid is covered with a thick film which is removed, without tearing, with a chopstick, and dried by sticking the chopstick into a wall. A second film sometimes forms, which is treated in the same way. The material thus solidified on the surface of the liquid is used in food; it is eaten, either fresh or dry, and its taste is not unpleasant. "The liquid remaining in the vat is used to produce Pois de fromage; first, a small quantity of water mixed with plaster, which has been previously cooked in the furnace used for the operation, is added; finally, a few drops of a concentrated solution of salt from the salt marshes are added (according to our analyses, this salt is none other than magnesium chloride). The liquid is gently stirred to form a homogenous mass, which soon coagulates and solidifies. The added plaster certainly has the effect of coagulating the pea casein. As for magnesium chloride, it's hard to say what role it should play, and it's only used in certain Chinese cities. "The formed pea cheese is poured, still hot, into square wooden frames, Om. 40 square and Om. 05 high. These frames, stacked two on top of the other, are placed next to each other on a large stone table, the longitudinal edges of which are hollowed out into channels; the frames, placed on the table, are closed at the bottom by a thin cloth through which the water contained in the cheese can drain. When the volume of the material has been reduced by half, the frames are removed, and the cheese they contain is sometimes shipped great distances. All that's needed for transport is to close the frames with boards nailed with bamboo pegs. Once at its destination, the pea cheese is cut into small fragments using a large metal knife. "Pea cheese is generally grayish-white and jelly-like; it doesn't keep for more than a day in hot weather, and to prevent it from spoiling so quickly, it's usually mixed with salt or sauces of various kinds. It can then be kept for several years. "A fist-sized piece of Pois cheese sells for two sapèques, or one centime. Pea cheese merchants also deliver for consumption the hot, non-coagulated liquid we mentioned earlier; poor Chinese eat this substance, which has a bland but by no means unpleasant taste. At certain times of the day, the stores where this cheese is sold present a curious aspect; Chinese workers come in large numbers to buy a portion of liquid cheese, which they take away in small cups; others absorb the coagulated cheese on the spot. For many of the poorer classes, the morning meal consists solely of a cup of liquid pea cheese, in which they soak a few cakes fried in oil. Pea cheese is made on a large scale in most of the Chinese ports we visited, from the south to Peking, and in a few Japanese towns we were able to visit. "Pea cheese is quite pleasant to the taste; it could be of great service to the diet of Europeans if we could manage to cultivate the seeds which are the basis of its preparation. Fried in fat, like potatoes, pea cheese makes a very delicate dish. "The seeds used to prepare this cheese often contain 17 0/0 of a clear oil whose flavor is not unpleasant. "In addition to the above information, we would like to add some analytical results that we and our colleague Mr. Lhôte have obtained on oleaginous peas and cheese: CHINESE PEAS (Per 100) Water.................... Ash............... In normal state. Dry state. 15.07 4.63 Fat......... 12.98 Nitrogen.................. 5.79 5.45 15.28 6.81 39 PEA CHEESE (Per 100) In normal state. Water.................... 90.37 Ash................ 0.76 Fat......... 2.36 Nitrogen.................. 0.78 Dry state. 7.89 24.50 8.09 COAGULATED MATERIAL DURING CHEESE PREPARATION (Per 100) Normal state. In dry stateWater.................... 9.36 Ash..... 4.01 Nitrogen.................. 9.70 " 4.12 10.71 This coagulated material contains 11.19 0/0 nitrogen, after deduction of water and ash. CHEESE PREPARATION Dried peas used........ 101 gr. - Nitrogen 6.94 Dry cheese obtained....... 17.71 - Nitrogen 1.43 Normal coagulated matter... 1.085 - Nitrogen 0.105 1.535 "Finally, we reproduce below a passage from a report made to the Société d'Horticulture de Marseille on two types of Chinese cheese and their manufacture. We have omitted the recipe for preparing the curd, which would need to be corrected: "At the end of this period, a solid mass is obtained, which is cut into small pieces. These are placed in a jar into which salt is thrown. The whole is then sprinkled with San-cho (rice brandy) and the jar hermetically sealed. The mixture is then left to rest for at least three weeks. The cheese is made. The brandy can be replaced by any other equivalent substance. "It's useful to note the condition of the cheeses we're putting in front of you, in order to compare them later with those we might make. "We have two stoneware terrines, covered with a brownish glaze, one containing white cheese, the other red. "Cottage cheese. - This food comes in the form of small, unevenly cut pieces, 3 cm by 2 cm thick. The rind shows a kind of white mold. Inside, the cheese is greasy, yellowish-gray in color, and the paste is coarse, though fairly well melted; note that this terrine had been opened prior to receptionSome people compare the taste of this cheese to slightly advanced Maroilles. "We gave this cheese to a large number of people to taste, without telling them where it came from; most found it good, and don't hesitate to think that it would be accepted by the public. "Red cheese - This terrine was perfectly closed; on opening it, it gives off a special aroma somewhat similar to that of Fraise à l'euu-de-vie. Each piece is 4 centimeters in one direction and 2 in the other. It is covered with a red, slightly carmine stain. "On opening the pieces of cheese, we find them colored red to a thickness of 1 millimeter; the center is yellow; the paste is very fine and quite dissimilar to that of fromage blanc. As for the taste, it's different, saltier and without any known similarities. "Some prefer white to red, which at first glance tastes like brandy. In fact, the quality and taste of both cheeses cannot be compared. "The result of these experiments, carried out by over a hundred people of all ages and conditions, is that these cheeses will become popular in France when they can be made on the spot. TSIANG-YEOU SOY. Under the name of Tsiang-yeou, a sauce of general use is made in China, replacing the Shoyu of the Japanese; but its quality is very inferior. It is listed in China's tariff of export duties under the name Soy, and is probably what is sold in England under the name India Soy. This sauce is as black as shoe polish and is not to our liking. We believe that its recipe is common to China and Java, and we reproduce it below, based on a note published by Isaac Titsing, in the Verhandelingen van het Bataviash genootschap, de Batavia, volume III, 1791. We reproduce verbatim the translation of the Dutch text kindly supplied to us: "The preparation of Soya is simple and is done in the following manner: One takes a gantang of Miso beans (Soya), a gantang of burnt or ground Wheat or Wheat, which one assumes is necessary to give the proper color. These three species are mixed together and locked away in a box or cupboard for a period of eight days. Once the mixture has turned completely green, we take it out of the box or cupboard and leave it to dry for a whole day in the sun. "We then take two and a half gantang of boiling water and one gantang of pure salt, which must be dissolved in the water; after this, we leave it to stand for one etmaal (twelve hours), until the salt dirt has fallen to the bottom and the water has become cold, and we decant. The above-mentioned products are then added and turned with a shovel, for fourteen days, from time to time. "Froment or Gruau is used. The difference is that Soya made from Gruau is more fluid or limpid, and that made from Froment is thicker and more consistent, resembling ink. "Soya, nicknamed Ket jap (1) by the Chinese, is used with roast meat as a very delicate and appetizing condiment, both in Batavia and in the Netherlands. OTHER USES Soya is also used to prepare a condiment called Chi or Teou-che, made from its seeds, ginger and salt. Finally, Yeou-teou is used in the preparation of a (1) There is an error. Dr de la Savinière has informed us that the sauce in question is called Ketjap in Batavia. The Chinese call it Tsiang-yeou. - P. B. Ferment for making spirits and imitation wines, called Kiu-tsee. M. Dabry de Thiersant describes its preparation in Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation, 3e série, tome V, 1878, page 90: "In Canton, Kiu-tsee is made in a different way: "Take 75 pounds of good rice from the summer harvest (red rice, Hong-my, is preferred), 27 pounds of Dolichos Soja, 4 ounces of old Kiu-tsee and 14 pounds of pulverized Chan-kiue (Glycosmis trifoliata) leaves. "These Glycosmis leaves are first air-dried, and the drying process is completed using the heat of a vat, taking care to cover them with a sheet so that the essential oil does not evaporate. Glycosmis trifoliata is a tree that grows mainly in Kouang-ton province. Kiu-tsee manufacturers claim that, without its leaves, it is impossible to obtain good ferment. "Soya dolichos are cooked in fresh water for twenty-four hours in a cast-iron pot. "Rice is also cooked in a large cast-iron pot. When the water boils, the grain is thrown in and removed after ten or twelve minutes. The fire must be pushed quickly and the water must not be abundant, so that the grain is better seized. The rice is then spread out on a wooden table. When it has cooled, the Peas, Glycosmis leaf flour and powdered ferment are spread over its surface. All these materials are stirred and kneaded to incorporate them together, and placed in a trough, where they are trodden with the feet for fifteen minutes. When the mass has taken on the consistency of dough, we use molds to form bricks or rectangular loaves 6 inches long and 1 1/2 inches thick, weighing one pound. Once out of the mold, these loaves are arranged vertically on a board covering the floor. On the board is a bed of dried rice grains, on which the loaves are laid out, all touching each other. Both sides of the loaves are placed on the layer of rice grains before being erected. After eight or ten hours in summer and eighteen or twenty hours in winter, the sheet is removed and we see if fermentation has taken place under good conditions, if the color of the dough has become grayish and if blisters appear on the surface of the loaves, we separate them immediately and arrange them again vertically, forming empty squares. When, after four or five days, fermentation is complete, which is easily recognized by the whitish tint each loaf takes on, they are transported on nets, stretched out in the form of shelves, to a well-closed room, where they are left to dry for seven or eight days in summer, and four or five days in winter. They are then exposed to the sun for two or three days, on inclined racks; finally, they are placed for twenty-four hours in an oven, covered with a sheet. Drying is then complete, and they can be kept for two or three years. We believe that Soya is also used in a number of other food or industrial preparations, but we have only the vaguest notions about them, and we must refrain from talking about them. IV. - Soya in Austria-Hungary Following the Vienna Universal Exhibition, Professor F. Haberland published a remarkable study on the subject. Haberland published a remarkable study on Soya, demonstrating its importance and accelerating its introduction in all parts of the Empire. The results of experimental cultivation mentioned in the book are of great interest. This book, published in Vienna in 1878, is entitled: Le Soja. In 1880, Edmond de Blaskovics, of the Royal Hungarian Academy in Altemburg, Hungary, took up the subject again in a brochure entitled: Le Soja; de sa culture, de son emploi et de sa valeur comme fourrage; Vienne, 1880. V. - Soya in France Buffon was put in charge of the Jardin des Plantes in 1739, and shortly afterwards, the missionary Fathers of China sent him the most interesting specimens of that country's vegetation: Soya necessarily had its place in their consignments, and, without being able to prove it, we have no doubt on this subject. In any case, we found at the Muséum the bag that contained Soya seeds in 1779. It bears the harvest dates 1834, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41. 43, 44, 46, 47, 49, 50 to 55 inclusive; 1857, 58, 59; 1862, 65, 66, 67; 1870, 71; 1873 to date. In fact, Soya has been cultivated at the Muséum since 1740 most probably, 1779 certainly, and later, from 1834 to the present day without interruption. The plant has always vegetated and fruited to perfection, grown without special care. It has proved its hardiness and the little influence that atmospheric accidents have on it. Since 1855, the constant distribution of seeds by the Société d'Acclimatation has made it possible to try out the cultivation of Soya in France, but it is difficult, if not impossible, to obtain information on previous trials. M. Blavet has, however, found an interesting document, in a brochure entitled : Séance publique de la Société d'Agriculture d'Étampes, année 1832, page 84. One chapter is entitled: "Compte rendu par M. C. Brun des Beaumes, membre de la Société d'Agriculture d'Étampes, chevalier de Saint-Louis, docteur en la Faculté des sciences de France, de quelques essais de culture faits par lui en 1821, sur diverses espèces de Céréales, dans sa propriété de Champ-Rond, près Etampes". A final note reads: "The heat of the summer of 1821 was so favorable to exotic plants, that this year, I saw abundant fruiting at Champ-Rond, near Etampes, in my open-ground cultivations, Dolichos from China, Dolichos Lablab, Dolichos Soja; Niouelle (?) from Senegal showed its long spikes for the first time, etc.". From 1855 onwards, a large number of participants received seeds from the Société d'Acclimatation and experimented with them. Most did not report on their trials; others did, including Messrs Lachaume (1857), Vilmorin (1859) and Delisse (1863); but their crops were not progressive, and Soya had not yet gained a foothold in France. In 1868, M. Chauvin, vice-president of the Société d'Horticulture de la Côte-d'Or, cultivated several varieties of Soya and continues to do so to this day. In 1874, the Société d'Horticulture d'Etampes received seeds from the Société d'Acclimatation, and experimented with garden cultivation until 1880. These cultivations were directed with extreme zeal by M. Blavet, President of this Society. At the same time, Dr. H "*r brought the best Soya varieties from Japan and cultivated them. He failed in this attempt, which involved varieties that were too late. He confined himself to growing Chinese yellow Soya. He had no further difficulties, and made his own Shoyu for home use. In 1878, we received seeds of two kinds of Soya: one from Japan, with white flowers and very pale, greenish-yellow seeds; the other from China, yellow, part of the Chinese Houang-teou series, which we assimilate to the seeds received from M. de Montigny and other donors, and to those grown at the Muséum, in Etampes, in Marseille, just about everywhere. Seeds from Japan produce beautiful clumps, but the plants do not ripen their fruit. The Chinese species is as successful here as elsewhere. In 1879, Marseille received Houang-teou seeds direct from China, sowed, cultivated and harvested them without accident. In 1880, Messrs Vilmorin-Andrieux and Cte included in their catalog a variety grown in Austria-Hungary, thus making the propagation of Soya very easy. Mr. P. Olivier-Lecq, from Templeuve, receives from Mr. Jules Robert, President of the Société des fabricants de sucre, from Austria, in Séclowitz (Moravia), a batch of Green Hay, composed of Corn, Millet and especially Soya, preserved in an old ice-house in a las of 120,000 kilograms. He donated to the Ecole de Grignon the sample he had presented at the Melun competition, which had attracted the greatest attention from agronomists. Trials were carried out in various regions, and the results led to the conclusion that early yellow Soya can be usefully cultivated in France from Paris to Marseille, and that success is certain wherever Corn ripens its seeds, wherever Vines ripen their clusters. For a long time, the nutritional value of Soya was ignored. If our chemists had been familiar with the plant and had established its richness in analyses that would have been authoritative for everyone, it is certain that this would have greatly helped its propagation. But these analyses would not have been enough. Even though they would have been understood by the general public, even though it would have been proven that a handful of Soya seeds nourishes and restores strength just as well as two handfuls of Peas, Beans, etc., for a long time, quantity would have been preferred to quality. It is regrettable that Soya has been presented simply as a new vegetable, as it is a little more difficult to cook than the other legumes; its flavour is good, without superiority; fresh, it is more difficult to shell; dry, it requires twenty-four hours immersion in non-calcareous water. Ignorance of its nutritional properties has not been a determining factor in its cultivation. We stuck to the old-fashioned vegetables. The Austro-Hungarians were more astute; having acquired proof, indisputable moreover, of Soya's value as livestock feed, they had no other objective. At the very least, they seem to have considered the use of Soya for human consumption as secondary. It follows that, as soon as they had enough seed, they cultivated hectares of land, while we were still just cultivating vegetable patches. Soya VARIETY: it would be interesting to cultivate them comparatively; perhaps we could find among them some early varieties to add to those we already have. We have given above a list of those whose names we have been able to find. In the Paris climate, the yellow Chinese and Mongolian varieties are the only ones that can be grown at present; beyond the Loire, the same varieties can be sown, as well as the reddish-brown Chinese variety. We leave the black variety to Provence, Languedoc and Algeria (1). CULTIVATION The plant is easy to grow and differs little from the Dwarf Bean. We believe that all (1) In 1880, we sowed black Soya seeds, brought from Java by M. le pr de la Sarinière. The soil is suitable for this plant, if not equally, at least to a sufficient degree. Clump spacing is a crucial point. When clumps are too close together, ripening is delayed, and it is precisely here that we can encounter failure. If the soil is rich, more space is needed than if it isn't; but what grower doesn't know how to balance the fertility of the soil and the development of the plants? This is the A BC of the trade. We believe that the seeds must germinate very quickly, otherwise they will rot. The best time to sow seeds is between April 15th and May 1st, when the weather is neither too cold nor too dry. The seed should not be too well covered. Two seeds per hole is enough. We leave the Soya d'Etampes Om, 50 of space in all directions. We believe that sowing can be delayed until May 15, if the weather before then is decidedly unfavorable. We sowed seeds from Etampes on May 3 and seeds from Messrs. Vilmorin on June 10; the latter have joined the former. USE Soya harvest begins in September for Hungarian Soya, and in the first days of October for the other varieties. If the pods are not sufficiently dry by the latter date, they are laid out in the barn to dry out completely, but the seeds are left to ripen on the ground beforehand. A frost of 2 or 3 degrees doesn't harm them at all. Soya's hard, hairy pods cannot be eaten, like those of beans, before the seeds have formed, still less like the bean varieties known as Mange-tout. When the Soya seeds have reached full development, but have not begun to dry out, the pods are picked and shelled, and, in the opinion of many, the result is a vegetable superior to fresh shelled Flageolets. Without going that far, we'd say that it's their equal, that it's easier to digest and doesn't have the well-known disadvantages of beans. Its defect is that it is difficult to shell. When dry, Soya seeds are a good food. Their flavor is mild and very pleasant. We prepared them in the same way as ordinary white beans, but no matter how long and carefully they were cooked, they remained firmer than white beans, not harder. Soya should therefore be soaked for twenty-four hours in distilled water. To make up for the need for distilled water, 3 grams of soda crystals per liter are added to the water in the evening; the water turns white if it is chalky, and the precipitate is removed by decanting the next day. We won't go back over the various uses of Soya discussed in the previous chapters, but to show just how rich in nutrients this leguminous plant is, we'll show you the chemical analysis of its seeds. AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF HISPIDA SOJA (According to Messrs. Pellet and Schon (1). Dry state. Water (assumed 10 O/0)........... 10.00 Protein content............. 33.47 Fat content............... 17.48 Crystallizable sugar or similar matter (Müntz and our analyses)...................... Matter convertible into glucose, soluble in water (expressed as 7.37 sugar).................... 4.20 Matter convertible into glucose, insoluble in water (expressed as sugar)..................... 7.73 Cellulose....................... 4.78 Ash (including carbonic acid)....................... 4.80 Organic matter, not containing nitrogen. 10.17 37.19 19.42 8.19 4.66 8.59 5.31 5.33 11.31 The conclusions of Messrs. Pellet and Schou are: "That Soya is a concentrated food which contains not only the nitrogenous and non-nitrogenous organic elements essential for animal feed, but which also contains significant quantities of phosphoric acid, potash, magnesia and lime, necessary for the mineral constitution of flesh and bone". We tried our hand at making Soya cheese, and presented the product to the Société nationale d'Horticulture at its meeting on June 24 1880. M. Adrien Sicard, first vice-president of the Société d'Horti(1) Revue des Industries chimiques et agricoles, 1882. culture de Marseille, has carried out similar tests. The cheese is easy to obtain; the pitfall is the raw pea taste, which cannot be removed. In the Tyrol, Soya is cultivated under the name of Coffee Bean, and is used to make a coffee substitute. At the Société nationale d'Horticulture's meeting of August 26, 1880, we presented a flask of roasted seeds; prepared in water, they give an inferior coffee, but with exactly the same aroma as coffee. Later, Dr Ménudier, president of the Syndicat général des Comices agricoles du département de la Charente-Inférieure, once again drew attention to Soya, recommending it for making bread for diabetics (1). More than fifteen years ago, one of us took out a patent, hoping that this use could be justified. We had to abandon this idea. To sum up, Soya provides a highly nutritious food for humans and animals; the oil extracted from its seeds could have useful applications; it is also good fodder. Oilcake, the residue from oil production, is an excellent fertilizer. The whole plant, buried in the soil, would make an invaluable green manure in regions where manure is in short supply. Indeed, growing legumes is the most economical way of obtaining nitrogen, since these plants draw it from the air. A number of the products derived from this legume in China and Japan, which are used in the daily diet of hundreds of millions of people, will perhaps one day be accepted in Europe. Soya is certainly one of the plants whose cultivation is most deserving of encouragement here and in our colonies. TALINUN ÉTALÉ TALINUM PATENS Willd. Portulaca patens Jacq, Hort. vindob. il, tab. 152; DC, Pl. grasses, 173. Fam. Portulaceae Woody plant, native to South America. Stems angular; leaves alternate, obovate-lanceolate, short-stalked. Terminal panicle, elongated, very loose, composed of multiflorous cymes. Flowers small, bright pink. Stamens shorter than petals. Capsule globose, depressed at both ends, trigonal, shiny, brown. This plant is cultivated in collections of succulents; it flowers all year round. Its leaves are thick and fleshy. "Talins have the same properties as purslane. Their leaves can be used as seasoning. Eaten cooked, they are refreshing". (Lamarck, Encyclopédie.) After tasting, we cannot share the opinion expressed above; Talinum spread out is too bland to be used as a seasoning. Cooked and prepared like spinach, it gives the sensation of a food soaked in oil. M. Cornu was kind enough to give us some seeds of a plant sent to him from Zanzibar by R. P. Sacleux, under the name of Purslane, which is eaten in that country, cooked like Spinach. The plant germinated in Crosnes, grew vigorously and flowered. We recognized it as Talinum crassi folium Willd. which is also cultivated in some parts of tropical America as a food plant. It is known in French Guiana as Porcelaine. Like T. patens, the leaves of this species are very fleshy; cooked or eaten as a salad, they are reminiscent of cultivated Purslane. In the course of this work, we have mentioned a number of plants that are eaten as spinach in warm countries. R. P. Sacleux has sent the Museum the seeds of a plant also sought after for this use, under the name Brède de Zanzibar. M. Cornu was kind enough to give us a few, and we obtained an annual Borraginée, Trichodesma zevlanicum R. Br. ALGERIAN TALRUDA CARUM INCRASSATUM Boiss. - Voyage dans le Midi de l'Espagne, t. II, p. 239; BUNIUM INCRASSATUM Battandier et Trabut, Flore d'Algérie, by Battandier and Trabut, p. 346. Umbelliferae family. Plant native to southern Spain and boreal Africa, with tuberous root. Tuber with the volume and appearance of a medium-sized truffle, rough, nippled, blackish-brown on the outside, white on the inside. Stem erect, fistulous, ridged, twiggy, reaching, in our cultivations, a height of about 60 centimeters. Radical leaves triternate; stem leaves biternate, with narrow, linear, dark-green segments. Involucre and involucelle usually quinquephyllous. Calyx with acute triangular lobes; conical stylopods, surmounted by persistent styles; single-banded vallecules. We received Talruda tubers from M. Durando, professor of botany in Algiers, which we planted at the beginning of winter and which did not suffer from the cold. We had carefully protected them with a bit of straw, but we believe this precaution is unnecessary. Indeed, Dr Marès wrote to us from Mustapha on June 5 1881: "I'm not at all surprised that Talruda spent the winter well in France. Mountains of 1,500 to 1,600 meters in Algeria often have snow. The ones I have in front of the windows of my property are 1,500 to 1,700 meters. The summit is covered with Cedars. I've seen the snow start in October and stay there continuously until the end of April. Every year, I've seen snow there, and it's very cold." To the questions we put to him, Mr. Durando gave the answers we reproduce here: "The Talruda you received was harvested on the Arba mountains. It can be found on all mountains at least 1,000 meters high, in Blidah, Téniet, etc. "It thrives in cool soil. "It thrives in cool, shady soil with humus, quite commonly under cedar trees. Cedars can only be found above 900 or 1,000 meters, and therefore on mountains of at least 1,400 to 1,500 meters. "The locals eat Talruda tubers raw, boiled or roasted, ad libitum. We reproduce below an interesting article by Mr. J. Dugast, director of the agronomic station in Algiers (I), which gives the chemical composition of the tuber and indicates the uses to which it can be put: "The Arabs know this plant as Talghouda. L11. .. "() Bullet. de la Stat. agron. d'Alger, 1894, p. 48. and mix it with barley. 8 "At the request of the Prefect of Algiers, I examined a sample of Talghouda flour. Here is its composition: a-e .  Water...................... 15.66 Ash...................550 Nitrogenous matter................... 7.00 Fat.... 1.34 Starch and congeners.................. 63.12 Cellulose.............................. 640 Undosed matter..................098 100.00 "Starch grains are ovoid or irregular, sometimes in small numbers, two, three or four, forming compound grains. They vary in size. The most numerous measure from 4 to 8 thousandths of a millimeter in diameter: some, the largest, reach 15 to 20 thousandths of a millimeter. "The immediate composition of this flour is quite similar to that of barley; it is less rich in fat, but contains about the same proportion of starch. "On the other hand, if we compare these results with those of potatoes at the same degree of desiccation, we see that the latter is richer in starch and poorer in nitrogenous matter and fat. "Taghouda flour is therefore a food with a certain nutritional value, intermediate between barley and potato. We tasted these tubers and found them perfectly edible, but of mediocre flavor. The plant did not thrive in our soil, which was too dry. It can only be harvested every two years; the first-year tubers are still too small to be used. In addition, we consider the experiment we have carried out to be very incomplete, and recommend continuing it by sowing Talruda on the edge of the woods. In this way, we could make use of uncultivated land. TOMATE DE LA PAZ Tree Tomato; Vegetable Mercury. CYPHOMANDRA BETACEA Sendtn. Solanum betaceum Cavan; Pionandra betacea Miers. Revue Horticole, pl. color. 1880, p. 150; 1881, p. 470. Fam. des Solanées. Shrub or small tree 3 to 4 meters high, native to Mexico, New Granada and Peru, introduced and cultivated in all the higher parts of tropical America, notably the West Indies, Brazil and the Argentine Republic. In warmer regions, Cyphomandra betacea is grown for its fruit, which has a sweet taste when raw Fig. 79. - Tomato de la Paz. Cyphomandra betacea Sendtn. and pleasantly acidic. Peeled and seedless, it can be used for the same purposes as the tomato, and Mr. Miers (Journal of Botany, 1845, p. 358) says it is sold for this purpose in the markets of Lima. Made into a compote with sugar, it is said to make a pleasant meal, with a slightly acidic, very refreshing taste. Dr. Morris, Deputy Director of the Royal Garden of Kew and former Director of the Colonial Garden of Jamaica, has noted that in Jamaica it is impossible to grow this plant in the lower parts, where the temperature is too high, and that, on the contrary, it gives excellent results in the region between 2,000 and 5,000 feet above sea level. Introduced to various parts of southern Europe, this Solanum has done very well there. Its cultivation presents no difficulty in subtropical regions. Dr Morris has made great efforts to spread it in the English colonies, mainly in the higher regions of India. Reports published in the Bulletin of the Royal Garden of Kew, August 1887, show that the results obtained have been most satisfactory. In the Paris climate, the Tomate de la Paz does not bear fruit until the second year after sowing. These seeds germinate easily, and when planted in February-March, on a bed and under a frame, the resulting plants can reach almost 2 meters in height before the return of the bad season. Their large, highly ornamental leaves mean that this Solanum, like many of its congeners, can be recommended for garden decoration. Before the first cold spells arrive, the plant should be lifted from the soil, repotted and placed in a cold greenhouse, where it should remain until the second half of May. Planted on an old bed, it produces flowers which are followed by fruits that remain green until the end of the summer season, ripening only when the plant is returned to the greenhouse. They ripen from November to January. These egg-shaped fruits, more or less attenuated at both ends, are about the size of a guinea fowl egg; their skin is parchment-like, reddish-green, yellowish or variegated depending on the variety; this skin, which has a particularly unpleasant taste, must be carefully removed when the fruit is eaten or used in any culinary preparation. As we have just seen, Cyphomandra betacea cannot be cultivated in the Paris climate, since the beds and frames are inadequate, and the plants need to be housed in greenhouses to produce fruit. - Nevertheless, we thought it would be useful to report here on the results we have obtained, and to draw the reader's attention to this plant, which would obviously be useful in a number of our colonies (1). We have also tried the cultivation of Solanum quitoense Lamk. (S. quitense H. B. K.), originally from Peru, where it is grown under the name Narangita. (1) For further information, see an article published by one of us in the journal Le Jardin, 1890, p. 54 (black fig), and Note sur la Tomate en arbre, by M. Maxime Cornu, Revue des sciences naturelles appliquées (Journal de la Société nationale d'acclimatation) 1893, p. 314.  M. Maxime Cornu, professor at the Muséum, kindly gave us the seeds of two varieties of this plant: one with sweet, sugary fruit, the other with acidic fruit, sent to him by R. P. Sodiro. These fruits are said to have the shape and volume of a small orange. They are much sought-after. We have obtained some very beautiful plants which, cultivated like the previous species, have given us a few flowers in the late season, but which have never set fruit. In the Proceedings of the american academy of arts and sciences, June 25 1887, p. 441, Solanum piliferum Benth. is indicated as growing in Mexico (Rio blanco). The fruit of this plant, egg-sized, greenish-yellow in color, with an apple-like odor and pleasant flavor, is said to be highly prized. It is sold at markets and preserved. It would be interesting to know the exact value of this Solanum in order to spread it in our colonies, if necessary. TOPINAMBOUR BLANC DE LA MARTINIQUE Calatnea Allouia Lindl; Phrynium Allouya Roscoe, Monandrian plants of the order Scitamineæ, pl. 38; Maranta Allouia Aublet, Histoire des plantes de la Guyane française, vol. I, p. 3; Jacquin, Fragm. p. 53, no. 174, vol. XXI; Descourtilz, Flore des Antilles, vol. I, p. 127, pl. 26; R. P. Duss, Flore phanérogamique des Antilles françaises, p. 584. Scitaminaceae family. Perennial plant, with rhizome forming a large vertical tuber, to which several other tubers are attached Fig. 80 - Calathea Allouia Lindl. ovoid-globose, located at the end of fairly long threads; radical leaves ovate-lanceolate, unequilateral, strongly ribbed, long-stalked; inflorescence almost globose; flowers pure white, arising two by two in the axils of overlapping, membranous bracts; corolla tubular, with outer limb divided into three small, equal, oval segments; inner limb formed of two lower, oval lobes and a hooded upper lobe. Capsule with three compartments. "A starch very similar to that of Arrow-root is extracted from the tubers of this plant; it is cultivated in Guadeloupe, where it is known as Moustache de Barbade." (Roscoe, loc. cit.). "The roots are lined with tubers of varying size, which are good to eat cooked under ash." (Aublet, loc. cit.). We have accepted, on Roscoe's authority, the name Moustache de Barbade (1), under which, according to him, Calathea Allouia would be known in Guadeloupe; however, our correspondent from Pointe-à-Pître seems to ignore this and gives the plant's tuber the name Topinambour blanc. He writes: "Tussac gives it as called Topinambour blanc by the negroes of Cap Haïtien, where it is commonly found on the market. At the Pointe and throughout the West Indies, too, this little tuber is found, which children devour greedily and grown-ups eat by nibbling it while they chat. Topinambour is also the name, in Guadeloupe, of this vegetable, which has the shape of a small spinning top, is recou(1) The name Moustache de Barbade is known neither in Martinique nor in Guadeloupe. In Martinique, the name Moussache de Barbade is given to Tolomane or Canna starch. There is no Calathea Allouia starch. Moussache is not the name of a plant, but of a starch. ..V 8. - green with a grayish-white, parchment-like skin, and, when cooked, has a transparent flesh like a frozen Potato, but crisp almost like the Pomme de terre franche." Mme L..., from Pointe-à-Pître, kindly dictated the following: "White Jerusalem artichokes are placed on the stove in cold water; they are left to boil for about three quarters of an hour; they are tasted to ensure that they are perfectly cooked. "They are then taken out of the water, drained, sprinkled with fine white salt, left to cool and eaten cold for dessert; above all, they should be eaten very ripe, cold and salted to perfection; there are people who love them. Mr. L... likes white Jerusalem artichokes, but Mrs. L... doesn't, and her disdain is expressed in the following note. -- We have grown Calathea Allouia under a frame, and obtained beautiful plants, but they did not form tubers. According to Descourtilz, they need eight months of vegetation. Market gardening does not allow them to do this, so it is impossible to grow this species in the Paris climate. ... . -. . TRICHOSANTHE COULEUVRE Plant snake, Patole, Angourie à fruits longs, Beloes, Snake gourd. TRICHOSANTHES ANGUINA Linn. species, ed. 1, p. 1008; Lamk. Encycl., I, p. 290; Suppl., I, p. 385; Illustr., III, p. 375, tab. 794; Loureiro, Flor. coch., p. 588; Sims, in Bot. Mag. tab. 722; Ser. in DC, Prod. III, p. 314; Roxb. in Fl. ind. Ill, p. 701; Miq. in Fl. ind. Bat, I, pars 1, p. 677; Rev. Hort. 1859, p. 593; Naud, Ann. sc. nat. ser. 4 vol. XVIII, p. 190; Clarke, in Hook, Flor. Brit. India, II, p. 610; Cogn, Monogr. Phanerog. vol. III, p. 359; Cucurbita sinensis, etc. Till. Till; Anguina sinensis, etc., Mich. Mich; Trichosanthes pomis teretibus, etc., Lin, Hort. Cliffort; Petola anguina Rumph, Herb. Amb., V, p. 407, tab. 148; Cucumis anguinus L.; Trichosanthes colubrina Jacq. f.; Involucraria anguina Rœm.; Trichosanthes Turolata Hamilt. Cucurbitaceae family. Annual, climbing plant, up to 2 meters high. Leaves alternate, cordate, orbicular, 3-5-lobed, unevenly sinuate. Long, bifurcated tendrils. Male flowers in clusters or cymes, on peduncles about 1 decimeter long, composed of a calyx with reflexed sepals, a white corolla with 5 divisions long and very elegantly fringed at the edges, and 5 stamens. Female flowers are sessile, stamenless, but have a pistil with a trilocular ovary and trifid style. Fruits cylindrical, 50 cm to 1 m long and 4-5 cm in diameter, straight or slightly curved, giving them the appearance of snakes; ripening in September-October, they are green speckled with white at first, turning yellow at maturity. 639 4 Fig. 81 - Trichosanthe couleuvre (Trichosanthes anquina). mcmerd rity; the seed is elongated and reminiscent in shape of the Gourde (Lagenaria vulgaris). Native to the East Indies. "This species, as reported by M. du Petit-Thouars, is cultivated on the Ile de France for its fruits, which are picked when half-ripe; in this state, when cut into small pieces, cooked and seasoned appropriately, they form a healthy vegetable that is pleasant to the taste. (Lamk. loc. cit.). "This classic species has been well known since the time of Linné, and is cultivated in most botanical gardens; but it has some difficulty coming to the climate of Paris. Its fruits, usually sweet, are edible in India and could be used here, when young, for the same economic purposes as those of the Cucumber." (Naudin, loc. cit.) The seeds of the plant we cultivated were given to us by an inhabitant of Mauritius, under the name Patole, the only one used in the English colony and in Réunion. We gave it the same care as the Melons, except for pruning, and obtained a large number of fruits, only a few of which reached maturity at the end of September and the beginning of October. The others were only slightly developed, but very suitable for the use we wanted to make of them. For the table, pick the fruit while it's still very young, cut it into small pieces smaller than a thimble, avoid peeling it, and season it like Flageolets with butter and fine herbs. Thus prepared, they form a fresh vegetable, tender without being mushy, and bearing no resemblance to cucumbers or squash. Needless to say, they can also be prepared in a variety of other ways, as part of a jus or as a garnish for stews. It is unfortunate that they cannot, without being cut into several pieces, be introduced into Pickles jars. They would lose their curious appearance, which would be a great pity; but, if this sacrifice were made, they would be perfectly at home in vinegar preserves. We believe that the Patole deserves to be cultivated in amateur gardens, in the south of France and in those of our colonies which do not yet have it. The fruits that ripened here were only 70 centimetres long, but they were highly contoured and looked marvellously like green snakes with white marbled coats. TRICHOSANTHES CUCUMERINA L. DC. in Prodr. III, p. 314; Roxb, Fl. ind. III, p. 701; Hev. hort. 1859, p. 593; Naud, Ann. des se. nat. 4th ser. vol. XVIII, p. 190; Bot. reg. XXXII, tab. 18; Flore des serres, vol. IV, tab. 305; Cogn, Monogr, phanerogam, vol. IIl, p. 360. Native to the East Indies, Ceylon, Java and Western Australia. In India, this species is known as Jangli-chachinda (Hindostani) and Ban-patol (Bengali). Its fruits are smaller than those of 4 the previous species, and are streaked with white and green when ripe. They contain a red pulp that is usually eaten as a carry, before ripening. "This fruit is very bitter, yet, according to Roxburgh, it is included in the Hindu diet, which is esteemed all the more for its greater bitterness, no doubt because of the anthelmintic properties they attribute to it". (Naudin). Trichosanthes cucumerina would be easy to grow, but it is too bitter to be used in Pichles. We presented two fruits to the Société d'Acclimatation, one picked young and preserved in vinegar, the other preserved in alcohol, having reached full development, but not yet having the beautiful color it would have had at maturity. TRICHOSANTHES OVIGERA BLUME. Seringe in DC, Prodr. III, p. 314. Native to Java and Sumatra. Cultivated in botanical gardens. It is easy to grow under glass, perhaps even as simple as the Paris gherkin. Its fruits are less bitter than those of Trichosanthes cucumerina and could perhaps be used for vinegar preserves. Their small size and attractive shape would seem to make them ideal for this purpose. We presented them to the Société d'Acclimatation, small and preserved in vinegar, and more fully developed and preserved in alcohol. Two other Trichosanthes with edible fruit exist in India, but we have not experimented with their cultivation. They are: 1° T. dioica Roxb. (Palbal, in Hindostani; Patol, in Bengali), with green fruit before maturity, then orange-yellow, 5 to 10 centimeters long, which is eaten cooked when ripe. It is said to be an esteemed vegetable. 2° T. palmata Roxb. (Lal-indrayan, in Hindostani; Makal, in Bengali), also cultivated for its fruit, which is the same size as that of the previous species and is used in the same way. On May 12, 1893, M. Franchet presented us with a small tuber of Actinostemma paniculatum Maximowicz (1), which was included with herbarium specimens sent to the Museum from Eastern Se tchuen by M. l'abbé Farges. These samples were accompanied by a label bearing the following suscription: N° 93, Kia pey mou, tuberous-rooted plant cultivated to falsify pey mou. This tuber, cultivated at Crosnes, gave us a plant which flowered the following August and which we have kept ever since. Unfortunately, Kia pey mou is a dioecious Cucurbitaceae of which we found ourselves possessing only one sex (female): we were therefore unable (1) Cogniaux, Mouographiæ phanerogamarum, vol. 3, p. 920. fruiting. The specimens received from China and kept in the Museum herbarium belong to the same sex. The plant is absolutely hardy, and so powerful that it thrives in the most arid soils. Each part of the stem close to the ground takes root, giving rise to a tuber, so that when the plant is uprooted in late autumn, it yields an abundant harvest. The tubers have a very particular shape; they are made up of large scales grouped together in such a way as to resemble to some extent the arrangement of the scales in the bulb of a lily, with the difference that they are few in number, very thick and loosely interwoven. These tubers are smooth and pure white when plucked; they contain abundant starch, but have a bitter taste as pronounced as that of Coloquinte, making them absolutely inedible. It is possible, however, that a special preparation will enable the starch to be used. Kia pey mou would therefore not deserve to appear in this book if we didn't think that its merits as an ornamental plant would prevent it from being accepted in gardens. Its climbing stems, from 1 m. 50 to 2 m. high, are fitted with tendrils and bear heart-shaped leaves with 5 palmate lobes, slightly reminiscent of those of the grapevine, but very hairless, dark green on the upper surface, paler green and glossy on the underside, with a yellowish gland at the base of each lower lobe. The furrowed petiole is 4 centimeters long; the leaf blade is 7 to 8 centimeters long and as wide. The female flowers, the only ones we have observed, are barely 4 to 5 millimeters long; they are green, grouped in small numbers in the leaf axils and borne on slender peduncles of unequal length, some very short, others up to 2 1/2 centimeters long. The ovary is globose. The calyx, swollen above the ovary, has the leaf blade divided into 5 lanceolate lobes, long extended to a point, as are the corolla divisions, also 5 in number and similar to the previous ones; both are closely spaced; they are slightly divergent at the apex. According to M. Franchet, Plantæ Davidianæ, vol. 2. p. 130, Fritillaria Roylei Hook. M. l'abbé Armand David, who collected it in Moupine in 1859, says of it: "The root, which is a round, flattened onion, is the famous Pé mou, so sought-after in Chinese medicine. Lophophores are very greedy for its bulbs". "Along the way, one of my men pointed out traces of Lophophora, moss and grasses torn up by the broad beaks of these birds, which live on succulent roots, especially those of the yellow Fritillary, known as Pé mou; this plant gave its name to our Gallinacea, which almost always contains some onion of this precious Liliacea in its stomach (Armand David. Journal d'un voyage dans le center de la Chine et le Thibet oriental). Nouv. Arch. du Muséum p. 57 I. In a note, Mgr. Biet tells us that the bulbs of Fritillaria Roylei are harvested on the high plateaus of Thibet, at an altitude of 3,000 meters (Lytang plateau) and are cooked in sugar water. They are said to be a highly sought-after mandarin dish. Dr. Bretschneider, in his Botanicon sinicum, makes no mention of the food uses of Pey mou. According to this work, part. III, Botanical investigations into the materia medica of the ancient chinese, Shang hai 1895, p. 86, the name Pey mou is applied to various plants with a high reputation in the treatment of various illnesses. In the Proceeding of the American academy of arts and sciences, January 31 1889, p. 50, Mr. Watson describes, among the new plants collected by Dr. Palmer in the Guaymas plains, a Cucurbitaceae which he calls Apodanthera (?) Palmeri Watson. The fruit is said to be edible, with a flavor reminiscent of the Musk Cucumber. Here again, this is a plant that it would be useful to cultivate experimentally. VALÉRIANE D'ALGER Horn of plenty. FEDIA CORNUCOPLE Gærtn. Valerian family. Annual plant. Stem Om,40, twiggy, glabrous; leaves sessile, ovate-oblong, almost entire, Fig. 82. - Valerian of Algiers. thick, glossy green; flowers fasciculate, pink, very attractive. Seed vesicular, oblong, divided on one side by a longitudinal depression, convex on the other, yellowish: its germination period is four years. Algerian Valerian is nothing other than a large Lamb's lettuce, whose cultivation does not differ from that of ordinary Lamb's lettuces. Like the latter, it reseeds itself and requires no more effort than it is worth. It's easy to see why our assessment doesn't apply to its flowers. Algerian Valerian is one of those neutral salads that can be said to have neither vice nor virtue. They're only as good as the seasoning. VALERIAN WITH BIG ROOTS CENTRANTHUS MACROSIPHON Boiss. Valerian family. Spain. Annual plant, entirely glabrous. Stem thick, fistulous, branched, 0m, 25 to Om 30 high. Leaves oval, thick, glossy green: lower ones briefly petiolate, entire or toothed, obtuse; upper ones sessile, deeply incised. Small but numerous flowers in corymbs. Corolla with a small tube, three times longer than the ovary, which in turn is three times longer than the corolla spur. In their book, Les Fleurs de pleine terre, MM. Vilmorin-Andrieux et Cie teach the cultivation method applicable to large-stemmed Valerian, considered as an ornamental plant. We refer the reader to this work. The plant has been recommended as a successor to Lamb's lettuce. It can indeed replace them, but is, in our opinion, far inferior. The tasting we did was not favorable. Such is not the opinion of M. Charton, who, in the Revue horticole, 1872, page 259, under the title of : Une bonne salade trop peu connue, published the following note: "We are not short of salads; we have, thank God, some excellent ones, so much so that we can say that the embarrassment is in the choice of species and varieties; But, as the saying goes, an abundance of good things does no harm, and we have no doubt that, despite the riches we possess in this genre, more than one reader of the Revue horticole will be delighted to know about this one, which differs quite markedly from all the salads cultivated up to now, both in appearance and, one might say, taste. "The plant we're talking about belongs to the Valerian family; it's very closely related to Lamb's lettuce, whose taste it has, a slightly fatty sweetness, with a slight bitterness that makes it a little less bland, a little less insipid than Lamb's lettuce, to which, for these reasons, it will be preferred by some amateurs. "This plant is Valerian macrosiphon, or Centranthus macrosiphon, already well known in gardens, where it is grown for its pretty bouquets of pink flowers, and rightly regarded as one of the prettiest ornamental plants. "To obtain a beautiful leafy development and a successive production from September until the frosts, we recommend sowing the seeds on the spot, absolutely as if they were lamb's lettuce, but covering the seed a little less, which is much finer, and this from June and throughout the month of July. "If readers want to believe us, they won't cut the plant too young; if they let it develop, they'll be rewarded with more abundant production and fuller, fleshier leaves. "The young stalks themselves are very tender and edible, and if, from the first forkful, you're a little surprised by the slight bitterness of this salad, you'll be amazed to find it more pleasant as you eat more of it, and finally you'll be convinced that it's an excellent salad as well as being exceedingly harmless, and you might add one of the healthiest and most hygienic, since it belongs to the Valerianae family." VOANDZOU (VOANZO, in MADAGASCAR) VOANDZEIA SUBTERRANEA du Petit-Thouars; Glycine subterranea Linné fils, Decad. tab. 17. family Leguminosae. Annual herb with creeping stems divided into spreading branches. Leaves composed of 3 oblong, oblate leaflets; common petiole 3 to 4 inches long, peduncles short, axillary, inclined, those of biflorous hermaphrodite flowers. Corolla yellow; wings oblong, spread horizontally; standard oval, striated. Vegetable rounded, fleshy, monosperm by abortion. Peduncles sink into the ground like those of the groundnut. "The earliest travelers to Madagascar (1), had (1) The R. P. Camboué, a missionary in Madagascar, sent, on various occasions, seeds to the Société nationale d'Acclimatation (see Revue des sciences naturelles appliquées, 1890, p. 76), as well as to the Société nationale d'Agriculture (See Bulletin de la Société nationale d'Agriculture de France, 1888). noticed this annual legume, which the inhabitants cultivate to eat the fruit or seeds, like Peas, Beans, etc. It resembles the Peanut. It resembles the peanut, particularly in that the flower support curls up and buries the young fruit or vegetable in the soil. It is widely grown in gardens, especially in tropical Africa, and less commonly in southern Asia. It does not seem to be grown much in America, except in Brazil, where it is called Mandubi d'Angola". (A. de Candolle, Origine des plantes cultivées.) VOANDZOU We received a letter from Elim, Spélouken, dated July 13 1882, from Mr. E. Creux, head of the Waldensian mission in the Transvaal, which contained the following passages: "Our church is sending us a farmer, Mr. Mingard; I hope you will see him when he comes to Paris... Sesame, peanuts and an excellent tuber bean whose native name I don't know are widely cultivated by the natives...". We did not see Mr. Mingard, who was already on his way to Africa when we received word that he would be passing through Paris; but we did receive a letter from him, dated Elim Waterfall, Spélouken, February 1, 1883, saying: "I am sending you 100 grams of our Tindlohu or Tuber Beans, and 100 grams of our Tinyawa, Hedge Beans, with oars. "The first species is good and sweet; it makes a very good vegetable here. It is sown at a rate of one bean per hollow. They must be ridged like potatoes. "The second is more mediocre, similar in taste to small beans. For the table, Tinyawa must be boiled beforehand. They grow here in bushes. We received and sowed the seeds announced. The Tinyawa is a Lablab. It has vegetated vigorously, but without bearing fruit. We belatedly recognized that the Tindlohu was the Voandzou, a very interesting plant, but rebellious to cultivation in the Paris climate. We had sown the seeds in a frame, and they had sprouted; three or four leaves, borne on long petioles, formed a small tuft in the center of which were several weak, very spindly shoots... We waited for the stems to emerge, but they didn't, and by the time we stopped, it was too late. The spindly shoots that had appeared, and which were doubtless not destined to vegetate in the open air, were dried out. We still don't know enough about Voandzou. We have learned neither its cultivation nor its uses. We are told that its roasted seeds are sold to negroes in the streets of Rio, among other coarse sweets; but this usage would in no way explain the general cultivation of this vegetable in a large number of tropical parts of Africa, where there are several varieties of reddish-brown or yellowish-white, single-colored or variegated. The seeds are certainly eaten like beans, peas and broad beans. R. P. Camboué has devoted an interesting note to Voanzo, published in the Revue des Sciences naturelles appliquées, 1889, p. 893, in which he tells us that the plant is cultivated in Madagascar in the clayey or silicoclayey soils of the bare Imérina hills, at around 1,300 meters above sea level. Sowing takes place around the beginning of the rainy season (October-November). Around February, when the plant is flowering, it is lightly ridged. Harvesting takes place around March-April. "Voanzo is then sold on the Tananarive market for A francs per hectoliter. In Imérina, Voanzo is eaten prepared like beans or peas; boiled in water, its flavor is somewhat reminiscent of chickpeas and hazelnuts. It will certainly be impossible to grow Voandzou in France. It could be introduced into our African possessions, Guyana, Pondicherry, Cochinchina, Tonkin, etc. The plant is curious enough to warrant a closer look. The plant is curious enough for growers to try to raise a few plants under glass. It would certainly be of great service in those of our colonies that do not yet have it. YOUNG TS'AI IPOMÆA REPTANS, Poir ; Convolvulus reptans L.; C. repens Willd.; Ipomæa aquatica Forsk. Fam. Convolvulaceae The seeds of this plant were sent to us by Fr. Heude, missionary in Zikawei, China. They were accompanied by the following note: "They are everywhere in southern China. We pick the tender shoots and treat them like spinach, amaranth and alfalfa, i.e. we soften them in water and fry them in oil, lard and so on. "It's best to grow them in beds, in cool, open soil. Sow as soon as you receive them. I doubt you'll be able to get ripe seeds in Paris. It is obviously this plant that Ch. Eckeberg refers to in his book Chinese husbandry. The Chinese," he says, "cultivate a water spinach in ponds, which grows in such abundance that it completely covers the surface of the water. It is one of the most common vegetable herbs. Fortune, in his Voyage agricole et horticole, cites Convolvulvs reptans as one of the vegetable plants traded extensively in the markets of southern China. In a letter dated January 28, 1890, Dr. Bretschneider tells us that the most common name for this vegetable in China is Young ts'aï (pronounced Ang tsoi); this is the name by which the plant is described in Chinese botanical books, in the Canton dialect. Its popular name in Beijing is Koung-tsai. Young and Koung are the names of the plant; Ts'aï means vegetable. Although aquatic, it is not grown in water in Beijing. In other parts of China, Young ts'aï is nevertheless grown in ponds or streams, as shown by a note published in the Revue horticole, 1890, page 52, under the title Jardins flottants chinois. It reads: "An ingenious means of protecting crops from flooding and at the same time preserving them from excessive drought is put into practice by the Chinese. "It consists in building rafts of variable length, with a floor featuring numerous interstices. A layer of straw 2 to 3 centimetres thick is laid on top, covered with mud or earth from the bottom of a river, to receive the seeds of various plants, principally Ipomxa reptans, whose stems and roots the Chinese eat. Under these conditions, the straw, then the soil, soon rots and disappears. The roots then develop in the water. These rafts are attached to the banks of lakes, ponds or streams, on which they float constantly, defying flooding, and it is a curious sight," says Mr. Magowan in the China Review, "to contemplate, in summer, these gardens of a kind that is totally unknown to us in Europe." M. Balansa, botanist traveler, in charge of the exploration of Tonkin, gave us some interesting details on the cultivation of Ipomæa reptans in our colony during his stay in Paris in 1889: "The plant exists everywhere. It is widely cultivated. "The tips of the leafy twigs are harvested and sold in the markets. The vegetable is eaten cooked, but has no particular flavor. "In the interior of Hanoi, there is a pond specially devoted to the cultivation of this plant. It is divided into several parts belonging to different owners, which are bordered by bamboos. "The foot of the plant always plunges into the water; the leafy branches float on the surface. Women go out in small flat boats to harvest them. We sowed Young ts'aï seeds under a frame and transplanted half the plant under glass and half in the open ground. The plant did better in the open air than in the trunk. It flowered quite abundantly in both conditions; however, it was in the trunk that we were able to collect three or four seeds. The lateral branches appear very late; they creep along the ground and cling to it like ivy to the wall. They are thick and soft, with fleshy leaves. The flowers, quite large and pure white, dazzle the carpet formed by the leaves. This Ipomoea might not be without interest as an ornamental plant. As a vegetable, it could be experimented with in a more favorable climate than that of Paris, where in any case it cannot be usefully cultivated. According to Krasnow (1), an aquatic gentian, Limnanthemum peltatum, commonly known as Djinsaï, is cultivated in ponds and provides a sweet, mucilaginous salad, much appreciated in Japan. (1) Krasnow, Les régions théières de l'Asie subtropicale, 1st vol. Japan, St. Petersburg, 1897 (in Russian). IRIS JUNCEA Poir, Desf. Atl. fl.; Iris luritanica Ker. Bot. Mag. tab. 679. Fam. des Iridées. 657 Flower bright yellow; outer divisions orbicular oval-bladed, unicolored, obliquely erect tabbed; inner divisions spatulate-oblong, pointed, notched; stigma liguliform-bladed; lamina bilobed. Bulb pelit, barely the size of a hazelnut, covered with a brownish tunic. Stem 1 to 2 feet tall, spindly, slightly flexuous, leafy at base. Leaves linear-lanceolate, narrow, subulate at the apex, glaucous green. Spathe herbaceous, usually uniflorous. Perianth tulip very short, camja naked. Portugal, boreal Africa. In the Bulletin de la Société d'Acclimatation, volume III, 1856, we read the following letter, page 456, addressed to its president by M. A. de Cès-Caupenne: "Monsieur le Président. Settled in Algeria, where I run a large forestry operation in the province of Constantine, and living in contact with the Arabs, I have noticed that among the dishes that make up their frugal diet, there is one that is much sought-after in all the douars I have visited, and that is provided by a plant that grows wild in the forests and wetlands. Zétoutt is the name the Arabs give to this plant (Iris juncea). "Its stem resembles that of the Narcissus sau42 vage. The food part consists of an onion no larger than a hazelnut. "This Zétoutt flowers in spring, at the same time as the Iris and Jonquilles. As soon as it blooms, Arab women rush to harvest it. To eat it, they strip the oiguon of the film that covers it and cook it in butter or water, turning it into a paste, like potatoes, to make cakes. "This plant is floury and its starch has a very fine taste. During the winter, wild boars are very fond of it, and just as the digging of pigs is used to find truffles, the digging of wild boars guides the Arabs in their search for Zétoutt. "There is every reason to believe that we can increase the volume of the Zétoutt onion by means of weeding, thereby introducing a new product into France's agricultural and market-gardening industry, a product which, as it becomes more widespread, could become a valuable resource. This is a question which perhaps deserves the attention of the Society. One of its members, the honorable Mr. Tastet, to whom I spoke about it a short while ago, saw it in this light, and it is with his encouragement that I take the liberty, Mr. Chairman, of sending you a few samples of Zétoutt that I collected myself a few days ago in the Safia cork oak forest. A friend of ours, a landowner in Algeria and director of a cork oak company, had 1,200 or 1,500 Zétoutt bulbs collected for us in his forests, which he gave us as a gift. We didn't take advantage of this precious gift. Believing, perhaps wrongly, that Zêtoutt would only be as useful as its cultivation was economical, and that we should even try to naturalize it on the edge of the woods, we planted our bulbs in semi-shade and limited ourselves to weeding the soil whenever necessary. The experiment lasted four years. The winters did not, we believe, contribute to the destruction of our plantation, but the soil was too arid, and the end result was that we had almost nothing left of our 1,200 or 1,500 bulbs. We probably wouldn't have been any more successful if we'd done things differently, because we have to admit that the bulbous plants didn't give us any satisfactory results. We lost the Japanese edible lily, the Crocus edulis, just as we lost the Zetoutt. More skilful amateurs with more favourable soil will perhaps succeed better than we did. In any case, this is a plant for which we can repeat what we said about edible lilies. It can be harvested and used wherever it grows spontaneously; but there is no advantage in introducing it into gardens, as it takes several years to obtain mature bulbs from seed, which, as we saw earlier, are always small. We have also experimented with a number of edible Irideae which have not given us better results, including Jahuique (Tigridia Van-Houttei Baker), Flore des serres et des jardins de l'Europe, pl. 2174; Baker, Handbook of the Irideæ, p. 69, from Mexico, of which M. Cornu gave us seeds he had received from M. Dugès. When cooked, the bulbs of this species are said to taste like chestnuts. Two other plants in this family also have edible bulbs: 1° Iris edulis Thunb. (Moræa edulis Ker, Vieusseuxia edulis Link), a species native to the Cape of Good Hope. The Hottentots collect the bulbs and stems, which they make into bundles. They cook them lightly and eat them. According to Thunberg, this food is very tasty and nourishing. Siuges also eat it (Encycl. meth.). 2° Gladiolus edulis Burch. A species that grows on the Cape of Boune-Espérance and whose roasted bulbs have the same flavor as chestnuts (Botanical Register, vol. Il, p. 169). Accoub (lig. f)....................................... Adenophora verticillata (fig. 55)........................... 422 Garlic with edible flowers (fig. 2).......................... Allium odorum (fig. 2).................................... - fistulosum, var. Catawis a (tig. 17, 18 et?).... 92, Alstrœmeria Ligtu (fig. 3)................................ 93 10 Amorphophallus Rivieri (fig. 40)...... ... 270 Angourie des Antilles (fig. 4).............................. Aponogéton à deux épis (fig. 5 and 6)................ ... 26, Aponogeton distachyum (fig. 5 and 6).......... .... 26, Arachis hypogæa (fig. 7)........................ Arracacha esculenta (fig. 3)............................... Japanese burdock (fig. 9)............... Basella rubra (fig. 10)........................... Benincasa cerifera (fig. 11).................................. 18 27 27 33 36 46 50 54 Brassica chinensis (figs. 62 and 63). 465, 466 Calathea Allouia (fig. 80).... .......................... 635 Camassia esculenta (fig. 12).......................... Capucine tubéreuse (fig. 13)............................... Chayote (fig. 14)......................................... Chervis (figs. 15 and 16)..................................... 63 - 6 82 87 Chinese cabbage (figs. 62 and 63)....................... 465, 466 Catawissa (figs. 17, 18 and 19)............. 92, 93 Claytone perfoliée (fig. 20).............................98 Mandera cucumber (fig. 21)............................. 108 - musky (fig. 22)............................. 114 Peruvian cockerel (fig. 64)... ............................. 477 Cornaret jaune (figs. 2 and 24)............................... 120 Courge de Siam (flg. 25)................................... 122 - torchon (figs. 67 and 68)................................ 500 Crosne (figs. 27 and 28)................................. 146, 147 Cucumis Anguria (fig. 4).............................10 - Melo, var. Dudaim (fig. 51)......................... 386 - Sacleuxii (lig. 21).................................. 108 Cucurbita melanosperma (fig. 25)............................. 122 Cyperus esculentus (fig. 76)................................. 572 Cyphomandra betacea (fig. 79)............................. 631 Daïkon (figs. 29, 30 and 31)............. 175, 177 Dioscorea alata (fig. 35).................................... 235 - Fargesii (fig. 36)........................ ......... 249 - Batatas (figs. 37, 38 and 39).............. 274, 275, 278 Fedia Cornucopiæ (fig. 82). 647 Sweet fennel (fig. 37)................................... 193 Fœniculum dulce (fig. 37)................................... 193 Glycine Soja (fig. 77)........................... 576 Okra (fig. 33)........................................... 202 Grosse Anguine (fig. 34)................................. 211 Gundelia Tournefortii (fig. 1)............................. 2 Gynandropsis pentaphylla (fig. 26)......................... 144 Hibiscus esculentus (fig. 33)............................... 202 Igrame ailée (fig. 35)....................................... 235 - de Farges (fig. 36)............................. 249 - de la Chine (figs. 37, 38 and 39).............. 274, 275, 278 Kudzu (fig. 4l)............................................ 301 Lappa major, var. edulis (fig. 9............................ 46 Leuisia redivira (fig. 42)................................... 326 Lilium auratum (fig. 43)....................................333 - speciosum (fig. 44).................................. 334 Japanese golden lily (fig. 43)................................ 333 Luffa acutangula (fig. 67)...... 500 - cylindrica (fig. 68).................................. 500 Two-horned mackerel (fig. 45)............................... 347 - two-spined (fig. 46)...............................5350 - verbanaise (figs. 47 and 48)....................... 359, Margose à piquants (figs. 49 and 50)..................... 369, 360 370 Martynia lutea (figs. 23 and 24)................................ 120 Melon Dudaïm (fig. 51)................................... 386 Mioga (fig. 52)............................................. 397 Momordica Charantia (figs. 49 and 50)................ 369, 370 Morelle de Wallis (fig. 53).......................... 412 Moutarde tubéreuse (fig. 54). 419 Nelombo de l'Inde (fig. 56)........... 424 Nelumbium speciosum (fig. 56)....... 424 OEufs de coq (fig. 57)................................. 435 Olivaire du Congo (fig. 58). ......................... 438 Olombé du Gabon (fig. 59).............................. 443 Oxalis crenata (fig. 60)............... 451 Oxalis Deppei (fig. Gt)................................ 459 Pak-Choi (fig. 63).................................. 466 Pe-tsaï (fig. 62)........................................... 465 Physalis de Franchet (fig. 66)............... 490 - du Pérou (fig. 64)............ ................. 477 - violet (fig. 65).................................. 484 Physalis Francheti (fig. 66). .......................... 490 - peruviana (fig. 64)............................... 477 - philadelphica (fig. 65)....... ... 484 Pipengaille (fig. 67).......... ...... 500 Ground pistachio (fig. 7).... ....................... 33 Portulaca grandiflora (fig. 69).... ................ . 517 Large-flowered purslane (fig. 69)..................... 517 Puer ria Thunbergiana (fig. 41)...................... 301 Snake radish (fig. 70 and

71)................ 533, 535 Romaine gigogne (fig. 72)............ . ............... 537 - du Pamir (fig. 73)............................... 539 Salpichroa rhomboidea (fig. 57)......... ................. 435 Sagittaria variabilis (fig. 74)................................ 553 Scolymus hispanicus (fig. 75)... ......................... 556 Sechium edule (fig. 14)..................................... 83 Sicana odorifera (fig. 22)................................... 114 Sinapis junca, var, napiformis (fig. 54)....................... 419 Sium Sisarum (figs. 15 et 16).............................. 87 Soja hispida (fig. 77)..................................... 576 Solanum betaceum (fig. 79). 631 - muricatum (fig. 53)............................... 412 - macrocarpum (fig. 34). ............................ 211 - olivare (fig. 58).................................. 438 - Pierreanum (fig. 59).............................. 443 Souchet comestible (fig. 76)............................... 572 Soya (fig. 77).............................................. 576 Stachys affinis (figs. 27 et 28).......................... 146, 147 Tomate en arbre (fig. 79)..................... 631 Topinambour de la Martinique (fig. S0)...................... 635 Trapa bicornis (fig. S0)...................... 45)................................... 347 bispinosa (fig. 46).................................... 350 verbanensis (figs. 47 et 48)................... 359, 360 Trichosanthe couleuvre (fig. 81)............................. 639 Trichosanthes anguina (n̂g. 81)........................639 Tropæolum tuberosum (fig. 13).............................. E Va ériane d'Alger (fig. 82).................................. 647 Zmngiber Mioyn (fig. 52)............................ ....... 397 1 Achira............... 70 Achira cimarrona... A ctinostemma paniculatum Maxim.... A denophora verticillata Fisch Adzuki................ Agriophyllum arenarium tnge......... 526, - gobicum Buge. 526, Aha.................. Ahacha................ Ahipa............. 189, Ail à fleurs comestibles.. Ainu-Wasabi............. Aje...................... Albersia oleracea Kunth.. Alcocalz......... Alkekenge jaune douce... Allium canadense Kalm.... - fistulosum L., var. Catawissu......... - japonicum Regel.... - leptophyllum Wallich. - nipponicum Franch. et Sav............ - odorum L........... - oleraceum L........ 75 643 421 224 547 220 221 209 - 3 420 242 14 364 488 97 91 *& ☙"0 Aloo...................242 Alstroemère Liuto... Alstrœmeria Ligtu L.... - Ligta Ruiz et Pav.... 7 Amande de terre........ 571 Amarante de Palmer. 10 Amarante oléracée... 14 Amarantus flavus L... 14 - gangetieus L....... 15 - oleraceus L......... 14 - Palmeri S. Wats... - spinosus L......... - tristis L...... Aa. omum Mioga Kæmpf... Amorphophallus Konjac C. 16 15 15 396 Koch..... 289 Rivieri Durieu, var. Konjac........ Amphicarpæa monoica Ell. 289 et Nutt.......... 216 - Edgeworthii Benth., var. japonica..... - sarmentosa Ell...... 220 218 Anamalahobé..... 143 Anampatsa.. Anemone flaccida Fr. Schm. Annesorhiza macrocarpa Eckl. et Zevh. montana Eckl. et Zeyh. Anethum dulce DC........ 16 288 22 22 192 Angourie à fruits longs.... 638 Angourie des Antilles..... Ansérine Quinoa..... Anthericum esculentum Spr. 48 523 62 Anvert........ 366 Anys-wortel. 22 Apins tuberosa Mœnch 23, 330 Apios tubéreuse. 23, 330 Amana... --...---...-..... 336 1 Apodanthera Palmeri Wats... 646 Aponogéton à deux épis... 25 Basella alba L............. Aponogeton angustifolium Ait.............. - crinifolium Lehm... - crispum Thunb.... - desertorum Zeyh..... - distachyum Thunb... - echinatum Roxb..... - junceum Lehm...... - microphyllum Roxb. - monostachyum L.f... - undulatum Roxb.... - zosteræfolium Schrad. Arachide.............. Arachis hypogæa L.. 31 31 31 31 41 25 31 31 31 41 31 31 31 32 32 Aralia cordata Thunb...... 448 - polaris Hombr. et Jac¡............. 450 - edulis Sieb. et Zucc. Aricoma................. Arisæma Conjac Sieb..... Arracacha esculenta DC.... - moschata DC........ - xanthorrhiza Bauer... Arracacia......... Arrow Head......... Arrow-root........ Arum sagittifolium L....... - xanthorrhizon Jacq.. Asparagus ascendens Hamilt........... - lucidus Lindl.... - trichophyllus Bunge. Asperge tubéreuse... Athamantha sicula L....... 448 509 289 35 36 35 35 552 366 362 362 39 38 39 38 89 Atropa origanifolia Desf.... 134 rhomboidea Hook.... 434 Ava-tenga-tiga........... 256 B Balebale................ 259 Balisier à deux couleurs... - à fécule... Bambous comestibles..... Bambusa e tulis Carr... - macroculmis A. Riv... - mitis Poir.......... Bamieh.................. 74 70 40 44 44 44 204 Ban-tchoung-tsi......... 530 Bangkoang............... 182 Ban Patol... 641 Bardane comestible....... 45 Bardane du Japon....... 45 - cordifolia Lamk..... - crassifolia Wight.... - rubra L. Baselle à feuilles en cœur. - de Chine à très larges feuilles...... - blanche........... - rouge............ 51 50 51 51 49 50 50 49 49 Batatas edulis Chois.., var.. 315 Bellevalia comosa Kunth... 58 Beloes............ 638 Beni kuwandzo.........336 Benincasa cerifera Savi..... Bénincasa cérifère. Berle des potagers........ Bhat........ 53 53 85 573 Bhat wan.......... 575 Bicorne jaune.......... 119 Bœrhaavia paniculata Lamk. 206 Bidens pilosa L... 416 Bitter root.............. 322 Bolboi........ Bolbos............... Borboi........... 57 58 58 Borodina..... 403 Bosch Barroe...... Bossai...... 501, Boussingaultia baselloides Kunth............. Boussingaultie... 172 550 60 60 Brassica chinensis L..... 464 Brè le.................... - d'Angola........... 14 49 - de Zanzibar........ 626 - Gandole........... 49 - malzache. 409 Bundo................ 227 Bunium incrassatum Battandier et Trabut... .. 627 Busbeckia radicans Mart... 434 C Cabellos de Angel... 124, 125 Caia..................... 455 Caïqua................ 368 Calabra de China..... 113 Caladium sagittifoliumVent. 362 - utile Hort. 362 - aanthorrhizon Willd. 362 Calalou. 206 - Baselle. 50 Calathea Allouia t......... 634 Cal undou..... 230 Calystegia japonica Choisy. 287 Casmash........... 62 Camassia esculenta Lindl. 62, 330 - Fraseri Torr........ Camassie comestible..... 69 62 Cambare........... 242 Canaigre.............. 446 Cane Suoots....... 102 Canna comestible.... - discolore......... Canna Achiras Gillies..... - coccinea Ait...... - discolor Lindl....... - edulis Ker..... - flaccida Dill........ - gigantea Desf....... - glauca L.......... - indica Lindl!........ - paniculata Ruiz et Pav............ Canna root............... Capacho.......... 70 74 72 71 74 70 21 3 84 74 72 75 74 75 70 Cape Gooseberry......... 478 Capucine tubéreuse..... 76 Caras................ 241 Cardamine yesoensis Maximowicz.............. Cardillo................ Cardouille.............. Carum Gairdneri Benth. et Hook........... 420 555 563 81 - incrassatum Boiss... 627 Caruru................. Carvi de Gairdner........ 14 81 Castagna del lago. 261 Custalia edulis Salisb..... 432 - cœrulea Tratt....... 433 - magnifica Salisb.... - mystica Salisb...... 442 432 Castelia cuneato ovata Cav... 462 Catawissa............... Caui.................. Caya................... Centranthus macrosiphon 91 455 508 Boiss...... 648 Ceratocephalus pilosus Rich. Chærophyllum canadense 416 Pers.............. 401 Chahiota............... Chakli-bi.............. Chalcam................ 82 333 209 Chan Yu............ 242 667 Châtaigne d'eau.......... 358 Chayota... Chayota edulis Jacq..... Chayote.... Chenopodium auricomum F Muell..... 82 82 82 82 525 - Quinoa Willd..... 523 Chervis................ Cheveux d'Ange........... Chinese Artichoke...... Chira take...... Chiro ko................. Chirouis............... Chita............... Choopuree alo.......... Choro-gi................ Chou caraîbe.... - de Chine........... Chou Yu................ Chouchoute... Christophine. Chuchu.......... Chucklusa........ 85 124 145. 296 296 85 322 251 145 352 464 3 245 8 CE 82 & 90 Chufa................... 573 Chuno de Liuto......... * D Chuno de Oca..... 455 Ciboule Catawissa.... Citrouille odorante... Claytone perfoliée... Claytonia cubensis Bonpl... -- perfoliata Willd.... - virginica L........ Co-ba................ Cocodyi............. Coleus barbatus Benth..... - edulis Valke........ - parviflorus Benth. - tuberosus Benth. 377. - tuberosus A. Richard. Colocasia antiquorum Schott........ 298, - esculenta Schott 207, Conanthera bifolia Ruiz et Pav................... Concombre de Mandéra... - du Sikkim.... 91 385 97 97 100 101 264 383 382 381 381 382 363 70 108 110 - musqué.......... 113 Concombre arada....... - à épines........... - des Antilles........ - épineux d'Amérique. - marron........... - sauvage... Conium Arracacha Hook... 18 13 18 18 * 1 18 Y3 18 35 Chara.................... 1421 Conophallus Konjac Schott... 289 TABLE ALPHABETIQUE DES MATIÈRES Conopodium canadense Koch 401 Convolvilus juponicus Thunb. 287 - reptans L.......... 653 - repens Willd... 653 Caqueret à feuille d'Ansérine............ .. 482 - du Pérou....... 476 Corchorus olitorius L., var. edulis........... 117 - capsularis L...... 117 Corette potagère......... 117 Cornaret jaune......... 119 Corne d'abondance.... 647 Corydalis ambigua Cham. et Schlcht... 288 Cottavaré................ 230 Couche-couche... 280 Courge de Siam......... 121 Courge torchon.... ..... 500 Cous................... 91 Cousse-couche... 280 Crambé de Tartarie.... 129 Crambe cordifolia Stev..... 142 - laciniata Lamk..... 129 - Tataria Jacq....... 129 - tatarica Willd. 129 Cresson de Para..... 142 Crocus Aucheri Boiss.... 544 - cancellatus Herb. var. persicus...... 542 - edulis Boiss. et Blanche............. 544 - Sieberi Gay. 544 Crosne................. 545 Cryptotænia canadensis DC. 401 Cryptolobus americanus Spreng........ 216 - sarmentosus Spreng. 216 Cucumis agrestis Mill..... 374 - anguinus L.... 638 - Anguria L..... 18, 206 - compressus L....... 19 - Dudaim!...... 385 - Melo L., var. Dudaim. - odoratissimusMœnch. - Pancherianus Ndn... - pedatifidus Schrad... 385 391 385 385 - pictus Jacu......... 385 - Reginæ Schrad.... - Sacleuxuï Paill. et 385 Bois.......... 108 - sativus L., var. sikkimensis......... 110 - Schraderianus Rœm. 385 Cucurbita cerifera Savi.... 53 Cucurbita ficifolia Bouché... 121 - melanosperma A. Braun. 121 Cumar.................. 321 Cumingia tenella Don...... 70 Curua................... 113 Curuba.... 113 Cu sàng.......... 186 Cyamopsis psoraloides DC... 230 Cyclanthera edulis Ndn... 169 - explodens Schrad... 171 - pedata Schrad. 168 Cyclanthère comestible... 169 - pèdiaire. 168 Cyclobothra lutea Lind!... 70 Cyperus dulcis Rumph... 501 - esculentus L....... 571 Cyphia tortilis N. E. Brown. 172 - sylvatica Eckl.... 172 Cyphomandra betacea Cav... 630 I Daidzu...... 575 Daïkon................173 - de Satzouma 180 Daima-giku.............. 145 Daizu... 575 Dasycoma subpinnatum Miq. 569 Dau................... 182 Daun Sabran............. 182 Daunech.............. 382 Daunini............... 259 Dieffenbachia Sequine Schott.. 207, 236 Dioscorea aculeata L.. 253, 263 - affinis Knth. 268 - alataL.231,252,259, 263, 268 - altissima Lamk.... 268 - anguina Roxb.. 239, 255 - atropurpurea Roxb.... 236 253 - Batatas Dene., 230, 237. 246, 273. - Berteroana Knth.... - bulbifera L. 236, 268, - cayennensis Lamk....... 235, 286 235 284 268 - crispata Roxb.. 238, 255 - Decaisneana Carr. 218, 273 - dæmona Roxb.. 237, 256 - eburnea Lour...... - fasciculata Roxb.238, 236 253 - Fargesü Franch. 248, 281 Dioscorea glabra Roxb..... 256 - globosa Roxb... 234, 251 - heterophylla Roxb... 256 - intermedia Thw..... 237 - japonica Thunb. 230, 237, 246, 276 - lutea Mey. 237 - nummularia Lamk... 237. 255 263 - oppositifolia L.. 237, 256 pentaphylla L....236, 250, 257, 203 - pubescens Poir...... 269 - pulchella Roxb...... 254 - purpurea Roxb. 234, - rubella Roxb... 234. sativa L... 236, 263, - Schimperiana Hochst. spicata Roth... - tomentosa Kœn. 239, - toxicaria Boj..... - trifida L........... 252 252 270 236. 239 256 238. 280 - tritoba Lamk. 231,234, 267 - (riphylla L... 237, -truncata........ 268 268 Djinsai....... 656 Doku quatz.............. Dolic bulbeux.......182, - tubéreux..... Dolichos bulbosus L...... - hirsutus l'hunb..... - Soja L............ - tuberosus Lamk. 189, 448 190 189 182 300 575 511 Dosjen................... 448 Dotooki... 448 Dserlin lobine........... 545 Dudaî.................. 385 E Eleocharis esculenta Vieillard. 507 - plantaginea F. Muell. - tuberosa Schult. 349, Engasaku................ Epiaire à chapelets.... - des marais... 508 501 288 145 166 Épinard d'Australie...... 525 - de Chine.... - du Gabon.......... - du Malabat......... - marron... ... .... 49 16 49 14 Eremurus aurantiacus Baker 332 Erythronium dens-canis, var. grandiflora....... 331, Euryale ferox Salisb....... 336 431 Eutrema WasabiMaximowicz 420 Euxolus caudatus Moq..... - oleraceus Moq....... 16 14 Fedia Cornucopiæ Gærtn... 647 Fennel doux.......... 192 Fève d'Égypte....... 423 201 Ficoïde cristalline... 199 Fito Radzuka... 496 Florida artichoke....... Fœniculum az ricum Miller. - dulce C. Bauh...... Fritillaria kamtschatensis 167 192 192 Fisch...... 331 - Roylei Hook 645 Fromage de Soya.... 603 Fuki... 197 Fukubero............. 288 3 Gado-gado.... . 224 Gajo-so... 288 Gandola alba Rumph...... - rubra Rumph...... 49 49 Gari Kulay....... 575 Gatole....... 368 G n-Mame... 220 uirole....... Glaciale...... 85 199 Gladiolus edutis Burch 660 Glycine Apios L........... 23 - bracteata L. 216 - comosa !...... - hispida Miq........ - monoica L......... - Soja Sieb. et Zucc. 216 575 216 575 - subterronea L... 650 Elm. 45 Gol Kandra............ 375 Gombo. Gongoulou du Cachemire.. Go-san tsikou. 42, Gotte-keligam.......... Gotte-kelim. .. Grekika kerata.......... 202 209 43 389 382 204 - Olgæ Regel.....-... 332 ! Groseille pay... .......... 280 Grosse Anguine......... 210 Guayavos................ 411 Gumalla................. 321 Gumarra............... 321 Gundelia Tournefortii!.... Gymnogongrus pinnulatus... 4 299 Guranya aloo............ 252 Gynandropsis pentaphyltu DC................ 144, 206 H Hacub.................... 3 Haricot de Baria...... 213 - de terre.......... 216 - de terre du Japon... 220 - de Ricciardi...... 215 - Mungo......... 222 - du Tonkin....... 213 Haru sukashi Yuri....... 335 Hasu none.... 425 Ha tsikou........... 42 Heleocharis tuberosa Schult. 349 Hemerocallis graminea Andr. 336, - minor Mill.... 336 336 340 340 Herbe à la flèche......... 365 Herbe à la glace........ Hibiscus cannabinus L.... - esculentus L........ - Sabdariffa!..206, 199 286 202 284 Hieronymus Würzel...... 135 Hime Yuri........... 335 Hiratori Yuri............. 335 Hoang-Kin........ 303 Hockate-Gobo......... 46 Hog Nut................ 216 Hogaku................ 335 Horaiji Yuri........... 334 Hotei tsikou......... 43 Houmime................ 378 Houmime................ 378 Huevos de Gallo. 434 Hyacinthus comosus L...... 58 Hydropyrum esculentu.n Link 103 - latifolium Griseb.... 101 Igname............ 230 - de Chine.. 273 - de Farges......... 248 Iguamas........ 184 Ikokuttara............... 198 Indian Rice................. 247, 298 Indian Rice...... 103 people Soy............... 612 Inhame............. 242 Inou sirone.............. 384 Ipomxa aquatica Forsk.... 653 - Batatas Poir., var. chrysorrhiza Forst.. 315 - reptans Poir....... 653 Iris edulis Thunb........ 660 - juncea Poir. 657 - lusitanica Ker...... 657 Jamaso.................. 198 Jangli chachinda.......... 641 Jeche imo............... 246 Jellico................... 569 Jmen jo................. 246 Jiquima.................. 513 Jiquimilla....... 513 Jiquie....... ........... 117 R Kaffir Potato............. 383 Kaile............ 262 Kaile tokatolu......... 262 Kam aloo........... 242, 252 Kamass rool.... 64 Kandyk................. 331 Kan-lu..... 145 Kan sun.......... 102 Kunoko Yur. 335 Kanta aloo....... .... 257 Kanta natya............. 16 Kan-ten............ 225 Kao-paé............. 105 Kârâmanie payarou....... 230 Karela................. 368 Kasokaso.......... 250 Kasoni.........250 Katako Yuri...... 330 Katakuri.............. Katjang heedja!...... . 336 224 Katrán bjeloi............ 136 Kawai....... 261 Kenhirugawo.... 287 Kerneria dubia Ca s...... 416 - tetragona Mœnch... 416 lhinga................... 498! Ketmie acid......... 202, 224 Ketmie comestible........ 202 Lilium avenaceum Fisch... 332 Keu..................... 259 Khithsi................. 303 303 Khu qua.............. 368 Kia pey mou....... 643 Kiao................. 101 - pai tsai............ 101 - sun................ 101 Kidney bean....... 218 Kieu..................... - 1 Kilira.......... 264 Kiri imo................. 247 Kitesh......... 287 Kiu.................... 341 Kiu tzee................ 614 Knollenziest............ 145 Ko........ .... 300 Kolbesch..... 118 Koniaku... 280 Kookoor aloo......... 255 Kon Nyaku d'li Numa..... 299 Korokoni............ 97 Kou........... 101 Kouchou... 363 Koung t'sai............ Kudzu............... Kulcas.......... 654 300 364 Kumara..... 315 Kuwai................. 549 - bulbiferum L........ - callosum Sieb. et Zuc. - cordifotium Thunb.. - japonicum Thunb.. 340 338 339 338 - kamtschaticum Hoffin. 331 - longiflorum Thunb... - pomponium Thunb.. - spectabile Fisch..... - speciosum Thunb... - tenuifolium L... - ThunbergianumRœm. et Sch..... - tigrinum Gawl. 335, 338, Limnanthemum pel tatum 338 335 331 334 331 335 342 Gmel.................. 656 Ling Kio....... .....347, 506 Li comestibles 330 Lis rose des Egyptieus..... 423 Liu kiu yuri.............. 335 Liuto................... 8 D Lokaloka............. 259 Long Okra..... 498 Lotus du Nil.............. 423 Lou teou....... - teou sze........... - teou tseiou........ - tz'tsung.. Luffa acutangula Ser...... - cylindrica Roem... Lycopus lucidus Turcz... Lysi chiton kamtchatcense 223 226 226 94 498 501 384 Schott......... 65 L Lactuca sativa, var.... 536, 538 Lagana............. 358 Lal-indrayan........... 643 Lal Sag.................. 15 Lau-ho...- ...... 303 Lappa edulis Steb...... - major Gærtn.., var. 45 edulis............ 45 Lat-guranya aloo......... 252 Lava namula......... 259 Leiotulus alexandrinus Ehrenb........... Leopoldia Holzmanni Heldr. Lepidium chilense Desf..... - Meyenii Walpers.... 567 57 143 343 - oleraceum Ait..... 143 - Piscidium Forst..... 143 - virginicum L........ 143 Lewisia..... 322 Lewisia rediviva Pursh. .. 322 Lien hoa.. 505 M Maatai................. 504 Mäca....... 343 Macre à deux cornes..... 346 - à deux épines... 350 - verbanaise.... 358 Ma-daké..............41, Madère............ 44 207 Makal......... 643 Makayo............... Malawari..... 198 403 Malabaila Sekakul Russel... 567 - platyptera Boiss... 567 Mame...........575 Mandubi d'Angola... 650 Mangareto............... 366 Lilium auratum Lindl..... 333 ! Mangaride............... 322 Maô-Yu-tsé.............. 248 Mapuev 270, 280 Maranta arundinacé... 365 Maranta All uya Aubl..... 634 - arundinacea L...... 365 - indica Tussac 365 Margose........ 71 Margose à piquants...... 368 Martvnie jaune. 119 Martynia Craniolaria Swartz. 120 - lutea Lind!......... 119 Mâsh.... 228 - Kolai..... ...... 230 Matambala......... 375 - Mauve des Juifs... .... 11 - potagère........ S 117 M'Counive..... .. 498 Meï.................. 304 Mekanada........... .. 15 Melloco....... 439 Melocoton.......... Melon belle Angevine... blanc du Japon... - Chayote....... 113 391 389 391 de Nouméa.... . 393 - Dudaïm... 382 Melon de la Reine Aune... 385 - de San Gaëtano... 368 - des Canaries.... 385 - de senteur....... 385 - Pear............ 410 - Shrub... ...... . 411 Mélonkie............... 113 Melonsito de olor 386 Melothria pendula L...... 394 Mélothria pendante..... 391 Membiru.................. Mesembryanthemum angulatum Thunb....... 4 201 - cordifolium L..... 201 - cristallinum L.... 199 Metake................ 41 Mioga................. 396 Miso...... 579, 585 Mitsuba, Mitsuba Seri... 401 Moala.......... 259 Momendv Ajoovo........ 141 Momordica, Balsamina Descourt. (non Linné). 368 - Balsamina L. 374 - Charantia l.., var. minor Mn..... . 371 Charantia L.., var. Momordica Charantia L., var. muricata Grisb. 371 - Charantia Descourt. (non Linné)...... 374 - Charantia L... 368 - dioica Roxb. 375 - jagorana C. Koch... 368 - muricata Willd... 371 - operculata Willd, 368 - Roxburghiana Don... 371 - senegalensis Lamk... 371 - vulyaris Tournef... 374 - zeylanica Mill. 371 Morxa edulis Ker...... 560 Morelle de Balbis. 406 - de Salta. 408 - de Wallis. 411 - des anthropophages. 403 - des Oiseaux. 408 - nodiflore 409 Morelle des cannibales... 403 Mo So............ 41. 44 Mô-so-také... 42 Moth............ 230 Mothi............. . 230 Motsiji.... 416 Mou aloo...... 253 Mougri... 532 Mountain Rose.... 322 Moutarde tubéreuse. 418 Mouzambi......115, 206 Moyashi...... 226 Mug......... 230 Mugi-guwai 336 Muguet des Pampas..... 436 Mukekashi......... 421 Mung................. 230 Muscari comosim Mll..... Musli......... 58 40 Myrrhis canadensis Moris... 401 Nadrou.... .. 428 Nafé (pâte et sirop de).... 205 Naga imo.... 230 Nama...... - dumpa.......... 31 31 Name............. 212 Namé de Sauto Doming... 269 - de liso.......... 269 - de Espina........ 269 abbreriata...... 371 Narangita................ 632 Nasturtium indicum DC.... 144 1 Oseille de Guinée..... 206, Natsu Sukashi Yuri....... 335 Natya Sag................ 14 Nelumbium asperifolium Delile............. 429 - luteum Willd...... 430 - speciosum Willd..... 423 Nélumbo de l'Inde........ 423 - jaune.... 430 Nelumbo lutea Caspary.... 430 - nucifera Gærtn...... 423 Neurosperma cuspidata Raf. 374 Neustanthus chinensis Benth. 300 Ngeon fen........ 426 Ngeon fen........ 426 Mra................. 6 Nisesseri. 420 Nobiru................... 8 Nukago... .. 246 Nuphar multisepalum Engelm............. 432 - advenum Ait....... 431 Nymphæa abbreviata Guill.. et Perr........... 433 - cœrulea Savign..... 433 - edulis DC.......... 432 - esculenta Roxb.. 432 - Lotus L............. 432 - micrantha Guill. et Perr............. 433 - Rudgeana Mey...... 433 - rufescens Guill. et Perr............. 433 Nymphéacées alimentaires. 431 Oca...................... 451 Ochuba................. Oebi..................... Œnanthe sarmentosa Nutt.. 488 242 570 - stolonifera DC...... 569 Œufs de coq.............. 434 Ofetchiku......... Oignon Catawissa........ 41 91 O Kina Yuri...... ....... 335 Olivaire du Congo........ 437 Olluco.......... 439 Olombé du Gabon... Omalanthus pedicellatus Benth...... Oni Yuri............ 335, 442 403 338 Orythia edulis Miq........ 336 Oseille pahouine......... O Soune.............586, 673 284 445 538 Oubi..................... 242 Oudo................. 448 Oumime................ 378 Oumime bâtard....... 378 Ouri..................... 337 Ou Sen................. Ouvirandra fenestralis Poiret................... Ovirandrana............ 541 31 31 Oxalide crénelée.. 451 - de Deppe... 459 Oxalis crenata Jacq... 451 - Deppei Sweet..... 459 - tetraphylla Cav., var. Deppei.. 459 - tuberosa Molina..... 510 Pachyrrhizus angulatus Rich....... 182, - Thunbergianus Sieb. et Zucc.......... - trilobus DC......... - tuberosus Spreng.... Palbal................... Pandipane............. Pantana...... Panturasee............. Papa lisa............ Papengaye............ Papilla........... Pastinaca dissecta Vent.... 190 300 300 189 643 368 124 569 439 501 462 567 - Sekakul Rauw....... 567 Patagon................ Patate............ Patché payarou.......... Patole.................. Patwa............... Payarou.................. Pe ci................... 206 315 230 638 286 230 502 Pé mou........643, 645 Pepinhodo mato.......... 21 Pepino................... 411 - de Comer.. 170 Persicaire à feuilles cuspidées................... 463 Peruvian Cherry.......... 478 Petasites japonicus Schmidt. 197 Petite Margose à piquants. 371 Oseille Canaigre.......... 446 1 Petite Tomate de Saita.... 408 4 Petite Tomate du Mexique. 482 Petite Valériane....... 206 Petit Riz du Pérou........ 523 Petole................... 501 Pé-tsai................... 464 Peucedanum Canbyi Coulter et Rose.......... - ambiguum Nutt..... - farinosum Geytr... - Cous Watson........ 90 90 90 91 Pey mou............ 643, 645 Phalangium esculentum Nutt. - Quamash Pursh... 62 62 Phaseolus aconitifolius L... 230 - aureus Ten.... 222 - calcaratus Roxb... 230 - farinosus L......... - hirtus Retz........ - humilis Hassk...... - Max Roxb........ - minimus Rumph. .. - Mungo L........... - radiatus L.......... - Ricciardianus Ten... - subvolubilis Ham.... - tunkinensis Lour.... - viridissimus Ten. 201, Phellandrium stoloniferum 230 222 8 223 222 222 222 215 222 213 222 Roxb................. 569 Phellopterus littoralis Benth. 402 Phrynium Allouia Roscoe. 634 Phyllostachys aurea Rivière. - mitis Rivière..... 43 44 Physalis de Franchet.... 489 - du Costa Rica..... 486 - du Pérou.......... 476 - violet..... 482 Physalis atriplicifolia Jacq. 482 - chenopodifolia Willd. 482 - edulis Bossin...... 482 - - Sims.... 476 - fœtens Poir....... 488 - Francheti Masters... 489 - Lafonii Paill. et Bois. 486 - lanceifolia Nees..... 487 - megistocarpos Zuccagn. 482 - minima L..... 488 - origanifolia Lamk... 434 - peruviana L, var. foliis subintegris.... 476 - philadelphica Lamk. 482 - pubescens L... 488 - villosa Dun.... 487 Phytolacca acinosa, var. esculenta Maxim... 196 - decandra L. 491 - esculenta Van Houlte. 496 - Kæmpferi A. Gray... 406 - oclandra L....... 496 Phytolaque à dix étamines. 491 - comestible........ 496 Picotiane................ 521 Picurnia esculenta Moq.... 496 - pekinensis Hance.... 496 Pionandra betacea Miers... 630 Pipengaille........ 498 Pipinella.......... 82 Pistache de terre.......... 32 Pi-t'si............... 349, 501 Planchonia arbuti olia Dun. 434 Plectranthus barbatus Andr. 383 - esculentusN.E. Brown. 383 - floribundusN.E.Brown 383 - madagascariensis Benth............ 378 - ternatus Sims....... 375 - tuberosus Blume. 381 Poire de terre Cochet..... 500 Polygonum cuspidatum Sieb. et Zucc.......... 463 - multiflorum Buerg... 463 - sachalinense Schmidt....... 198, 464 - Sieboldii Hort..... 463 Polymnia edulis Weddell... 509 Pomme de Brahma...... 385 - de merveille...... 374 - de terre de Cygne.... 553 - de terre de Madagascar.............. 381 - de terre de marais... 553 Pomo di terra della Regina. 159 Porcelaine. 626 Portulaca grandiflora Hook. 516 - patens Jacq...... 625 Pourpier à grandes fleurs. 516 Pourpier dressé.. 626 Priva lævis Juss.... 462 Provatza. 520 Psoralea esculenta Pursh 330, 521 Psoralea comestible. 521 Pueraria Thunbergiana Benth.......... . . 300 Pugionium cornutum Gærtn. 545 - dolabratum Maxim... 545 Pukusa-Kina............. 288 Pu-tsai... 504 - violacea Carr.....-. 482 ! Pythagorian Bean.......... 423 Qualusa.................. 362 Quamash................. Quélite.............. 62 16 Quinoa................ 523 R Racine amère............ 322 Radis du Japon........... 173 - monstrueux de Kashgar..... - rose d'hiver de Chine. - serpent............ Radis de Madras.......... Raphanus caudatus !.... - sativus L., var. 173, Mausi................... 530 529 532 533 532 529 259 Renouée cuspidée..... 463 - de Siebold.......... 463 Risesseri................. 420 Riz (Petit) du Pérou... 523 Romaine asperge...... 538 - Gigogne. 530 Romaine du Pamir....... Roselle-Indian-Sorrel...... Rouba................... 535 285 439 Rumex abyssinicus Jacq..... 445 - arifolius Ait........ 446 - hymenosepalus Torr.. 446 Sada-payarou............. 230 Safran comestible...... 542 Sag................. 15 Sagai....... 545 Sagittaire de Chine et du Japon............ Sagittaires comestibles.... 549 549 Sagittaria acuminata Smith. 549 - alpina Willd. 549 - gracilis Pursh.... 552 - hastata Don......... 549 - - Pursh... - heterophylla Miller... - hirundacea Blume... 552 549 549 - latifolia Pursh.... 552 - latifolia Willd....... 552 Sagittaria longiloba Engelm. 675 et Torr...... 553 - macrophylla Bunge.......... 549, - natans Pall........ - obtusa Thunb....... - obtusa Willd........ porriana Sweet. - sagittæfolia L., var. 352 549 549 553 549 diversifolia Micheli. 549 - simplex Pursh. 553 - sinensis Sims....... - variabilis Micheli.... 549 552 Sain-In.................. 242 Salpichroa rhomboidea Miers............... 434 Salpichroma rhomboideum Miers............... 434 Sambo............ San ruoang............ 128 182 Sarana............ 331 Sarana kamtschatica Fisch. 331 Sassayari............. 338 Sato imo............298 Scilta esculenta Smith..... - Fraseri A. Gray..... 62 69 Scirpus sphacelatus Spr.... 508 - tuberosus Roxb... 501 Scolyme d'Espagne... ... 555 Scolymus hispanicus L.... 555 Scorsonère délicieuse.... 563 Scorzonera deliciosa Gussone 563 Sechium edule Swartz..... Sedre......... 82 259 Seguine......... 207 Sekakul.............. 567 Senebiera pinnatifida DC... 143 Seri................. 569 Serpent végétal..... 638 Shiratamayuri... 335 Shiro uri................ 389 Shisen imo.... 246 Shoot.................. 102 Shora-aloo.... 255 Short-podded Vam-bean... Shoyu....... 580, 182 586 Sicana odorifera Ndn...... 113 Sikao Omodaka... 550 Sinapis juncea L., var. napiformis Paill, et Bois..... 418 Singhara..... 350 Siro Quai........ 550 Sirru kirai...... 15 Sium canadense Lamk... 401 - Helenianum Hook... 568 TABLE ALPHABÉTIQUE DES MATIÉRES Sium Sisarum L.......... 85 Skachi........ 335 Skunk Cabbage.......... Smilacina oleracea Hook... 65 et Th.................. 333 Snake gourq... 638 Soja hispida Mœnch.... Solanum anthropophagorum 575 Seeman.......... 403 - aviculare Forst...... 408 - Balbisii Dun..... 406 - betaceum Cay.. 630 - brancæfolium Jacq... 406 - decurrens Balb...... 406 - edule Velloz.. - formosum Hort. Dor406 pat.............. 406 - guatemalense Tisen... 411 - inflatum Hornem. 406 - laciniatum Ait.... 408 - macrocarpum L..... 210 - mauritianum... 406 - muricatum Ait., var. 411 - nigrum L., var patulum L......... 409 - nodiflorum Jacq. 206, 409 - oleraceum Dunal.. - olivare Paill. et Bois. - opulifolium Portens410 437 ch... 406 - Pierreanum Paill. et Bois......... 442 - piliferum Benth..... 634 - quitense H. B. K.... 633 - quitoense Lamk.... 633 - sisymbriifolium Lamk 406 - Thouini Gmel....... 406 - viscidum Schweigg.. 406 - Wallisii Carr 411 Solenostemon densiflorus Benth.............. 377 Sooju.................. 580 Soosni aloo. 253 Souchet comestible.... 571 Souchet sultan...... 571 Soulkhir 526, 547 Soy................. 612 Soya....... 575 Spatulum... 322 Spilanthes oleracea L... 142 Spœtlum........ 322 Stachys affinis Bunge...... 145 - floridana Shuttlew... 164 - palustris L. 166 Stachys tuberifera Ndn..... 145 Statice sinuata L... 520 Stilbocarpa polaris Dene. et Planch.. .... 450 Stizolobium bu bosumSpreng. 182 Taagu................... 521 Tagarninas..............555 Tahuique........... 659 Taiachas...............78 Take-noko....... 41 Talghouda.... 628 Talinum crassifolium Willd. 626 - patens Willd........ 625 Talinum étalé. 625 Tallo.................... 364 Tallus................. 364 Talruda d'Algérie....... 627 Talruda d'Algérie....... 627 Tametomo............... 334 Tapiramo................ 191 Taro....................364 Tataria ungarica Clus.... 130 Tatar Kenyer............. 134 Taugee....... 224 Ta-vah-pah.............. 431 Taye..................... 362 Tayo.................... 362 Tayoba................. 362 Tayove.................. 362 Ten mado...... 38 Ten mon do.............. 38 Teou-fou... 602, 603 Tignou tzé............ 145 Tigridia Van Houttei Roezl. 659 Tikau........... 262 Tindlohu.............. 652 Tinguarra sicula Parlat.... 89 Tipsina.................. 521 Ti-teou-mi........ 431 Tivoli............ 262 To-Fu............... 580, 593 Toloman................ 362 Tolomane..... 71 Toma.................... 288 Tomate de la Paz. 630 Tomo Roki.............. Topinambour blanc de la 38 Martinique...... 634 Tordylium Sekakul DC..... 567 Torui................ 408 Toulema................ 71 - Sieboldi Miq........ 145 1 Toulka payarou.......... 230 Toulola.................. 366 ¡ Udo..................... 448 Tous les mois........... Tou tchou.............. Tovaria oleracea Baker.... Toya................. Trapa bicornis L..... .... - bispinosa Roxb... .. - cochinchinensis Lour. - incisa Sieb. et Zucc. - natans L., var. cono71 242 333 362 346 350 351 351 carpa............ 362 - natans L., var. verbanensis............ 358 - verbanensis De Notaris.............. Tree Tomato.............. Trichodesma zeylanicum R. Br.................. Trichosanthe couleuvre... Trichosanthes cucumerina L. - anguina L.......... - colubrina Jacq...... - dioica Roxb......... 358 630 626 638 641 638 638 643 - ovigera Blume...... 642 - palmata Roxb.... 643 - Turolata Hamilt.... 638 Tropæolum edule Paxt...... - pentaphyllum Lamk. - polyphyllum Cav.... - sessilifolium Poepp. et Endl.......... - tuberosum Ruiz et Pavon......... 76, Trophis anthropophagorum Seem................ Tsao che tsan............ Tsiang-yeou soy.......... Tsin teou............. Tsuku imo........... Tsuno mata............ Tsurigane ninjin........ Tsyo-rogi................ Tsz'Ku.................. 81 81 81 81 510 403 145 612 226 246 299 421 145 549 Tuberina................. 145 Tudana................ 403 Tuhuha................. Tulema....... Tulipa montana Lindl..... - suaveolens Roth..... U 90 22 71 332 332 Uba-yuri................. 341 Ubi...................... 242 Ulluco.......... 439 Ullucus tuberosus Lozano 439. 510 Umarra... 321 Umbondine Potato..... 383 Umeda Gobô............. Urd mâsh........... Uvi........ 46 230 259 Uyuca................... 439 Valériane à grosses tiges... 64" - d'Alger 647 Vegetable Mercury....... 630 - pear............... 82 Vieusseuxia edulis Link... 660 Voámitsa... 378 Voandzeia subterranea Du Pet.-Th.. 650 Voandzou........... 650 Voanzo 650 Voli............... 259 Wab-es-i-pinig.......... 554 Wasabi............420 Wasei-yuri. 337 Water oats............. 103 White Lewisia.... 322 - Musli.......... Wild Garlic.............. - Hyacinth........... - Sago.......... 39 90 64 70 Withania origanifolia..... 436 X Yanthosoma hastifolium Schott........... 206 - sagittifolium Schott....... 207, 362 - utile C. Koch et Bouché........... . 362 - xanthorrhizon C. Koch............... 362 Yama Gobo 496 Yama imo........ .. 247. 281 Yacon..... 511 Yam................. 242 - Bean.............. 189 Yama yuri........ 236, Yaye nari....... Yeou teou.............. Yochino............ Yo Kan............ Yobu mame....... 575 334 223 220 Young ts'aï............ 653 Ysaño................... 78 O Zétoutt des Arabes.... 657 Zingiber Mioga Rosc.... .. 390 Zi-men-Isikou.......... 43 Zizania aquatica L..... 103 - palustris Turez....... 101 Levallois-Perret. - Imprimerie Creté de l'Arbre, 55, rue Fromont. -1