didactique; by ).-B. Lalanne. 1800. 1/ Most of the content accessible on the Gallica website is digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the BnF collections. Their reuse is governed by the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: -The non-commercial reuse of this content, or as part of an academic or scientific publication, is free of charge, subject to compliance with current legislation, and in particular the requirement that the source of the content be indicated as follows: "Source gallica.bnf.fr /Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf fr/ BnF ". Commercial re-use of this content is subject to a license fee. Commercial re-use means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or the provision of a service, or any other re-use of content that directly generates income: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS THE RATES AND LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the general code of public property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are -reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. Reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr / Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which the Bnk is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ The user undertakes to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, particularly with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 7/ To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, contact utilisation. commercialeobnf.fl. 504ce gal.ca.Dbt.fr Blbltothèque pattomate de Frane26. 6 3 - M 6 ETA VI 3 E INVENTORY 3 a Rimy 5t E Vu En 2 ia *2 -4 15 LN c-Ta e cén deX1 BS " F1A 2. 3 Eii ́ C PS F3 A E 3 rtayei 5 S N E Pn n E 152 3 1 SP 15 r 18 5 FARTT bo 3 4 2 8 EI A 2 e E24 F X3 2. E F 2.  ve 3 * e ity i 5 es 81 5b 6dd 34f- -Y UT E ITAA t́ h heed 3 2 8 META R 5 ANES 2 6 PPE tr 62 3 Ya 62 LE an RTTSI L 24 A AMNEESE CES e L e E PE eia SSE S d 27 Cb E Me Br 62 45 55 S 2 C en X m EME 3 23 E SAS 2 2 MEORE 1. 3 IS e 6 e EETI 31 LES E FRTN S 6 3 d 2 8 1 5 SSPR u Atec 3 3 FTA 63 ue 9 e FI E 4 I fet a7 o MSIO et 4 7 (u e i 6 8 3 CA r *. 3 e E " M 3 EE ue - E SrS 3 3 2 C e E II 52 lg u 6 56 22 4 5233 PreS etiEs 2 3 V. órde ESLEE S 2 4 14 5 a 3 e 44 S 3 X r 1 RARSS . s 26 4 3 3 ri E SIRIAI n ean 6555 uis E Va ere E TE s. (TIe t 2 33 e 64 2 3 3 ETR 3 3 L 3 P 3 *(32. e 11 S CSI 3 ET 5 5 . I R 25 S E E l E 8 3 2 E bg S e Ro 31 S l 4 E 4 E E E A 3 1552 8 3 3 * EtE I 23 3 a en A 3 C 65 ( ESSALPIDACTICS. S é Me * ? .- **☙ U -.- es 1AF1 - - LE POTAGER, ESSAI DIDACTIQUE; PAR J. B. LALANNE. = . Cui pauca relicti Jugera ruris erunt. VIRO. Georg, lib. XV. PARIS, CHEZ LES MARCHANDS DE NOUVFAUTÉS. cen-sme = eeeee AN VIIT. - 1800. E publishes this Essay at a time when the enjoyments of the greatest number of owners, singularly diminished by the misfortune of circumstances, are squeezed into narrow limits, such as those of a vegetable garden. May these ideas, thrown unpretentiously on paper, make them find the memory of what they have lost less bitter! May this little poem give those who read it the hundredth part of the pleasure I felt in composing it! DIALOGUE Between the Critic and the Poet. THE CRITIC. EVERYTHING is in vain; nothing can make you desist from it: Well then, impregnate yourself: but fear repentance. Thou wilt, by producing thy vegetable muse, Bring thy ridicule and shame to light. For to write, in great verses, the cares of gardening, The enterprise is of a madman. LEPOÈTE. A wise man's business. Our tastes make our talents: not every rhymer can Sing, in a high tone, glory and battles; Take lyrical flight; or, under Uranie's eye, Of the stars reveal pomp and harmony. The eagle attier, in his flight invisible to our eyes, Sees in pity the earth and loses himself in the heavens. The familiar pigeon, and happier perhaps, Never strays from the roof where it was born. Like him, from a long course dreading danger, I confine my boldness to the humble kitchen garden; And, whatever reception my muse may receive, I write for my pleasure, and at least I enjoy myself. THE CRITIC. Very well: but the public is weary of authors who amuse themselves with readers' boredom. Pride, in manuscript, becomes ecstatic and infatuated: The press deceives it, and the rhymer fails. I dread for you this dangerous glow With which your unfortunate essay will be illuminated. Carrots and cabbages, names that taste rejects, have, until now, frightened the poet: These vegetables, which you vainly claim to illustrate, Are, at most, believe me, worthy of figuring in the Maison rustique or the Quintinie. Some unfortunate names, stricken with anathema, Are adorned, in my verses, with usurped titles: But if such a word is not poetic and sonorous, It reminds me of a dish with which my table is honored. Sorrel, porreau, that I would have neglected, By some good joker (1) would soon be avenged. Banished from their place, these vegetables perhaps, Reclaiming their rights, which one dares to ignore, Would come, in the middle of Parnassus, accusers of forgetfulness, To rebuke my verses. However, of these names doomed to baseness, And Vanière and Rapin have charmed the Permesse (2); And Virgil, before them, was he not tempted To embellish the subject my muse has sung? LA CRITIQUE. 111 You speak of a language free of scruples, Where every word is ennobled, where no one is ridiculous: The example is dangerous. Le Parnasse français Pourrait (peut-être encore) avouer tes essais, Si dans ton oeuvre au moins l'adresse poétique Eût savoir donner le change au dégoût didactique, (1) Allusion to the dialogue of the cabbage and the turnip, par. M. B..... B...... (2) One in his Pradium rusticum, in the book entitled Olus2 the other in his poem Les Jardins. I'm not talking about Abbé Delille, whose poetic magnificence is a perfect match for the magnificence of the gardens he sings about. What Apollo disapproves of and forbids to name. With us, propriety enslaves language; And it is by this that a work lives and prospers. THE POET. No, no: it's all right to say it; and my circumspect verse Will not be ungrateful, by dint of respect. Does the turnip, on my table, with an air of emphasis, Come wrapped in a periphrase? And must I, in every sense, torment my mind To disguise the cabbage, the cabbage that feeds me? THE CRITIC. My remonstrance is in vain, and your pride is irritated: Adieu. It is thus, all of them, that I must leave them. Authors never agree with me: They are always right, and Criticism is wrong. Beginning. Fencing; ploughing; fertilizing; sowing. Hereditary site. View of the banks of the Loire. Painting of the great Bordeaux moors. Asparagus, the superiority of the kitchen garden over the woods. Description of different vegetables, cabbage in particular. Caterpillars, moles and weeds, the scourges of the vegetable garden. Work, man's resource in misfortune. Episode. Modest vegetable garden decoration. Laurel cabinet. Arbour. Watering. The great Condé at Chantilly. Fruit trees. The entes. The related orchard. The sunflower, country dial. The gardener's delight. Epilogue. POTAGER. TWO rivals, cherished by the didactic muse (1), Have adorned, in turn, with poetic luxury, Lavish gardens, an immense orchard. I, weak and young still, to the foreign Parnassus, New interpreter of Virgil's regrets (2), I come to avenge the affront of the useful vegetable garden. Far, far from my verses, as from my stay, These mountains of yesterday, these ruins of a day. Must we mutilate nature to enjoy it? Oh, how I prefer a cultivated aspect! He who has the most, often enjoys the least. The rich have desires, the poor have needs. Pauvres, se contentz-vous de votré humble partage; La médiocrité fait le bonheur du sage: (1) Delille, author of Les Jardins; Fontane, author of Le Verger. (2) It's impossible to doubt that Virgil, in the fourth book of his Georgics, had the vegetable garden in mind, since after elegantly naming chicory, parsley, cucumber, all gardening plants, the first plantations that strike his eyes in the enclosure of the old man of Galèze, are vegetables. Hic rarum tamen in dumis olus. From the few ornaments mentioned in this charming episode, ornaments which are reduced to a few trees in a row, one must believe that Virgil, instead of embellishing the sumptuous gardens of Lueullus, would have set about fertilizing the domain of mediocrity, Before having parks, man had a garden. I want everything to be simple in a country setting? No art. The vegetable garden must offer its master satisfied needs, not ruinous tastes. Surround your enclosure with a thorny rampart. What has become of that tomps whose absence we mourn; Where man in peace lived unafraid and undefended? Of these importunate walls the immobile whiteness, By tiring my eyes, also tightens my heart, Villains, isolate yourselves; I want to see my fellow men. Of the surrounding sites the pleasant aspects give you pleasures without cost, without embarrassment: So know how to enjoy, even if you don't possess. This hamlet which, from afar, dominates the plain, Seems, on purpose for your eyes, built on the hill: This plaintive nightingale, with such a sweet song, Does not live in your woods, but sings for you. Fate, of your enclosure limits in vain the extent: Your enclosure ends only where your sight is lost. If you've chosen the uniform plateau, Let your squares line up: Does the hillside please you? A winding path Should soften the slope. Listen to my lessons; and, with spade in hand, Twice, in winter, dig into the breast of your enclosure. The earth, covering the glebe where grass abounds, Warms to the fires of day, drinks the air that fertilizes it; And, opening to the rays of a spring sun, Will receive in its sides the hope of the gardener. However, resisting your impatience, Don't go spreading the seed at random. The best soil languishes if not fertilized. Do you have tenacious clay as your domain? The salts of the ewe divide its mass. Do you have only an arena and light sand? Don't abandon it; it can be corrected: Let the moist litter, where the genisse lies, Wet and nourish it with its unctuous juices. Cover the soil with clay and sand mixed with thatch, which the steeds have trodden at night. With these rich fertilizers the earth is prepared for the germs it awaits. Let the seed then, falling from your máin, By equal movements escape; and let suddenly The symmetrical rake, with its points close together, Wander in all directions over the hidden seeds. Often the ground must be split by a long, taut chord; And in similar furrows, from distance to distance, Your thrifty hand encloses the seed Of those grains which, diverse in species and name, Will yield, under the flail, their sonorous harvest (3) Such are the haughty broad bean, with its skirted pod, And the pea which garnishes the overloaded oar. But don't you dare, reversing the seasons, Wind the gifts of summer into winter. These couchès, near a wall, at great cost raised, Only half-heat enervées stems: This melon without color, under the hasty oloche (4), (3) Sylvamque sonantem. Virg Georg. Iiv. L. (4) In the southern regions, from the foot of the Pyrenees to the banks of the Loire, the melon ripens perfectly in terte plelne. Which, ripened by the sun, without the help of the verré, With its tortuous arms would embrace the earth. Nature, indignant, reluctantly opens her sides to the fruits that spring usurps from autumn: Each in its own season must blossom;. Let Pomona have September, and May be Flore's. Inhabitants, who from the north feel the wrath, My muse, in lamenting you, does not sing for you; And from our south the happy regionso Of a more indulgent sky are always enlightened. Let us advance towards the goal to which our steps are directed; And, without leading you astray from climate to climate, Let your ambition be limited to knowing well The hereditary soil where heaven gave you birth:... Your fathers died there. Happy, above all happy, who cultivates a garden received from his ancestors, On these charming hills, embellished by the Loire! O beloved banks, always present to my memory, Where nature, rich in its variety, Of itself fertile, to art has cost nothing! There, all is simple and beautiful; there, all laughs, all delights: The sky is more serene, the waves more transparent. There, the melon crawls; there, the orchard blooms; There, even more useful, stretches the vegetable garden: Loving houses, pierced in the rock, Green outside, with lined grapefruits; And this long wall, so from the forbidden sun, Seems, along the river, a green curtain stretched (5) (5) Such is the spectacle offered by the banks of the Loire on the Tours side. Some happy sites could still please you, On the banks where towards the Sarthe (6), in a charming valley, The Loir (7) reluctantly leans its urn and its name; And, sharing its course, surrounds the enclosure Where of the best of kings still wanders the holy shadow. When I left this place, with its first cotton Adolescence barely shaded my chin; Alas! and without pity, time, which nothing stops, Has since overloaded my head with two lustres! School of virtues, morals and talents, May your memory brighten my old age! And when I revisit the asylum of my fathers, 11 Those frightening, immense, solitary deserts (8), That bound the Garonne and the Adour (9) towards the seas; Cradle of my childhood and my first sojourn; =A (6) River that rises in the Perche, two leagues from Mortagne, and flows into the Mayenne above Angers. 17) Another river, which also starts in the Perche, and passes through La Flèche, it's of this, the ancient educational institution founded by Henri IV, that I wanted to speak. (8) The great moors of Bordeaux. They extend over an area of about forty leagues in all directions. Those who have crossed these deserts will find no exaggeration in this painting. ¡.) (9) The Adour is one of the smallest rivers in France, taking its source in the Pyrenees, near the beautiful Campan valley, which Ramond describes so well. Those who are not familiar with Ramond's observations on the Pyrenees may not be displeased to find this description here. a Two valleys, one descending from the Tourmalet, the other from the mountains of the Aure valley, end at the village of Sainte-Marie, in the Campan valley. Each of these I sought in vain to recreate my view. Nature, motionless, in a dreary repose, sleeps there in a stupor, mute and without echoes. uces valleys brings the tribute of its torrent; and the Adour, "formed from their mingled waters, after bathing the rich "meadows of this valley, meeting at Bagnères the plains of the Digorre, as if charmed by the lands it abandons, and those it will travel, seems to struggle, by its long cir "cuits, against the common destiny of rivers; when ren" contraut le Gave à Baïonne, born alongside it, it becomes "engulfed with it in the chasms of the Ocean. " I won't paint this beautiful valley where he was born, "this valley so well-known, so celebrated, so worthy of being so; these "houses so pretty and so clean, each surrounded by its meadow, "accompanied by its garden, shaded by its clump of trees; "the meanders of the Adour, more lively than impetuous, impatient for. "the soft inflections of the soil, rippling like waves swaying in a gentle, light wind; the gaiety of the herds and the wealth of the shepherd; the opulent villages formed, as if by chance, where the dwellings, spread across the valley, have redoubled their proxi" mity; Bagnères, this charming place where pleasure has its altars next to those of Aesculapius, and wants to be half in its miracles, a delightful stay, plucked between the fields of Bigorre and the meadows of Campan, as if between wealth and good" health; this setting, worthy of the magnificence of the picture; "this proud enclosure, where nature opposes the savage to the cham" pêtre; these caverns, these waterfalls, visited by all that "France has of most amiable and most illustrious; these rocks, too "vertical perhaps, whose aridity contrasts with the adornment of n these happy valleys; this pic du Midi suspended on their tran" quilles retreats, like the sword of the tyrant on the head of Damo" clès...., menacing boulevarts that make me tremble for the Elysium they enclose. Not a single shrub lends its shade. You advance in the distance; nothing offers itself to your eyes, But a glittering sand and the vault of the skies: Only a few pines, with their dark verdure, Blacken with their mourning, the mourning of nature; And of flying insects the hungry swarms, Drink in blood their envenomed stings. The Douse (10) with late slots, on a black arena, In her indolent urn, sleeping, wanders there. A few scattered shepherds, clad in fleece, In the center of the desert have built their homes. On wooden supports, where their stature grows long, Their haughty bodies move, their gaze plunges into the distance (11). The stranger who sees them looks for humans: They cross the waters, cross the ravines; And from these long, misshapen Polyphemes deserts, Graze flocks less savage than themselves. Hungry for booty and foaming with rage, the wolves howl horribly in the distance. Woe to the traveler lost in the dark night! (10) A river that rises in the fandes at La Bastide, on the borders of Armagnac, and flows into the Adour. (11) I was referring to the kind of stilts on which local shepherds perch, and which they use to cross marshes and puddles, as well as to watch over their flocks from afar. They stand and walk with marvellous skill on these wooden legs, usually three or four feet long, and even pick up, without leaving them, a coin tossed into the sand. 2 They reach him; alas, he struggles in vain: his entrails are already prey to their hunger. These places are frightening; but these places saw me being born: My asylum pleases me; here I am the master. Sweet property, by which all is embellished! But in the northern depths winter buries itself: April is reborn; already your seed opens and paints the soil that covers it with a light green. Your eyes rejoice at the sight of spring. The fava bean has unfurled its blossoming germ; Near the pea, spreading its dazzling flower, The humble parsley spreads its verdant leaf; We see, in hurried ranks, along the porreau: The isolated pumpkin has crossed its cradle; Its stems, crawling, will cling, join; And the precocious asparagus has begun to dawn. Hail, happy vegetable, honor of the garden! To name only your name is to insult you: I become your poet and sing of your culture. First, let the ground for your seedlings be, in wide ravines, furrowed by iron. In equal spaces, in these paths, cover, by pressing them, these tufts with hundred hands, Hairy filamens, innumerable roots: The germ sleeps there, buries itself and goes out of these ruins. Barely has the sun made its turn twenty times; The impatient asparagus arrives and sees the day, Fills its long avenues with a thousand sprays, And makes its slender stems spring forth. Respect their youth; wait for the time to come: Steel must not touch them until the third spring, When, with slowness, the vigorous sap, At leisure has nourished its tasty plant, When, towards its decline, from its withered charms Nature to autumn has yielded the debris, On your dear infants, the earth, each year, To the place from which it came must be brought back. Another time, another care. In the same month when the cherry tree once opened the year (12), and was the first to break the winter's prison, the spade must stir the earth over your seedlings; The sprout, barely hatched, has sprouted into stems: We see it grow; it grows; the ground is bristling. Like a field once populated the surface, these warriors whose race Cadmus sowed: At first helmets, half-formed busts, Suddenly growing, artful soldiers. The asparagus, at three aus, has finished cultivation: Enjoy the fruits of your labours without measure. Only, each autumn, at the ninth of the months. Of superfluous branches cut off the vain weight. Plough with care, when winter begins again, The soil where spring rests hope; And, with a circumspect iron, towards that same spring, Free your plants from winter's chains. O you! who in parks, with magnificence Promote at great expense the tedium of opulence; From this proud pomp descend for a moment: In the humble vegetable garden pleasure awaits you. ====== (12) The month of March, "These inanimate woods that steal the clouds, And whose dark horror repels the eye of day, What do they offer to your senses? the uniform return See my vegetable garden; it breathes life. Winter drags on in vain, overloaded with frost: Around me everything dies; here, nothing has changed. Summer comes; everything languishes: it rains; everything repairs itself. Nature, always rich and never stingy, lavishes her gifts on me, under my feet greens. My eyes applaud the cabbage I have planted. Let's enjoy; it's time: let's walk these paths. So many beauties spread out before my eyes! Before me the artichoke, on its erect stem, Rises, crimson or green, with its bristling stings; Sometimes helpless to the hand it surrenders, And its most cherished fruit is drawn in a crown (13). Next to it, lettuce lengthens and narrows (14): Its leaf, bent elsewhere, hardens into a globe (15). Here the chicory, stretched out on the edge, Under a tie of rushes sees its green fade. There, the melon ripens on the ground. Under its foliage in vain the cucumber is hidden; From its stem, as it is born, I sometimes tear it (16): Often, in its season, I wait for it to detach itself (17). (13) The crowned artichoke. (14) The Roman lettuce, (15) The lettuce. (16) Gherkin. (17) Ripe cucumber. The creeping pumpkin, in its obseur séjonr, Of its enlarged belly sees swelling the contour; And these feves, further, by the winds swayed, Distracted, with their noise, my dreamy thoughts. Nourishing vegetables, yes, of your various names, If Phébus confessed to me, I'd embellish my verses. To these ennobled names accustoming the ear, My muse would avenge parsley and sorrel. Perhaps, in my favor, disarmed disdain Would smile in my songs at perfumed chervil; Garlic with its irritating juices, spinach' salutary, Might not displease the delicate censor; The turnip, with which Auvergne sows its mounts, Would boldly appear without fearing affronts. The carrot would offer its golden root; And I would paint the plant in Memphis adored (18). Even cabbage, the ornament of my verses, Would brave scorn, as well as winters. Mets de la pauvreté, luxe de la richesse (19), Je dirai tes faveurs renaissantes sans cesse. I fear little to offend a taste too delicate: To wound the taste is nothing; the worst is to be ungrateful. The cabbage, diverse in name, color and fórme, Sometimes, on all sides, spreads its enormous leaf (20); Sometimes, on its stem, supports, without bending, Its head (21), sweet burden that time comes to whiten. (18) The onion, worshipped by the Egyptians. (19) Cabbage, the poor man's food, especially in my country, appears on the rich man's table only as a luxury dish. (20) Ordinary green cabbage, (21) Cabbage pommé. There, like a young lily imprisoned by glass, Her blossoming breast (22) is crowned with a bouquet. Here, surrounded by innumerable subjects, Like a king under the purple (23), he dominates his sprays; And, born beyond the neighbouring mountains of my homeland (24), Keeps in our climes the pride of Iberia. But, alas! and goods and evils gathered, By equal measure here below are mingled! Often in long swarms, on this tender foliage, The caterpillar drags and carries the ravage; And the cabbage, offering only hideous debris, Seems to cry the affront of its withered honors. Such, afflicted with the evil that every man encloses within himself, And that we draw from the mother's sides in its germ (26), Ashamed of herself and afraid to see herself, The young girl weeps, and veils her mirror. There are gardeners who, to defend themselves, rain ashes on this impure insect. Fruitless remedy: it doesn't die; it flees. No truce, no quarter to the enemy who harms. Sévissez; de rigueur armez votre justice: Qu'écrasé sous vos doigts, il trouve son supplice. Sometimes opening a tortuous path in the shade, The mole, snaking, lifts the ground. (22) Cauliflower. (23) Purple Spanish broccoli. (24) The Pyrenees. (25) Smallpox. It enters, a spring yields; and suddenly brought back, Takes, falling, the astonished captive. The earth gives birth to him; ungrateful, he devours it. Unnatural child, the grass chokes your plants: Yet they drew life from the same sides. Your stems will die: that's the end of it; the proud grass insolently usurps the nourishing sap, And by force at last, the only right of oppressors, Of maternal benefits disinherits her sisters. Make haste: let iron, severe with prudence, repress the license of such a great attack. You must prepare for endless efforts; The indomitable grass grows, and wearies your hand: Like, in its swamp, less swift and less rapid, The hydra multiplied under Alcide's axe. Truth often, to show itself to the eyes, Puts on the ingenious veil of fable: This Hercules, of the hydra relentlessly assailing, Of assiduous work imposes the task upon us. Work! happy need, which a beneficent god, To embellish the earth, made present to man; In misfortune above all you lend him weapons. Long ago, in those days of blood and tears; When the sons of Apollo, Mars and Plutus, Were mounted on the scaffold, guilty of virtue; When timid friendship, regretfully unfaithful, Before daring to weep, looked around; Freed from the dagger, the unfortunate Selmour Had hidden his life in an obscure sojourn. His daughter without desire or experience, Rose still knew only innocence: Her father's companion, and his only hope, She followed his heart, following her duty, Like a transplanted flower from the tropics, Opens in our climes under the sheltered greenhouse, And believes she will see again the sky that smiles upon her: Like one, in this asylum, where her beauty blooms, Each day adorned with a new grace, Rose grew in peace under her father's wing. Selmour, with fatigue hardening his hands, In the bosom of nature forgot mankind. A fertile vegetable garden, fertilized by their care, provided both with the pleasant and the useful. Selmour pushed the spade or dragged the rakes: weaker, on the flowers Rose poured the waters; Tending the young lilies, emblem of his age; Under the blooming jasmine prepared a shade; Fixed, with a wicker knot, the faltering carnations, And of an adored father kissed the white hair. Thus, ignored in this sweet exercise, They let flow this torrent of iniustice: And when at last the blood, from the top of the scaffolds Ceased to trickle under the iron of the executioners; That through the cloud, a ray of hope Had come to revive the remnants of France; When in his retreat Selmour was told, That after days of storm would shine a beautiful day; To the friends whose crowd around him hastened, Showing his vegetable garden, his daughter and his wealth: "My friends (he said, intoxicated transported), " Leave me my happiness and my obscurity" So pleasing is the countryside to the wise man who inhabits it! But the moments are dear; and my muse invites me From the art of the vegetable garden I resume the lessons; And as the most beautiful needs adornment, With some ornaments let us clothe nature. But to the air of the face they must match: To please taste, to taste we must submit. This flower, in Phyllis, makes grace blossom: On Daphne's forehead, the same flower grimaces. Let's not look here for prim ornament: The noblest adornment is simplicity. Far, far from my enclosure the vain luxury of Flora. The sumptuous orange, the odourless tulip, From the fertile kitchen garden must be banished: I also oxile the flower that was born of Adonis (26), And that which of Ajax and the young Hyacinth Is proud to see the fabulous imprint (27): The tuberose, with its dazzling snowy brow, The amorous narcissus, with its languid pallor, All this vain apparatus of pride and pomp would humiliate my cabbages with its shocking contrast. (26) The anemone, (27) The hyacinth, commonly called hyacinth, on which we thought we saw the diphthong AI, the cry uttered by young Hyacinth as he died at the hands of Apollo, and the first syllable of Ajax's name. Littera communis mediis pueroque viroque Inscripta est foliis, hæc nominis, illa querela. Ovid. Met. liv. XIII. The same syllable keeps, in equal strokes, The child's complaint and the hero's name. Monotonous border, accustomed asylum Of the crawling insect, with hideous face, Which soils and corrupts all with its frothy slime; And in the vegetable garden spreading its poison, Draggs, with tardifa steps, loaded with its house. This reptile enemy that man rightly crushes, With the fires of a double love every spring blazes; And feeling both the one and the other desire, Dards together and receives the sting of pleasure (28). To replace boxwood's barren adornment, Sorrel provides you with its fertile verdure... From its thorny stem and sweet carmine, The raspberry perfumes and wounds your hand; Of life's pleasures a natural image. In clusters of coral, the currant sparkles. Line up strawberry plants; but above all choose The fragrant strawberry that blooms every month. I also like to see the virginal rose on a friendly trellis. The rose fits everywhere: it's the queen of flowers. The violet in vain hides its colors from us; Its perfume betrays it: emblem of the poet Whose studious leisure binds him to retirement, Who, alone with himself, and in obscurity, Long ripens his glory and his fame. Let his bushy bouquets, entwining themselves in border, Embrace your tiles of a green belt. Let's embellish without pomp; and let every path offer me a bed of sand or gravel: (28) Everyone knows that the snail is a hermaphrodite. So I fear nothing of these liquid pearls That the dawn spreads with its moist wings. I'd like a lawn, but I couldn't walk on the grass in the morning. The spring lily of the valley, the fragrant daffodil, All these flowers, innumerable family, Gathered under your laws, can, without outraging it, With their innocent luxury adorn the kitchen garden. A little art embellishes, and too much art disfigures: To make me love her, divert nature. Thus withering on ungrateful toil, My muse, weary at last of arid detail, By a short episode brightening her sadness, Of austere precept softens rudeness. It's a happy secret to know how to please the eyes: Who knows how to speak to the heart, knows how to please even better. In the depths of the vegetable garden, under a tutelary laurel, I'd like to find a solitary asylum: A path leads me there: entwined pampers Serpentent on my forehead in braided arbour; And from this obscure dome thickening the ridge, Repel the sun and protect my head. I walk in the cool shade: The laurel receives me under its thick boughs. There, daughter of silence and mother of delirium, Imagination accompanies and inspires me. From the French Virgil (29), from that of the Romans, I steal the flowers that fall from their hands; And these scattered debris, the refuse of opulence, From my ashamed muse clothe indigence. (29) Delille. With touching remembrances I feed my heart? There, my thoughts embrace or dream happiness. Sometimes, under the hand of melancholy, My soul, to enjoy, closes and folds. In a vague abandon I swim, I fall asleep: The birds vainly modulate their chords; I look without seeing, I listen without hearing. Beneath this secret cradle I often come, At the morning hour when the night star Sets, awakening the dawn that follows; I see her, through the motionless foliage, In the serene east coloring the cloud, Of her Zephyr dress abandon the folds; And I believe I am witnessing Phyllis' awakening. And if, by chance, a stream, in its flight, Wandering along the enclosure I inhabit, Offered me its double bank where the cress floats; If I could see there the foolish fish Struggling in my rêts where its error is expiated, Or hanging, fretillant, on my line that bends; If I found there the coolness of a delicious bath.... No, I'd have nothing more to ask of the gods. Indiscreet wishes! at least from a simple fountain The poor can always water his domain. Already the powdery summer, burning the plants, Of sap exhausted has dried up the channels. The fiery lion, in streams of light, Shakes, high in the heavens, his fiery mane; Pliébus presses the airs with his triumphant chariot: The vegetable gasps, and the earth cracks. All is consumed and dies. The arid chicory asks heaven to pour its moist urn. These radishes, parched by the devouring fires, To see their heads swell, call the torrens: Celery itself, in its deep pits, To whiten its pipes, feels the need of the waves; And, pressing the ground of its imperfect fruit, The melon, from rain, invokes the blessing. Hurry, hurry, hurry: on your dying stalks Pour, towards evening, the refreshing waters. I've seen gardeners, ahead of the sun, sometimes water the plant as it wakes: Don't wait for the cicada to intone its eternal, monotonous squeak: Let this light vase, from which a long channel emerges, fill up as it plunges into the humid crystal; And through the many holes where the wave separates, Fall as rain, and from the air replace the stingy urn. Under the watering can thus reviving their vigor, Your seedlings will drink life by drinking freshness. The image of a hero gardener, whom this gentle care soothes, is recalled to your memory: And what hand could fail to cherish the job that honored the hand of the victor of Rocroi? Tired of the court, weary of glory and envy, Condé, in Chantilly, at last tasted life. He no longer had an army, but he still had a heart: glory often bores, but happiness never does. A few choice plants, the fine arts and study, His virtues still more, populated his solitude. He wants; all is embellished: of happy Chantilly, Under the steps of a hero, the ground has shuddered. As he tamed the Iberian, so he tames nature. And these cillets, proud to obey his laws, Feeling with pride the hand that binds them, With a luxury of colors shaded their plume. In this noble exercise, it was beautiful to see Senef's laurels crowning the watering can; And these peaceful hands, forgetting their valour, Still making the emblem of France bloom. I've spoken of the vegetable garden's glory and labours. The orchard, in its turn (3o), accusing my brushes, Asks that my verses repair its insult. Vegetables, fruits, easy food, Were the simple dishes of our simple forefathers: They were less polite; they lived happier; And sobriety, which we have proserited, Of the grave for them pushed back the limit: They died in the end, because it is necessary to die. Cursed be the first who, to better feed himself, In the blood of bulls staining his unholy hand, Made death serve the food of life! From that day, humans, accustomed to murder. Have hardened their hearts to pity closed; And in this century, alas! horrible century where we are, Man, without being astonished, has drunk the blood of men! Choose for Pomona a corner of the earth apart: The goddess of fruit wants to shine apart: Do you see her, confused and justly fearful, Fleeing Priape's lascivious touch? Her basket, running, escapes from her hands. To keep her from the god who presides over gardens, (30) I have separated the orchard from the vegetable garden; they harm each other. At the end of the vegetable garden, but under the same enclosure, Your trees in the air rise without constraint; Not of these espaliers (31) sadly aligned, Superb natives, well shorn, well combed, That the enemy iron mutilates and dishonors. Of these counterfeit dwarfs that a false taste decorates: We, from the humble abode of simplicity, Proscribe, without regret, their uselessness, The poor is thrifty, and the rich spends: One wants symmetry, and the other abundance. I love to see the boughs of these moving trees Yielding softly to the breath of the winds; In summer, from the heights of the air, where their head dominates, The shadows of their brow cool their roots (32); And their fruits, closer viewed from the sun, Shine with a fresher and more ruddy hue. Before the tree enriches you with its gifts, When it's still young, a propitious iron, Hiding under its bark a borrowed bud, Corrects the bitter savage's harshness. The stem ennobles itself, strips off its rottenness; And it's here that art does better than nature. But, captive with regret, the bud, frail yet, Blossoms, escapes, in sprays has taken off; (31) The only advantage of espaliers consists in the glance and the symmetry. It's indisputable that an all-round tree produces better fruit and more of it, (32) In southern regions, especially in the lower Languedoc and Provence, you can almost only see high-stemmed trees, which, casting wide shadows, keep the roots cool in summer. To your eyes it grows longer; and soon more robust, With a green diadem covers its august head; The flower comes to whiten it; and the astonished trunk Takes pride in the fruit that another tree has given (33). The greater the prodigy, the more doubtful the test: This art requires a skillfully happy hand. Often the most skilful, on an unhappy day, Of this barren hymen mismatches the knots. In its first sojourn the too constant sap, Of the confused gardener deceives the long wait; And always waxing in its same channels, Braves art, and springs in wild boughs. Like, before her fifteenth birthday, a virgin, astonished, At the insinuation of her court, led to the hymn, Changing, without murmuring, state and destiny, To the husband who awaits her abandons her hand. Often this union, if love fecundates it, Comes to be embellished with flowers, in happy nights abounds; And sometimes too (sad and common setback!) Or produces none, or has only bitter ones. Already various fruits assort its crown. Vertumne, varying his color and features; To each change owes new attractions. The tree with which Lucullus enriched his homeland (34), The plum tree long since conquered Syria (35), Decorating the first season in turn, With the purple of their fruits have strewed the lawn. -.. (33) Miraturque novas frondes ut non sua poma. (34) The cherry tree. (35) Damask plum. Virg. Geor. liv. II. A ses Mûre enfin, se détacho; et ma main l'a recue, Doux jus dans nos climats, poison chez les Persans, La pêche sofollit ses globes jaunissans. The gleaming vermilion with which the api is colored, Reminds me of Phyllis much more ruddy still; And these apple trees, in vain of long propped stakes, Of their hanging festoons embarrass my feet. It's not much of abundance: around your homes, Everything must brighten you, even the course of the hours. Why then offer to my eyes this instrument Which of the fleeting day sadly warns me, Mute interpreter, column where the nimble shadow Marks the steps of time on the motionless slate? Let all live and breathe in the gentle fields: A country clock must regulate time there. See the jealous Clytie (36) turn her head incessantly towards the sun: The god who betrayed her, the god she still loves, Has scarcely unfurled his golden diadem; The nymph, at this sight, to hide her outrage, With shame and pain has lowered her face; And, natural dial of morning work, The active gardener has given the signal. And when with its fires, already far from their source, The sun ignited the middle of its course, (36) We know that Clytia, jealous of Apollo's love for Leueothoé, was turned into a sunflower. This flower, which presents an extensive surface to the sun, suffers a shortening of its fibers by the action of this star; this is what gave rise to the fable, 2 Holds, in the highest air, the scales of the day; That Clytie in vain languishes for love; Then of the simple dishes, which you have brought forth, It's time to cover your country table. But, to see Téthys on her less ardent chariot, Phébus hurries at last to reach the west: The nymph, whose brow slowly rises, Seems to follow him to the shores where his course ends: Close then, close your gardens, your orchards; It's the moment of rest and light dreams. Happy the gardener who can see his days pass by in such a fortunate way! He is self-sufficient: what does he need of others? He lives independently, and belongs only to himself. In winter, when Ceres shivers under the icicles: He, in his vegetable garden, harvests with full hands. Where his enclosure ends, there ends his desire: What does he need? fruit? but he has only to choose, The nourishing purslane, with its golden leaf, The fragrant tarragon, the pale chicory; Filled with pure oil and fermented wine, Will temper for him the ardors of summer. 4 At this frugal meal, charmed to surprise him, Great ones will come down to his cave; As once, veiling their splendour and their name, The gods visited Baueis and Philemon... 32M Stop; what did you say, indiscreet and vain muse? Philémon et Baucis! pardon, la Fontainé (37). (37) See the fable of Philemon and Baucis, rendered by La Fontaine, after Ovid. 2 I charmed my leisure; when the Plutuses of the day, Out of the dust, not out of their baseness, Shamelessly displaying their bloody wealth; Under brazen purple, and in gilded chariots, Signaled to scorn their dishonored names: I, unknown disciple of Ovid's translator (38), Who deigned to serve me both as master and guide, In the bosom of a peaceful and gentle obscurity, I adorned the happy asylum where my muse sang. (38) All lovers of literature are familiar with Saint-Ange's translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses. The first six books have been published, and we eagerly await the other nine, to which the author has just put the finishing touches: but it is to be feared that our century's abnegation of poetry will prevent the translator from enjoying the fruits of his labor for a long time to come. In the meantime, I make it my duty and pleasure to publish that it is to Saint-Ange's advice and encouragement that I owe the little I am worth in poetry. END. Insufficient contrast NF 243-120-14