F CALIFORNIA FROM THE LIBRARY OF COUNT EGON CAESAR CORTI MAIN LIB.-AGRI. 4- 1.1 1-* -F- EEEI Google CUEI Google FCOLE DU ARDIN POTAGER, = 0ogl0 Diguged IERUET Google CONTENANT La Description exacte de toutes les Plantes potagères, leur culture, les qualités de terre, les situations et les climats qui leur sont propres, leurs propriétés, les différens moyens de les multiplier, le temps de recueillir les Graines, leur durée, etc. etc. BY M. DE COMBLES. CINQUIÈME EDITION, augmentée du Tnaité de la Culture des Péchers, du même Auteur, et à laquelle en a joint la Manière de semer en toute saison. TOME SECOND. A PARIS, Chez DELALAIN sils, Libraire, quai des Augustins, Ne. 38. An XI, 1802. GO ERUEIO GOOgle COLE D JARDIN POTAGER. 2 Google MAIN LIB.-AGRÉ - --1 EeT Google S2323 te 1802 V. 2. L'ÉCOLE DU JARDIN POTAGER. CHAPTER XXVII. Description of the CIBOULE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. THIS plant is an annual; there are three species, the common, the S. Jacques, and the perennial. The root of the first is an assembly of several bulbs joined together and aligned, forming a single bundle of hairy, white roots; its leaves are small, eight to ten inches long, cylindrical, sistulous and pointed, with a pungent taste; its stem is naked, straight, two to three feet high, M731699 A 3 1 swollen in the middle, bearing at the top a head shaped like that of the onion, but smaller, composed of white lily-like flowers, each with six small stamens and a pistil that turns into a rounded fruit divided into three chambers filled with rounded, angular, black seeds. The second differs in that its leaves are shorter, more swollen in the middle and more upturned on the ground; its flavor is stronger; but in all other respects the same. The third species, which is perennial, resembles the first in every way. All three species are used indiscriminately in most stews, both fatty and lean, eggs and vegetables of all kinds. It is also eaten in salads with lettuce when young, and is one of the most necessary plants for cooking. In medicine, it is used for the same purposes as onion, for which it is sometimes substituted, as it has much the same qualities and properties. The first species, which is the most widely cultivated, is sown from the end of February to August, and the newer it is, the more delicate it is; this is why it is sown in every month during the summer season: those sown in July and August are very prone to perish if not covered; on the other hand, once they have withstood the frosts, they have the advantage of keeping well into the spring much longer than the first seeds, which go to seed very quickly. The best way to preserve it and make it more profitable for the winter is to replant it in June from the first seed; when it is replanted later, the worm destroys a lot of it: When planted later, the worm destroys a lot of it, so we erect boards and trace small spokes eight inches apart; we join three or four feet of them together, and space the clumps half a foot apart, four good inches apart: these little clumps grow considerably, and provide abundantly until spring; they even make up for the lack of onions, when we run out. When frost approaches, we pull up a certain quantity and carry it to the greenhouse, or if there is no greenhouse, we make a trench seven or eight inches deep in the garden, and bury it close to the ground, covering it with dry litter in such quantities that frost cannot penetrate it, and we can always remove it if necessary. Market gardeners replant chicory in the same beds where they sow their spring onions during the months of June and July; and as the chicory is removed six weeks after being planted, it does almost no harm to the spring onions, and they thus make a double harvest in the same land; those for whom the land is precious can practice the same thing. Cultivation of this plant is quite straightforward, and any kind of soil is suitable, provided it is well prepared: If the soil is hard, cover the bed with an inch of potting soil, wet it if necessary and weed it. There is no need to take any other precaution, as it sometimes wilts or is eaten by worms. Replanted spring onions are the best for seed, because they have more body, and their heads are larger and better nourished; consequently, you need to keep a bed of them in place, which you let grow in spring; when the stem is fully formed, it is supported either with running laths, or with stilts to which several nipples are tied together, and in the absence of laths and stilts, they are tied with the month of August when the seed begins to uncover and emerge from its lodge, We leave it to dry in the sun for a few days on a sheet, then rub it with our hands, winnow it and lock it up, but it's better to leave it in its stuffing until it's needed, as it keeps better there and lasts four years, whereas winnowed it's only good for two years; It differs from onions only in size, which is slightly smaller. Once the seed has been harvested, if you don't need the space, cut off the stalk and all the foliage at ground level. The plant sprouts new shoots and produces seed again the following year, sometimes even three years later; that's what I've found. The S. Jacques has an advantage over the common one, in that the worm does not get into it, and that one foot is as effective in food as twice the size of the other; it is also not subject to winterkill, whatever the severity of the weather; I'm referring to the foot of the plant, as its leaves dry up and disappear in August, and it's only in the following spring that it comes back to life; then you can see it grow at a glance, forming extraordinarily large tufts that supply abundantly, and which are later to go to seed than the other species: It is not cultivated differently from the first, except that there is only one season to sow it, which is spring. Perennial chives bear no seeds, and multiply only from offshoots, which are detached from old clumps and replanted in the same way in spring and autumn. They keep well for ten years, and are planted 7 or 8 inches apart in all directions in prepared beds: A single plant is sufficient and produces 110 to 12 in the course of the year, which are detached little by little as needed, without destroying the whole clump; the few that are left reproduce again, and supply from year to year during its life; if, however, you prefer to replant new ones every year, it's all the same. In addition to this merit, it grows more rapidly than the other variety in spring, even though it is stripped in winter; during most of the summer, its hay dries out just the same if it is not wetted exactly; but in autumn, it greenens up again, and resists all the bad weather of the seasons, and will supply without interruption all year round if some care is taken to maintain its vigor; These advantages make it preferable to the other, and keep those who know it attached to it; our market gardeners, however, hardly cultivate it, and give as their reason that it is harder than the other; but the fact is that they want the same bed to yield them three or four different things every year, which the nature of this plant does not allow; its cultivation has nothing different from the other: We crimp it from time to time, and clean it of its bad leaves, particularly at the beginning of spring; those who have only this species, pull it up when frost approaches, and put it under cover either in the greenhouse or in a trench, as I explained for the other. There is a second species that is almost unknown in France, but is fairly common in Holland and Germany; it multiplies like the shallot, and forms an assembly of small bulbs numbering 60 or 80 very distinct from each other, which are used for the same purposes as ordinary onions: a single bulb forms this quantity from the month of November, when it is placed in the ground, until the month of August, when it is pulled out; it is left to dry like the shallot, and is locked up dry; it keeps all winter, and is no longer used as a spring onion; after the month of June, the stalk begins to turn into an onion. This species can be considered as much an onion as a spring onion. CHAPTER XXVIII. Description of CITROVILLE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Of all plants, this is the one that takes up the most space; it crawls like a cucumber or a melon, and its stalks extend up to 3 or 4 toises from its base. Its roots are small, straight, fibrous and hairy; it grows large, hollow, fragile, hairy sarmens on the ground, lined with large, deeply-cut, rough, bristly leaves; from the axils of these leaves, tendrils and pedicles emerge, bearing yellow, bell-shaped, flared flowers, divided into five parts, some sterile and others fertile, resting on an embryo that turns into a rounded fruit; The flesh is white, firm and sweet-tasting; the seed is contained in a fungus-like substance in the middle of the fruit; it is oblong, broad, flattened, cleanly rimmed all around, and lined with a slightly rough rind, under which is a white almond, pleasant to the taste. This species, as I describe it, is the most remarkable of all those cultivated in France; but there are an infinite number of others that vary either in the shape and size of the fruit, or in its external color, which can be green, white, yellow, mottled or striped in several ways; Suffice it to say that the quality of the fruit is always more or less the same, and there is no marked difference except in the species grown around Paris, known as Potiron. The bulk of the plant is quite similar to the previous one, but the leaf is almost round, without a cut, preceded by an extremely long and concave tail, about the size of a thumb; the fruit, in shape, is also quite similar; but it surpasses the pumpkin in size, as I have seen some weighing around 170 lb. It is usually a little flattened, especially on the head side, but chance produces some that are more or less elongated, and in general, they have many inequalities in their circumference; some are even marked with ribs, the skin is smooth, orange-colored, and the flesh the previous yellow; it melts less than all the other pumpkin species, and its flesh has more taste, but it still has the blandness of the others: however, cooked and mixed with milk, it can be served as a soup, and has its fans; this is also the only way to eat it that is bearable for people of a certain kind: country folk and craftsmen fricassee it with onion and in several other ways; but this stew can be abandoned to them, for on the whole, it's a tasteless dish and bad food, especially for cold temperaments; nevertheless, as it is an economical resource for people whose stomachs suffer everything, and for the peasant in particular who cannot feed on expensive food, it is appropriate for those who have country possessions, or who are burdened with children and servants who must be supported at a fair price : it is advisable, I say, to raise a certain quantity that can be found useful during the winter. The flesh of this species, like all the others, is humectant, pectoral, refreshing, and suitable for tempering the heat of the entrails, when taken as a decoction. There are two kinds of pumpkin: an early one, which is good at the beginning of August, and which is of medium size; and a later one, which is good only at the end of September, and which comes from an extreme size, as I said above: This is what differentiates them, being similar in all respects; the early one can be recognized by another mark, which is that its tail is yellow, while the other is green. This species, both the early and the late, multiplies, like all the others, from its seed, which must be sown in this climate at the beginning of March; because if it is not brought forward a little early, the fruit is prone to ripen only imperfectly, and it is of guard only as much as it is well August. It is placed under a bell, and cared for in the same way as melons and cucumbers; but as the plant is stronger, six seeds are enough under each bell, and when the plant is strong enough, it is replanted in the open ground, and two feet are placed together; this is at the end of April or the beginning of May. We make holes two feet square and a foot deep, which we fill with manure and a few inches of potting soil above; we wet the plant as soon as it is in place, and cover it exactly for s to ó days, unless it rains, as the sun ruins it in this circumstance; when it is picked up again, we lift the covers, and leave it to grow for about six weeks, until the fruit begins to appear: But when the fruit has stopped, which is always 8 or 1o feet from its root, pinch the dragnasse a little above it, and throw a few spades of earth on the node above it, which takes root and gives more nourishment to the fruit: at the same time, rest it on a tile, on the side where it is curved, so that rainwater can run off to the right and left. When the fruit has reached its full size, it should be exposed to the air, i.e. cut off all the leaves that shade it, so that the sun will ripen it and aptly aptly aptly apt it; Once it has reached maturity in August or September, depending on the species, we cut it and leave it exposed to the sun for ten or twelve days before locking it up; we then put it in a dry place on boards where it can breathe and where the frost cannot penetrate. When you find yourself a few piles of sumier or useless compost, no situation suits it better; it grows quickly and prodigiously. It is claimed that there is a male and a female in this plant, and it is at least true that there is a mark that characterizes the two alleged sexes, and it is chance that has produced it, just as single and double seeds come from the wallflower; the female grows two equal leaves, opposite each other, above her two ears, with the stalk coming out of the middle; This is easy to notice, and by experience our market gardeners have recognized that the male bears much more fruit, and that the fruit is bigger and fuller, so they let two second branches grow on these male plants, which give them three and four fruits, while the female is quite busy with one; They are therefore careful, once the seed has sprouted and marked, to uproot all the female plants and replant only the males, which also give better and more abundant seed. I tried it this year, and the fact seemed to me to be true to a greater extent; but as one year does not decide, I establish the certainty of the fact only on the say of the market gardeners who assured me of it. I don't know if the other pumpkin species are in the same situation: as they are not grown in this country, I haven't had the opportunity to notice it: those who grow them should take care. The seed of this fruit, about which I have not yet said anything, is its most valuable part: it is one of the four major cold seeds used so usefully in emulsions; it softens and refreshes the blood; it tempers the ardor of urine, calculus, kidney or bladder ulceration, and even the pain of gout; it also yields an oil that softens the skin, makes it even and erases blemishes, and is commonly used in cosmetic ointments; Everyone knows that it is used in the composition of that refreshing drink we drink in summer, as much for pleasure as for health, which we call orgeat, because barley water used to be its base; but as it is always being perfected, the way it is composed is quite different today; I'll give the recipe for the benefit of those who find themselves remote and isolated in their countryside. Take half a pound of the 4 seeds, which are pumpkin, squash, cucumber and melon seeds; wash and dry them, then add six ounces of sweet almonds and two ounces of bitter almonds, soak them a little in warm water to remove the skin; put the whole in a stone mortar and crush it well, then throw in two pounds of sugar with the skin. of sugar with the skin of a lemon, which you will grind with the seeds, this will make a paste that you will put well pressed in an earthenware or earthenware vase, and that you can keep for a month or more in a dry place. To use it when needed, you will take some from each pint of water, the size of a hen's egg, which you will put in a serge cheesecloth and dilute with a spoon; you will then press the pomace with both hands, and you will throw a few drops of orange blossom on the liqueur; you will then decant it into some jug or bottle which you will cool before drinking it. This seed keeps well for seven to eight years, both for the uses I've just mentioned, and for the seed; it has one more small merit that I don't want to omit, which is to serve as bait to catch rats, mice, field mice, leaches and other insects of this species, which are very fond of it. Before concluding this article, I feel I must say a word about several small species of fruit that are very similar to pumpkins: priest's bonnets, German trumpets, false oranges, coloquintes and so on. All these species have flesh and skin quite similar in small to the pumpkin, but they serve almost only to amuse the eyes, and are of no use to life; their shape and color vary infinitely; some are made into snuffboxes, and this is the surest merit I know of them, some others have properties for certain remedies, but their virtues are not proven enough to make them public, especially since the authors I follow say nothing about them; the first species that I have named, the bonnet-de-prêtre, otherwise known as the Jerusalem artichoke, must nevertheless be distinguished from the others, insofar as it is eaten, and it is not a bad eater: but it is neither fine nor delicate, and its shape is singular, having around its head several horns arranged more or less like those of a priest's cap, from which it takes its name. We have recently acquired a new species, called Giromont, whose leaves are shaped more or less like those of the fig tree, hairy and of medium size, and whose sarmens crawl like all pumpkins, flowering in the same way; but the fruit is different, being very black-green, sometimes striped with yellow, loaded with a few warts, a little elongated in the shape of pears; its flesh is firm and yellow, the great merit of this species is that it bears much fruit and keeps longer than any other, without being subject to rotting; Each plant easily yields 12 to 15 fruits, but the taste is no better than that of the others; on the contrary, I found it bland, and the flesh stringy; perhaps it would appeal better to others, or be better in other climates. It is certain, at least, that there is no species that would be as profitable as this one, if it could become established among country folk. CIVE. CHAPTER XXIX. Description of CIVE, its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. There are three species of Cive, the Cive de Portugal, the grosse Cive d'Angleterre, and the petite, otherwise known as the Civette. They differ only in leaf size, so the same description will apply to all three, noting that the Portuguese species is the strongest. Its flower is also higher and more elongated. The root of this plant is an assembly of small bulbs much like shallots, but which are formed in greater quantity, and which are not enveloped in the same way, being linked together only by roots which are white and loose fibers like those of spring onions; The leaf is long, cylindrical and fistulous, extremely small, with an odor and flavor similar to that of the spring onion; it sometimes sprouts a small stem ending in a spherical bundle of small purplish flowers the size of a filbert; these flowers are followed by a small seed enclosed in the calyx of the flower. In spring, this plant is frequently used in salad dressings, and sometimes in omelettes; I know of no other use or property for it, and medical writers have not mentioned it. Cive can be propagated from seed if necessary; but it is easy to propagate from offshoots, i.e. you separate the old clumps that make up yo, and each tuber you replant forms a clump in the same year: but 2 or 3 are usually left together; it is in March that it is replanted: as soon as it begins to grow, it is placed in beds or borders 8 or 9 inches apart; it requires loose, well-prepared soil, and will support itself in the same place for 4 or 5 years. Weed it as needed, wet it in dry spells and crimp it from time to time, especially in spring. At the end of autumn, cut off all its leaves just above ground level, and cover it with an inch of potting soil to help it grow more vigorously the following spring; the more you cut off the leaf, the more it grows back; and the newer it is, the more tender it becomes. CHAPTER XXX. Description of the CUCUMBER, its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Four species of cucumber are cultivated in this climate for tablé use, apart from the one that is grown for medicinal purposes, or only for the singularity I shall discuss next. These four species are the early and late cucumbers, the bouquet cucumber and the black cucumber. The first two are similar in all respects, except that the early cucumber is smaller and ripens earlier than the late cucumber. The roots of these two species are straight, fibrous, and covered with a lot of hair; the stems are sarmentose, thick, long, branching, and crawl on the ground; the leaves are born alternately borne on a tail six to eight inches long, thick and concave; they are shaped for outline like those of the vine, but larger, much less dissected, without serration at the edges, rough and covered with small prickles, especially below il cort de l'aisselle des vrilles, ou mains de fleurs d'une seule pièce, disposées en cloche, évasées et partagées LCHXPITRE XXX. 26 Prede in five parts, each about half an inch wide, of a pale yellow color, some of which are sterile and others slow; the latter are announced by the fruit which forms an inch long at the same time as the blossom, and even before the blossom opens, this fruit, which gradually expands, grows to a foot long by about three inches diametrically. It is rounded at both ends, sometimes straight, sometimes curved, most often dotted with small warts; white, green or yellow, depending on the species, as there are some of these three colors, its stalk is very thin, its flesh firm, white and transparent, without any odor. detidated, the seed is placed in the middle of the fruit, in three or four compartments lined with a watery pulp. This seed is white and oblong, pointed at both ends, a little larger than that of the melon, and covered with a hard rind under which lies a milky, sweet kernel. The third species, known as the bouquet cucumber or mignon cucumber, differs in several respects from the two preceding species. Its root is quite similar, but its stem, although equally shaped, is much smaller; its stems are shorter and less numerous, rising straight up to the base of the fruit. B rise straight up until the load of the fruit causes them to fall back; it hardly extends beyond eighteen inches, and often the bell is enough. Its fruit comes in bunches along its small stems, three or four of them together; it is green at first, and as it ripens, it takes on a yellow and golden color; its length is usually limited to four or five inches by two inches in diameter; its flesh is similar in all respects to that of the two preceding species, and its seed is the same, but a little smaller: its main merit is that it is very early. The fourth species is quite different from the other three: its root is very short, white and hairy, its leaves are born in crowds one on top of the other, placed alternately, and when they are in their full strength, they extend to fifteen inches and more, very similar in outline to those of the vine, but less deeply cut, rough, blistered and hairy, both above and below, spreading a bad odor; They are borne on a hollow tail the size of a finger, and from fifteen to eighteen inches long.Sometimes there is only one, sometimes there are two or three; it is very large, five-sided and partly hollow; when cut laterally, it represents a star; its length is about three feet. From the armpits of the leaves come the flowers, which are golden-yellow and velvety, bell-shaped, and resemble in every way those of the pumpkin; some are sterile, borne on pedicels three to four inches long; others are already formed before they bloom. At first, the fruit is very small and soft green, but as it grows larger and longer, it takes on a dark, almost black color. Its size and length are very similar to those of the late cucumber, but its skin is much rougher, forming a number of small ribs; its flesh is firm, yellowish in color, and much less watery than the other species. The seed is placed in several chambers separated by a pulp, as in the others, but twice as large, more flared and ruddier. One is called the Barbary cucumber, which is very large and oddly shaped, with a large number of warts; yellow in color, striped with green, the stem and leaf are nothing special, and I don't know of any properties. The other is called the snake cucumber or Luffa; its shape is elongated, but much larger at the head than at the tail; its skin is smooth, pale green, marked at the sides by small protruding fillets, arranged with symmetry; its leaf is cut, quite small, and its arms small; it is used neither in cooking nor in medicine of which the authors have spoken; it seems to me that it is a very new plant for us. A third, much better-known species, and very useful in medicine, is the wild cucumber, which is perennial; its root is long and thick, and it produces several thick stems that rise straight up to a height of fifteen to eighteen inches, and then fall to the ground when loaded with fruit; its leaves are rounded and pointed, quite large, and pillowed at the base; the flowers come from bell-shaped armpits, in one piece, pale yellow in color: its fruits, which come in large numbers. are the shape and size of a large Spanish olive, with a rough, uneven skin; they contain black, flat, almost oval, shiny seeds in three separate chambers. This plant grows naturally in our southern provinces, and is just as easy to find here in any garden where it is sown, both for utility and pleasure; in the latter respect, here is its small merit. When the fruit is ripe, which can be seen by its color, which is yellowing a little, whoever wants to enjoy it gently cuts it with the tail to present it to another, under some imagined pretext, and by presenting it on the side of the tail, and pressing it a little between the fingers opposite the one to whom it is wanted, the tail leaves, and the liquor, as well as the seed that is inside, come out with impetuosity, and rushes to the face up to four paces : we laugh for a moment, and the niece ends there. With regard to its properties, it is a plant of which all the parts are extremely purgative, especially the fruit; it is with its juice that one composes this famous elaterion of the ancients, of which the moderns also recognized the merit; it is employed particularly in old diseases, when there are inveterate obstructions to be removed, of which the ordinary purgatives cannot triumph, or verminous matters to be destroyed; the dose is from twelve to fifteen grains: one finds it at all the apothecaries. Honey in which this fruit has been boiled is given in an ounce or two at most as an enema for B 3 people prone to vapors, and for those who are not regulated. Let me continue with the species suitable for life. The first three do not differ in taste, qualities or properties: they are widely used for life in their season. The common man does not, however, pay the same attention to them as to those of a delicate nature, for the reason that they require a somewhat elaborate seasoning, which is not available in all conditions, and that they are perfectly good only with meats, whether fine or common; but, when they have passed through the hands of a good cook, they are well worthy of the attention of people of taste; and moreover, they are healthy and refreshing in themselves. Some modern authors, no doubt working on ancient and false traditions, have accused it of having several vicious, even poisonous qualities: it may well have had them in its origin; but this plant, like many others, having come to naturalize in this climate, which has proved favorable to it, has undoubtedly lost its bad qualities, assuming them to be true; and the fruit is currently recognized as good by everyone, except for cold stomachs, because of its cold quality. It is eaten raw and cooked in twenty different ways, both fatty and lean: We garnish soups with them, and when they're stuffed, the stuffing lifts them up a lot. We put them under chickens or poulardes, and it's a distinguished stew; we put them again under roasted meats, after having cooked and drained them. They are chopped with various meats, as well as with fish, and made into a very delicate stuffing; they are fried in a pan with butter and onion; they are also prepared in a saucepan with cream, parsley and cboule; finally, cooks take particular pleasure in varying the taste and seasoning of this vegetable, which is tasted and desired at the best tables. To eat it raw in a salad, there are two different ways of preparing it: some, after having mixed and sliced it, sprinkle it with coarse salt between two dishes, and stir it from time to time until the watery liquor has run off: they then season it with vinegar, oil and pepper: others cut the fruit into slices, and leave it overnight between two dishes; the next day they press it between their hands to draw out the juice; and, when they want to eat it, they pour oil and vinegar over it, with pepper and salt, and B 4 a few finely chopped herbs. Either way, they taste very good, and some authors claim that they are good for the stomach; but others claim, with more plausibility, that they are very indigestible, when eaten raw as I have just said. The use of cucumber is particularly favorable to hot temperaments whose viscera are overheated: it is its essential property to cool in kidney and bladder diseases, and especially in calculus, where its use is highly recommended; but, in these kinds of cases, it must be cooked. Its pulp, crushed and cooled in ice and applied to a freshly shaved head, is, according to two leading physicians, a specific remedy for frenzy. Its seed is one of the 4 major cold seeds so frequently used in emulsions, and is an ingredient in orgeat. The two early species are the ones that attract the attention of gardeners, and that everyone is eager to have early; their cultivation is difficult: but the other two, which I'll talk about next, are easy and inexpensive to grow. They are both easy to grow, and require great care, as no other plant is so delicate in its birth: they are sown on a bed in November or December; four inches of compost are enough for the seed, which can be mixed on the same bed with the other plants for which this dose is sufficient. Fifteen or twenty seeds can be placed under each bell; some people make holes with their finger and place two seeds in each hole, which they cover very lightly or not at all; others, after arranging their seed at equal distances, push it in with the tip of their finger, and leave the holes open to the air. Either way is arbitrary: I've tried them both, and have found no difference in effect; the only thing to note is that the seedbed must be warm, and the soil fine. As soon as the seed is sown, the bells are lowered, and even bounded if the weather requires it: they are covered overnight, and the same care is given as for melons; I will therefore omit this detail of conduct, which can be found in the melon chapter. Three weeks or a month after sowing, they should be ready to be planted out on a new bed, and only six should be placed under each bell, so that they can get the most out of it: they are strengthened on this second bed, and provided that it is warmed exactly, and that the plant is given as much air as the weather will allow, it is ready a month later to be planted out on a third bed, to remain there. This last layer should be loaded with seven to eight inches of topsoil, and the finest manure should be kept to form the last bed, which will do much to nourish the fruit. We space them two feet apart in a chessboard pattern, like melons, and choose the lightest bells, which helps to bring them forward. Five or six days later, if the feet are strong enough, we make the first pruning, i.e. we cut off the ears, and pinch the stem above the second leaf, or, to put it better, we cut it off: if they are still too weak, we wait to do it until they have strengthened a little. The heat of the layer is maintained by means of stoves, which are loaded as often as needed. We cover and uncover it according to the weather, and let the plant enjoy the sight of the sun as often as it appears; for air is as necessary to it as heat, and when it lacks one or the other, we soon see it melt. Excessive heat is equally pernicious to it, so too much care must be taken to keep it at the right temperature. It is not usual for this plant to need water until the fruit is well established, but this can sometimes happen when the soil or manure used is too dry. In this case, which can easily be seen from the length of the plants, they should be given a light wetting after the water has been warmed in the sun; or, if the sun is not available, a pint or two of boiling water can be thrown over a jug of natural water, to correct its coldness and crudeness. As soon as the stalks begin to make their arms, they should be stopped at two eyes; and when the second branches show fruit, they should be pinched at one eye above, and always re-pruned in the same way, as more grow. You must also avoid confusing the branches, especially as the leaves take up a lot of space, and you must cut off the gourmands exactly; you can also remove some of the leaves, when they cause too much embarrassment and shade the fruit, and consume too much sap, especially those called hard leaves. B 6 As soon as the first fruits appear, begin to give the bells a little air, and gradually accustom them to this; when the arms ask to be extended, let them come out freely; but, if you still fear some frost, be prepared to cover the bed with straw mats by means of a trellis that supports them. Once April arrives, the fruit should begin to strengthen, if it comes from the first seeds of November and December; and, as in this month we begin to have hot days, it is then advisable to wet it copiously as needed; for this plant likes water as much as melons like it little; it also needs to be pruned regularly, and when it is well managed in all respects, it gives fruit for two or three months. The first ones should be good to cut at the beginning of May; I have grown some myself under frames, which were good at the end of April. It's also true that, regardless of the care taken, if the years aren't a little favorable, the fruit is much delayed; by comparing, for example, the winter of 1740, whose rigors were felt until May, with the winter we've just had, it's easy to understand the difference the plants experience. Cucumbers are not like melons, which have a specific point of maturity; they are good at any age, and can be cut as soon as they are two inches in size. In England and Holland, this fruit is harvested much earlier than is common in France, and its duration is extended by three months more; as early as the beginning of April, they begin to enjoy them, and they grow them successively until Christmas. Their method for bringing them in so early, is to sow them in the first days of October in the open ground, and they are careful to cover them during the nights and on bad weather days: the following month they replant them, each plant separately, in a small pot which they place on a warm bed, covered by canopies or frames; they warm it exactly as needed, and give the plant all the care it requires: this plant is strong when the big frosts arrive; and M. Bradley, a famous author, assures us from his own experience that the plant, fortified in this way, is much more resistant to the rigors of winter, flowering in February and bearing fruit at the beginning of April. I haven't tried this method, but I think it's a good one, and there's no doubt that it would be easier to succeed in France than in England, where the climate is much colder, if one wanted to take the trouble. The reason for this is that the artist is not sufficiently rewarded for the fruits of long and assiduous labor; the genius of the nation in general, applied to other objects, is not turned to these small marvels of art, like that of the English, Dutch and Germans, who all surpass us in this genre: in two words, the same emulation is not to be found here; and this is not the only part of agriculture that is neglected. It is to be hoped that we will acquire a greater taste for it, and that the Great, who are the soul of a State and the motive of all the arts, will motivate the worker to make it flourish, since it is true to say (leaving aside other reasons of State policy) that the productions of nature, entrusted by the Creator to the industry of man for his use, are the most precious gift He has given him, and consequently the most worthy of his attachment. This little digression is not superfluous in the context of the subject I am dealing with, and it is better to place it here than elsewhere; for the small number of curious people and amateurs who are to be found in France, moan daily about the indifference of the bulk of the nation to all that is called the study and cultivation of plants; and it is a kind of shame for them that, with a marvellous soil and a favourable sun, we are deprived of a thousand small goods which our neighbors, in an ungrateful position, enjoy rather more abundantly than we do. However, it is not the worker who is guilty of this; if we know him at all, he will never be accused of incapacity or lack of activity; but what use is it to him to lavish his pains and his substance, if no one is willing to put a price on the fruits of his labor? It is up to those at the head of the arts to encourage it, and to inspire a taste for these novelties in the rich people who can consume them. Back to my subject. We have just seen what is done in England to accelerate the ripening of the fruit I am dealing with. All that remains for me to do is to explain how to extend its life until Christmas. Nothing could be simpler: we sow them at the beginning of July on a bed made of dry manure and fresh litter mixed together, which we load with ten inches of soil without any other precaution, because the season requires none. The following November, as the nights become cooler and the white frosts begin, the plant is covered with cloches or frames, and if necessary, straw mats are thrown over it: the plant begins to produce at the end of the same month, and being well cared for, continues to give fruit until the big frosts. I believe, although the English author doesn't mention it, that the bed may need some heating around All Saints' Day, to maintain the action of this plant, which is extremely afraid of the cold; that's what we'll be able to test, if we want to try the effect. I'll now move on to the cultivation of the two other species of cucumber I'd like to talk about. The ordinary cucumber, which we call the late variety, differs from the two early varieties only in size, which is such that we commonly see cucumbers a foot long and three inches across; its flesh is the same, but it fruits later. They can be raised on a bed to be enjoyed earlier, and when they are ready for replanting at the end of April or beginning of May, they are placed in the ground after preparing the site: We usually know how to use muted beds, on which we plant them in a chessboard pattern, like the others, two feet apart; others are content to make one-foot quarried holes, which they fill with consumed manure, with two joints of potting soil on top: they do almost equally well in either way. They are kept covered for a few days, until they are well established; they are then left in the open air. Those who have not taken the precaution of raising them on a bed, sow them in place in mid-April, in holes laid out as I have just said, and they come up in the same way, but later. When you have bells to cover them until the end of May, it is a safety against the frosts of that month, which often kill them; But after this month, they only need to be moistened abundantly, and often pruned, as I explained for the early ones, and in this situation they yield much more than on bedding. It is even claimed that yellow is nothing other than degenerated white: I'm not talking about a third species, green, which is not esteemed, even though it tastes the same. Particular care must be taken to cut the fruit as soon as it is good, as it not only hardens on the vine, but also prevents the young from enjoying it: when cut and closed in a cool place, it keeps even better and lasts longer. When a counterfeit one is spotted, it must be removed; a better-made one benefits from the food. When you want to grow them to make gherkins that can be eaten all winter as a salad, you should only sow them at the end of May in the open ground; they are good for cutting in September, when they are the size of a little finger. This plant is subject to a disease known as miller's disease or white rot, because its leaves flourish and, as they perish, abort the fruit. The only remedy is to cut off all infected leaves; and the best way to prevent the disease, which is better than the remedy, is to cover the beds with straw mats or heavy bedding in cold weather, especially at night. The black cucumber is cultivated like the previous one, but it is not sown in place: it must be raised worm-on-bed, and then replanted in well-smoked soil; its fruit is of a quality quite different from the others; its flesh is neither watery, nor so melting, and its taste approaches that of the chestnut: I find it in my particular bland, pasty, very-inferior to the others; however it has its amateurs. It produces a lot of fruit, and can be stored well into winter, as it is closed off from the air; these two qualities are what make it the most popular: the seed is removed as the fruit is eaten, and can be stored for a long time. The seed is removed as the fruit is consumed; it keeps for a long time. For the first three species, a certain quantity is marked in proportion to need, and left standing until it begins to rot; the seed is then removed, washed in several waters to remove the silt, and left to dry for a few days before being locked up: it keeps well for seven or eight years. Before concluding this article, I will explain how to make gherkins, for the benefit of those who like them and are sure of their digestibility. Choose the smallest or whitest ones; burst and cut off the tail, and put them in a white cloth, rubbing them against each other, to strip them of their down: then blanch them, i.e., throw them into boiling water, for the space of four minutes and immediately put them back into fresh water; remove them, and let them drain on a white cloth: then put them back into the vessel in which you want them to remain, either in a jug or a bottle, arrange them in it as best you can, intermingling a few bay leaves and a few long peppers, and pour white vinegar over them to the surface, after boiling it a little in a pan; then add about an ounce of salt to each pint of vinegar, and cover the vessel with double parchment tied around it. Eight days later they will be good to eat, and will keep from one year to the next; you can still add a handful of percepierre, tarragon or purslane chops, if that's your taste. CHAPTER XXXI. "Description of CORIANDE; its properties, cultivation, etc. Although JUOIQUON makes no use of this plant in food, as it is useful for the pleasures of the senses and the relief of the body in many illnesses, I believe it may deserve a place in a regularly stocked vegetable garden. Its root is small, white and lined with a few fibers; its stem is simple, cylindrical, smooth and soft, rising to eighteen or twenty inches; its lower leaves are rounded and toothed, while the upper ones are more deeply cut and divided into very narrow strips; Its flowers are parasol-shaped at the top of the branches, shaped like roses, with five megaloid, indented, purplish-white petals, and a calyx that changes into two seeds which, when joined together, form a whole sphere, first green, then pale yellow. The odor of the whole plant, but particularly of the fresh seeds, is strong and stenchy; however, it softens as it dries, and the seeds acquire a sweet, pleasant flavor; these seeds are gray, round and pea-sized. They are used for the same purposes as aniseed, with which they are mixed, or substituted when it is lacking; it is stomachic, carminative and antivenomous. What I've said about the virtues of aniseed should also be said about this seed, and I won't repeat it here. I'll just add that its green leaf, cooked with a mound of bread, is good for dissipating inflamed tumors. The seed is also used to make small sugared almonds, which provoke the winds as well as flattering the taste; it is also used as a base for a liqueur, called coriander water for this reason, which is very pleasant to drink and quite beneficial; brewers also add a few kernels to beer, and it gives it a good taste. This plant grows easily in all kinds of prepared soil, and the countryside is covered with it around Paris, near Aubervilliers. The seed is sown in March, and the plant is weeded six weeks later, if weeds take over; but this can usually be dispensed with: there is no other way to care for it, only that there should be no thunderstorms at flowering time, as lightning will ruin it. The seed is best harvested at the end of August: the whole plant is uprooted or cut off; and, as the seed detaches itself at the slightest shake, to avoid losing as much as you would take out, you should have four sheets sewn together in the field, on which it is placed as soon as it is cut, and immediately beaten. A second precaution, equally useful, is to harvest in the morning at dew. The seed remains good to sow for two years. CHAPTER XXXII. Description of CORN-DE-CERF; its properties, cultivation, etc. THIS plant is annual; its root is woody, single, with a few fibers; its leaves emerge from the heart at ground level, eight to ten inches long, narrow, deeply and unevenly cut as they approach their tips, a little hairy, quite dark green; around the heart there are also a few spikes, borne on a round, slender tail, similar to those of the plantain, which bloom imperceptibly : each flower is borne on a small calyx surmounted by a few stamens with no visible petals: these stamens are followed by the seed, which is extremely small, more oval than round, and brown in color. The leaf is used to make salad, and has no other known use or property for life: in fact, it is rarely used today. It is useful in medicine, being astringent through the belly, and aperitive through the urine, vulnerary, and suitable for stopping stomach courses and haemorrhages; it is also good for renal colic, for urine retention, for alleviating stone; for digging up and consolidating wounds. It is sown in March, as sparsely as possible; despite this, there is always too much: two months later, you can start using it, and as you cut its leaves, new ones grow: it should be weeded and watered when young, and placed in loose soil; it requires no further care: its seed ripens in August, and keeps well for two or three years. CHAPTER XXXIII. Description of the gourd, its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. 11 THE gourd is an annual plant of which there are three species: the long gourd, the large gourd and the calabash. The first has a sinewy, white root, divided into several fine fibers; its stems are sarmentose, as big as a finger, two or three toises long, and creeping when not shaken to make them rise; its leaves are round and large, cottony and crenellated at the edges, borne on cylindrical, oblong and concave tails; its flowers emerge from the leaf axils, bell-shaped, white in color, flared and so cut out that they appear to be composed of five distinct petals, hairy on the inside, and trimmed on the outside with a short down; some are sterile, being borne on no embryo; the others are fertile, and supported by embryos that develop into cylindrical fruits up to four feet long; the size of the fruit on the tail side approaches that of the leg, but increases greatly as it grows towards the tip: its bark is thin and whitish-green when young; as it dries, it takes on a yellow color, and hardens like wood. Its flesh is white, bland and a little spongy, usually divided into six quarters filled with compartments, which contain long, flattened seeds, broad at one end and narrowed at the germ end, enclosing a soft, pleasant-tasting white almond under a hard skin. Its flesh is refreshing, but rather insipid; however, in many proTome II. C vinces it is eaten with pleasure, cooked with soup stock; it does not melt like pumpkin, but is nevertheless very tender: it is also made into a highly prized jam: these are its two main properties. Its use is good for hot temperaments, but pernicious for the opposite: it is also used to quench thirst, by drinking the water in which it is infused. Its seed is its essential merit; it is one of the four major cold seeds used in emulsions, for all illnesses resulting from blood acrimony; it also enters into the composition of orgeat, the recipe for which I gave in the Pumpkin article. Its green leaf, applied to the udders of new mothers, causes them to lose milk, according to a great author. Water distilled from the fruit before it ripens is suitable for external inflammations of the eyes, ears and gout; and taken internally, it soothes the body's great heats: its juice, by expression, has the same effect. Its crushed flesh, when raw and applied to burns, heals them and soothes inflammation. Its cultivation is the same as that of pumpkins, with the difference that it must be transplanted to the foot of a south-facing wall, or to the foot of a few strong, high poles, to which it can cling by means of its maidens; for this fruit wants to have air all around it: it comes out longer and more united, and is not subject to spoilage, nor to being pierced by insects, as when it lies on the ground. This species differs from all pumpkins in that it is good to eat only when young, whereas the others need to be well matured and even kept for some time. The second species differs from the first in that its fruit is round and pot-bellied, and grows considerably; it is used for the same purposes. The third species, called calabash or flask, differs from the other two by the shape of its fruit, which is bottle-shaped, with a narrow neck and a large belly; its seed is also browner. This species is particularly used to make flasks for holding wine or water, or whatever else is deemed appropriate; gardeners use them in various places to hold their seeds. The fruit is left to dry well, and then emptied, raking it as well as possible. A small tool like a rake would be very useful for this. I know of a fourth species, whose skin is a coarse green-black, striped with a yellowish-white C 2; but it is considered more of a coloquita than a squash, and I have not heard of any use being made of it. CHAPTER XXXIV. Description of CRAN; its properties, cultivation, etc. THIS plant, also known as horseradish or wild horseradish, is perennial. Its root is long and thick, creeping, white, with a pungent, burning taste; its leaves are fifteen to eighteen inches long, broad in proportion, pointed, a beautiful glossy green, a little blistered, rough and toothed at the edges; sometimes it bears a stem, and often it bears none: This stem rises to a foot and a half or two feet; it is straight, firm, fluted, hollow, and bears small white flowers with four petals, arranged crosswise, followed by small, almost round fruits, which contain the seed. The root, which is the only part of the plant used, stimulates the appetite, and is eaten with meat instead of mustard: when freshly grated, it tastes almost the same, which is why it's called German mustard. It's also eaten with fresh butter, which is made into toast; it's the usual Flemish breakfast. It's a useful resource in remote rural areas, where mustard isn't always on hand; I say useful for those whose taste isn't sufficiently piqued by natural meats. Its medicinal virtues are stomatal, pecteral and anti-scorbutic: it is cut into wheels and infused for twelve hours in a decoction of barley, or boiled to make a herbal tea; the dose is one ounce in a pint of water: scorbutics are greatly relieved by it, and it is one of the greatest remedies for this ailment. Phthisics are also made to drink the milk in which this root has been boiled, and hydropics the white wine in which it has been infused; asthmatics also receive relief from it, and it also has the virtue of stimulating urination. This plant grows naturally along streams, rivers, ponds and damp meadows. It is also cultivated in gardens, and its virtues make it well deserving of a place there. Some claim that there are two species, one larger than the other; but, after 2 giving it enough attention, I attribute the alleged difference only to the quality of the soil, more or less oily, which makes the plant stronger or weaker. It multiplies in three ways: either from seeds sown in spring, or from offshoots separated from old plants, or from the plant itself, which is cut three rows thick and placed back in the ground; but this must be done at the same time as the plant is uprooted, and in a season when the sap is in action: each root forms a root which forms a plant just like the offshoots. Most roots cut in the same way produce the same effect; it's an experiment that's easy to do, and proves that the same plant contains many germs in its substance, as well as in its seed. It must be renewed every year, so as to always have one that follows the other in the degree of goodness it should have; for its root becomes hard and cordate from the third year onwards; so that it is only perfectly good during the second, (I mean for the use of life), needing the first to form. There's nothing special about growing it; just make sure you place it in the freshest soil you can find, and in a slightly shady spot. Description of CRESSON; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Cress is an annual plant used in salad supplies; it has no other use in life, but it has great health benefits. There are three very different species, each with its own foliage, but all tasting more or less the same: common, curly and golden. The common cress, better known as cresson Alenois, has a fairly small leaf, cut deeply like parsley, of a tender green color and a pleasant taste; When it goes to seed, it sprouts a stalk eighteen inches or two feet high, all the branches of which are covered with small white flowers, arranged in a cross, which bloom one after the other, followed by a small, round, flattened capsule enclosing the seed, from which it easily emerges; this seed is dark yellow-orange in color, flat, long, small and hot-tasting. Curly cress differs in its leaf, which C4 is curly and curled like brown cabbage, quite large and dark green; it resembles the previous variety in all other respects. The golden cress has an oblong leaf, about the width of a finger, unevenly cut at the edges, and of a golden yellow, from which it takes its name: its stem is stalked, and its flower white as in the others; but its seed is half as small, and of a lighter color. The leaves and seeds of these three species are used medicinally: both are hot and desiccating, attenuating, aperitive and abstersive; the main use is for swollen spleen, scurvy and mucilaginous tartar of the lungs; the seed brings out measles: it is ground with sain-doux, to rub and heal the head and other scabby parts. The whole plant is specific against worms, especially those of the pericardium. These three species of cress multiply only from seed, which can be sown all year round, either on the bed or on the ground; it is mixed on the bed with all the small seeds, and sprouts after three days: eight days later you begin to cut its leaf, and it gives all the more pleasure, the smaller it is: you must therefore sow a little every two weeks. It requires no special care: four inches of potting soil are enough for this plant. After the months of rigor, it no longer needs the bed, and can be sown in the open ground by the rays; but during hot spells, it should be sown in the shade, and moistened often; it requires loose, slightly loamy soil. If sown in March, it will be ripe in June, and the plants are removed as soon as the first capsules begin to open. It is left to dry for a few days, then threshed and locked up immediately. It keeps well for two years. There is a fourth species of cress that grows naturally in fountains, wherever there is flowing water; I will describe its properties, although it is not one of the cultivated plants: the resemblance it has with the other species authorizes me to do so, all the more so as in large parks, it is quite common to see it around canals and springs. This plant forms several low, creeping stems, which feed in the water and swim on the surface. Its roots are white, numerous and very slender; its stems grow to about a foot; they are curved, fairly large, hollow, twiggy and green, sometimes turning a little red; its leaves are almost round, arranged in rows with several on a rib ending in an odd one, always green, fragrant, with a pleasantly pungent taste; its flowers are born at the ends of the stems and branches, small, white and arranged crosswise. The flower is followed by a silique which divides into two chambers filled with almost round, small, reddish seeds that are pungent to the taste. This species, known as watercress, not only has all the virtues of the others, but also has them in a higher degree, and has been perfectly tested; it is aperitive, diuretic, anti-scorbutic, stomatal and hysteric. A handful of its leaves and stems are added to aperitif broths of crayfish and hepatic herbs, which purify the blood and make it fluid; it also relieves hydropics and hypochondriacs, and diverts soporous affections. Its leaf, boiled in milk, is excellent for ailing breasts (I mean the beverage): taken as a decoction, it is used to purify the blood; at the same time, it is detersive and incisive; it restores menstruation and expectoration; it is the specific remedy for scurvy; it cures grátelle, by rubbing with the leaf: its juice wilts polyps in the nose and makes them fall off, provided they are washed off often; the same juice held in the mouth relieves tongue paralysis, awakens the mind and senses, and makes you sneeze; put in the ear, it soothes tooth pain when it comes from a cold cause. The leaf applied as a poultice, and mixed with sourdough, resolves boils and all kinds of apostumes; it likewise relieves sciatica drops, applied in the same way to the painful part. With so many health-giving properties, this plant also has the advantage of serving as a food: it is eaten with pleasure in salads; it is served under roast poultry, and is no less flattering to the taste: finally, it is well worth the effort of those who have it at home or in the vicinity, to see to its preservation, by ridding it of the weeds that choke it in the places assigned to it by nature, and by preventing cattle from trampling it underfoot when they go out to graze. It should be noted that there is another species of grass around fountains which is quite similar to watercress, and no less so; the leaf, although shaped in much the same way, is pointed and larger. The cress that grows at Cailli in Normandy is particularly prized: the species is smaller, more tender, and has a finer taste than that found near Paris. Those who find themselves in dry, arid countries, far from any stream or fonC6 taine where this plant grows, and who are in need of it at the moment for some illness, can grow a few plants at home, and here's how. Make one or more tubs about two feet in diameter and five to six inches high, with holes drilled in the bottom flush with the bottom on one side; fill them halfway with soil, and plant in them two or three feet of watercress, which you send to be dug up in the nearest place: as soon as it is planted, we flood it with water, so that it exceeds the surface of the earth by a good inch, and leave it in this state: it takes root again and grows as in a fountain, if we observe two things: 1°. always maintain this inch of water on the surface; 2°, change the water from time to time, as it could become corrupted by too long a stay in the heat: simply unplug the hole, and it will run out; and, when it has run out, replace the plug, then pour in new water. When frost approaches, these tubs are locked up, and given as much air as the weather will allow. Description of the ECHALOTE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc... The ECHALOTE is a species of onion; or, to put it another way, it is an assembly of several bulbs joined together, a little larger than a filbert, and carried on a bundle of fibrous roots; these bulbs are aligned, pale red on the outside, and white on the inside, having a taste and odor approaching that of garlic, but less strong and more pleasant. Its leaves are numerous, long, small, cylindrical and fistulous, with the same taste and odor as the bulb: it has neither stems nor flowers, at least I've never seen any; and I think Mr. Lémery was quite mistaken in this respect in the description he gave. There are two species, the common and the large, which resemble each other in all the points I have just mentioned, except for their size. The bulb of the latter is once as large as that of the former, and its leaves are almost as strong as those of the chive: we can see from this that it is of better value than the other; but it is still only in the hands of a few curious people, and I cannot say where it came from; we must be eager to know and multiply it. This plant, by which I mean the bulb, is of great use in all types of cooking; it stimulates the appetite and pleasantly piques the taste; it is mixed into most sauces, both fatty and lean, and goes particularly well with oil and vinegar: it leaves no taste after it like onion and garlic, when it has been eaten; and this is why it appeals better to many people. The leaf is not used. Its bulb is highly aperitive; it is sometimes used medicinally for esquinancies, and its use is good for those with pits and who are subject to urine retention: it is also claimed that when crushed and applied to the bites of rabid dogs, it prevents the unfortunate consequences. It is also good for keeping out bad air, and is used in place of garlic. This plant multiplies from its tubers, which are separated like those of garlic, and are planted at the beginning of March in borders or beds, four inches apart in all directions, taking care not to bury them more than level with the surface of the soil. Four days later, they sprout, and from May onwards, you start using them; but to keep them, you have to wait to pull them up until the tops are completely dry, which is usually at the end of June; they keep perfectly well throughout the winter, provided you let them dry out well before storing them, and keep them in a dry place. Cultivation requires no special care; many gardeners plant them around onion beds, and they do very well in this arrangement, provided the soil is suitable; for I would observe in this respect that it does not succeed in any kind of soil, being very often prone to clouding and rotting in the foot; and I don't know precisely where this depends, or which type of soil is more favorable to it; for I have more than once seen it succeed and fail alternately in light soils, and have the same fate in other, fatter soils. I believe its success depends to a greater or lesser extent on the weather. Everyone will have to find the best place for it in their own soil, and to be on the safe side, you can put it in different places: if it doesn't do well in one, it may do better in another. Moreover, when planting them, care should be taken to choose the most rounded and elongated tubers; the bulb will be more beautiful as a result. CHAPTER XXXVII. Description of the EPINARD; its different species, properties, s4 culture, etc. This plant is an annual; there are two species: the common one, otherwise known as male spinach, and the one known as the large species. Some would like to count a third, which they call female spinach; but they are wrong to consider it a species, since all its flowers are sterile, and it is a degeneration of the other two species, among which this one occurs in all seeds. The root of the common spinach is small, white, simple, with few fibers; its stem is two feet or more high, hollow, cylindrical, fluted, and divided into several branches. Its ferns are almost similar to those of the arroche, borne on long tails; those at the bottom of the stems are sometimes cut on both sides at their base, ending in a point; and those at the top of the stem have only two extensions and are like ears at their base. This plant bears no flowers, but only green fruits, loaded with four whitish filaments; the embryos are born from the leaf axils at the ends of the branches, in clusters piled one on top of the other, which change into a fruit the size of a vetch seed, round, flattened and smooth, ash-colored as it ripens, and filled with a pear-shaped seed; others have it much more flattened, almost triangular and prickly. This difference between the seeds of one species and those of another authorizes some authors to make two different species; but it should be noted that this is the only difference in the plant, and that it is not worth dividing it into two species: moreover, I've found that when I sow prickly seed, I sometimes get plants that make the seed round; and similarly, when I sow round seed, I get plants that make it prickly: so it seems to me that this must be considered simply as a variety and a play of nature. The spinach of the large species differs from the first, in that the plant is much stronger and higher, and the leaves larger, rounder and thicker. Its seed is round like the other, of the same size and color. The first species is more delicate to the taste of some; the second provides more, and according to others, has a more decisive taste; it also withstands winter better, and melts less in the fire: everyone can be satisfied. It can be used for both fatty and lean varieties, but the method of preparation is always the same: first, all the leaves are peeled and washed thoroughly; then they are thrown into boiling water, where they are cushioned, and removed after half an hour to drain. The most common practice is to chop spinach when it is cooked; but good cooks do not do this, and apprehend it as it comes out of the water, having recognized that in this operation it loses most of its juice and taste, so that all that remains is the pomace. The method used by some others is to cook them without water, as they yield enough of their own, and it's true that they taste much better; but you don't want to start with too much fire, which would burn them. In some countries, they are eaten raw in salads, when they are young and tender. Finally, authors unanimously agree that, the way they are used, they are a healthy food, albeit not very nourishing. This dish is used for entremets at the most delicate tables, either with juice or cream, and is always the first dish eaten: simply prepared with butter, and seasoned with onion and spices, it is generally appreciated: others add cream, with a lemon peel and a few drops of orange blossom: under sirloin and leg of lamb, there's no grass that's so delicate, and that takes the juices of meats better; we still make excellent pies with it: it's also used in stuffings, with sorrel, to soften its acidity, as well as in soup. The water in which they are cooked is particularly good for degreasing and cleaning iron, especially roasting spits. Its medicinal properties include softening and loosening the belly, and easing coughs and acridity of the chest. The water distilled from its leaves is also sovereign in soothing the heat of the bowels, and the ardors of a stomach irritated by inflamed bile; its leaves are also used in emollient decocttons and poultices. Asthmatics receive great relief, and are sometimes cured radically, by the frequent use of spinach boiled with veal; and this was the only remedy used by M. Fagon, first physician to Louis XIV, who was greatly troubled by this ailment. Applied externally to the stomach and liver, they dispel inflammation and pain. According to a modern author, too frequent use of this plant makes the blood melancholy; but M. Fagon's experience seems to destroy this opinion. The two species I have mentioned can be cultivated in exactly the same way, and can be sown for a full eight months, from the end of February to October: you need to choose the best, most well-amended soil you have, and top-dress the seed when you can. Those to be sown over winter are broadcast, but those to be eaten in summer are best sown by rays, as they are easier to crimp and cut. The first crop, sown to overwinter, is sown in mid-August, and begins to be used in the first days of October: the second is sown in mid-September, and the spinach is hardly cut before winter: the third is sown in the first days of October; and these, which remain small, are used to succeed the first after winter. We start again at the end of February or in March, and these new seedlings are eaten after the last ones have overwintered. We cut them as soon as they are strong enough; they only need this cut, because afterwards they go to seed, as well as those from the autumn seeds: a fortnight later, we sow a few more which have the same fate: we continue from fortnight to fortnight throughout the summer, when we like this vegetable so much that we can't get enough of it, as is the taste of many people, so that we can eat them all year round, except in times of frost; still, with the precaution of covering them, or cutting some to lock up in the greenhouse when bad weather approaches, where they keep for three weeks, stirring them from time to time, we can have them without interruption. It should be noted that the seed of common spinach is much quicker to set than that of the larger species, which sometimes remains in the ground for two or three weeks. The only cultivation this plant requires after being sown, harrowed and walked on, is to be weeded exactly and wetted if necessary during the summer, otherwise it yellows and rises out of the ground; if it can be put in the shade in very hot weather, the leaf comes out greener and more beautiful. When sowing by rays, you can do as I said for carrots, and even wet the seed as soon as it is sown, and cover the rays the next day; this is the method used by our market gardeners. At the start of spring, those that have spent the winter should be cleaned of all the leaves that winter has spoiled; the heart grows back instead, and the earth, freed of all the garbage that covers it, is more easily put in the right mood; weed them at the same time. In winter and spring, no tools should be used to pick them: they are plucked by hand, flush to the ground with the tail; but in summer this subjection would be unnecessary, since they are only cut once. In some provinces, the whole stalk is cut off: but this method is not a good one, because, in addition to the fact that they cannot grow back, the heart, which is harder than the leaf, is always felt when they are eaten, and is not clean on a well-served table. We keep as many of the first ones sown during the winter as we see fit for seed; they yield more than the last ones, and the seed is rather ripe. As the stem rises very high, by which I mean the larger species, it's a good idea to support it with a few laths, and to defend it as best you can from birds, which are very greedy for it, as well as field mice. The seed of those we sow in spring, although less well nourished, will also serve to make up for the lack of those whose feet have spent the winter, but they are unlikely to provide as much. Finally, the stems are pulled out or cut when they start to turn yellow, without waiting for them to dry out completely; the seed finishes ripening in the sun, spread out on a sheet, and keeps well for three years. Sterile plants, as I said, can be found mixed in with fertile ones; these so-called female plants can be easily distinguished when the plant is raised, in that it is weaker and more yellow, and instead of seeds, it bears groups of small petalless flowers all along its branches, which are, strictly speaking, nothing more than stamens that dissipate and turn to dust as soon as they are touched. Care must be taken to uproot all these false feet as they become known, especially as they are unfruitful and harmful to the good ones. As soon as the seed is dry, it should be threshed and sealed. The common species is of two kinds as regards the seed, as I have said; one makes it round and smooth, the other triangular and prickly; and as the latter is very awkward to handle, both to clean and to sow, the former is rightly preferred. A new species of spinach has recently arrived from America, under the name of basella, which the Americans are making great use of; but it will still be some time before it can be widely grown. I saw it in the King's Garden, and perhaps it is only there: but, as far as I can judge, it will not be very difficult to multiply it with a little effort; and I can say that it is well worth the effort. There are two kinds, differing from each other only in the color of the leaves, one green and the other reddish like beet, with thick purple-red veins, and the stem the same. The stems are heart-shaped, seven to eight inches long at the bottom of the & plant, by four wide, united at the edges, smooth and glossy, very thick: the stem is very thick towards the base, and grows a number of rather loose threads, almost similar to those of beans, which rise up to six feet, and turn around the oars that are placed on them, with a little help: these threads or branches are covered with leaves throughout, and together make a gap of two feet or more in all directions. Flowers appear in great numbers all along the nets, arranged in clusters and borne on short, thick pedicels; but the term "flower" is a misnomer, for they are, strictly speaking, nothing more than small buds which are rose-colored on the surface, without any noticeable petals or stamens, and which change into a soft fruit or berry, the size of a pea, split at the head which is green at first, and which, as it ripens, becomes a black violet. These berries are placed unevenly along the tails where they are born, and each contains a hard seed the size of a peppercorn, which is the seed of the plant. Up to this point, we at the Jardin du Roi had been content to give it the necessary care to preserve it, observing the degree of heat and humidity it could require; we had succeeded perfectly, not only in preserving it, but also in raising it from its own seed: we Tome II. D apparently did not presume that this plant contained so many good qualities, nor that it could multiply in all hands, and we had not pushed our research any further; we had not even had the curiosity to taste it. Knowing it at first sight, I asked for a handful of its leaves, which they were kind enough to give me for testing, and the same day it was done. I had them cooked and prepared in the same way as our ordinary spinach, with the difference that I had the sides of the leaves removed, just as they are removed from perry: I then tasted them, along with three or four other people capable of judging them, and we unanimously agreed that their taste was superior to ours, with none of the pungency we are obliged to correct with sugar or cream; on the contrary, they are sweet on their own, with the advantage of being fleshier and melting much less. All this has given me a strong desire to multiply the species, and I hope to succeed; the difficulty is that it cannot spend the winter in the ground, and that it can only give its seed in the second year, from which it follows that it must be preserved for a winter. Experience has shown that it perishes in an ordinary greenhouse, and that it necessarily needs a warm greenhouse; but I think that, although few people have a warm greenhouse, if a few apply themselves to preserving a certain quantity of seeds, they will easily suffice to supply other curious people: besides, it's quite possible to get some from our American islands; a small quantity will serve for a long time, since a single seed, according to the calculation I made on the small quantity of leaves I picked from a single plant, should provide at different times during the year enough to make two or three good dishes; and provided you manage to get some seed, you'll be able to console yourself with seeing the plant perish at the first frosts, after having enjoyed it for six months or more. This is a particular merit that ours don't have, as they go up in the summer almost as soon as they're up. Moreover, nothing is easier than to preserve it in winter when you have the space; all you have to do is take it with you in May when you leave the bed where you sow it, in the quantity you see fit, and take care to water them as needed: the plants are not nearly as strong there as in the open ground, but they do not fail to give a large quantity of seeds. The one I'm talking about has the advantage of not being difficult to raise, and of growing surprisingly fast. I don't know whether the seed would grow in the ground, it hasn't been tested; but it's D2 certain at least that, replanted in the ground as soon as it comes out of the bed, it grows perfectly there; it's in this situation that I've seen and admired it. Everyone will be able to take advantage of this little discovery as they see fit, and in relation to the explanations I have given. CHAPTER XXXVIII. Description of the ESTRAGON; its qualities and properties, its cultivation, etc. ESTRAGON is a fragrant plant, commonly grown in all gardens, and used in salad dressings with chervil, burnet and others. It is also used in omelettes, chopped finely: a special vinegar is made simply by infusing the leaf in it; mixed with gherkins, it enhances the taste. This plant is cordial, stomatal, incisive, detersive, aperitive and sudorific; it excites urine; it drives away winds; it provokes appetite; it resists venom, and makes you spit when chewed; it is also good for scurvy: infused in boiling water like tea, with a little sugar, it is very good against stomach weakness, indigestion and the desire to vomit; but some people find it difficult to digest, and are prone to have indigestion after eating it. It multiplies equally well from seed, from rooted plants, and from cuttings; but usually a few old clumps are pulled up in spring, separated into several parts, and replanted in well-prepared beds, a foot apart: this planting is done as soon as the spikes begin to emerge from the ground, as the more advanced the spikes, the more difficult it is to regrow. This plant rises to around two feet, and produces several branches where the seed is formed, which is extremely small and preceded by a small, imperceptible flower. At this height, the leaf is too hard, and only those of the young shoots should be used. This leaf is long and narrow, light green, smooth and plain at the edges: we always tend it, taking care to cut off a certain quantity every two weeks, by the stem, which always grows back until the frosts. It should be crimped and weeded if necessary in the heat of the year: it is then cut to D3 level after All Saints' Day, and covered with an inch of compost, if available. Care must be taken not to pull out the root when cutting it, as it holds very little to the soil. It should be renewed every three years. There is no need to take any precautions to preserve it during the winter; it easily withstands bad weather, but its young shoots are often subject to frost at the start of spring. You need mats or dry straw to cover them when you're threatened by frost. If you want to enjoy it during the winter, replant a few feet of it on the bed at All Saints' Day, and give it the same care as the other plants that are replanted at the same time. It can be combined on the same bed with all those that are content with 6 inches of potting soil. CHAPTER XXXIX: "Description of FENNEL; its different species, properties, culling, etc. FENNEL is a species of anise, from which it differs in many ways that make it preferable. Everything about it is useful: the root, the leaf, the seed, both in food and in remedies: advantages that aniseed does not have, and whose merit lies in the seed alone. There are two species, the common and the sweet: I could name a third, of which I have recently received some seed, which I have been assured is superior to the others in fineness; but I have not yet tested it to seed. The threshold is extremely fine and delicate, and the plant is not nearly as strong as the others: I have been given the Italian name fenochio di zuecarro, sweet fennel. Common fennel is perennial, and will last for several years. Its root is straight, white, fairly coarse, with an aromatic flavor mingled with some sweetness; its stem is four to five feet high, straight, cylindrical, fluted, gnarled, smooth, covered with a thin, green bark, filled with a white, fungous pith, divided into several branches towards the top: your leaves are broad, branched, divided into narrow, cylindrical lobes, dark green, sweet-tasting, sweet-smelling; those at the tip are like hairs. These leaves are borne on tails that embrace the stems and branches in a gauntlet-like fashion: at the top of the stems and branches are large, rounded umbrellas, whose D4 FENOUIL. are pink with five fragrant yellow petals, supported by a calyx that turns into a fruit consisting of two oblong seeds, quite large, convex, fluted on one side, flattened on the other, brown in color, with a pungent, slightly strong flavor. This plant grows naturally on rocks and stones in Africa and other countries close to the Line: cultivation softens and changes it a little in more temperate climates, such as ours, and particularly in Italy and Spain, where it is much more widely cultivated than here. Sweet fennel, otherwise known as Florence fennel, has much more perfect qualities than the one I've just mentioned, and also differs in that its stem is lower and its leaves smaller; its seed, on the other hand, is three times larger, whiter and more regularly fluted: The seed, on the other hand, is three times larger, whiter and more regularly fluted; it has a whitened leaf and the stem is also more tender and sweeter; but, for the plant to reach its full perfection, it is claimed that the seed must be taken from Syria or the Azores Islands, and that the seed collected in our climates is very degenerate, which seems to be proven by all the varieties found in this species, which rarely conforms in all respects to the description I have just given: However, in Italy, where it is very successful, only the seed collected there is used, as well as in Languedoc, where it is widely cultivated; but it is true that it is not all equally good, and to get it right, one is rather embarrassed: I have tested it several times; and as a rule, one must observe that it must be of a greenish white, tending towards cinnamon; that which is whiter is degenerated. Both species are cultivated in the same way. The seed is sown in May or June, when the plant is to be blanched and eaten as a salad, and in March when the seed is to be collected. Sowing is done in rows, either in beds or in borders. The soil must be loose and well-prepared: water lightly to encourage emergence, if the weather is dry; when the plant is six weeks or two months old, thin it out and weed it. It requires little water, unless it is intended to be eaten as a stalk, in which case it is transplanted to a bed, like celery, when it is strong enough, and spaced at one foot in all directions. It is cared for in the same way, wetting it frequently and mounding it when it is as D5 FENOUIL. large as it can be; it whitens and forms a stalk much larger than celery, and much superior in quality. Its flavor, delicacy and fragrance appeal to both taste and smell. It is tender at the same time and much less indigestible than celery; in addition to being good for the stomach, it is good for many ailments, as we shall see below in detailing its virtues. The Italians make great use of it, and rightly so: they eat it in salads, or more simply with salt: they also put it in soup. The tips of young leaves are still used in their salad supplies, where they give off a pleasant smell and taste: they even eat the tips of young branches without any seasoning. It's true that, particularly in Rome, it has qualities that you wouldn't believe unless you'd eaten it on the spot. It's a great loss to us that this vegetable is almost unknown here. I agree that the climate not being so favorable to it, it would not have as many good qualities; but from the most to the least, it would always be of great merit: perhaps even that if one studied its culture with care, one would find veins of ground where it would succeed perfectly: I raised some myself which was found to be passably good, in spite of the cold and wet quality of my ground; from which I presume that in a more favorable ground it would be much better. The greatest difficulty I've found is to bleach it without it rusting or rotting, and another is to prevent it from rising. The remedy to these two inconveniences lies, I believe, in the choice of the soil and the amount of water to be given to it.

The seed ripens very well, and is used for many purposes. The seed ripens very well, and is used for many purposes; but I take no comfort in the fact that the merit of this plant for us is limited to the use of the screw; for it has many more beneficial qualities. It is aperitive, diuretic, sudorific, stomatal, pectoral and febrifuge. Its root ranks first among the five great aperitive roots. Its seed is one of the four major hot seeds, and its leaf, though less used in particular, when distilled with the whole plant, produces a water that is sovereign in certain situations. The juice of its roots, taken from three ounces up to six, is an excellent remedy for intermittent fever-quarts, being taken at the beginning of the attack: it excites sweating, and the patient must be careful to cover himself well Dó FENOUIL. after taking it. The decoction of its roots and seeds is specific against smallpox and measles, as well as in malignant and putrid fevers. No other plant, in the opinion of many great physicians, comes close to this one's virtue for opening and resolving. The seed has a particular virtue for dissipating winds and soothing colicky pains: it is boiled with herbs in decoctions to be taken as enemas; and simply chewed or powdered, it produces much the same effect. It is also a sovereign remedy for eye diseases of all kinds, including weakness, obscuration, colyria and humours. This infusion alone, according to a leading physician, radically cured a patient with a well-formed cataract before his very eyes. An essential oil is extracted from its seeds, and is available from all apothecaries. It provides great relief for asthmatics and calms the most obstinate coughs; twelve to fifteen drops are taken in a glass of chopped milk or pectoral tea; six or eight drops are also very useful for colic. Good fennel, a fairly common liqueur, which is nothing other than wine spirit soaked in this oil, has the same effect with one or two spoonfuls, especially in windy colic and indigestion. Thresholds and roots boiled in barley and rice water bring milk to nursing mothers. Some claim that use of this plant makes you slimmer; it is therefore favorable to those with a marked tendency to become overweight. Finally, it has the well-recognized virtue of fortifying the stomach, aiding digestion and dissolving glutens, whether used in food or taken as an infusion. Shouldn't a garden always be stocked with such a useful plant? It's because of its great virtues that the Italian says: Fenochio è pane mi bastua, It's enough for me to have fennel and bread. CHAPTERXL. Description- of the FEVE-DE-MARAIS; its qualities and properties, cultivation, etc. This is one of the hardiest plants, and one of the easiest to raise: it grows in fields as well as gardens, and succeeds in all kinds of climates, provided the soil is a little cool. Its root is partly straight and partly creeping, and furnished with many sibers. Its stem commonly rises to two feet, and more when in good soil: it is quadrangular, fluted and hollow, with leaves along its entire length, placed without symmetry, and divided into three, five or seven parts, separated by a rib to which they are attached: its leaves are oblong, rounded, thick, bluish and smooth: its flowers are born several together from the axils of the ribs on the same pedicel, arranged in order and on the same side; they are leguminous and white, variegated with purplish and purple veins at the base : the lateral leaves are black in the middle and white at the edges; the inner leaf is greenish: the calyx is green, divided into five quarters, from which emerges a pistil which then changes by degree into a long, thick, almost round, fleshy and hairy pod, filled with beans, three, four or five in number; these seeds, being green, are greenish-white, oval in shape, a little quartered, large, flattened, and enveloped in a hard, thick bark called the robe, with a long, black mark where they attach to the pod. As they dry, they turn red, and the inner substance becomes hard and solid. As the seed dries, the pod and plant also dry out, and everything turns black. Each plant produces up to fifteen pods, when the soil and the year are good, especially as the same plant often produces two or three stems. The ways in which it is prepared are fairly well known: it is eaten with butter, bacon or cream; when it's new, it makes an entremets dish, which people who are fond of and delicate are very keen on. For this preparation, we take the marsh bean when it is very small, i.e., the size of a large bean, a little larger: we only remove the tip of the germ with the fingernail to accommodate it. People are more accustomed to bog beans when they are larger: they are then stolen, to use the usual term; they are cooked with a little water, after having been lightly browned in butter; then pepper and salt are added, along with a pinch of savory, whose taste enhances that of the bog bean, which is a little bland by nature. It also has the disadvantage of being heavy and windy, and of tightening up a lot: you mustn't eat too much of it if you don't have a strong stomach. This vegetable has medicinal properties; its flour is one of the four resolvatives commonly used in poultices to soften, resolve and dispose tumors to suppurate: in tummy courses, when it is permissible to stop them, the porridge made with this flour and milk is a good remedy. The ash from the stems and pods of this burnt plant is an aperitif: an ounce is boiled in a pint of water, then filtered and drunk by hydropics. The bark and pod of this grain, infused from evening to morning in a glass of white wine weighing three large, is an almost infallible remedy for urine retention. Water distilled from the flowers is an excellent cosmetic for removing spots and freckles from the face. Five different types of broad bean are grown in this country: the large variety, the julienne, the picarde, and two small varieties called féverolles: the latter two are only suitable for horses, and are only sown in fields. I won't say any more about them. Of the other three species, the large one is the best, and the one you should stick to for your own particular use: the other two are much smaller, and have a wilder taste: they are only used when the first one is lacking, and are only eaten by people who can put up with anything. Few are grown around Paris, although they are consumed as much as the other species: they are brought from outlying countries, in preference to the large species, because being harder, they are more resistant to transport, and the seed is much cheaper for those who traffic in it. The large species is sown in December and February; we risk a little in this first season, when they can be preserved: they are a fortnight earlier than those of the second seed; but they often perish: field mice, magpies and crows eat them, or frosts destroy them, unless they are well sheltered, and carefully covered in times of snow and frost. It is therefore advisable to put off the strongest seed until February. The latter is the best, because it is easier to crimp them; three are enough in each clump, spaced a foot or fifteen inches apart. They are crimped in March or April, depending on their strength, and limed a little at the same time. The flower stops better, the pods come out more beautiful, and the aphid, which is their enemy, attaches itself much less when this part, which is the most tender, is removed. If the aphid has already reached the pods, collect the infected stem ends in baskets and throw them away, or bury them. Before sowing them, many people, slaves to old practices, soak them either in natural water, or in manure water, in the belief that this will make them germinate and sprout; for me, who experimented with this for my rule, the only effect I noticed was that after soaking them in this way, many rotted in the ground and didn't sprout, and the others didn't advance any further: everyone can experience this. You must choose the best soil you have to plant this vegetable, which does not do well in light soils; and the better the soil has been smoked and ploughed, the more it yields. At the end of May, the first seedlings begin to bear their fruit, which is desired by delicate people only as long as it is small: so it should be picked at this time, and the pods, which follow one another, provide three weeks' supply. You can continue to sow them until the end of April, but after this month, the flowers, which come into bloom in the hot weather, are prone to dropping; aphids join in and ruin them. What can be done at no cost and at the risk of the event, is to cut off the first few plants that have borne fruit in May or June, just above ground level. Only as much as you need is set aside for seed, and the stalks are pulled out when the pod and cossate are black and dry; they are then threshed, and the grain is locked up dry, taking care to protect it from the rats and mice that are fond of it. This grain keeps well for two years on land; by the third, it hardly ever rises at all. Some individuals dry it green to eat during Lent, and here's how. They are taken to a good size; their coats are removed; they are threaded into strings, and first placed in the shade for a few days; then they are exposed to the sun until they are quite dry, and they are locked in a dry place; but when they are well appreciated, they are a bad food that turns to mush, and is more disgusting than appetizing. One author has suggested that to fertilize land properly, it should be sown with seeds and ploughed with the whole plant, which should be buried well when it begins to flower, and that this amendment is preferable to all manures: I don't know of anyone who has tried it out, so I can neither approve nor reject it; but I do know, having witnessed it many times, that in the Kingdom of Naples, many private individuals fertilize their land with a similar plant, whose name I haven't remembered, which they let grow very high, and which they bury in the same way: hence I presume that this kind of fertilizer could be good; nr.However, in countries where manure cannot be found, this practice might be good and useful. CHAPTTRE XLI. Description of the GARDEROBE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. ETTE plante n'est d'aucuneut usage dans les alimentations; mais, comme elle sert à la conservation de nos vétemens, qui, dans l'ordre de nos besoins, tiennent le sccond rang, elle mérite bien qu'on lui donne une place dans un Traité de la culture des plantes utiles à l'humanité. There are two types of garderobe, distinguished by male and female. The first, also known as aurone, has a woody root with a few fibers: it grows several sarmentose stems, two or three feet high, hard, brittle, filled with a white, reddish pith, grooved and branched. Its leaves, which are difficult to describe accurately, are endlessly multiplied, cut into lobes slightly wider than those of fennel, and borne on broad tails. They are whitish, with a strong odor and a bitter, acrid taste. The flowers are numerous along the branches, yellowish in color, and similar to those of wormwood; namely, with florets, but composed of a large number of very short, pipe-shaped florets, divided into five parts at their apex, each borne on a seed, and enclosed in a scaly calyx: the flowers are followed by small, oblong, naked seeds, without aigrette, similar to those of wormwood, but smaller. This plant is more or less bitter, depending on the season, climate and terrain. The second species, called by several names, the female aurone, the santoline and the small cypress, has a thick, hard, woody, branching root: it grows stems a cubit or more high, woody, spindly, covered with a whitish down, and divided into several branches, which are surrounded by small, finely serrated leaves, or rather loaded with small tubers that surround it four by four along its entire length: they are whitish, with a bad odor, and a flavor that is at once pungent, bitter and aromatic: each small branch bears a yellow flower with florets, composed of several other pipe-shaped florets, divided into five parts at their apex, separated by gutter-folded leaves, and enclosed in a common, scaly, almost hemispherical calyx; each floret is borne on an embryo that changes into an oblong, striped, brown seed without a tassel. This plant, both male and female, grows naturally in Italy and Provence, in mountains and uncultivated areas, from where it has spread to gardens, where it is very easy to grow: it can be propagated from seed or from rooted plants, and is used to make borders around quarries. The female species has a particular virtue: its pungent odor keeps worms and ringworms away from any place where it is planted, thus preserving clothes and other woollen furniture from the ravages of these insects. Both also have medicinal properties. The first species is very good for killing worms, dissipating winds, and stimulating urination and menstruation, insofar as it removes obstructions of the kidneys and womb: it is substituted for wormwood, its virtues being more or less the same. It is claimed that a decoction of its buds is a specific way of bringing in hair and preventing it from falling out. It forms the basis of a reputed and well-tested ointment for hair, the recipe for which is given below. Take a handful of leaves of male Garderobe, and as much of Capillaire; join to it 1 ounce of honey of Laudanum, 1 large of wild Myrthe; 3 large of seed of Linen, 3 large of Fenugreek, 3 ounces of oil of sweet Almonds, 3 ounces of good white Wine; make infuse the whole together during twenty-four hours, then make it boil until there does not remain any more moisture; pass it by expressing it, and make onctions with this ointment during the new moon. A great physician assures us that the leaves of the second species, dried and reduced to powder, diluted in matricaria water in a dose of one and a half large, taken on an empty stomach for ten days, and then from day to day, stops women's white flowers. Another similarly assures, on the basis of his own experience, that one lump of the same powder is very usefully employed in pleurisy and fluxion of the chest. CHAPTER XLII. Description of the BEAN: its different species, cultivation, etc. The name bean is common to both the plant and the fruit it produces: however, to distinguish the pod, which is eaten green, from the bean when it is separated from its pod, we say green bean and white bean; and when the bean is dry, we say dry bean or bean feve. This plant is universally known, and is widely consumed in all countries: some species spin, i.e. grow upwards; others remain low, hence the name dwarf bean. The leaf is uniform in all species from this country: it is arranged like that of ivy, i.e., divided into three almost equal parts which grow together on the same stem, all three ending in a point, of a beautiful meadow green, smooth, thin and united at the edges; its flowers are odorless, small, irregularly shaped, white or purplish, depending on the species, and emerge from the leaf axils in bunches of four, six, eight or ten, placed two by two in echelon along the branch where they are held: the stem is extremely loose, and only supports itself by clinging to neighboring stems. for lack of any other support. The flower is followed by the pod, which is more or less long, depending on the species, and a finger's breadth wide; it contains five or six seeds, more or less, which detach easily when dry. This vegetable is used so frequently in the kitchen, that it's arguably the most common household staple. It can be eaten in all seasons, in all conditions, and with the most delicate of tastes: it can be eaten fat or lean, and in many different ways. Green with its pod, it can be eaten with juice, butter or cream; but it must be removed exactly from the pod. E it is necessary to remove exactly its fillets and both ends: in tender grains, we give him the same appetizers: under roasted meats it is particularly good. Dry, it can be fried in a variety of ways; it can be eaten in salads and purées. When candied, it holds its place perfectly in entremets, either in juice or in cream; and, although it is very difficult to resist the temptation to eat it, in whatever way it is presented on the table, it is nevertheless advisable to warn that in grain form it is windy and heavy on the stomach, and for this reason, certain temperaments should eat it with moderation. Its medicinal properties are softening, aperitive and resolving: its flour is very commonly used in poultices to soften, resolve and dispose tumors to suppurate. Distilled green bean water, taken in the morning on an empty stomach in a bain-marie, in a quantity of three or four ounces, is good against gravel. Chewed beans applied to horse bites are said to heal the wound. There are an infinite number of bean species. An individual of my acquaintance has collected sixty-three of them out of curiosity, all very distinct in shape and color, but with very little difference in taste and quality: I shall not undertake to detail them, so as not to deviate from my object, which is to make my work less curious than useful, and I shall confine myself to fifteen or sixteen recognized as the best, and very-sufficient for our needs. Those whose climate and terrain are more suited to a few other species will be right to cultivate them; and I have no doubt that some which are only of mediocre quality here, and which, for this reason, are abandoned, could be much better in other countries: I myself remember having eaten with pleasure, in the Levant, several kinds that I have never seen in France. The sixteen species I have chosen are: 1 the jack bean. 2 the grivelé. 3 the early dwarf white bean. 4 the early white flat. the parchmentless. ó the common white. 9 small round white. 10 white Swiss. 11 grey Swiss. 12 red Swiss. 13 de Prague. 14 le gros à confire, de Hollande. 7 Caux kidney. 15 cardinal. 8 from Soissons. 16 from Spain. All these species multiply from seed or grain, which is planted at the end of April in warm, light soils, and in mid-May in later soils. No plant is so delicate, and requires soil so well prepared and smoked at the same time: it must have had a good ploughing before winter, a second one at the end of February, and a hoeing before sowing: these three ways are amply paid by the product, and I have the experience that those who spare the one of February, lose instead of saving. The soil must also be loose by nature, and well amended. If the soil is greasy and damp, the grain is prone to rot, and if it rises, the plant is always languid, turns yellow and produces very little. This plant has one advantage over all the others, which is that it has to be changed every year; but it does better the second year in the same soil, provided it is given a little manure; the grain comes out clearer and more even. This tool is little known in many countries, but is nevertheless the most convenient I know of for most grain seeds, peas, broad beans, Turkey wheat, etc., so I'll explain here how to use it for those who don't know it, and who would like to try it out. I will also explain its shape. The iron is thirteen to fourteen inches long, by eight on the bushing side, and is used at the other end, which is thus square. It should be slightly curved in the middle, and the beans should be sown either in the open field, in beds or in borders. First, two hoes of earth are removed from their intended place, and thrown to one side, one to the right and the other to the left: We then give several blows with this sharp tool to loosen the earth; we pull out another good hoe which we hold in the air with one hand, while with the other we spread the seed at the bottom of the little pit we're making, and we throw this hoe back on top, which we level out a little with a turn of the hand, from two feet to two feet: we continue as long as the ground is long, and according to the species we put in more or less grain. A second row is started when the first is finished, and the clumps are arranged in a chessboard pattern, at the same two-foot distance. Be sure to crush the clumps and remove any stones. After a fortnight, the seed should sprout: but if, in this interval, the tool is placed on the end, which must be of well-beaten steel, one line or one and a half lines thick at most; at the other end is the socket, which must be bent so that the handle returns to the tool and takes the same turn. This handle should be a little curved like the iron, and should only be 5 to 6 inches away from its cutting edge, and three inches away from the socket; its length should be eighteen inches. E 3 times there are stormy rains which beat the earth, the grain which cannot pierce the crust which forms above, especially when there are a few days of heat, needs to be helped; and it is necessary, with some light instrument, to break this crust to give him facility to leave, without which it perishes between two grounds. A month later, when the feet have gained a little strength, they are put back on their shoes, i.e., the earth that was thrown to one side when sowing is put back around the clump, and the earth is broken at the same time. If you want to row them, this is also the time to prick the oars, and they produce once more. Three weeks later, if they are rowed, we go through the rows to help the stems, called nets, to hang onto the oars. In some countries, such as around Chartres, we cut the nets as they form, and they never fail to have an abundance of grain: I think this method is very good when they are not rowed, as all the sap remains in the stalk, the first flowers all hold, the grain is better nourished, and it costs less in expenses and trouble: at the very least, when the nets have reached the end of the oars, they must be stopped; for they cause confusion, and uselessly consume much sap from which the bottom would benefit. If there is a lot of weed growth, as happens in rainy years, it must be weeded by hand and with skill, so as not to harm the planters given the last shoe. They are finally picked green in July, if they are needed. Both hands must be used, one to hold the pod's tail, the other to pull it so as not to break the nets; but, for the best, it is advisable to designate a special area for those to be eaten in this way, without touching those to be left to dry; If they are dwarf beans, wait until the plants have been stripped of all their leaves, and the pods have dried thoroughly; make bunches of them, and remove them in dry weather. But if they are bush beans, as the pods only dry one after the other, they must be picked as you go along; otherwise, the bottom pods, which are the first to dry out, may partly open, and the bean may fall out; or it may wilt and rust in its pod, if the weather is rainy; and it's all wasted. If you have room to sow them dry, you'd better not thresh them until you need them, because they keep for two years longer, and the whites keep their whiteness and glaze better too. This vegetable is privileged in that no insect damages it like the others, so there's nothing to fear when they're threshed in the field. They're only good for sowing for two years at most, because by the second year some of them are missing. To advance this fruit and enjoy it from the first days of June, we sow it very thickly on a bed at the beginning of March. It springs up quickly, and great care is taken to cover it in bad weather; it is then transplanted to the foot of the southern walls at the sin of April, where it picks up again easily with a little wetting; but this is only good for early dwarfs. The bed should be filled with six inches of compost. If you want to preserve green beans for the winter, choose the most tender ones and throw them into boiling water for a quarter of an hour; then pass them into fresh water, thread them with string, and put them in the air for two or three days in the shade, and the same number in the sun; or, if there is no sun, let them dry out on racks in the oven, making sure it is only lukewarm: When sufficiently dried, remove and seal in paper boxes or bags. To use them, fry them for twenty-four hours in lukewarm water, into which you have thrown a piece of beurre manié, and cook them in the same water; then season them as you please, and you will find them as tender as in their season; but, to tell the truth, the taste is quite different. Now to the description of the species. The jack bean is one of the first to be sown in early fields, and the first to supply Paris. Its flower is purplish, its pod very long and tender, and its grain of a good size, very elongated and rounded, of a black color, speckled with white. It is usually used only in green, but its grain is one of the softest and best there is. The only drawback is its color, which makes the sauce blackish; however, if you are careful to discard the water when it is half-cooked, and to replace it with boiling water, you can partly remedy this defect. It yields a lot. The kidney bean does not have such a soft grain; it is a similar species in terms of earliness; its flower is purplish, and its pod of mediocre size, rather elongated, tender and striped with red. Its grain is lime-gray speckled with black; it yields a lot when paddled. It is commonly used, like the previous one, only in green, for the same reason that its grain makes the color of the sauce black; it can however be corrected in the same way as we said above. The early dwarf white bean produces its fruit at the same time as the two preceding varieties: it does not spin, as its name suggests, and yet it is extraordinarily profitable, especially if picked often. Its flower is white, and its pod long and plain; its seed is also white, but of a perfect white, smooth and glossy: it is small, elongated and a little rounded. It is eaten both green and dry, and is very tasty either way: of all the species, it is the one that gives the most pleasure and profit in a middle-class garden; except that the dry bean does not lead the way as much as the larger species, which I'll talk about next. E The white flat bean is still in the same class as the previous ones in terms of haste: it spins and loads a lot when rowed. It has white flowers and medium-length pods, with medium-sized, short, flattened and fairly white beans. It is used both green and dry, but when eaten dry, it lacks the perfection of some others. The bean without parchment is the most esteemed to be eaten green, by the reason that its pod does not have inside this small film, called parchment, common to all the other species, and which makes it more tender and more pleasant to eat: it also has the advantage of giving its grain much more than any other; it is notoriously tender and soft, and at the same time as early as the preceding ones; it provides a lot when rowed. Its qualities justly earn it the eagerness of those who know it: it has a white flower, a very long pod, and a short, flat, white, medium-sized grain. It is used for both green and tender beans with the same pleasure: when dry, it has nothing to distinguish it. The common white bean is found everywhere, and is most widely used in provinces where the more distinguished species are not known, and where perhaps they would not be as successful as around Paris. Its flower is white, its pod mediocre, and its grain short, flattened, of a slightly dirty white; it spins and loads a lot when rowed: it is eaten equally green, as a tender grain, and dry. The Caux kidney is so named because its germ is sunken, and its overall shape resembles that of a sheep's kidney; it is a very good and highly esteemed species, and loads a lot when rowed. Its flower is white, and its pod highly elongated, but less full than some others; its grain is a little small, elongated, and quite perfectly white, smooth and glossy. It can be eaten in all ways, but when dried it is one of the most esteemed, being soft and tender; it is the successor to the first species. The Soissons bean ranks first for eating dry or as a tender grain: it is the largest of all, the most tender, and cooks best: it is very heavy when rowed, but is prone to staining in rainy years. Care must be taken to pick the pods as they dry. Its flower is white; its pod very long, but not very full; its grain very flattened, of a white and a glaze superior to all the others: it is the latest species. It is as good in green as the others, when eaten young, but is always reserved for eating as a soft or dry bean. The small, round, white bean is the smallest of all the ordinary species, and the best, to many people's taste, to be eaten dry: it is tender, soft and cooked perfectly, even having something distinguished in the taste. It sails and loads prodigiously when paddled. Its blossom is white, its pod small, but well filled; its grain almost round in all directions, and of a slightly russet white. It is only used dry, and is very good value. The white Swiss bean is a species designed to be eaten green; it carries a lot of weight, even though it is dwarfed. Its flower is white, its pod very tender and long; its bean is medium-sized, rounded, russet-white and of very mediocre quality: it is quite early, so it is hardly used for anything other than green. Grey Swiss differs from the first only in the color of its grain, which is a blackish red with black inlays: it is dwarfed like white, and is intended for green use only. The red bean is of the same class, except that its color is a beautiful red, mottled with several colors that vary according to the terrain. The Prague bean, otherwise known as the Queen's bean, because, it is said, Her Majesty was the first to whom it was presented a few years ago, is a singular species grown only in a few private gardens, and which should be more widespread; its flower is purplish, and its pod extremely small, but very full. Its seeds have no definite shape; some are quartered and round, others pendulous, some smaller, others larger, but all smaller than the smallest peas: its color is isabella, speckled with cinnamon. It is not eaten green, nor as a tender grain, but dry: it has a fine, distinguished taste that makes it invaluable to its fans, especially when served in salads with oil and vinegar. It is sown and cultivated like the other species; it is neither more delicate to raise, nor later to bear fruit: it should only be noted that it must necessarily be rowed, if it is to be truly profitable; and in this arrangement it yields an incredible quantity of pods and grains, which compensates well for its smallness. The large confit bean from Holland, known in German as schewvert, which means saber, because it imitates the shape of a saber, is an extraordinary species for the volume of its pod, which is seven to eight inches long and a good inch wide. Its flower is white and fairly large, and its rounded grain is white and wormy, which is almost the only way it can be used. It is widely consumed in Holland and neighboring countries, but hardly known in France. The cardinal bean is a new species, whose country of origin I do not know. Its flower is white, its pod quite long, but not very full, and its bean flattened and very large; its color is white all around, and purple all around the germ: this is what distinguishes it the most, because it has nothing special about it, either for taste or produce; on the contrary, it has the defect of ripening very late and with great difficulty, which means that it yields little, and sometimes nothing at all. The runner bean is a singular species, cultivated more for its flower than for its fruit; this flower is similar to that of the others, but of a perfect fiery color, and it produces abundantly for three months, provided it is rowed: The flower is followed by the pod, which is very long, coarse green and rough under the finger; the grain it contains is twice the size of all the other species; its color is grayish-delicate, mottled black for the most part. It is not usually eaten; however, people are beginning to develop a taste for it, and having tasted it myself, I found it no different from the others; but it sins by color like the grey and Swiss bean. I mention the four species that follow only to give a few examples of my own. The Chinese bean spins like our own; it has a smaller leaf; its flower is flax-grey in some, and white in others: it emerges from the leaf axils in bunches of ten to twelve, arranged much like a wallflower sprig, and can form as many as twenty-five or thirty on each plant. Most of the flowers bear fruit, and there are usually eight or ten on each cluster, shaped like ordinary pods, but shorter, wider and more inverted, with the added difference that both sides are bristling with small saw-like teeth, and the skin is rough and rough. The mature bean is round and flattened like a lentil, but twice as big, and perfectly black, with a white border around half its circumference. It's because of this resemblance that we call it a Chinese pea; but the leaf, stem and pod are characteristic of the bean. It multiplies extraordinarily; I counted on a single pred that I had raised on a bed, up to two hundred and some pods: in the open ground it would not provide so much; but it always provides a lot, provided that it has been advanced on a bed, and replanted at the foot of some well exposed wall. I cooked a handful to see what it tasted like, and found it peculiar: perhaps it would appeal to connoisseurs; but I must confess that, although there's nothing wrong with it, it didn't flatter me. Perhaps in its natural country it has other qualities that we don't find here, or virtues that we don't know. The first species of Mississippi bean multiplies from seed like the others. It should be sown here early on a bed, and then replanted in a good exposure: The leaves are distributed partly to the right and partly to the left, diametrically opposed, an inch apart, set in a parrot-like echelon, and arranged in three equal parts like those of ordinary beans, but of a completely different shape, only about an inch long, forming a perfect oval, smooth and united at the edges. The fruit-bearing stalks arise from the leaf axils at the bottom of the plant, six or eight in number, and bear twelve to fifteen inches from their birth to the first siliques, which are gathered in the shape of an aigrette at the tip. The flowers are purplish, shaped much like all bean flowers, but so small that their shape is barely noticeable. The flowers are followed by siliques or pods which contain the seed; these siliques are finger-length, rounded and small, like small string: each contains fifteen to eighteen brown seeds, shaped much like the small round white bean, and no bigger than a grain of millet. From this detail, it will be seen that this grain is not suitable for use as food. In fact, only the green silique is used; small as it is, a large quantity is needed to make a dish: from which we must conclude that it apparently has a merit that we do not know. I thought at first that the plant was stronger in Mississippi than it is here; but I was assured that there was very little difference, and that it was an exquisite food for these inhabitants. As far as we are concerned, we can only consider this plant as a curiosity. The second species of Vississipi is completely opposite to the previous one; the stem is weak like that of ordinary beans, and also spins; the leaf is arranged in the same way, but it is larger, and the three parts that make it up are regularly oval, ending in a point: The succeeding pod is extraordinarily long and large, and contains several large, short, almost quartered, russet-white beans with a black germ. I don't know what the pod is; I've only seen it in the Jardin du Roi, where it has been brought recently: I can only assure you that if it were to become naturalized in our climate, it would be of great value; that's what we'll certainly know in a few years' time. The American bean is a spinning species like our own, but with a very slender stem and an extremely small leaf. The flower is proportionate, and the silique that follows it is only about an inch long, and contains only one or two almost round, coffee-colored seeds the size of a grain of hare's lead. From this description, I don't think anyone who grows beans for profit or propagation will be tempted to try this one. There are several other similar species of bean, which I will pass over in silence, as they are of interest only to the curious, as I have already remarked: so I feel I must end this article here. "CHAPTER XLIII. Description of the HYSOPE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. THERE are three species of hyssop; but, as they differ only in the color of the flower, and are perfectly similar in everything else, the description of one dispenses me from describing the others. Its root is thick, woody and hard; it sprouts several stems that rise to a foot or eighteen inches, hard, knotted, twiggy, topped, from the bottom to the top, with long, narrow leaves, a little larger than those of savory : its flowers are spike-shaped, but all turn to one side, and are white, blue or pink, depending on the species; The upper lip is raised, rounded and indented, while the lower is divided into three parts, the middle of which is spoon-shaped, indented and terminated by two points. Each flower is followed by four oblong, brown seeds, enclosed in a capsule that serves as the flower's calyx: these seeds are fragrant, sometimes approaching the smell of musk. This plant is of no use for life, but in gardens it is used to form borders around vegetable patches, where it spreads an aromatic and very pleasant scent, especially before it comes into flower. Its greatest properties are medical: it is incisive, aperitive, digestive, detersive, vulcerative and fortifying: it is mainly used for tartarous diseases of the lung. Its leaves and flowers are used in cephalic decoctions, and in the aromatic wine so frequently used by surgeons to dispel swollen wounds. Distillation yields a water and an essential oil with many properties. Its flowers are used to make a simple syrup, and another compound in which several other bechic and aperitive plants are used, and which is highly esteemed for chest illnesses, especially asthma and obstinate coughs. The minced leaf, mixed with fresh butter and applied externally, is good for bruises. Fresh or dried hyssop buds, soaked in mulled wine and placed in a knot and applied in fomentation to the eyes before going to bed, cure echymosis; and the same fomentation is sovereign for dissolving rumpled blood and resolving it when extravasated. Water or a decoction of the whole plant also cures eye inflammation. It is also used to make an excellent preserve for lung diseases. Finally, it is good for strengthening the brain, making the blood fluid, stimulating the months and urine, and removing obstructions. This plant can be propagated by seed and offspring, but more commonly by the latter, which is safer and easier. It is planted in borders around quarries in March and September, in the same way as lavender. The method for one is the same as for the other. It must be destroyed and renewed every two years, for cleanliness's sake, because when it stays in place longer, it creates a gap that is unpleasant to the eye. It should be placed as far as possible from the sun, in soil that is neither too oily nor too light. It requires no other special care. CHAPTER XLIV. Description of lettuce; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Lettuce is one of the most universal and common of garden plants. It can be found in all four parts of the world, and adapts easily to all climates and soils, provided the soil is well prepared, and the species chosen are suited to the vein of the soil. There are three main species, which vary considerably from one another, and form an infinite number of individual species. The first is that which only produces a large number of large, smooth, elongated leaves, without forming an apple. The second is that with a round leaf, which apples on its own and is called head lettuce. The third is a leaf that is curved and almost smooth, called chicon or romaine. These three species, with the exception of the leaves, which are round or curved, smooth or curly, and of different colors, grow their stems more or less equally; this stem, which rises to two or three feet, is firm, thick, cylindrical and branched: the branches are further divided into smaller ones, loaded with flowers, and spread out like sheaves. These flowers are composed of several yellowish half-florets, borne on embryos, and enclosed in a small, oblong, scaly calyx. These flowers are followed by the seed, which is oblong, flattened and pointed at both ends, white, black or yellow, depending on the species. This plant is so familiar and well-known that it needs no introduction. It is eaten raw in salads with oil, vinegar and salt; and provided it is eaten on its own without any supplies, it is very healthy, and can only upset extremely weak and cold stomachs: digestion, against general prejudice, is easy, and particularly so for those who drink little or no wine. Cooked, it is eaten in soup; it is also mixed with various vegetables, especially peas. It is refreshing and humectant: however, some doctors claim that it is not suitable for asthmatics. It is used almost as much in medicine as in food. A distilled water is extracted from its leaves, and is commonly used as a base for refreshing juleps and sleeping pills. Its leaves are also used internally in refreshing broths and enemas, to combat burning fevers and diseases that threaten internal parts with inflammation. Its seed, which is one of the four small minors, has much the same virtues, and is used in refreshing potions in a dose of two to three large doses. Externally, the leaf is applied to the forehead as a bandage, either alone or fricasseed with vinegar, chervil and purslane, and is very useful and effective against migraine. It is also claimed that frequent use of this plant, which is milky by nature, is very beneficial for nursing mothers to maintain and increase their milk. Its juice is used in all refreshing syrups, and is the main virtue of populeum, so sovereign for inflamed hemorrhoids. In addition to the three species of lettuce distinguished above, there are a few wild species commonly found in hedgerows, which have the same virtues as the cultivated species. Some authors even claim that, being milkier, they are more aperitive and more detersive; but they are not used for life, being hard and bitter; their leaves are usually long, narrow, sinuous, deeply cut on both sides, and armed with fairly rough thorns all along the coast; they flower and bear their seed, which is black, and quite similar to the seed of those grown in gardens. I'll now describe the three species in question. The first is of such little use for the table, and so mediocre, that it should rather be banished from gardens than cultivated: however, if, against my opinion, there are climates and land situations where it succeeds better than the others, as I have sometimes been persuaded, the only way to take advantage of it is to bind it like chicory; when it is in full strength, the heart whitens, but rots easily. The second species, head lettuce, is the most widely cultivated: it seems that nature has amused itself by varying it with perfectly distinct qualities, which have made it all the more varied in its names. The curious and the amateurs should be pleased that I have brought back twenty-five species, with the necessary details, by means of which they can obtain in all kinds of soils, and successively in all seasons, the enjoyment of a present that nature has been so kind as to make us so pleasant and so multiplied: I say in all kinds of soil, because there is no land where it cannot be cultivated; but at the same time, I make the observation that not all subdivisions of lettuce are suitable for all soils, that on the contrary, some are successful only in certain soils, and that it is only after testing one's own soil that one should stick to cultivating those that are the most successful. I therefore subdivide head lettuce into twenty-five varieties: petite Crêpe, grosse Crêpe, Bagnolet, George. l'Aubervilliers, la grosse Blonde, la Dauphine, la Perpignane, la Bapaume, la Batavia, la Laitue brune, la Sanguine, la Coquille, la Passion, la Gènes, la jeune Rouge, la grosse Rouge, l'Italie, la Royale, la Paresseuse, la Versailles, la Cocasse, la grosse Allemande, la Pomme de Berlin, et la longue Vissée. F 2 The third type of lettuce, known as chicon or romaine, is not much less cultivated than the previous one; it is not subject to the bitterness commonly found in head lettuces, which is why it is preferred to be eaten raw. I know twelve to fifteen species; however, only seven are generally known and cultivated, and are more or less equal in quality, the others being degenerate species of little merit, even the one with yellow seeds. These seven species are Romaine hâtive, Chicon vert, Gris, Blond, Rouge, Panaché and Alfange. I now return to head lettuces. I. Petite crêpe, otherwise known as petite noire, because its seed is black, is the smallest of all lettuces: it is yellowish-green, extremely curly and toothed; its head is small in proportion, especially when grown under a bell: it is very tender in this situation; but, to tell the truth, it has little taste, and its main merit is that it succeeds better than any other lettuce on a bed throughout the winter, a season whose harshness makes it find everything good. In the open ground, it is much better, and apples better; but it is only suited to spring: in the other seasons, it rises as soon as it apples; and, in strong soils, it even melts rather than peels: it therefore requires a soft, well-soiled soil, with a southern or eastern exposure, along some wall, or at the foot of some windbreak. It is the first species to give seed, but it gives little, and even that which it does give is very prone to clouding. There is a second, much larger species, whose seed is similarly black, but which does not grow under a bell jar, and which is hardly cultivated today. To grow it in all kinds of weather, intelligent gardeners, and particularly market gardeners, sow it from the end of August on small ados of potting soil with a southern exposure, and then transplant it to small, low beds where it bolts; this first sowing is eaten in December. They sow it on a bed, for the second time, around All Saints' Day; and the plant that comes from there, they replant it in place on another bed, when it is strong enough: it must have been transplanted beforehand: this one is eaten in January. The third seed is sown in December, and they continue to sow it every month until March, so that they always have some in succession; but this third seed requires much more care than the first. For this lettuce, as for all the others that are sown or transplanted, the first thing to do is to fill the bed with only four inches of potting soil: when it is ready to be sown, i.e. when the great fire has passed, the seed is sown under a bell, very clear, and very lightly covered with potting soil: many market gardeners are even content to beat it with their hand against the potting soil without covering it. The seed sprouts a few days later; and, when its two ears are well formed, and the first leaf begins to emerge from the heart, without waiting any longer, it is transplanted two by two, an inch apart, under other cloches. If the layer is still good, we transplant it on top; if not, we put it back on top of another one: sixty or eighty leaves enter under each bell. We leave it to fortify itself in this state until it has four or five leaves, and we take care to maintain its bed in a good warmth: I don't mean heat, because this plant does better with a moderate fire; and it's enough, so to speak, for it to find the bed warm when we sow it, and transplant it, or plant it in place; the two extremes of cold or heat melt it. We are also careful to keep the bells stuffed and covered with bedding, mainly during the nights, and to increase the blankets in proportion to the severity of the weather. When you have straw mats, it's even better to cover the whole layer over the bedding, not only to keep the heat in more securely, but also to more easily shake off any snow that may fall, and which, without this precaution, would mingle with the bedding, which would then have to be changed often, without preventing the cooling of the layer. From time to time, it is important to check that the plant is not overheated. This can be seen when you lift the bells and see hot steam coming out: you should then give them a little air for a few hours. When the weather is mild, or when the sun comes out during frosts, the bells should be lifted during the height of the day, and put back on as soon as the sun goes down. When it has finally reached four or five leaves, it is transplanted again under 4 cloches, on a new layer to remain there and to prune; and this last layer must be loaded with six inches of compost, so that the root does not touch the manure: we put twelve or fifteen, which we then reduce to four or five at most, as soon as they begin to be pressed. Those that are removed are also replanted in fours, under other cloches. Care must be taken not to use new cloches for transplanting at any time; they must have been used for other plants for two weeks, or exposed to the sun for a similar length of time along a wall, to allow them to dry out: experience shows that without this, the plants they cover melt and perish. The same care and heating should then be continued, according to the greater or lesser need, and care should be taken to give the bells a little air from time to time during the best hours of the day, whether the sun is shining or not; because without air, the plant withers and doesn't grow: It's enough to raise the bell by one finger, on the south side, if there's no wind, and you support it in this state with a bit of rolled straw; but if the wind is too strong, whatever it may be, you must always give the air on the opposite side. As they fill the bells, you need to raise them higher with forks, depending on the weather, and then cut them when you've reached the point where you want them. When the apple starts to peel, remove all the low yellowing leaves and press the soil against the base; the apple will be bigger and more beautiful. You must also change the forks every 3 or 4 days, in other words, give air in turn to the four sides of the bell, so that they all benefit equally; otherwise, the one that enjoys the benefit of air to the exclusion of the others, will strengthen itself at their expense, and do them a great deal of harm: try, however, to match this with the wind. II. The large crepe differs from the small one only in size, which is almost twice as large: it also has the same qualities, shape and color. Its main merit is that it is extremely soft and tender; it also requires the same quality of soil and the same exposure. It can be sown and brought forward to be enjoyed in the spring, which is its season: it can even be planted for peeling, but it does not tolerate the bell. It should be left in the open air as soon as it has been replanted, either on a bed or on the ground. Its 5 seeds are white and ripen early: it yields very little. There is another type of crêpe that market gardeners call "la ronde": it is very lightly curled, and comes a little larger than the others; but I don't know if it's the same one I'll talk about below, known more generally as "Bagnolet" or "petite-courte". The seed of both species of crepe is the one taken in preference to any other to make lettuce for cutting, otherwise known as nasturtium, as it is blonder. The way to sow it is to make small rays two inches wide by one inch deep. Others sow it broadcast, or in the field, to use the gardener's term, under cloches, and beat the soil well with the hand without burying it. Twelve to fifteen days after sowing, it can be cut; but to nourish it better, and give it more taste, it should be sown fairly lightly, and left to enjoy until it has two good leaves, in addition to its ears; it takes longer to come, but it gives more profit and pleasure. We sow a little every two weeks from the end of September: this way, we can have them for as long as we want, but we're not so keen on them as soon as the head lettuces start giving. The same care and precautions as I explained above should be observed for those intended for head lettuce. III. The Bagnolet, which others call the petite courte, the printanière, or the dégrebé, grows like the petite crêpe, but beats it in that it is earlier, and the head is larger, yellower and firmer; it also has the advantage of peeling under a bell without needing air, which is a merit. Its leaf is blond and smooth, much less curly than the crêpe, and less prone to melting. Market gardeners don't grow it as much; I don't know why, because it's better in every way; and I'm devoted to it in my own right, for winter and spring, to the exclusion of all others. It succeeds equally well on land and on beds; but it climbs easily as soon as the heat begins. Its seed is white; and for this reason, as much as for its resemblance to the crepe, some call it the white crepe, or the round crepe, as I said in the previous article. Only four should be placed under each bell, and it is 0 a species that everyone should be eager to have: it seeds little, given its smallness, and is very prone to clouding; more should be reserved than less. IV. There are two types of George, one called grosse George, the other white George. The first is grown on a bed, and the apple under a bell like the previous ones, where it succeeds perfectly, provided it is in the air and amply moistened: three are enough under each bell; and if you want to put four, you must space the bells four inches apart. Its leaf is blond and fairly smooth, and its apple tight: it is soft and tender, and can be considered an excellent lettuce, which in its time provides abundantly for all needs. The best time to plant it is at the beginning of April; take care to give it the right amount of air, and cut it as soon as the head is formed, as it rises almost immediately. The seed is white, yields many and ripens from the first. The second type can be sown either on the ground or on the bed; but it only apples on the ground, and particularly at the foot of walls: it comes very large and well-headed, sweet and tender. Its leaves are blond, brittle and not very curly: it requires light, well-soiled soil. It is the first to come on the ground when it has been a little advanced on the bed: it must also be cut as soon as it is heady, having the same defect of rising quickly. Its seed is white, abundant, and mú̂rit of the first. The majority of market gardeners choose it in preference to all the others, to make lettuce for cutting, both because it supplies abundantly, and because its leaf at birth is blonder and wider than the others. V. Aubervilliers is a small spring lettuce that also does well in summer, but its small size has disgraced it from most gardens. Its outer leaves are smooth and coarse green, its head very yellow and very tender: it hardly melts, and can be kept for quite a long time on the head; these advantages would deserve it a happier fate. The seed is white, yields little and ripens early. VI. The grosse blonde is aptly named, being large and very blond: it is tender and sweet, and apples perfectly; but it rises almost as soon as it is plucked, especially in summer: it is in spring and autumn that it is most successful. The seed is white, yields a lot and usually ripens well. VII. The dauphine is a spring lettuce, which is only good in this first season: it is very early and very large, with a flat shape; its head is quite tight: it is sweet and tender, and may be considered one of the best lettuces. It grows well in any kind of soil, provided it is moistened often and generously; it grows a lot of suckers around its first leaves, which must be carefully removed. Its seed is black, yields a lot and ripens early. VIII. Perpignan comes in two varieties: one green, the other speckled, i.e. with yellow spots. The green variety has plain, smooth leaves with a large rib; its apple is very large and very yellow, quite tender; without any bitterness: it holds up well in dry soils, and resists heat: it also climbs only with difficulty; but in damp soils, it rots easily; it must therefore be given its proper soil. Its seed is white: it supplies a lot of seed, but it needs to be sown early for the seed to ripen. The second differs from the other only in its external color, and in its ribs, which are a little smaller; in addition, its qualities are the same, and its seed is also white: it yields a fair amount. IX. Bapaume is a large, very blond lettuce, which stands up very well: it can be grown in all seasons and in all types of soil; this is its main merit. Its head is not tight at the top, but is very full at the bottom, which deceives those who look at it without knowing it. Its seed is black and yields very little. X. Batavia is a species totally different from all the others, both in volume, configuration and size: it is the size of a small cabbage. Its leaves are extremely curly and folded, light green in color, with a hint of red sown around the edges; its head is a little concave, whitening only imperfectly, yet tender and delicate, and at the same time so brittle that it hardly suffers transport. In strong soils, it has a slight bitterness, which is its only defect; but, despite this, it is highly esteemed by people of taste, and preferred to many others, especially as it takes seasoning better than any other. It does not do equally well everywhere: those who find themselves on its own ground can congratulate themselves. It needs to be watered frequently and generously, but only in the morning or evening, as midday watering will cause it to speckle and rot, and it is very sensitive to cool temperatures. After August, therefore, it is no longer to be relied upon, and this must be taken into account when planting it. The seed is white, yields a fair amount and ripens fairly early. XI. Brown lettuce, otherwise known as Dutch lettuce, is a fairly good lettuce that apples very well, and holds up better than many others in droughts; it is of a nice size; its outer leaves are dull green, very smooth, and very plain at the edges; its heart is yellow and full: if it were more tender and delicate, we would have nothing to reproach it with. It's always a good idea to have some in summer, as it doesn't melt and doesn't go up as easily as most of the others: it's at least excellent for cooking, when you find it too hard to eat raw. Its seed is black, and it yields a lot; but it ripens a little late, and in tender years it rots rather than ripens. XII. Sanguine is a medium-sized lettuce, covered with red veins like variegated chicory, and very pleasing to the eye. It apples fairly well in spring, but only in that season; in other seasons, it rises rather than peels. It requires soft soil. Its seed is black: it yields enough, and ripens quickly, XIII. The shell has a leaf that is more green than yellow, round, fairly smooth and fairly large: it is usually hard and bitter, and is good only for soups. Its merit is that it withstands winters better than any other, and is therefore the first on earth to turn pomaceous. When there has been no bedding to raise other species, the seed is sown in mid-August; the plant is strong enough by October to be replanted, and is then planted on the south or east coasts, in two, three or four rows, depending on the width of the beds. During heavy frosts, it is covered with well-shaken bedding, or playon of varying thickness, depending on the severity of the weather: it is carefully removed when the thaws arrive. Cocasse, Italie and chicory, which also survive the winter, can be covered in the same way, provided they are neither too long nor too tough. If you haven't grown crepe and George on a bed during the winter, you can put it on a bed at the end of February, to get it earlier. It is only good on the ground in mid-May, a little earlier or a little later, depending on the year and the soil. The seed is white; but there is another species whose seed is black, and which is valued more highly. However, having examined them both closely, I found little or no difference between them; both grow well and set seed very early. XIV. Passion is a species much like the previous one. Its leaf is green and blistered, of medium size, which also spends the winter; and this is all its merit, being otherwise hard and bitter. In spring, it is used for soups and refreshing broths: it is very useful for those who live in cold, snowy countries; it withstands the rigors of winter better than any other. Its seed is white: it yields a fair amount. XV. Genes come in three varieties, distinguished as blonde, green and red. The first has blond, fairly smooth leaves. Its apple is a little pointed and very white, without bitterness: it is good in spring and autumn; in summer it is cloudy. Its seed is white: it yields a lot, which ripens fairly early. The second has green, curly leaves; its apple is hard and yellow, larger than the first: it does not leaf out. Its season is spring and autumn, and in dry years: it also does well in summer. It should be watered only when badly needed, but needs to be crimped often. Its seed is white: it is very prone to clouding. Reserve more rather than less. The third has curly red leaves and a tender yellow heart. It survives the winter, but should be placed at the foot of the sunset walls, as the sun is against it at this time of year. It should be planted in spring and autumn; it does not do well in summer. Its seed is black and takes a long time to ripen. Medium-sized, it apples very well: soft, tender and very yellow at the core; its outer leaves are soft green, whipped with red, round and almost plain. Its favorite season is spring and autumn; in summer it nuils and melts easily: it requires soft soil. The seed is black, and often fails to ripen, being very late: it must be planted early on the bed, to be sure of harvesting it. XVII. The grosse rouge has all the good qualities of the preceding variety, and surpasses it in size, which is at least twice as large: it also has the advantage of remaining well-appointed for as long and more than any other, and of succeeding in all seasons, when the soil is suitable. It requires a rich soil; in the sands, it comes up thin and hard. It has the added merit of never wilting, at least in fatty soils such as mine: these advantages make me consider it a first-rate lettuce, a must-have in any well-stocked kitchen garden. Its outer leaves are round, almost plain, black-green, shaded with a large, dull red. The head is as yellow as an orange; the seed is black, ripens fairly easily, and yields a lot. XVIII. Italian lettuce has long been the most cultivated of all lettuces, having the advantage of succeeding in all seasons, and of lasting quite a long time on the head: market gardeners have abandoned it in favor of cocasse, which lasts even longer, but is not as good in all other respects. Its leaves are fine and tender green, edged with red; its head is tight and perfectly tasty: its only fault is that it speckles a little in summer; it requires light, lean soil and little water. Its seed is black and ripens well, but it does not yield much. XIX. Royale is one of the best lettuces for summer, provided it is moistened abundantly: it has a good size, apples well, and lasts a long time: it is quite soft and quite tender; its outer leaves are a beautiful green, a little blistered and shiny. It's a pity that it's a little prone to shading and melting; otherwise, it's perfect and of good quality. The seed is white and provides a fair amount of yield, but ripens with difficulty in tender years. It's a good idea to bring forward what you intend to sow. XX. Before the Cocasse and the Versailles were known, the lazy variety was the most cultivated for summer; it really does not climb as much as any other, and is more resistant to drought; but it is always a little hard and bitter. The best way to eat it is cooked. Its apple is very hard and quite large; its outer leaves are a coarse green, very blotchy, and packed one on top of the other. Its seed is white: it yields a lot, but it needs to be brought forward a little for it to ripen more surely. XXI. For the past ten years, cocasse has been the favorite lettuce of all gardeners, and especially of market gardeners, who almost exclusively grow cocasse throughout the summer. This preference is due to its excellent eating qualities, and to the fact that it can be kept on the vine for a very long time, despite heat and drought. Its outer leaves are a large, shiny green, heavily blistered: it is very large. Sown in August and transplanted at All Saints' Day, it survives the winter. These are the advantages that have made it so popular; but it is prone, in many soils, to rot between two hearts, or to spotting, especially in rainy weather. It requires a soil that is neither too light nor too strong; or, if it is light as in some of our marshes, it must be helped with a lot of manure and compost, and watered amply, in which case it succeeds perfectly well. These types of soil are particularly suitable for summer; in strong soils, it only grows leaves and does not close: in this season, it should still be sunk a little when replanting, as the apple forms better. In addition to the above-mentioned defect, it is also hard and a little bitter, and its exterior is not very attractive; In view of these faults, which greatly outweigh its good qualities, I am obliged to say that it deserves the preference it is given, only insofar as the land does not allow others to be raised during the summer, in which case it is better to have it as it is than to have none at all; and market gardeners in particular, who have a great interest in making the most of their plants, are right to be attached to them. To collect the seed, it must be raised on a bed; if the winter seed has perished, replant it on a hillside, and help it to rise by making a cross-shaped incision on the apple, without which the heart often rots because it cannot emerge. Its seed is white, and yields a lot when the season is favorable, but sometimes it doesn't ripen. which many people confuse with the cocasse, and which I had judged at first myself to be one and the same species, under two different names, better examined is certainly a different species. The leaf of the latter is a lighter green, without any freckles, like those of the cocasse; it is also less curly, and has a flatter head; its leaves are less crowded together, and it is less prone to rust. I have often compared them together, so as to be able to argue, against all opposing opinions, that they are two very different species, and that they are similar only in that they are almost equally successful in heat, and that their apples are equally supportive; nevertheless, I place this one above the other, especially as it is not so hard, nor so bitter. It may be, as some claim, that this one was formed from the other; but the origin makes no difference to the present state of this plant. Its seed is white, ripens late and yields more or less, depending on the year: it requires the same precautions as cocasse when harvested. Many market gardeners use this species to make lettuce for cutting, because it is more resistant to frost. XXIII. grosse Allemande, known in Holland and Germany as Impériale, is a lettuce which, although very old, was either lost in France, or never became well established: it is still only known to a small number of people; but its great qualities will soon spread it to all gardens: it can be called the queen of lettuces. There are no good qualities that it does not have, and I know of only slight defects. It is monstrously large, with the same volume as Batavia. Its outer leaves are extraordinarily large and smooth, ending a little pointed when young; its color is a pale, dull green; its apple is very tight, yellow and tender; its taste is sweet when the soil suits it. It can be kept for as long on the head as the cocasse, and does not spit in the same way: it comes in well in all seasons, except for its size, which is not the same in summer as in spring; but I have noticed that in our light soils, such as our marshes in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, it is prone to melting in the warmer months, especially when wet too often; this is one of its faults: another is that in certain areas, it is a little bitter, but this does not prevent it from being eaten with pleasure. It is prone to growing suckers between its lower leaves, which must be carefully removed, as they are harmful to the heart. It must be raised early on the bed so that it can set seed, because, in addition to being difficult to raise, it takes a long time to set apple: it must be planted at a distance of about fifteen inches in all directions. G ron apart in all directions, and whenever it is in good condition, it is tightly packed. This detail will show that it is worthy of preference over all the others; and I have no doubt that, once our market gardeners are familiar with it, they will substitute it for cocasse, if they can prevent it from melting through cultivation. It is advisable not to replant after July, as the apple does not have time to form after this time, being very late, as I have already observed: it has a white seed, and yields a lot when the year is dry. XXIV. The Berlin apple still surpasses the previous one in size, but differs in many respects. I have only had it for a year; the man who gave it to me, a Hanoverian, spoke unfavorably of it, and only announced it to me as a plant remarkable for its size, and in no way superior to the others in quality. But either this foreigner didn't know it, or our climate suits it better than Germany's, I conceived a very different idea of it after the trial: it came to me with all the qualities of a perfect lettuce, sweet, tender, fine, brittle. Its heart whitens very well; its color is a tender green, slightly tinted on the edges with a few red shades. It apples fairly quickly: it succeeds in both spring and autumn seasons, and a single plant is enough to make a reasonable salad. It should be planted eighteen or twenty inches apart in all directions: it apples fairly quickly, but its apple is not perfectly tight, and does not hold together for long. Its seed is black, abundant and ripens early. XXV. La longue vissée is a new lettuce that was sent to me from Italy last year, and which I have not seen anywhere else: it is singular in its shape, which is elongated like a sugar loaf, and ends in a point, with indentations and elevations that turn from bottom to top, and have the same effect as a press screw, which gives it its Italian name that I have francized. The outer leaf is yellowish-green, brittle and curly, much like Batavia: it is soft and tender; all in all, it's a very good species, regardless of its singularity. I wasn't able to test it in all seasons, as I didn't have enough seed. Its seed is black, ripens fairly well, but yields little. Some soils may be suitable for the twenty-five species of G 2 lettuce I have just mentioned; but at least there is no soil that is not suitable for some of them. So everyone, after having tried them all, if he sees fit, will stick to those that will be most successful for him. I don't approve of stubbornly bringing in those for which the stock is not suitable: as the multiplicity of species is only a matter of curiosity, we should be happy when we are provided with a few good ones, which, succeeding one another, can supply our needs throughout the year. I had heard of two new species, one called spinach lettuce, the other long apple. The first is unusual for its leaf, which resembles that of spinach; but it hardly makes an apple, and has no qualities to recommend it. The second makes, like chicory, a very elongated apple: it is always hollow and not very tender. Among the others that I have not mentioned, there may be some that do well in other climates; everyone will do well to keep the species they are happy with. I'll move on to chicory: the first is early romaine, which has the advantage of peeling, or, to put it more accurately, coëffer under a bell; it gives great pleasure in novelty, although it remains a little thin under the bell: its shape is quite similar to blond chicory: its outer color is a little less light, and its leaves more pointed, yet it is hard to tell them apart when they are both raised in the ground, both being cambered and of roughly equal size. They should be sown in beds as early as October, so that they can be enjoyed in April; the method used by some gardeners is to place one foot between four pancakes on their beds. These pancakes, which come much earlier, are removed, leaving the romaine the master of the place; but I find a drawback in this, which is that they occupy the bed for too long: it's better to set it aside, and put only three lettuces, so that they are comfortable, under each bell, which must then be raised on three forks, when the heads of the plants begin to touch the top: its seed is white, abundant, and ripens well. II. The green chicon, of the seven we know, is the most widely cultivated, for the reason that it is the largest and the least delicate in relation to the weather, and that it succeeds well in all seasons. It also has the advantage of being self-sealing; or3 at most, a tie at the end is enough. Its leaf is long, rounded at the tip, rough and a little blistered; its rib is blanshe, and its color a coarse green. The good species must be flattened at the top, which market gardeners call camus; when it ends in a point, it's a sign that it's degenerate: consequently, only those with a flattened shape should be marked for seed. It spends the winter being sown in August and replanted on a coast in October: it is the most profitable crop for those who raise it for sale; but to be eaten raw, it is the least tender and the least delicate of all. When replanting in the open ground, after having overwintered in layers or ados of potting soil, make sure to bury it a little when planting, and butter it: it yields a lot of seed, which is black. III. Gray chicon is not very different from the previous one; its color is a darker green; it has the advantage of being milder and more spring-like, but it also melts easily during the summer, and should only be used for spring. It overwinters well and adapts well to all types of soil: its seed is white and very abundant, but ripens a little late. IV. Blond is much more delicate to eat than the previous varieties: it makes "an equally large, flat and full apple, but melts more easily. It also rises very quickly. Its leaf is yellowish-green, a little pointed at the tip, with a white rib; it is less thick and less blistered than that of the other two varieties. It thrives best in soil that is somewhere between light and heavy, but its success also depends on the season: in tender years, it thrives best in light soil; in dry years, it thrives best in heavy soil. Its seed is white, but it yields less than the green variety, so you need to keep more of it than of other species. V. Red bears this name with justice, its outer leaves being truly red, but its heart is a perfect yellow and tender: its defect is that it is very prone to melting as soon as it is bound, and there are few soils where it succeeds well; strong soil is the one that suits it best, especially in dry years. When absolutely necessary, water should be poured from the mouths of watering cans right up to the ground, so that the plant does not get wet, and it should be cut as soon as its heart is white: this shows that only a very few G.4 should be grown at a time. It has the advantage of being sown very lightly in the months of July and August, along walls facing east and south, and then thinned out to a suitable distance, so that it can be kept until the big frosts, and whitens without needing to be tied. Its seed is black, and it yields a lot. VI. The variegated variety, which others call flagellt or Silesian lettuce, so named because its leaves are whipped with red veins similar to certain yellow tulips, is preferred by connoisseurs over all others, because it is both pleasing to the eye and to the taste: it is sweet and tender, and combines all the good qualities one could wish for. There are two species, one much more prone to melting than the other: the latter, which comes from England, has its outer leaves less variegated than the other; but those in the heart are more so, and it coëffices almost by itself like green chicory. In some soils, both are subject to melting as they whiten. Spring is its season, because in summer it melts and rises, and in autumn it rots. The seed of the first species is black, and that of the second is white: both yield poorly. The variegated variety ripens between the first and last lettuces. VII. Alfangium is a particular species, which is similar to the others in shape only; its leaves are pointed, snake-like, thin and smooth; the color is pale green, with a few red shades at the top. It is very tender and delicate: but it has the double defect of rotting and climbing easily; however, it succeeds very well in some soils, and it is advisable to test it before rejecting it: its seed is white, abundant, and ripens fairly early. All these species need to be bound to whiten. Depending on their strength, one or two straw or rush ties are placed on the bottom of the plant, not too tightly, and a few days later, a third tie is placed on the top, which is tightened even more: Bind them on a fine day, and wait until there is no more dew or humidity, taking care to bind only as much as you need, as they will soon rot after they are white, or go to seed; from eight to eight days, bind as much as you can use. The two types of chicory, red and variegated, which I have just mentioned, do not appear in public markets, nor does alfange: Their natural tendency to melt, as I have shown, is one of the reasons why our market gardeners do not grow them; to which must be added the difficulty they would have in selling them to fruit growers, who would be afraid to take them on, because they cannot endure, like the others, being closed for several days at a time in cellars while waiting for the buyer. The public loses out, because they are incomparably better; and all those who have gardens should endeavor to grow some for themselves in preference to any other, if the land suits them. You won't get much profit out of it, but you'll be compensated by taste. With regard to all chicories, I must point out that when they go to seed, we still make useful use of the stalk, which we call côton; we eat it cooked in white sauce, and it's a pretty good meal; we also pickle it in vinegar, and it's used in winter salads. It now remains for me to tell you what you need to do to grow all the different types of lettuce and chicory I've just mentioned, early in the season. You enjoy them late when you wait to sow them in spring, as is the custom in the provinces, and with most of the middle-class gardeners around here. The practice of our market gardeners is to sow their seeds under a bell as early as September or October, on ados of potting soil exposed to the south. Three weeks later, they transplant them onto other teens, as I explained for pancakes, and give the cloches a little air every day, as weather permits. They leave them to fortify themselves in this state until February, taking care to cover their bells exactly with litter during frosts, and to uncover them at daybreak: they are then strong enough to be replanted in place, if the season is right. For this, a good exposure is chosen; but beforehand, the plant must be accustomed to the open air, by gradually weaning it from the cloches, as the weather permits: for they would melt if they were put in the open ground as soon as they came out of the cloche. Some market gardeners sow them later, and raise them on a bed; but, in addition to saving manure by the above method, it is constant that the plant resists better in the open ground, when it has been raised without so much artifice. In the latter case, care should be taken to wean the plant from the meme des cloches eight or ten days before replanting. In the provinces, where C6́ one hardly knows the compost neither the layers, one can prepare light grounds mixed with horse dung, or manure of rotten sheets, which form a true compost, very good with this use as with several others. Ados can be formed from them, as I have explained; and if you don't have blown bells, you can have assembly pieces, such as those I have described in the chapter on layers. When replanting these lettuces in February or March in the open ground, if it's sunny or sunny, they should be lightly watered the next day at high noon. I have nothing to add to the description I have given of the various lettuces I have chosen and indicated as the best; now we come to the cultivation they require. First, choose the softest, smokiest soil you can find in your garden. When the beds are erected, and earthworked if possible, they are marked out to form five rows in each five-foot-wide bed, seven to eight inches apart; they are marked out very lightly with a chalk line and a pointed stick, so that they can simply be planted in a straight line: for this plant must not be buried; its heart must be flush with the surface of the soil, which must be pressed only slightly against its root with the planter. Water them as soon as they are planted, and continue watering them as the weather requires, observing during the first few days that they should only be watered in the morning, after the cool of the night has straightened out their wilted leaves from the previous day, otherwise the water will mix with the soil, suffocating their heart and delaying their growth. A distinction needs to be made for Batavia, grosse Allemande and Pomme de Berlin; it's to space them at the distance I've set in their article. After they have been well taken up, they are given a little way with the serfouette, and as many times as the soil needs to be weeded, they are serfouised; you must be exact until they are at the point of being eaten. When a lot of rain has fallen, causing them to rust and rot, if the weather is fine afterwards, they should be left to fast on water for several days at a time, so that the sun can revive and restore them. Beetle worms, and another gray worm, often make war on them by cutting their roots; care must be taken, as I said with chicory, to look for them at the foot of those you see wilted. In wet soils, limas, snails and, above all, loaches, destroy them as soon as they are born, to the point where it is sometimes impossible to keep a plant over winter, or to replant it in spring before the end of April. The latter insect devours as many as can be planted: it must then be sought with great patience at the foot of each lettuce that is seen to be gnawed, when the damage is perceptible; for there are some so small that sight can only distinguish them with great difficulty. But, as this operation costs more than it's worth, the shortest way, when you're reduced to this, is to stick to growing lettuce on a bed during these two seasons, and to wait for the onset of heat before replanting in the open ground. Care should be taken to remove as useless those that are beginning to grow; the others have more air and are more profitable. Lettuce that comes up without being replanted is usually more beautiful than that which is replanted, and is more successful as a seed. As it is customary in spring to sow the seed in beds or ribs, from which it is removed to be put back elsewhere, it is only necessary to leave a few for seed, suitably spaced. Don't forget to sow a little seed every two weeks, so you'll always have good seedlings to replant. For plants that are sown or replanted in March and April, and which sometimes need watering because of the fairly ordinary sunshine in these two months, they should only be wet in the morning or at midday. If they are wet in the evening, and there is a slight frost the next morning, they will perish, or if there is no frost, the moisture will attract loaches and limas of all kinds, which will destroy them. There are many soils where the seed, when the great heat begins, heats up in the ground and does not germinate; care must be taken to wet it every day to make it germinate; and when experience shows that this expedient is not sufficient, as is usual in dry and scorching soils, as soon as the seed has been sown and harrowed, the place must be covered with some straw mat, or large straw spread promptly, and wet over it: a few days later, when the seed begins to sprout, remove this cover at sunset, so that the night air hardens it a little. The seed of this plant is harvested in August and September, from plants that have spent the winter, as in spring. Care should be taken to mark the most beautiful apples for seed, and to prick a few sticks at the base to tie up the mounts when they begin to tire of the winds. At the same time

clean plants of all useless leaves which retain sap in the stem, and which then rot, sometimes communicating their rottenness to the stem, especially in rainy seasons: large lettuces are particularly in need of this attention. At flowering time, a small white worm is often formed in the bud as a result of some nuile: an ailment for which there is no remedy; you must therefore keep more than less at different exposures: some sometimes perish, and others escape. But the best precaution is to always have a supply from two previous years; and, if you don't have any, you can resort to another precaution, which is to reserve some for seed from two plantations, i.e., that they be planted a month apart from each other, because since these kinds of nuiles are only ruinous at flowering time, some may not yet have reached or passed this critical moment, if the others are caught. To be picked, when most of the buds are crowned with their aigrettes, and the plant is wilting and yellowing; it is then necessary to cut or uproot the plant, which is exposed upright to the sun for a few days, and as much as possible: it is then beaten, winnowed, and dryly closed by labeling. The German method is better than ours in this respect. After the plants have been exposed to the sun for two days, we take each one separately, and beat them lightly on the side of a broken barrel, at the bottom of which the seed falls as it falls: only the best detaches itself, the other, which is neither dry nor ripe, remains in its pod: we expose it again to the sun to ripen. But this second quality of seed is not nearly as good as the first, so it is only used to make lettuce for cutting: the first makes the plant much stronger and more straightforward. This is a very good practice to follow. This seed keeps well for three years; in the fourth, some of it still comes up, when it has been well-aged; but the safest thing is not to count on it. It is a little prone to bolting when sown in the same year as it is harvested; it is better not to sow it until the second year. When you're in a hurry to get it to rise, put it in a small canvas bag, and soak it in water for twenty-four hours: then tie it to the side of your chimney, or put it in a pile of very hot manure, so that it heats up for two or three days, until you see that it has sprouted; then sow it either on the ground or on the bed: however, this is only a good practice for those you want to sow on the ground; otherwise, on a bed, it always sprouts fairly quickly. It should be noted, moreover, that germs largely perish when handled and sown. CHAPTER XLV. Description of LAVENDER; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. This plant is aromatic. There are eight species: male lavender, female lavender, English lavender, large-leaf lavender, Spanish lavender, Indian lavender, and two species of annual lavender. The male lavender, like the aspic, has a woody root, furnished with several fibers, and grows woody sprays from a foot or eighteen inches to two feet high, furnished with several knotty branches. Its leaves are green, placed in twos, and arranged in saltire, with a strong, pleasant odor and bitter flavor. Its branches all end in spikes, preceded by a long tail, garnished throughout with small bunches of one-piece blue flowers, whose upper lip is upright, rounded, cut into two parts, and the lower divided into three: they are borne on a narrow, oblong calyx, from which a pistil emerges, attached like a nail between four embryos, which change into as many seeds enclosed in a small, oblong, blackish, shiny capsule. The female lavender is similar to the previous one in root, stem and spike arrangement; but its leaf is smaller, narrower and whiter, and its tuft much higher; the odor is also less strong: the flower is of the same shape and color, but larger: the seed is round, small and brown. English lavender is shaped like the preceding varieties, but is not so bushy: its leaves are also thinner and whiter; the flower is white, and its scent sweeter. Large-leaf lavender grows as a shrub and throws out many branches: its leaves are smooth, long and pointed, not very wide, a beautiful green, flowering little or not at all, and with a scent more or less similar to the preceding ones. Spanish lavender, otherwise known as Stæchas by botanists, has extremely fine, dissected leaves of an incipient green, forming a small shrub that grows to twelve or fifteen inches. Its flowers are blue, arranged in spikes like the preceding ones, with a sweeter and slightly different scent. Indian lavender has an oblong, fairly large, thick, dark green leaf, with a scent quite similar to that of the first two species; it grows into a shrub and throws out many branches; its spikes are shorter, its flowers smaller and its color paler. Annual lavender comes in two varieties: one has a dissected, meadow-green leaf, forming a small shrub fifteen to eighteen inches high; its flower is blue, arranged in spikes like the previous two; but it is not nearly as fragrant: its seed is small and rounded, a little elongated, brown in color, tending to cinnamon. The second species grows from meadow to shrub, but its leaves are more regularly cut; it flowers in the same way, and has little odor; its seed is extremely small, longer than round, and its brown color a little reddish. The first three species are used indifferently, and have more or less the same virtues; however, in this climate, only the second is used; the others are more curious than useful. It grows naturally in Provence and part of Languedoc, and in such abundance that it is used to heat ovens, as is the case with rosemary and sage. It has more virtues in its natural climate than it has here, but it has enough everywhere to make it recommendable. Lavender leaf and flower are used interchangeably, although it is agreed that there are more virtues in the flower together with the spike than in the leaf alone. It is even claimed that lavender water, which is nothing other than the flower separated from the spike, and distilled with brandy, or simplemeat infused in a bottle of water exposed to the sun, produces even more sensitive effects: it is sovereign in wounds, in strains, and in all kinds of pain; we rub it repeatedly on the sick part, then leave a cloth or fog paper soaked in it: we mix it in all cephalic and nervous decoctions. But lavender water is not always used in accidents and unpleasant encounters; it is also used to awaken and revive the senses: we rub it on our heads after shaving, and it prevents the freshness from penetrating through the pores: it is used in cleanliness baths for both sexes; and it is as pleasant to the senses as it is useful to the body, from which it removes bad exhalations when we are subject to them. An essential oil is extracted from the whole plant, and is highly prized for diseases of the brain, hysterical vapors and epilepsy; the dose is eight or ten drops taken in a suitable liqueur. It can also be sprinkled on the volatile urine salts so often used by people prone to vapors. Four or five drops of the same oil, taken on an empty stomach, dissipate migraines and fortify the stomach. Mixed with St John's wort and chamomile oil, it makes an excellent liniment for rheumatism, paralysis and other convulsive movements. Lavender oil, also known as aspic oil, is infused into olive oil, and is equally suitable for the arts and medicine. It is used in the composition of the beautiful varnishes used on all precious paintings, and kills worms, bugs and other vermin that attach themselves to the human body. The spikes, loaded with their flowers and dried properly, are excellent, taken as an infusion like tea, for dizziness, trembling hands, convulsive movements, soporous affections, paralysis, asthma, stammering and other diseases of the nerves. Its freshly cut ears are used to make bundles to ward off bad odors; they are put in places where the air is foul, and among linen to give it a good smell. We use the flower in particular, which we detach from the spikes, to make scent sachets; and for this, after we have drawn the quantity of flowers we need, we mix in a handful of cloves and as much fine pepper, more or less, depending on whether we want the scent of lavender or spices to dominate in the sachet: the whole is put in paper bags, the opening of which is closed with glue, to. These bags are then covered with a silk cloth, which envelops them tightly. This scent mixture is far superior, according to the tests we've made of it, to all the perfume jars, which are common in many homes. I don't want to omit an important observation made by several authors on the use of lavender water or oil; it is that as much as it is sovereign when the weakness of the parts comes from cold weather or cold humors, it is just as pernicious when there is heat, because then it increases the illness by affecting the head. The first six species of lavender, which are perennials, can be multiplied by seed, cuttings or rooted plants: the first method is hardly ever used; it is easier to replant them fully formed, especially the second species, which is common in all gardens. I'll speak separately of the others, which require special care: for this one, by which I mean the female, we separate the old plants into several parts, which provide more, and which suddenly form their border. This is usually done in spring or autumn; it grows again easily without any particular care, and any soil is more or less equal to it; it resists all weathers, and stays in the same place for two or three years; but then it must be renewed, otherwise it will spread too far. Its spikes are cut when in full flower, for the use for which they are intended; they are left to dry, if seed is to be obtained, and are harvested in August or September. The first species, by which I mean male lavender, is rarely cultivated in this climate, even though it is no more delicate than the female; the reason, as far as I can judge, is that it supplies less than the other. English lavender is no more so, because it also yields little, and being very delicate, it is prone to perish in winter in the open ground: those who want to keep it safely must put it in pots and lock it up in the greenhouse. Large-leaf lavender is little known; it would, however, seem to have the same virtues, with the same odor and flavor; but, as it necessarily requires to be locked up in the greenhouse, Tome II. H this difficulty, no doubt, will always prevent it from being commonly cultivated. Spanish lavender is in the same class, and serves little purpose other than to satisfy the curiosity of the general public. The two annual species are useless, having far fewer virtues than the others. They are sown in the ground in March, then replanted: the seed ripens in September. They should be watered as needed, as should the other species, which are taken to the greenhouse for storage. With regard to the first species that can be planted from cuttings, I'd like to point out that it's much safer to start them on a warm bed than in the ground. Once they have recovered, they can be transplanted wherever you wish. CHAPTER XLVI. Description of LAUREL; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. There are three main species of laurel; I will not mention others which have no use in cooking, and whose merit is only in the flower, to which some purely medicinal virtues are attributed, such as the two species of Alexandrian laurel, and the two species of laurel: the three species to which I will refer are the frank laurel, the royal laurel, and the cherry laurel. In warm countries, such as Spain, Sicily and the Kingdom of Naples, the bay laurel is more of a tree than a shrub: I've seen some as big as an average oak; but in our climate, which is less favorable to it, it doesn't grow nearly so strong, although it is quite common to find some that grow to ten or twelve feet, and sometimes more. Its roots are large and uneven, with many fibers; its stem is smooth and knotless; its bark is thin and grayish or brown; its wood is porous and fragile; it grows a number of branches that form a beautiful head when the lower part is pruned. Its leaves are oblong, pointed, hard and evergreen, sinewy, smooth, fragrant, with a pungent, aromatic and slightly bitter taste, attached by short tails. Its flowers are one-piece, cut into four or five parts, white or yellowish in color; the flowers are followed by fruits or berries as large as small cherries, oblong, green when born and black when ripe, H 2 under whose skin is a shell containing an oblong seed: these berries are fragrant, aromatic, oily and bitter. The royal laurel differs from the former in the color of its leaves, which are a cheerful green and have neither odor nor aromatic taste; but it resembles it in flower and fruit, with the difference, however, that the flowers of the royal laurel are born in clusters, whereas those of the frank laurel are born from the armpits of the leavesThe cherry laurel is neither a regular tree nor a shrub; It has no stem that forms a true tree body, and its branches are too extensive to be considered a shrub. Its stems are straight and twiggy; its bark is plain brown; its wood is white and very brittle; its leaf is similar to that of the lemon tree, but larger, wider and slightly serrated at the edges: it is very smooth, a beautiful shiny green, with a slightly bitter astringent taste. The flower is small, rose-shaped, with five white, odorless petals, and is followed by a fleshy, almost oval fruit, about the size of a sloe, green when it is born and reddish-black when it ripens, beneath which is a thin shell containing an oblong, bitter seed. This species has no other known cooking qualities than to give boiled milk an almond-like taste: a leaf or 2 is added to soups, and to certain soft cheeses eaten for dessert. The leaf is sometimes used medicinally: it is astringent and fortifies the stomach. This plant keeps its greenery all year round, and in winter is a delight to the eye. In warm countries, it is used to form paths and fences in the same way as we plant bower bushes: pruned in straight lines, it produces a very beautiful effect. Here, where the climate is different, we keep to a few feet, more for pleasure than for real need. We are obliged to place them at the foot of the south-facing walls, to protect them from the severe frosts that often kill them; but the plant usually grows back the following spring. As this plant is very vigorous, it is soon resuscitated: it requires no particular care, other than to be ploughed in the normal seasons, and to be supported by a few trellises or small poles attached to the wall; those who are very curious about it stuff it during the winter, but this care can be dispensed with. It is commonly propagated from offshoots that are detached from old plants, or from cuttings that are left to wither on the ground before being put back in place. 3. It can also be propagated from seed, but it will take longer to form. The first two species of laurel are the really useful ones, and are used indifferently; but the first is as common in this country as the second is uncommon. Its dried leaves are used in most stews and short broths, both fatty and lean; they are also used to crown hams; and they are also used, interwoven with fruit, to brighten up winter desserts. Its medicinal properties are far more numerous. Its leaves are astringent, resolving and warm; they fortify the stomach, aid digestion and dispel wind: they are taken in infusions of five to six like tea, or in powder, at a dose of two large ones, to restore the stomach, prevent nausea and dispel the pain of windy colic. Externally, they are used in fomentations with aromatic herbs, to fortify numb parts in cases of paralysis, rheumatism, etc. They are also good externally, for softening tumors caused by wasp stings; taken as a gargle, they soothe toothache. Its berries have even more virtue and warmth than its leaves, especially those brought from hot countries: they are used for diseases of the stomach, liver, rat and bladder; they digest raw humours; they divide and resolve thickened and viscous juices; they awaken appetite, dispel disgust, lift obstructions of the liver and spleen, excite urination, induce menstruation, and push out backwardness. An excellent oil is obtained for nerve diseases, paralysis, convulsions, colic and stomach weakness: this oil is obtained by expresion, by coction in boiling water, or by distillation; and it is given both internally, in small doses of ten to twelve drops, and externally as a liniment. A spirit with the same virtues can also be obtained by fermenting its fruits. For windy colic in particular, and for stomach weakness, one infuses four ounces of good wine with one large berry and two large dried orange peel, and drinks it with a little sugar; I have tried this remedy on myself with perfect success. These berries have virtues that extend to almost everything, and they are used in the composition of many unguens and electuaries, in orvietan, in theriac and in dressings. Laurel grows naturally in all H 4 warm countries, and particularly on sunny sea coasts; it grows straight up to a height of thirty or forty feet, forming a well-stocked, evergreen head that provides pleasant shade. It can be propagated from seed or from marcottes. In the first case, the seed is sown in March in crates or tubs filled with soft earth, mixed with potting soil, at a distance of three inches from one seed to the next, sunk a finger deep, and covered with a little potting soil or chopped dung; beforehand, it's a good idea to soak the seed in manure water for a few days, as it sprouts more quickly and reliably. These boxes are placed in full sun at the foot of a wall, and watered often: sometimes the plant is strong enough to be replanted the following year, either in boxes or in the ground; but the safest thing is to wait until the second year. In the second case, at the end of March, branches from old plants are placed in dummies, where they are held in place with hooks: they take root immediately, and can be weaned the following September; this is the best way to have fairly well-formed plants; but this plant usually grows a lot of offshoots from the foot, which are separated and replanted to form others, with only the care of watering them often in the first year. As for the old plants, they require no cultivation other than to be ploughed during the seasons, and brought closer together from time to time when they grow too far apart: the branches, which are removed and left to dry, are used for the various purposes for which this plant is suited. CHAPTER XLVII. Description of the EPICERIA; its various species, properties, cultivation, etc. THIS plant, although little known to gardeners, is useful for food and health; it is an annual. There are five species, but I will describe only one, as the others have no properties. Botanists call it nigella semine aromatico, to distinguish it from other nielles, a name which is really its own; but the one I give it is the one it bears in Italy. The plant bears a close resemblance to the anemone; its foliage is cut in the same way, but H 5 more delicate, finer and lighter green; its root is yellowish, with many fibers: Its stem is small, fluted and branched; its branches all end in a white, slightly bluish, odorless flower, arranged in a five-petal star shape, with several stamens in the middle, surrounded by a crown of small oblong bodies; the flowers are followed by small, fairly large fruits, ending in five or six horns, and divided into several chambers containing angular, hazelnut-colored seeds with an aromatic odor and a very pungent taste. This seed is sometimes used in foods in place of the four spices; it is true that it has the taste of nutmeg, clove, cinnamon and pepper all at once: however, it is not commonly used in France; but it is used in various parts of Italy. This seed is useful in medicine, because it is incisive, aperitive, vulnerative and resolutive; when chewed, it stimulates salivation, and when taken as a decoction or mixed in food, it increases the milk of nursing mothers; it induces months in women, resists venom and fights quarte fever; it is also good for killing worms and driving away winds. It is prepared according to the type of illness. This plant is sown on a bed in March, and the seedling is good for transplanting in May: it is very delicate, and requires loose, earthy soil. Plants should be spaced six to eight inches apart, and no wider or taller than an ordinary anemone. It thrives best in the hottest climate, which is why it is much stronger in Italy, where its seed is much wittier than here. It should be placed in a good spot, and watered often in dry spells. The seed is harvested in August, and keeps well for several years, both for sowing and for various uses, provided it is kept in well-stoppered bottles. Among the four species I have not mentioned, there is one called nigella cretica, whose seed is even stronger than the previous one, but I do not know its virtues. H6 CHAPTER XLVIII. Description of lamb's lettuce; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Lamb's lettuce is a small winter salad, naturally produced in the countryside in all temperate countries, but which becomes stronger and more abundant when cultivated. It goes by many names, depending on the country where it grows: blanchette, poule grasse, doucette, and salade de chanoine; all these names are its own. It's a small plant, not as wide as your hand; its leaves are long and narrow, and spill to the ground in a smooth, light green. It is cut from the root and eaten whole, with only the bad leaves removed. Some people eat it on its own, while others mix it with celery or chicory, and others with beet and anchovy. It is generally well liked, and much of it is consumed, especially as it is healthy, refreshing, soothing and laxative. It is used in veal and chicken broths to soothe the ardor of fever, and to ease the pain of nephritis. It is also used successfully in rheumatism, gout, scurvy and hypochondriac: lastly, it is very good for correcting the acridity of humors and the excessive saltiness of the blood. The latter differs from the former in that its leaf is much broader, and the plant a little stronger, which makes it more profitable: it is also much later to come up in spring, and consequently serves longer than the other; but it is not so sweet to the mouth, being covered with a kind of down which displeases most people, and which makes it less marketable than the other: our market gardeners grow very little of it. This plant requires very loose, well-amended soil: it can be sown very thickly, because it is always thinned out by pulling out the strongest. The weakest, which is then left to grow, is used to produce seed: it essentially needs to be loosened and moistened often until it has sprouted. The first sowing is done in mid-August, and is eaten at the end of autumn. We continue to sow from fortnight to fortnight until mid-October, to have some without interruption: the one sown in October is the best for Lent, when it has risen well before the frosts. It is weeded when it has emerged, and this is the only way it can be harvested. It can be sown in spring and in the following months, if you have a taste for this plant; it succeeds in all seasons, provided it is well watered, and placed in the shade in the warmer months; but in summer, lettuces are rightly preserved, and all this time lamb's lettuce is forgotten. To collect the seed, at the end of winter a few beds are thinned to three-quarters, and the rest left to grow: each plant, if it is at ease, grows to a spread of a foot in diameter, similar to a flowering talaspicum; and all its little branches are first loaded with small bunches of white flowers, tending to blue, to which the seed follows, which is small, flat, and yellowish in color, I mean common. Italian lamb's lettuce is quite different, being small and long, ashen in color, with a small black dot at one end: its flower is also different, being an obscure white tending to red. As soon as it approaches maturity, it detaches itself at the slightest breath of wind; consequently, you must prevent it from falling, by plucking the stalks in the morning with the dew, as soon as the stems begin to yellow; but far from exposing it to the sun, like other seeds, you must place it in a heap with its cossate in some cool, poorly ventilated place, and let this mass warm up and partially rot; the seed feeds and perfects itself in this humidity. After a fortnight, shake the cossate with a fork, the seed falls out, and is then exposed to the air for a few days; it is then winnowed and enclosed. This seed is good for seven to eight years, I mean the common one; but you mustn't sow it the first year, as it sprouts too late and with too much difficulty. The seed of the other species will only keep for four or five years. Our market gardeners, sometimes lacking clean places or leisure, collect it quite differently; they let it ripen on the ground and fall, then they tear off the cossate, and pick up with a broom all this seed spread on the ground; and as they pick up as much earth as seed, they put the whole in tubs with half-fulls of water, and stir it well: The earth sinks to the bottom, and the seed floats to the top; they remove it cleanly with a skimmer, or in any other way they like, and dry it, after which they lock it up. In light soils with a lot of earth, like theirs, this method is quite practicable; but in fatter and wetter soils, it would be very difficult to follow it, besides the seed would be prone to germinate on the ground, if it stayed there too long, and if it suffered some rain. CHAPTER XLIX. Description of MARIOLAINE; its different species, properties, calture, etc. DA marjoram is an aromatic plant of which there are many species, some perennial, others annual; the main ones cultivated in gardens, both for pleasure and utility, are wild marjoram, common marjoram, shell marjoram, variegated marjoram, small-leaved marjoram and hairy marjoram. Wild marjoram, otherwise known as oregano, has many small, woody, filamentous roots; it grows a number of small, hard, quarrelsome, hairy stems; its leaves are almost heart-shaped, brown-green, hairy, fragrant, and about the size of a child's fingernail. Its flowers are born at the top of its stems in spindly, scaly spikes that form large bunches. These flowers are small, arranged in the shape of a mouth, or a pipe cut into two whitish-red lips at the top: the flowers are followed by very small, almost round seeds, enclosed in an oblong capsule that served as the flower's calyx. Common marjoram is no less abundant in roots, which are also small and fibrous; it grows many small stems, rising to eight or ten inches, which together form a rounded tuft: These stems are woody, twiggy, small, a little hairy and reddish, lined with leaves arranged opposite each other, almost round in shape, soft, whitish, covered with a white down, half the size of oregano, with a strong, penetrating and very pleasant smell, and a slightly acrid and bitter taste. Its flowers are born at the ends of its branches, gathered in the form of a spike or head, rounder and shorter than those of oregano, composed of four rows of leaves laid in scales: these flowers are very small, whitish in color, one-piece in mouth, whose upper lip is upright, rounded, indented, and the lower divided into three parts; the flowers are followed by small, almost round, russet-colored, fragrant and bitter seeds. Shell marjoram, also known as gentile marjoram, differs from this variety in that its leaves are rounder, closer together and hollowed out in the shape of a shell; they are also whiter in color and smell sweeter. The flower is arranged in a spike like its predecessors. variegated marjoram is similar in all respects to the previous variety, except for the color of its leaves, which are mottled pale yellow; some are even completely yellow, making it a pleasing variety to the eye. Small-leaf marjoram differs from the above only in that its leaf is extremely small, similar to that of ordinary thyme, but more rounded: it is also the most fragrant of all. Hairy thyme is a species similar to the previous one, but its leaf is slightly larger and more hairy, which gives it its name: its spikes are also shorter. This plant is not very useful with foodstuffs; however, it is often mixed in, not only to make them more pleasant, but also to correct their flattery and make them easier to digest, especially with peas, beans and fish. It is also very pleasant to the sense of smell and, as much for these reasons as for its particular virtues, there is no garden. where one is not eager to have a few borders of it, or at least a few feet. It is cephalic, pectoral, stomachic, hysteric and sternutatory; all the species have more or less the same virtues. The powder of its leaves and flowers, dried in the shade, is very suitable for making serosities flow through the nose. The infusion of its flowers is also used successfully to suppress urination and menstruation, and is equally effective in making asthmatics and those with stubborn coughs cough up; the former is used in preference to the other species for these illnesses. Its distilled water is a marvellous help in indigestion, sour reports and winds: in these cases, the essential oil of this plant, the syrup or the preserve, can also be used. The oil in particular delights the senses, and soothes tooth pain, by soaking a cotton ball in it and placing it in the hollow of the affected tooth. For head colds and torticollis, oregano is dried over a fire, wrapped warm in a cloth and applied to the head. Marjoram powder, mixed with apricot marmalade or preserved orange blossom, is good for epilepsy, vertigo and trembling. Finally, this plant, however it is used, is recognized as sovereign for all cold diseases of the brain and head, for those of the chest and stomach, and for drawing out all aqueous humors. Marjoram can be propagated from seed, cuttings or offshoots, which are seeded or replanted in the same way as all other aromatic plants. The first two species are usually planted in borders around vegetable garden quarters, and withstand the winter without any particular care; but the others require a greenhouse in this season, and must therefore be raised in pots to enclose them more easily, and give them as much air as possible in their prison, moistening them a little if necessary. It is advisable to renew it from time to time, when you notice that it is being stripped, and that it is growing only weakly. Description of MELISSA: its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. MELISSA, otherwise known as lemon grass, is a perennial, fragrant plant. There are four species: garden lemon balm, wild lemon balm, Roman lemon balm and Pyrenean lemon balm, but the latter three are not cultivated in gardens. Its root is woody, long, round and fibrous; its stems are numerous, rising to a height of about two feet, almost square in shape, firm and stubby; its leaves are oblong and pointed, similar to those of common balsam, covered with short hairs, toothed at the edges, light green, with a pleasant lemon scent and a slightly pungent taste. Its flowers are born in the leaf axils, forming rings that are not complete around the stem, nor completely whorled; they are small, mouth-shaped, reddish or yellowish when born, forming a kind of pipe cut into two lips, supported by a calyx made into a hairy cone: each flower is followed by four slightly oblong seeds, stuck together, enclosed in the calyx where the flower is held. This plant is of little use in food: its young leaves are sometimes used in salad dressings, and some others put them in omelettes, as parsley is used, but this is not common. It delights the sense of smell; that's what's most flattering about it. Its greatest properties are in medicine, where it is often and very usefully employed; it is hysterical, cephalic and stomachic. Its dried or even fresh leaves, infused as a tea in half a pint of water, are sovereign for all diseases of the brain and those of women, for palpitations of the heart, for fainting, for vertigo, even for paralysis and for deciduous disease: a handful can also be lightly boiled in veal stock. A water made from it is sovereign for apoplexy, lethargy and epilepsy, as well as for vapors, colic, menstrual and urinary suppression; a spoonful is taken neat, or mixed in a glass of water, depending on the type of illness, more or less violent. This water, as well known as Eau des Carmes as Eau de Mélisse, is not a special secret, as many people imagine: M. Lémery has given a dispensation of it, which is recognized as the best: any private individual with a still can easily test it; and a pint, which is sold publicly for 20 livres, costs only 6 or 7 livres at most if you make it yourself. Here's how to make it. Take six handfuls of fresh lemon balm leaves, and an ounce of dried lemon peel, as much nutmeg and coriander; add half an ounce of clove and cinnamon; crush these drugs well, crush the leaves, and put the whole into a vessel suitable for distilling them, with two pounds of white wine and half a pound of brandy; Leave this mixture to digest for three days, after covering the vessel with its lid, to which you will add the container, the openings of which you will plug exactly; and then distill this material over a moderate sand fire, or in a bain-marie. A simpler lemon balm water is also made, without mixing the above drugs, to be used in cordial and hysterical potions, in a dose of six or eight ounces, like the others. It is usually only made from rooted plants, although it also comes from seed. We separate the offspring from old plants that produce a lot of it, and plant them in March in good, well-smoked soil, in a slightly shady spot: it does very well around fruit trees. It is sometimes prone to degeneration; when this is noticed, it should be destroyed and new ones planted. If it is not easy to find it in the vicinity, it grows naturally in the woods in certain countries, which must be distinguished from wild lemon balm, which also grows there, and which is very different, having a very unpleasant odor. The one I'm talking about is cut every year in autumn, just above ground level, and grows back in spring: it stays in place for a very long time, and withstands all bad weather without the need for any precautions. Its leaves are used for salad as soon as they begin to form, but are not used for distillation until July and August, when they are more perfected by the sun. CHAPTER CHAPTER LI. Description of the Melon - its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. The melon is a fruit cherished by all nations. The plant that produces it resembles the cucumber in many respects; its roots are extensive, straight, very hairy and yellowish in color; its stems, called arms by all gardeners, are sarmentose, hairy, untied, long, branchy and crawl along the ground. Its leaves alternate in appearance, borne on a three- to four-inch, medium-sized, hollow tail: they are almost round in shape, heart-shaped, light green and a little hairy; from the base and axils of the leaves come clusters of flowers, one-piece, bell-shaped, flared and split into five parts, star-shaped, very pale yellow; some are sterile, others fertile, where the fruit is uncovered even before they bloom: the fruit is smooth, shaped like an olive, green in color, Tome II. I but as it grows it takes on the shape, color and size of its species, which varies greatly, and also ripens sooner or later. its point of ripeness. It is a pleasant, refreshing food, and easy to digest when eaten in moderation; but excess produces wind and colic, sometimes followed by dyssentery and stomach upsets that are difficult to cure: We have also seen very severe quart fevers resulting from the immoderate use of melon, especially among people of a certain age, who should abstain from it, as should those of a pituiteux or melancholic temperament; each person must be his own doctor in this respect, and know how to deprive himself of a food that is harmful to his health. The Italians make an excellent jam from the rib of this fruit, which in their country is very thick, Provence melons; but I don't know if the rib of those we grow here, being much thinner, would be equally suitable for jamming. Here, we only pickle in vinegar, as we do with gherkins, those that are picked and thinned in May, when there is too much knotting, and which are then the size of a Spanish ôlive. Connoisseurs find them very delicate: see the chapter on cucumbers for instructions on how to preserve them. Its seed is one of the four cold seeds; it is used in all emulsions to cool overheated entrails, to temper the ardor of fever, and to provoke urination; it also enters into the composition of orgeat, the recipe for which I have given in the Pumpkin article. The southern countries are the most savory for this fruit; its taste is also much stronger there than elsewhere, and we are not obliged to give it the infinite care that we take here. We sow it in the ground like all vegetables, and let it grow freely without any cultivation other than crimping it once or twice: the sun does the rest, and gives it a quality that ours never have to the same degree; however, there are years when ours come very close to it; I have even seen Italians and Provençals be very pleased with it on more than one occasion. There are an infinite number of melon species, but I'll limit myself to a dozen or so that are the most successful in our climate, without claiming that they should be preferred everywhere to other species; on the contrary, I urge those who live in different climates to stick to species other than those I've adopted, once they've seen them succeed; and I'm happy to repeat I 2 here what I've already said more than once: such and such a soil will not be suitable for such and such a species of plant, which will be perfectly suited to such and such another; el vice versâ; and on this occasion I won't say precisely Tot capita, tot sensus; but rather, more or less and in an equally true sense, Tot littora, tot fructus. The species I want to talk about are: Le Melon Français, De Langeais. otherwise known as- A graine blanche. mé le maraîcher. A graine rouge. Des Carmes, which is Le Morin. of three kinds; the long De Florence, the round, and the white Sucrin de Tours. S. Nicolas à côte. large and medium. In the French melon class, which is the most widely cultivated, there are regularly round ones, flattened ones, and others with an elongated shape; some are more embroidered, others less so; some have more cut foliage, others less so; some are earlier, others later: should we conclude from these differences that the French melon is divided into as many species, or simply believe, as some do!Are we to conclude from these differences that the French melon is divided into so many species, or are we to believe, as some do, that they are simply a game of nature? For my part, without undertaking to treat the matter as a philosopher, I will declare myself in favor of the latter opinion; and I will say that these differences cannot in fact be regarded as characterizing species. In order for a production to claim the dignity of a species, it must be fixed and determined; in order for it to be believed fixed and determined, it must be followed without variation in its productions and multiplications, in much the same way as matter, which, although thrown repeatedly by the caster into the matrix, always renders bodies perfectly equal in form. Now, the productions we are talking about vary in their reproductions: for example, the seed of a round melon sometimes produces elongated ones, sometimes flattened ones; they are therefore without sequence, without determination; they are therefore only a game of nature which has no law for them, and only the effect of a passing meeting of the elements. But whether they are species or accidents, that's what I don't set out to describe; and I'm only concerned with the genus of the simple melon, I mean the market garden melon. Its shape varies, as I have just said, but in general its skin is extremely embroidered around the circumference, with no marked ribs and very full. It differs in these respects from melons from hot countries, which all have marked and very thick ribs, and which are as empty as they are full, with conse3 quently little flesh, albeit delicious. The color is very red, and it has a lot of water; but the taste, an essential ingredient, is not always equally good. In dry and hot years, it is vinous and sweet; but in cold and rainy years, art brings it to the truth, but cannot give it all the quality it could have. The avarice of those who grow them also very often makes this fruit despicable; their main aim is usually to make it large, because they think they can sell it better; and they don't realize that it can only be made large by watering, which takes away all its taste. The long Carmelite melon, like the round one, originally comes from Saumur; it was brought to the King's kitchen garden, from where it passed to the Carmelites, who took particular care in cultivating it. Its flesh is more or less red, full of water, very sweet, with a strong taste; but it is sometimes a little soft and mushy. Don't let it ripen too much: it's good in June if it's been brought forward; the skin yellows a little as it ripens. Some degenerate and ripen a little, and some are even slightly ribbed; but this difference is only external and does not change their quality; they are no less good, very thin-ribbed and very full. The round melon, apart from its shape, which is round and small, has all the same qualities, and ripens at the same time. The white melon has a smooth, whitish skin and a slightly oval shape; it is a good size, and ripens at the same time as the two mentioned above; it is preferred by many connoisseurs: I can assure you that I have eaten some that left nothing to be desired. The Saint Nicolas has an elongated shape, a slightly greenish color, evenly marked ribs, mediocre size, very thin ribs, firm, red flesh, full of water, sweet, vinous, and superior in finesse to those we have mentioned; it ranks first among the species we cultivate: it ripens in July. There is a very similar species, called the Avignon melon: some claim that it is the same under another name; others maintain that it is different: I would rather be of the former opinion than of the latter; for, having compared the two, I have seen only a slight difference in shape, which is a little more pointed in the Avignon melon than in the Saint-Nicolas. The Langeais melon bears the name of the 14 countries where it is best known, if it did not originate there. It has a slightly elongated shape, regularly marked with ribs, is a coarse green at birth, and golden yellow as it ripens; its size varies from year to year, sometimes being very small, and in the past being almost as big as market gardeners. It is also prone to embroidery, more or less, and sometimes not at all. Its flesh is red and firm, its taste sweet and vinous; it has a lot of water and is very full. A considerable quantity used to come from Langeais to Paris every year, but since we've succeeded in raising them well enough here, this little trade no longer exists. However, we must admit that it is better here than it is here, because it grows naturally in its own soil. Now, any fruit that comes without artifice is always superior in quality to that which is forced; it ripens in June and July. The white-seeded melon is a very early species of Carmelite melon; its shape is oval, of medium size; its skin is green and smooth, which changes very little as it ripens; its flesh is full of sweet water, but not sufficiently spicy; it is very delicate to raise: these two defects prevent it from being as widely cultivated as the others: it ripens in June: its seed is white, and gave it its name. CHAPTER LI. 201 The red-seeded melon is round, of medium size; its flesh is firm, red, and has a sweet, vinous taste: it ripens in July: its seed is a golden yellow, almost red. The Morin melon is a market garden variety, round and slightly flattened, with a sort of crown around the eye; its flesh is firm and red, with a sweet, vinous taste. Its flesh is firm and red, its taste sweet and vinous. It is very full, embroiders perfectly, and is usually a fortnight ahead of the maraîcher. It differs from ordinary market gardeners in that the little background that can be seen between the embroidery is a coarse black-green. The Florence melon, whose proper name is cantalupi, comes in four varieties: green, black, orange and white; all four are equally marked, very full and very early; they differ from one another in the following respects. The green one is small, a little elongated, with a few warts; the skin is green, with little embroidery; the flesh is red and sweet: it yellows a little as it ripens on the sunny side: its defect is that it splits. When it ripens perfectly, it's an excellent melon; but in this climate it doesn't always succeed, being good in mid-June. The black melon is a darker L4 green, round and small, with similar warts; it also splits, but does not change color as it ripens; in addition, it has the same qualities as the previous melon. It is the most esteemed of the four, being the sweetest and windiest; in Italy, it is called il melone degli santi, the melon of the saints: it ripens at the same time. The orange melon is elongated without warts, turns yellow as it ripens, embroiders a little and does not split; but its taste is a little less intense than that of the two preceding varieties: it ripens a fortnight later. The white variety is round and ribbed like the others, but larger: its flesh is white, full of water and very sweet; its rib is rather thick, so it has less flesh: it ripens in July. It should be noted that these four species of cantalupi require much more nourishment than the others, as their ribs are thicker and more spongy: the bed should be filled with six to eight inches of potting soil; you can even mix a third of prepared soil with the potting soil, as is done in Holland; the fruit is fatter and better nourished. The gros sucrin de Tours is the size of a market-gardener, extraordinarily embroidered and unevenly round, with imperceptibly marked ribs; its flesh is firm and red, with a sweet, spicy taste, full of water; it turns yellow slightly as it ripens, and is usually good only in August: it is an excellent melon. The small sucrin is at most half the size of the previous one; it is round and flattened; its skin is green: it changes little as it ripens, it is very good and full, with a spicy taste; but its smallness greatly diminishes its merit: it ripens the same way in August. From these details, we can see that the small species surpass the large market melon in all good qualities: water, finesse, sugar, everything is there; they are also earlier, and in the late season they do not lose their good qualities like the large species, which, although it ripens, has no taste after the first days of September. They also have the double advantage of stopping facilemént, and of being generally all good in ordinary years. The previous year (1749), despite all the bad weather that accompanied it, a private individual in Versailles found cantaloupe that were good on the fifteenth of June, and which were sent to the King. However, our market gardeners apply themselves only to the first species, because of its size, and the others are only seen in private homes where they are grown for themselves, which is a great loss to the public. 16 I'm not talking about the little early carmelite, which does very well in what it is, and which ripens first of all; but which, because of its smallness, is not worth the expense of cultivation, being no bigger than a calvil apple, and being a little sweet besides. I've heard a lot of praise for a species from Italy called the crimson melon, because its flesh is crimson red. A foreign lord, curious about this crop, also assured me that it was very successful in Germany, where he grew it himself every year: from which one might conclude that it should be even more successful here; however, it is not known here, and whatever research I have made, I have only been able to obtain imperfect information about it: the curious, within reach of its natural country, will be able to find out more about it. Some people like to grow a particular kind of watermelon, known here as the melon d'eau, and in Provence as the pasteque; it comes round, extraordinarily large, weighing up to thirty pounds and more. The flesh is crimson red, the seed black, and the skin green and smooth; but it is a waste to grow it, as it is not edible here; it is barely edible in its own country for those who have not accustomed their taste to it from youth. Its main merit is that it has a lot of refreshing water; but it's a bland water that neither flatters nor awakens; I testify to this with many people who have often tasted it as I have, both in Italy and Provence. There is another species that is very similar, but smaller, and which differs on the outside only by a string of yellow spots, arranged in the form of ribs that all end at the head of the fruit, whose seed is red, and which is known as the American melon; but it is only used for jam, and is excellent for this purpose. It can be cultivated for this purpose: it succeeds very well, and yields a lot: last year I collected twenty-one on four feet, all well conditioned. Its leaf is extremely indented, similar to that of the watermelon; it stops late, and it's only at the end of its branches that the fruit knots; but it grows visibly as soon as it's stopped: it requires a lot of space and little pruning. I could also name a species that is very excellent in the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, which is known here as the green Morée melon or the Candie melon, and in Italy as the winter melon. The flesh is white, similar to that of the cucumber, very elongated; the skin smooth, pale green; and it has the advantage of keeping all winter hanging on the floor in a dry, airy place. In Naples, they are tied around the windows of outdoor houses: the temperature of this climate allows this, as it almost never freezes. This melon is full of water and so sweet that its excessive sweetness displeases some people; but this small defect does not prevent it from being a pleasure in the ungrateful season in which it is grown. I've seen it succeed a few times here, when the year has been favorable; but often it has neither taste nor quality. We can always risk the event of a few feet. For those who don't have it, it's time to give them an understanding of melon cultivation, by which I mean cultivation such as nature commonly demands, and not that for which art should be exhausted. It would undoubtedly be pleasant for individuals to be able in some way to have this fruit two months earlier than nature allows; and there is no doubt that by means of layers, it would be possible to serve it at the beginning of May, whereas it is not commonly eaten until July, and only abounds in August and September: I don't even doubt that in Spain, the kingdom of Naples and Sicily, Barbary, America and other regions close to the line, we could, by helping nature in its months of rest, have some throughout the year; we can at least presume this by the example of England, where, although the climate is very different, I mean much less clean, some curious people manage to have some, admittedly devoid of taste, but two months earlier than us: an example that has just been successfully put into practice, by a French Lord * who, with the greatest talents and all the knowledge that makes famous characters, recommendable and dear to the State, has always been a lover of plants, and has never disdained their cultivation. But however rare and satisfying this curiosity must have been here, it could only suit people to whom opulence allows everything; it would not be possible to find many who would devote themselves to it: one needs greenhouses glazed and built at great expense, an understanding man who always watches over them, which one can hardly find; an even and continuous fire, and much care besides, which * M. le Maréchal de Bellisle, having recently found himself in the vicinity of London, noticed this little marvel of nature, and set about imitating it as soon as he got to France. On his return home to Bizy, he actually carried it out, having brought with him an English gardener experienced in this cultivation, who, finding new facilities in our climate, succeeded in the first year, and presented him with some at the beginning of May. The plants are still, to tell the truth, only a fruit for the eyes, and too bad to be eaten. The method which produces melons a little later, but which are good, and which only require costs that everyone can afford, is therefore always to be preferred, and this is the one I'm going to develop. The bed of small melons is prepared at the beginning of January; whatever the quantity of seed you wish to sow, a length of nine feet in the bed is more than sufficient, as each bell can easily contain twenty-five to thirty seeds; on this length you can place twenty or more bells, which would make up five to six hundred feet; this is much more than is necessary for the first seed, even for those who trade in them. Individuals who are not in this situation can fill in as many bells as they see fit, and can occupy the remainder with lai tues or cucumbers. The bed should be no more than 2 and a half feet, or 3 wide, to make it easier to heat up, and three and a half feet high before being filled with compost. The dose of potting soil should not exceed three inches, for the reason I'll explain shortly: of the remainder, it is trained as explained in the chapter on layers. If it is greasy or too coarse, the plants are liable to melt: the same disadvantage results if it has already been used to blanch celery or chicory, as a small amount of hair remains, absorbing the heat and giving off a hint of corruption: if it is too old, it does not have enough virtue to raise the fruit to perfection, and it is often because of this defect that the plant melts halfway through. To do this properly, use only two-year-old compost, which has not produced anything during the second year, and which has been stirred from time to time; in this way, it will have acquired new salts during the resting period: nothing is easier than to set aside a small supply every year for the following year. Market gardeners generally don't start sowing large melons until the end of February, which saves them a month of rigorous care. Their main reason for not hurrying them any further is to save on their manures; for they make two seasons for them, as they put it, i.e., they serve them twice, being first used to raise turnips and lettuces, most of which only come up in March and April, and then for melons; They then turn over the old layers, and mixing the old manure with a third of the new, they make up new ones, on which they replant their melons, which are good in this time to put in place. This shows that it's not the risk of sowing them earlier that holds them back, but only the expense and care involved; for the large species they cultivate is less delicate than the smaller ones: If the weather is set for frost, put an inch of pigeon droppings in the middle of the bed, i.e. the thickness of manure, and cover it with old straw mats or warm manure after it has been sown; this helps it to warm up, and keeps it warmer for longer. When it's ready to sow, the most common practice is to sow the seed under a bell in holes made with a finger, two inches apart. Two or three seeds are placed in each hole, without covering them, or at least very lightly; but when you have sowing frames, which is much more advantageous, as I explained in the chapter on Layers, you sow it in the open .field, and when the soil is covered with it, so that each grain is an inch apart, we press the tip of our finger on each grain to press it in, and then pass our hand over the whole surface of the soil, to cover it lightly; but as there are few people provided with these frames, I must here mainly have in view the practice of bells, which is the most general, and match the principles to this method. It is to be hoped that the day we sow will be a fine one: in which case you can leave the bed uncovered until sunset ; but, as you can't delay, whatever the weather, when it's at its warmest, if you're threatened by snow or ice, or if the frost bites hard, you must cover as soon as you've sown, and bind the bells, i.e. swaddle them with litter or regain, so that they are completely covered, and double the covers during the night, as the weather requires: Fifteen days later, sow a few more bells on another end of the bed, and continue from fifteen to fifteen days until the end of March, to make up for the lack of the first ones when they die, and to have a succession of them until September. It is therefore important to ensure this succession of fruits, to prolong a pleasure that would certainly be too short-lived if we stuck only to the first melons. Your first well-cared-for seedling will sprout six to seven days after it has been placed in the ground, whatever the severity of the weather; for it obeys the warmth of the soil in which it grows; and when the seedling is a few days older, it needs to be put into the ground, i.e. a little bit of soil is brought to the base with the finger, and lightly pressed. The most difficult part of growing melons is preserving the plant: too much or too little heat melts it; too little or too much air has the same effect, and great care must be taken to maintain this degree of heat. To get it to breathe properly, you have to take the moments, so to speak, on the fly. During heavy frosts, the sun usually comes out; you need to take advantage of this, and uncover the bells' bottoms from around ten in the morning, until three or four in the afternoon; but the bottom must always be kept low. Sometimes, too, it's cold and sunless, and that's the worst kind of weather you can have; but you have to choose a few hours during the day to uncover the bells a little, otherwise the plant will turn yellow and melt under the covers. But if the fog is thick, or if it's snowing or raining, leave everything covered for as long as it lasts: the plants are in great danger, but there's no remedy. Manure vapors, as much as the deprivation of air, ruin plants in this situation: they attach themselves to the stems and leaves, and this humidity melts them: they fall again on these young plants in large drops, from the glass where they collect, and rust them. This last disadvantage can be overcome by placing pieces of woollen cloth under each bell, supported by three small sticks between the plants and the glass; the vapour attaches itself to them, and you change them from time to time to make them dry alternately; but I confess that this is a great subjection: when you have frames, the operation is much easier and safer, as I said in the first chapter. When a few fine, mild, quiet days arrive, you need to take advantage of them as much as you can to give the plant a bit of air, since it is stretching out in its shirt and becoming tender; one hour after sunrise, remove all or most of the bedding between the bells; and two hours later, the bell is given a finger's breadth of daylight, on the opposite side to the wind; it is lowered one hour before sunset, and the blankets are put back on, thicker or thinner, according to any change that may have occurred in the weather. The most important thing to keep the plant in vigor is to maintain the warmth of the bed by means of the stoves: every day, you stick your hand into the middle, and as soon as you realize it's cold, you warm it up; a few days later, when the heat of this first stove has considerably diminished, you reshuffle them, and always wet them as you change or reshuffle them, if the manures are dry. Finally, in all respects, follow what I said in the chapter on layers, which I won't repeat here: you should also follow what I've said about blankets; and don't neglect to have straw mats for the ease of shaking off snow when it falls, and to prevent rain from penetrating the layers. They are also very useful to protect them from the sleet of March, which is deadly for plants; nothing cools a bed more: you must be careful to prevent it when the weather seems ready, and remove the mats as soon as the sleet has passed. When the severe cold is over, you should always give the bells a little air during most of the day (a finger's breadth is enough), but when the weather begins to warm up, you should leave the same amount of air night and day. However, it must be said that until the end of April, it is almost always advisable to lower the bells at night. The method I have just described is used by all gardeners and market gardeners in general. I have found myself obliged to place it first, as the most authoritative; but on the example of some very well-meaning individuals, I have tried another which I have recognized as better; you are free to experiment with it. Sow the seed, as I said, on a piece of bedding; don't wait until all the fire has passed, as this seed needs a lot of heat to rise quickly and reliably: as long as you can sustain the heat, albeit with difficulty, by sticking your hand into the soil, that's enough. After four or five days, the seed lifts, and the same care as explained above is applied. A fortnight later, the seedling is strong enough to be transplanted onto another layer, which must be prepared, and it is transplanted much lighter, i.e., one bell should make three; but the layer must not be so hot as for the first seed. We leave it in this state for three weeks; it strengthens, and we transplant it again on another layer, where it should be more at ease: seven to eight feet is enough under each bell. We leave it on this third layer until it is strong enough to be replanted; fifteen days will perfect it, provided the weather is mild. With this new method, I've found that the plant stretches less, roots better, remains stockier, is less prone to melting and makes more progress; The reason for this is that it benefits from the warmth and sap of three new layers, which the one remaining on the same layer does not enjoy equally, even though it has been warmed exactly, so that the seedling you planted at the beginning of January is usually ready to be replanted at the beginning of March. If you follow ordinary practice, you will hardly be able to plant the seedling before the end of March; and it goes without saying that you will have kept the January seedlings, as the February ones are only good in 217. the beginning of April. Finally, in one of these two months you do your planting, and for this purpose you prepare your beds, which must be four and a half feet wide, and which are reduced to four because of the borders; two feet high is enough in this season, (I mean after having been walked on.) The rule is to put only one foot under each bell, and to form two rows in a chessboard: you raise them with a little clod, if you can; and transplanted right away, they tire little. They should not be wetted, as the vapour from the bed throws enough moisture into the soil; but the bells should be kept lowered and covered with a little bedding, until they are well established; and if it is a little hot, they should be covered with straw mats. If the plant is strong, the first pruning should be carried out as soon as it is well established, i.e. seven or eight days later, but not at the same time as planting, as some gardeners do; this often results in a kind of canker forming on the pruning, caused by the vapor from the manure, which spreads to the whole stem, causing it to perish. The best thing to do in this respect, when the plants are too far under the last layer in which they were transplanted, and there are no layers ready for replanting, is to stop them at two Tome II. K eyes, eight days before planting. This will seem surprising to those who have never practiced it, and I myself was not convinced of the good effect it produces until after I had tried it; for it really seems that this small quantity of compost is not capable of nourishing the fruit. One might also suspect that the root would heat up and heal in the manure it is forced to pierce, but experience destroys all arguments against this use. This plaute, as I'll soon say, fears nothing so much as water; and the more the soil abounds, the more moisture it retains, which commuuicates with the foot; the less there is consequently, the less it retains, because the air and the sun have a lot of six, and the water, for the same reason has rather, pierced this mediocre, thickness from where it runs off into the paths: this is the first reason. The second reason is that the plant, having less nourishment, stops growing fruit more quickly, and doesn't grow wood with the vigor that a fatter bottom would give it, which is the usual reason why fruit often sinks as it knots; moreover, we save a lot of work, which the pruning of this quantity of mutilated wood requires: as long as we have the principles of vegetation, we feel the need to make it bear fruit. But, you may ask, between too much humidity, which is admittedly contrary, and too little, is the middle ground sufficiently maintained? In hot weather, can this plant draw enough juice from such a weak substance? My answer is that it can, based on my own experience and that of several market gardeners; and to make the assurance I am giving clearer, it should be borne in mind that a vapor is constantly rising from the manure, which the glass, either cloche or frame, attracts, and which sufficiently moistens the soil; and that, in addition, when there is a great need, this is made up for by light watering done at the right time, in the way I will explain below. I'll add one more reason, which is that the heat of the stoves works much better and more quickly on a small quantity of potting soil, than on a larger one: besides, the root of this plant doesn't prick, and only runs on the surface. The result of this practice is 1° that the plant is less prone to melting due to humidity; 2° that the fruit stops earlier and more reliably; 3° that it ripens more quickly; 4° that it has more taste, because it is molas nourished with water. Experimentation will show the truth of what I'm saying. K 2 It could still be objected that piec, when replanted a little hard, does not find a home in this small quantity of compost. I must say, however, that since the root is so close to the manure, particular care is needed during the first few days, to protect it from the excessive heat of the bed, which sometimes starts a second fire after it has been planted, when the weather warms up: You need to probe it with your finger several times during the day, and especially at high noon; and as soon as you notice that the heat is increasing, you need to lard it, and give the bells a little air: these risks only last a few days, after which you can see the plants benefiting visibly, as the sun makes itself felt. As soon as it has recovered, we perform the first operation, which is to prune its upright at the second leaf, and to cut off its ears, as I said above; but if the stem is not sufficiently formed, we leave it to benefit until it is in a condition to suffer it. A modern author, who has written about this fruit in the context of other subjects, condemns this cutting off of the ears, on the general principle that nature does nothing useless, and that we must not give it laws or do it violence; but, starting from the same principle, it would therefore be wrong to prune trees or vines; it would be wrong to cut the shoots of several roots, in order to profit from them; it would be wrong to pinch peas and beans, melons and cucumbers: how many other operations would be wrong? Practices recognized as good by experience cannot be destroyed by simple reasoning, however specious it may be. Let's return to our subject. When the stems begin to grow arms, they must be pinched at two eyes; and as they grow new branches, they must be cut back again and again with a small, sharp knife. Finally, we must make it a rule to leave only two arms on each stem, and a third, called the false arm, because it grows out of the stump between the good arms: everything that grows more around the stem must be cut off. We always keep one of the false arms, because we know from experience that they often bear fruit more often than the good ones. A small number of gardeners always prune with one eye, and do well, they say: for my part, I neither condemn nor approve this K method, which I have never tried, and which is rarely used. False flowers begin to appear after the second pruning: they should be carefully removed, as should the tendrils that grow on the arms. You should also cut off the gourmands which usually grow straight from the middle of the plant; they ruin the good branches: you can easily distinguish them by their size and liveliness. If the branches are so arranged that they cannot be brought back, then some cut leaf must be used to cover them. There's a bad kind of leaf called hard leaf, which comes out of the arms, and consumes more sap than four good ones; it should be cut close to the stem: you can tell by its darker color than the others, by its thickness, and by its more pointed shape. After the first or second pruning, some hairy branches grow, with pipes five or six inches long without eyes; these must be cut off, as this type of branch rarely or never produces fruit. Genuinely good fruiting wood must be short, by which I mean that it must have its eyes close together; and the closer it is to the foot, the bigger and better the fruit, and the better it holds. Any branch with flat wood is also bad by nature, so it must be removed. During the course of these various operations, the stalks gain strength and the branches multiply; they must be thinned out to avoid confusion, and food must be provided for those most likely to bear fruit: These forks are usually pieces of barrel stave wood, sharpened at one end and enthrited at the other: they are driven into the soil more or less deeply, depending on whether you want to give the plants more or less air, and the edge' of the bell rests on the notch which retains it and even temys conpre the strong winds. But, for greater safety, these forks should always be placed on the opposite side of the wind, and the bells lowered as much as possible during its violence; however, as long as the weather is serene, they should be placed on the side of the rising sun, and all branches should be enclosed under the bell on the K4 1 opposite side, until the fruit is stopped; but some should be allowed to escape at the other edge where the fork is. When pruning, the branches should be distributed so that none stretches out over the paths; they should be thrown back on the sides and in the middle: from time to time, both hands should be pressed a little firmly around the foot, to push it back into the soil. When you start to see some fruit stopping, if it's outside the bell, bend the branch so that it's covered; and if it stops so far from the foot that you can't bring it back without risking forcing the branch, in that case take another bell and cover it; for it is extremely important, for the goodness of the fruit, that neither rainwater nor sprinkling water ever falls on it until it is perfectly ripe; the Provençals themselves observe this, despite the heat of their climate and the dryness of their soil, as I have noticed in the vicinity of Marseille. For this purpose, they raise a small inverted earthen pot, supported on three forks five or six inches above each fruit. They do even more; persuaded by experience that any water is not only contrary to the fruit's goodness, but that it even harms the plant, their method of watering them is quite different from ours: their melons, as I have already said, are in the ground, and are planted in the middle of their boards, which are domed; they put only one row of them, and give only three feet of width to the boards. From this we understand that the two sides are hollow, and form two small ditches into which they let water run when necessary; but this is only at the end, and when the leaves are very wilted; this water filters between two soils, and substains the roots without drowning the foot, as watering cans do, which often causes them to perish. The perfectly curious add to this: when the weather is rainy, or when they foresee a storm, they remove the pots I mentioned from over the forks, and cover the fruit entirely with them, until the fine weather returns: However, they have observed that, despite this precaution, as soon as the year turns rainy, their melons lose a great deal of their good qualities: incontestable proof that authorizes more and more the use of frames, where they never receive more water than they are willing to give. It's also to protect them from sunburn, which is frequent and dangerous in their climate, and at the same time to prevent them from ripening too quickly, which would make them dry and unhealthy; in this way, they prevent the sun from beating down on the melons, as the portion of its rays that revolves around them is enough to ripen them. But in this climate, we hardly need this precautton; for, as much as it is important, when the fruit begins to set, to keep it covered with its leaves so that it benefits better, as much it is necessary, when it approaches its size, to uncover it so that it receives through the bell or the frames the immediate rays of the sun: each one must regulate himself, in this respect, according to his climate. Vegetable growers generally take none of these precautions, even though they know them and are convinced of their good effect: But most do not want to expose their bells to unforeseen hail, and other small daily accrdens; they are much less concerned about the goodness than the beauty of the fruit, which is why they should not be imitated: however, there are only too many individuals who do this; but I have seen them repent more than once. For example, in 1746, there were clouds in May and June, which ruined most of the fruit. Some of my acquaintances promptly used their bells, and put the fruit back under cover; but in an attempt to repair one evil, they created a greater one. The fruit, which had become accustomed to the fullness of the air, found itself deprived of this abundance, so it hung up, hardly professed any more, and ripened badly and later. When you have done so much as remove the eloches, you must never put them back; the most suitable expedient on these occasions is to always keep a small trellis over the beds, ready to receive the doormats, when you have to fear cos kinds of bad weather. As the fruit appears, whether in the first, second or third sap, the branch should always be pruned to one eye above; but if there are several, after a while only one of the first sap should be left, and the strongest chosen; quinno days or three weeks later, you choose a second one from the second sap, and do away with all the rest; it's even much better to leave only the first sap, especially in cold, rainy years. Some market gardeners, greedy for profit, are not so reserved, and sometimes leave R 6 three or four on each plant; but experience shows that the more a plant is loaded, the less quality and size the fruit has: the person who breeds for pleasure must prefer to have one good one to two mediocre ones. However, although I don't want to give a decisive reason for this, we also know from experience that, under stretchers, one plant can produce three, and even four well-conditioned ones: I've seen as many as seven; the reason for this is that heat being evenly distributed throughout the body of the bed, and the temperature of the air being the same throughout the space between the surface of the bed and the glass, the fruit finds greater resources to feed itself; let's add to this that the branches not being violated, as under cloches, where they must be kept tight, nature acts at the same time with greater freedom and prodigality. When this fruit has reached a certain size, many individuals are in the habit of placing it on a piece of tile, with the idea that the humidity communicated by the soil is detrimental to its goodness: this is true in the last season, I mean for all those that have not ripened by the end of August; and this precaution is then very useful, because the soil cools down, as the nights become long and cold : Experience proves that potting soil in some way helps to nourish the fruit and make it swell, because it helps its parts to expand; moreover, it ripens much more as a reflection of the soil's own heat: the proof is clear, since the side of the bed is always riper than the side of the soil. But there is a way to prevent this evil, when it occurs, without falling into other inconveniences: Take small baskets, such as those used for peaches and apricots sold in public markets, which are eight to ten inches long and four to five inches wide, with a one-inch rim; fill them with straw, and place them under the melons; these baskets stop the moth, which cannot pierce them, and the fruit benefits equally from the reflection of the heat that passes through. The timing of all these operations cannot be fixed; they depend on the season and on how far the plants have advanced as a result of the gardener's care; but they are self-evident. Pruning is also determined by need. Nothing is more damaging to the plant and the fruit, as I have already said, than the confusion of branches; they need to be unloaded exactly: in the ordinary course, they need to be worked on at least once a week; and when they are vigorous, every four days? but a lot of trouble is saved when, from birth, you pinch the branches exactly without letting them spread too much, and the fruiting branches show up just as well. When pruning, market gardeners usually cut the wood they are pruning about an inch from the mother branch, to avoid the mess of cankers that often form where the cut is made, and sometimes spread from branch to branch to the perishing plant. This method has its disadvantages, in that it dissipates the spirits by these kinds of slang, which are ugly moreover: the one I follow, and which seems preferable to me, in that the wound covers better, and a canker never forms, is to throw on it a little dry loam, pulverized between the fingers, or to apply a small piece of leaf from the plant, which stops the flow of sap to it, and which dries while the callus is forming; both are equally successful: However, I prefer the use of potting soil, in that the operation is done more quickly, and it remains firmly applied to the wound; instead of the leaf sometimes being disturbed by the shaking of other nearby branches, which are worked on one after the other. Moreover, this precaution is only really important for branches that are cut close to the base; for all the same branches, the risk would be too great, and there is no need. Although the season is advancing, you must not lose sight of the fact that you must always maintain the heat of your layers in a degree of heat that is more or less equal; because it is sometimes appropriate, until the month of May, to reheat them: but in this respect, you must operate in relation to the changes in weather that occur. For example, you may have put in a new stove at the right time, and then a few days of unforeseen chaleturs occur; this stove, as a result of the event, overheats your bed, and threatens the plant; this must be remedied diligently, either by removing it altogether or in part, or by providing plenty of air under the bells, and using suction cups. Finally, the need must determine the remedy, and from time to time the finger must be thrust into the layer to probe its heat, in order to regulate it more reliably. On other, quite opposite occasions, we are sometimes reassured by a few fine days which seem to herald the end of bad weather, and which make us neglect all sorts of precautions; but then cold days and equally cold rains occur: the bed becomes mortified, (in gardening terms) and the plant runs to its doom. You can't be too quick, on these occasions, to revive it with hot sumier stoves, mixed with pigeon droppings; and it's a good idea to make little stoves in them, as I explained in the chapter on Beds; at the same time, keep the plant well covered, until the bed has regained its heat. When the month of May arrives, it is quite usual to see the heat begin; and if it is such that the plants need some light watering, they must be wetted, but with great care and restraint, as I have quite insinuated, and never water during the strong sun, whose bells could suffer as much as the plant. The English are in the habit of only ever wetting the paths, for the same reasons as I said above, and some people also practice this in France: I think everyone would do well to follow this method; but, for the water to be able to communicate itself to the bed, the paths must be at least level with the surface. In addition, the best time to water is from 5 p.m. until dark, or in the morning from daybreak until 7 a.m., if you haven't been able to do it in the evening. It's also very important not to water with water freshly drawn from a well, or from some other reservoir; it must have been left to cool in the sun for a day, more or less, in barrels placed at noon, if you don't have some basin next to the melonnière. The quality of the water also contributes infinitely to the quality of the fruit. Hard, raw water is extremely detrimental to this, and the fruit that is fed on it is never good: The latter are much inferior to the former, and there is only one voice to agree on the cause; to which we can add that the market gardeners of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine wet them much less than those of the other Faubourg, commonly using only one waterway for twelve feet, while the latter use two or three. The layer, which receives neither rain nor dew, and which is uniformly hit by the sun in all its parts through the reflection of the glass, deteriorates much more than an ordinary layer, and consequently needs to be helped. But once the fruit has reached a certain size, it must no longer receive the impressions of water, and neither must the stalk, for the same reasons I have set out above; and to protect them from the damage they would suffer, here is my method. I have a dozen earthen pots, which I cover with preds and fruits, and I wet over them; a jug makes my rule for four feet: these four watered, I lift my pots and put them back on the next four, as for the rest. The operation is neither long nor difficult, and I protect my fruit from the bad effects of water. Some people throw pigeon droppings into the barrels in which they cool the water, and claim that this greatly advances the fruit. I have never wanted to do this test, because apart from the repugnance I have always felt, others have assured me that the effect was not such, and that moreover this droppings could impart a bad quality to the fruit. There are often fruits which become counterfeit by a whim of nature, so that the afflicted part falls as if in paralysis, hardens and hardly profits any more; which makes the fruit not only counterfeit, but also bitter and bad while ripening. If this is noticed early on, it can be remedied by making several cross-shaped scars with the tip of a knife on the curved part, which relaxes it and facilitates its extension: this operation quite often restores them; but if the curve is considerable, the shortest way is to remove these kinds of fruit and wait for better conditioned ones to come along. There are also fruits with a disposition to be bad without resource, they are called hard melons; they can be recognized by their shape which is almost round, and of a large black green. This kind of fruit is never worth anything, even though it is profitable and grows; it must be plucked: the good fruit must be drawn and elongated as it stops, of a light, plain green. If the fruit of the second sap doesn't do well, you have recourse to that of the third, which arrives on Midsummer's Day. If both fail, we fall back on the last, which comes at Magdeleine; but quite often the fruit of this sap does not ripen well. When the first fruits stop ripening, we must take care to cover them completely with a leaf; and if the leaves holding the base are too far apart, we cover them with one of the leaves we cut off when pruning. Violent thunderstorms sometimes occur in May and June, which are dangerous for the fruit and bells that the wind blows away, and which suffer even more when accompanied by hail: it is prudent to always be on guard, and not to move your straw mats too far away, so as to be able to throw them promptly over the bells when the weather threatens.

Here are a few special considerations that I should have placed higher up, but it is better to give them out of place than to keep them quiet. The first is to beware of sunburn, which is quite common in the first days of heat that follow the cold of March and April; its bright rays are a warning: you should then throw some litter on the bottom of the bells, keeping a little air on top: the same precaution should be taken in February, when, after having kept the beds open for a few days due to the harshness of the weather, they are uncovered on a sunny day: the plants, tenderized under the blanket, are soon surprised, if you don't keep a close eye on them. The second is to visit the roots of languishing plants, and when you find them chancie (which is the usual cause), you need to push the plant deeper into the soil: it sprouts roots from the collar, which restore it. The third is to be attentive to the changes in weather that often occur in April and May: during this period, warm rains bring new heat to the layers, however old they may be, and such that all the plants would melt, if care were not taken to give them air in proportion to their needs; you must therefore behave according to their degree of heat, and probe them often so as not to be surprised. Fourth: if you have neglected to sow the last seedlings in March, in order to have fruit in September, and you find yourself pruning your melons in May, you can plant the branches you are pruning to unload them, place them under a bell, not too far forward, and cover them for a few days, as if they were rooted plants: it will perish, but it will survive; that's what I've experienced several times. Fifth: once you've planted as many layers as you intended, if you have any left over, there's little risk of putting it in the ground under any good shelter; the fruit comes later, but is sometimes better than that of the layers, when the summers are hot; I've eaten perfect ones in some years up to the end of September, and last year (1749) I had quite good ones up to All Saints' Day: It's true that the year was very favorable; I also admit that in other years the trouble we took was pure waste, but it doesn't cost much to always try to bring them out. They should be covered with cloches, and cared for in the same way as diapers: when planting them, put in a handful of potting soil, and nothing more; little water, for the same reasons I have already stressed; and in this same position, a pipe covered with straw under the fruit is very necessary, because the soil always returns more freshness than the potting soil. Sixth: in the month of May, as I've already mentioned in passing, clouds often fall, which others call "nielles", and which attach themselves to leaves, stems and fruit, which contract spots in the places where they are trapped by this bad weather, and which ruin them. These clouds are caused by a few dews or cold showers in the morning, interspersed with a few rays of sunshine and a pale sun. As soon as you notice it, if you haven't been able to prevent it by covering your beds with straw mats, you should sprinkle them lightly all over; this water often washes away and corrupts this kind of venom; but if it has bitten so hard that it cannot prevent its bad effect, you must immediately cut off the branches and leaves attacked by it, as well as any fruit that is stained; for however small the stain may appear at first, it makes very rapid progress, and corrupts it completely: or if it stops, it makes the flesh so bitter that it cannot be eaten. Seventh: as the fruit nears maturity, and heavy rains fall, the best part of the fruit often melts and bursts, taking away all its external merit and even its goodness. As soon as the damage begins, and there is reason to fear for the future, the stem should be torn halfway through the wood with the fingernails, two inches from the fruit; this prevents the damage by preventing the sap from entering so abundantly: it is also necessary, as much as possible, to turn the head of the fruit towards the north, because this is the part where it usually cracks; and, as it is the sun which contributes much to making it crack after the rains, it is often preserved by removing the aspect of this star. Eighth: if you want to bring the fruit forward when it's almost at its full size, and has been fully embroidered, remove half the old stoves, and replace what you remove with hot manure; Eight days later, you can cut it, as this new manure has two effects that hasten the fruit's ripening: first, it burns the roots that were filtering through the old stoves, thus weaning it off some of its nourishment; second, it increases the heat of the plant, which helps it ripen earlier. The result of this operation is sometimes that the violence done to it deprives it of some of its quality, especially when very hot weather is pressing on it; but if the weather is a little cool, it is good although premature: besides, it would not be prudent to risk everything, we only risk a layer. Ninth: horseflies and moths, as well as rats and field mice, often wreak havoc in diapers. See Chapter 1 for remedies. When at last, after so much care, one has reached the point of enjoying one's work, that is, of picking the fruit, all that remains is to do it at the right time, and this is another little study: sometimes its maturity is announced by a change in color, that is, it goes from green to yellow; I don't mean a perfect yellow, which is the sign of a bad melon, but a yellowish or russet green: sometimes, too, there is very little change on the outside, especially in the case of the smaller varieties, which need to be picked greener than the larger ones, and which complete their ripening when kept for a few days. The sense of smell, which many people consult, is not always a reliable judge either; for it is more common for a melon to be overripe when it gives off a lot of odour, than for it to be overripe. Some others make up their minds on a few small cracks in the embroidery, similar to fingernail punctures, from which they 'augur well; but all these signs are equivocal, and even vary according to the years and climates: those who are not in the habit of handling them, like our market gardeners, who judge them quite reliably by eye, must try to cone tre the right point by testing. The most certain sign that I couldas, quer, but of which not all melens ger Tome II. is when the tail becomes encircled, that is, when it seems to want to detach from the fruit. The signs by which a melon can be judged are when the stem is large and short, in proportion to the species, when it looks well nourished, when it is heavy in the hand, firm under the finger, and precipitated by the sun; it should also be noted that a freshly cut melon can never have the degree of goodness that it acquires when kept for two or three days. Care must be taken to reserve the seed of the most beautiful fruits, and to take only that of the upper part, that is to say, that which the sun has struck, which is always more August than that below, and to take it only from the fruits of the first or second sap: this seed, which is cleaned as much as possible of its silt, must be placed in the shade to dry and improve, by stirring it from time to time; and when it is quite dry, it is locked in some place where mice cannot get at it: it is good for seven to eight years and more. It is said that the older it is, the better the quality of its fruit; however, many market gardeners sow it in the first year, when they have no other variety. Here's an important observation in this respect. Many people are accustomed to having the fruit they eat cooled in fresh water, or even with ice, and finding it good, they reserve precisely the seed; but it has been observed that this foreign and supernatural freshness alters the seed, and changes the species. I do not undertake to explain the reason for this: in many things of this nature, we must surrender to experience; for the obscurity of the cause does not destroy the effect: it is only a question in this, to go as far as possible, of removing the seed from the fruit as it is collected, which is easy. When you have to send melons a little way, you should take care to pick them a little green, as the road will finish ripening them; and you should cut their tails a little long, leaving even a few leaves. CHAPTER LII. Description of the MELONGEN; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. It is called Meringeane in Provence, Viédase in Languedoc, and Obergine in some other provinces. L 2 It is very common in all hot countries; but in this climate, it is grown only as a curiosity, and this is by default, as it usually succeeds very well: the Provençals nevertheless claim that it tastes better in their region; I leave them with this opinion; but according to my taste, there is little or no difference when summers are a little hot. There are four species; two with red fruit, one elongated and the other round; and two with yellow fruit, one round and the other long. I'll describe these four species separately, starting with the long red one, which is the most common. This plant has many long, whitish roots, packed with fibers; its leaf is water-green, covered on the surface with a kind of white powder like flour, elongated, up to seven to eight inches long, three to four wide, wrinkled all around without any serration, attached to long, thick tails; Its stem is thick and branchy, rising to two or three feet, and covered with leaves throughout its branches; its flowers emerge in large numbers from the body of the branches in clusters of 3 or 4, borne on a small pedicel. The flower is purplish, formed in a single piece, but cut in such a way that it represents six petals of equal size, pointed and wrinkled; its base is supported by a calyx, in the center of which rises a pistil, accompanied in its circuit by six species of yellow needles or stamens, which all meet at the tip in the shape of a keel; This pistil is then transformed into a full fruit, roughly shaped like a cucumber, but shorter, the color of a belle-de-nuit, sometimes striped with white and green, rounded at the tip, smooth and glossy, a little curved, with no odor; its flesh is white and soft, quite watery, with seeds arranged in two rows; The fruit's tail and calyx, which expands as it grows and envelops it to about two inches, are bristling with prickly red spines; the seed is small, round and flat, shaped like a small kidney, and whitish or russet in color. The second species is similar in all respects to the first, except for the shape of the fruit, which is round and slightly flattened, and the size of the finger. The third species differs in its fruit, which is round, a little egg-shaped and yellow in color, and in its leaf, which is much more indented; its stem is also less elevated and less dense; in all other respects, it is the same. The fourth species differs greatly from L 3 plus; its stem is very low, though roughly shaped like the others; its leaf is whiter green; it is also more indented, and its veins are lined with rough, prickly spines, both above and below; its flower is smaller, and its fruit of mediocre size, rather elongated. The fruit is greenish at birth, whitens as it matures and turns yellow as it ripens. The taste is more or less the same in all four species, although the yellow ones are more highly esteemed; they are widely consumed in southern countries: this does not, however, determine the excellence of this fruit; each nation has its own tastes, which often do not cross the border. This fruit is of a nature that should be neither overly praised nor overly despised; it is delicate, but tastes a little wild and bland at the same time. The best way to eat it in its natural state is to cut it in half lengthwise, remove the spongy substance where the seed is attached, when it is of a certain strength, and cook it on the grill over a low heat, gradually soaking it in oil or fresh butter, with a little pepper and salt, to which fine herbs are sometimes added: some use an anchovy that melts with the oil. This accompaniment goes a long way to correcting the blandness of the fruit, to which habit completes the taste. Some others cook it in the oven between two dishes, or in a tourtière, prepared in the same way as above; this preparation makes it less likely to smell of smoke. Here, it is more commonly eaten fried in a paste like artichokes, and in my case, it seems much better; but there is one preparation you need to know: as much as possible, the fruit should be chosen a little young; it should be cut lengthwise into thin slices, without removing anything; it should then be placed on a dish proportionate to the quantity, and sprinkled with coarse salt; it should be left in this state for five to six hours; The salt melts, and at the same time carries away the vicious juice of the fruit, from which a black liquor flows; we drain them, and squeeze them again in the hand, to remove the rest of the watery liquor from the pulp; after which we throw them into the batter, and from there into the frying pan. They are still very good and very delicate when cut into pieces, and mixed with meats in stews, and after having soaked for two or three hours in fresh water, and having been peeled beforehand; but they should only be thrown into the stew half an hour before removing it; if they remain there any longer, they will turn to mush. They can also be preserved for winter by drying them, and here's how. You cut them into slices, the thickness L4 of a finger, after removing the skin: you strip them well of their seeds, and throw them for a moment in boiling water; you take them out, and lay them in the sun on racks; after which you put them in a lukewarm oven. They are then placed in a lukewarm oven, where they are repeatedly baked until they are completely dry: they are then dried and, when you want to use them, they are cooked in lukewarm water. The plant and fruit, applied externally, are often used medicinally for inflammations, cancers, burns, hemorrhoids and to soothe pain. Cultivation of this plant is very simple in hot climates; the seed is sown in the open ground in good exposure, and the plant is then transplanted into well-prepared soil, with no care other than frequent watering: but in our climate, it should be sown early on a bed, and then replanted in a checkerboard pattern, eighteen inches apart on a soft bed, or at least in well-smoked and well-exposed soil, with care taken to wet it often in dry spells: moreover, it is not very delicate to raise; but at the first frosts in autumn, it perishes; that's why you need to bring it forward if you want to enjoy it safely. When summers are a little warm, it produces as much here as in southern countries, and the seed itself ripens quite well; but in tender years, neither the fruit nor the seed acquires its perfection, and it is always safer to take the seed from Provence or Languedoc. It should be noted that this fruit is only good when freshly picked; I have sometimes tried to keep it for several days, and I have found that it loses a lot of flavor: I even once brought some from Marseille to Lyon; it no longer had any flavor. CHAPTER LIII. Description of MUSTARD; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. MUSTARD, otherwise known as Senevé, is an annual plant. There are five main species: garden mustard, rabe mustard, arugula mustard, Spanish mustard and Siberian mustard. c Root mustard is woody, brittle, white and full of fibers; its leaves are similar to those of the L5 rabe, but smaller and rougher; its stem grows to a height of four to five feet, round, hairy, divided into several branches with small, yellow, 4-petaled flowers arranged crosswise; When these flowers have fallen, they are followed by rather short, angular and pointed siliques, filled with small, almost round, reddish or blackish seeds, rather like those of turnips, with a pungent, biting taste. Ache mustard has a simple, short, finger-sized, woody, white root, with many very long fibers; its leaves are similar to those of ache, laciniate, especially the lower ones, with rough, pungent hairs; its flowers are similar to those of the preceding species, but attached to longer pedicels, with a pleasant odor; the flowers are followed by hairy, pointed siliques, filled with very pungent, almost round, white seeds. Arugula mustard differs from the two preceding varieties in that the plant is weaker, the leaf cut like that of arugula, and the seed reddish; it is not cultivated in gardens, and grows naturally in stony, damp, maritime places. Spanish mustard is quite similar to the first species, except that its flower is the color of sulfur, and its siliques are smaller. Its seed is relatively so small that its shape is barely distinguishable. In botany, there are three other species of Spanish mustard, which differ in their foliage; but, as they have no interesting qualities, I'll pass over them in silence. Siberian mustard has the advantage over all the others that its leaves, though large and thick, are very good in salads. The first two are used only for the seed, which is also used in food and medicine. When prepared for the first use, this seed awakens the appetite and facilitates digestion: it is used with most meats, fish and vegetables. Pigs in particular require this accompaniment, however they are eaten; black pudding, sausages, andouilles and feet would be unbearable without mustard. It is also eaten with boiled beef; mixed with oil and a few fine herbs, it makes an appetizing seasoning for cold poultry, which we call remoulade: it also pleases in salads with celery. It is also used in salads with celery. L6́ with scorched onion to make a sauce much used under various roasted meats, known as sauce-à-Robert. Finally, although its pungent taste displeases some people, it can be said to please most, and to be useful and almost indispensable, with the health advantage of cooking food and having no harmful qualities. There are several ways of preparing mustard. Some, after crushing the seed, bind it with half-thickened sweet wine, to the required consistency: others dilute it with vinegar, and some add a little flour; it is in this last way that it is most commonly prepared in Paris, and for this reason it is called white mustard. The newer it is made, the better it is: however, it can keep well for quite a long time, if kept in a well-covered vessel. It comes to Paris from various provinces, particularly Dijon and Gien, which are more highly regarded; I don't know if this preference is well-founded. There is another way to prepare it, which extends its life to a year or more: here it is. Take two ounces of powdered mustard, and half an ounce of powdered common cinnamon; make a mass with flour, and a sufficient quantity of vinegar and honey, of which you will make small balls which you will leave to dry in the sun, or in an oven when the bread has been removed; and when you want to use it, you will soak one or more of these small balls with white wine and vinegar : you'll always have a mustard that's pleasant to the taste, good for the stomach, easy to transport, and particularly convenient for people who travel, either by land or sea. This seed is no less useful in medicine: it is a powerful sternutatory and a most effective machicatory: a dragmeg of this seed is enclosed in a cloth, after having been slightly crushed, and is chewed by patients threatened with apoplexy or paralysis; this remedy makes them spit abundantly; it also relieves those whose head is heavy and laden with pituitary. This seed is useful in soporific and lethargic affections; it is also good for people prone to hysterical and hypochondriacal vapors; it is used successfully in pale-colors, scurvy and indigestion; this plant is aperitive, stomachic, antiscorbutic and hysterical. Mustard, as prepared to enhance the taste of meats, is applied to the noses of people of both sexes prone to vapors, relieving them in their attacks; it also awakens the lethargic. The following poultice is a good resolver for sciatic gout, rheumatism and squirrelly tumors. Fry leeks with strong vinegar, after chopping them finely; and when they are cooked, sprinkle them with crushed mustard seed, and apply them to the ailment. Some people make a poultice from pigeon droppings, mustard and turpentine, and apply it to the areas where gout is felt; but wait until the inflammation has subsided. Such a poultice would be very capable of bringing back scabs, the suppuration of which, once removed, would have given rise to a deposit on the chest or some other part. The oil extracted by expression from mustard seed is effective against paralysis, and for resolving cold humors. There's nothing unusual about growing this plant: the seed is sown in March; and, as it's very fine, it must be sown very lightly: if you have beds, it rises earlier and more reliably; if you don't, it's sown at the foot of a well-exposed wall, in loose soil, or in a tub filled with compost: When it is strong enough to be planted, it is transplanted and cared for as usual. The seed is harvested at the end of August or in September, and left to dry out before being stored: it keeps well for sowing for two years. CHAPTER LIV. Description of the turnip; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. The turnip is the root of an annual plant of the same name. This root is of different shape, size and color, depending on the species; it is fleshy and soft, exhaling a pleasant odor; its leaf is a little elongated, deeply cut, rough and hairy, of a coarse green; it lies on the ground: its stem, which rises to two or three feet, is branchy and smooth, more or less large, depending on the species; flowers are born in abundance at the ends of its branches. This flower is yellow, sometimes white, with four leaves arranged crosswise; the calyx grows a pistil which becomes a silique when the flower has passed; this silique is composed of two panels resting on the edges of a partition, which divides this fruit into two chambers, filled with a few round, brown seeds. This fruit is very useful at the table; it is eaten fatty and lean, in many different ways: it is used in soups; it is used with meats of all kinds, but particularly with mutton and duck: it is prepared with white sauce and mustard; it is fried into a paste in certain countries: it is susceptible to all sorts of accommodations; and it is a healthy food, although it is accused of being a little windy. The turnip also has great medicinal properties; its decoction is very useful in broths for the chest: mixed with sugar, it forms a highly-prized syrup for soothing inveterate coughs and asthma. The way to make this syrup is to cut the turnips into wheels, rake them, fill an earthenware pot with them, cover it and seal it with paste: then put it in the oven, after removing the bread; leave it there for twelve or fifteen hours, and separate the juice at the bottom of the pot; on four ounces of this juice, throw an ounce of candy sugar which is left to melt, and take a spoonful on its own, or mixed with a glass of herbal tea: this syrup is sovereign for colds, as well as for softening the acridity of the chest. The seed of this plant is an aperitif: two large pieces are crushed and infused in a glass of white wine. The decoction of turnip also has the virtue of curing chilblains, when the feet or hands are washed often and warmly; others apply the cooked fruit as a poultice to the ailment. There are many species of turnip, of which I will reduce six, which are the best for our climate; I say for our climate, because there are some that are far superior, but which are only suitable for the vein of earth that produces them, such as the turnips of Ferneuse, Saulieu in Burgundy, Saint- Jôme, Gatinois, etc. We bring them in every year from France, France and the United States. Every year, turnips are brought to Paris from all these places; but they cannot be bred there, I mean to have them as good: the species degenerates, and all art cannot prevent it. Of all the plants, it is the one that is least accustomed to changes in terrain, and which grows best against all reason in places where the others only languish. The six species I have chosen are the small Berlin turnip, the Vaugirard turnip, the long white common turnip, the round turnip, the gray turnip, and the Meaux turnip. The Berlin turnip is very small, longer than round, and white; it is the earliest and best; it is not widely known; but those who have tried it prefer it to the others with justice: its taste is very spicy, and it is perfectly tender. The Vaugirard turnip is of mediocre size, a little elongated, dirty white, turning gray at the top, of good taste, and tender: it is very common in Paris, and highly esteemed. - 1. Common turnips, both long and round, are the most commonly grown in Aubervilliers and other neighboring towns, which supply Paris with them: there is little difference in quality between them, but the round variety is larger; the skin is very white, the flesh is soft and tender, and the taste is quite good. The gray turnip has a gray skin, as its name suggests, and a fairly elongated shape: it has its supporters who prefer it to the white variety, because of its slightly spicy taste; but it is not usually so tender, and is more prone to worminess. The Meaux turnip is the most profitable because of its size and length, which is commonly eight to ten inches; its exterior color is yellowish-white, its flesh very white; it is tender and has a very pleasant flavor: it is highly prized, but it has been noted that the one brought from Meaux is better than the one grown near Paris. These six species are cultivated in the same way: they are sown in two stages, in March and August; but in many soils, they do not succeed in spring. The lightest soil is the best for them: in strong, damp soils, this vegetable is almost always worm-eaten and tasteless; it is also important that the soil has been well tilled, and is healthy when sown: too dry or too soaked, the seed does not distribute itself evenly, and does not rise so well; and as this seed is very small, care must be taken not to spread more than is necessary; the best way is to mix it with three times as much ash or sawdust, and to spread it as evenly as possible; It should not be sown too lightly; moreover, when it has emerged and reached a certain point of strength, the plant should be thinned out so that there is a distance of about six inches from one foot to the other; at the same time as this operation is carried out, weeds are weeded out, and this double method is very important: I know that many people dispense with it, especially in the countryside, where whole fields are sown with it; but I also know that it's no better, and our market gardeners around Paris, who know how useful it is, are very exact about it: there's no other precaution to take. This plant is more usually sown on land that has yielded wheat, than in gardens; however, when you have a garden of a certain size, it is pleasant to have it on hand. It has a cruel enemy in the form of the lily; this insect devours both its ears as soon as it is born, and there is no longer any resource: to ward it off, it is suggested that ash be sprinkled on it, or chimney soot in the morning dew; a vain expedient, which I tried out a long time ago, without any success. The shortest way, when the damage has reached a certain point, is to give the soil a new look, to sow another seed which often has the same fate as the first, in which case you have to give up. This inconvenience is common in many soils, especially in dry years, and those who are aware of it must be careful not to waste time and seed. I have observed, however, that by sowing it late, i.e. after mid-August, this insect, which is beginning to retreat, no longer tires it so much. When it succeeds, the turnips are usually good two months later, and should not be left in the ground any longer, as they become ropey, or the worms get into them, or the field mice eat them: they are pulled out by hand, or with a flail if they are too big, and are closed in the greenhouse until needed, after having twisted their tops: those from spring are kept for the summer, and those from August spend the whole winter, being put in the sand. In Aubervilliers, market gardeners sow them in their enclosures, which they leave in the ground all winter, and they don't spoil as they do in many other areas. In countries where they are planted in large quantities, a hole is made in the middle of the room, proportionate to the quantity, and they are placed in it; they are then covered with thatch, and they keep perfectly well, provided that the rainwater has some drainage, and that the weeping of the soil does not flood them. Lovers of this vegetable sow them in beds as early as February, which they enjoy at the beginning of May: in this case, the bed must be filled with eight to nine inches of compost, and its heat must be considerably dampened, because if it is too hot, the turnips fork and become covered with small roots, which is a major defect. In Paris, we don't know another species of turnip, which is very common, and NAVET. Its color is white, both inside and out; its shape is flat, and its circumference is sometimes as large as that of a hat; it has a sweet and pleasant flavor, which outweighs that of all other turnips; but it is perfectly good only in soup; in any other sauce, it is not worth the turnip; however, country people, who are not very delicate, use it in every way. I don't know why it has never found favor in this climate, where it would be perfectly successful, having seen it tested in my own home and in the homes of others. I've heard a lot of praise for another species of turnip found in Germany, whose flesh is yellow like a carrot, and very tender; and I've been told that it's never worm-eaten, because it's attached to the earth only by the tip of its root, and the rest is protruding: those who are curious about it can find out more about it in the vicinity of Darmstad, where I've been told I've seen it. To collect the seed of all turnip species, choose the quantity of the most beautiful fruits you consider appropriate, and put them in the ground in March, a foot apart: they soon sprout their stalk, and the seed is good in August: you pull out the stalks, or cut them in the morning with the dew so that they don't fall off; you leave them to dry for a few more days, after which you beat them and lock them up: they only keep well for two years. CHAPTER LV. Description of the ONION; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Its root, which is the fruit itself, is bulbous, composed of several tunics, fleshy inside and membranous outside, of different colors and shapes, depending on the species, lined at the bottom with white fibers, filled with a subtle and very harsh juice, which grips the eyes and makes them cry; Its leaves are a foot or so long, fistulous, cylindrical and pointed, with a pungent taste like the root. When it goes to seed in its second year, it sprouts a bare, straight stem, three to four feet high, swollen towards the middle, bearing a fist-sized head at the top, composed of lily-like flowers, each with six petals, six stamens, and a pistil which then changes into a rounded fruit, divided into three chambers, filled with rounded, angular seeds, black on the outside and white on the inside. Everyone knows its uses for life; and its properties are such that there is almost no dish where it does not enter at least the juice; and, although there are people who fear it, its taste being softened with meats or vegetables, is bearable to its greatest enemies; and constantly there is little good sauce without the mixture of the onion. It can be used in all meat juices, in soups, to flavour broths, in green salads, and in salads cooked over charcoal, alone or with beet, capers and gherkins. In many countries, it's so popular that it's eaten raw like an apple: there's no other vegetable so widely consumed. Its virtues for health are no less remarkable: it is, by nature, a pectoral and aperitif, and sovereign in many illnesses. During the last plague in Marseille, it cured plague victims. The way to use it is to give the patient the expressed juice of an onion from which the heart has been removed, for which a little theriac has been substituted, and which has then been baked in an oven or under a tureen; as soon as it has been taken, the patient is well covered, and if he is happy enough to sweat, he is surely cured: for double safety, a similar onion that has not been expressed is applied to the bubo. Crushed with honey and salt, it's still a sovereign remedy for rabid dog bites. A famous contemporary physician also asserts that an onion cut into rouelles and infused in half a pint of white wine, taken on the last three days of the moon, is a proven remedy for nephritis. Cooked under embers and eaten with oil and sugar, it also soothes coughs and relieves asthma. Crushed with a little salt and applied to a recent burn, it stops the pain and prevents the formation of bells: the first can be followed by a second, cooked under ashes and kneaded into an ointment; the burned area is then wrapped with a cloth. The heart of a small white onion, cooked under ashes and applied hot to a damaged tooth, often alleviates the pain. For migraines, two onions chopped Tome II. M and soaked in wine spirit, applied to the head, dissipate the pain. Crushed and mixed with fresh butter, it also soothes the pain of hemorrhoids. Its expressed juice, soaked in absorbent cotton and placed in the ear, stops jamming. It also removes stains from the face and, when mixed with chicken fat, dries out the heels of mules. Nephritic colic is surely cured by having the patient take half a pint of white wine, in which an onion cut into pieces has been infused for two hours, and you're lucky when the ailment can give this infusion time. Eaten raw or cooked, it is very good against rheumatic pains in the kidneys. "These are its main virtues, which have often been tried and tested; there are still others that I'm not mentioning, but that's enough to show the merit of this plant: However, according to some doctors, its excessive use in food is harmful, in that it provokes wind and headaches through the fumes it carries, and causes restlessness during sleep: they consider it particularly contrary to bilious temperaments; everyone should be aware of the effect it has on them, and use it accordingly. There are nine very distinct species, and I could count more if I were not convinced that those I have left out are degenerated from the others, or that the difference between them is due to the climate or the quality of the soil. These nine species are the round Red Onion, the Pale; the round White, of which there are two species, the Early and the Late; the Long, which is of two colors, red and white; the Spanish Onion in the same way, and the small one from Florence. The red onion is the most widely grown in Europe, because it is the largest and keeps the longest: Its shape is round, a little flattened; its flesh white, veined with red, and its outer color reddish-purple; it is also the strongest, another reason why its lovers prefer it to the next one; but it does not have the same credit in Paris, where nothing in the foodstuffs is so dominant; so it is used very little: besides its color, which turns purple when it is cooked, displeases the eyes; however it is preferred for the juice. Carpenters prefer to use it to prepare their wares. The pale variety is shaped in the same way, but more flattened: its exterior color varies; some are straw-colored, with a hint of M 2 lemon, while others are a pale red: the first is the most esteemed by those who know it, because it is sweeter; but the other has the advantage of keeping longer: each therefore has its merit and its supporters, and it is the species that is most consumed during the winter. The cultivation of these two species is the same, and they are both sown at the same time; commonly it is only at the end of February, in light soils, and at the end of March, in heavy soils: they can also be sown in August, and transplanted in October; they are more likely to come this way, but they also don't keep that long. The soil must be well amended, and the fatter the soil, the more successful this vegetable will be; in sandy soils, it will not grow: however, care must be taken not to fertilize the soil in the same year as sowing, as this would scald the plant; soils that have been used to grow cabbage the previous year are very suitable for it. The land must be ploughed well on All Saints' Day, and a second ploughing a month before sowing, as the seed does not require such freshly tilled soil. We broadcast it on a fine day, when the soil is healthy, and we spread more or less of it, because a good part of it often perishes in the ground: the ordinary rule is to put two ounces on each plank fifteen toises long by six wide, on which we can settle. We must try to sow it evenly, and in calm weather; the way we bury it must be regulated according to the soil, and according to what we have or don't have to cover it: in soft soil, when the boards are upright, and you have nothing to put on top of the seed, you must first walk on them with your feet together, then spread the seed, and lightly harrow afterwards with the fork, without any other way; but if you have potting soil, you pass the rake after the fork, taking care to pass it very lightly so as not to move the seed, and you spread the potting soil on top as evenly as you can; a finger's breadth is enough. In heavy soils, it's best to sow the seed first on the rough ploughing, as it is: you then walk on it, dragging your feet a little, and harrow afterwards; and, whether or not you're terracing, you mustn't pass the rake over it, as rain and watering beat the soil too much when it's even, and cause it to split. It's a good idea to use potting soil or small amounts of manure in this kind of soil, especially when it's greasy and clayey, as it sometimes screeches and hardens to the point where the onion can't expand and remains almost like a ciboule. Potting soil also has the advantage of keeping the soil fresh, so that one watering has more effect than two when there's nothing on it. Three weeks after sowing, it starts to emerge, and some time later it needs to be weeded: it's a good idea to wet it afterwards, as water reassures the soil; even before weeding, if the soil is a little dry, it needs to be wetted, so that weeds can be pulled out more easily: When it's a little strong, we thin it out so that there are three inches between one and the other; this is what makes it big and well-rounded. When it finally begins to turn, i.e. to round out, you should stop watering it, unless there is an extreme drought, because too much water makes it tender and prevents it from keeping: in some countries, you don't even need to water it at all, but you should consult your own land. When the fruit is fully turned, and about the right size, you have to pull down and twist the stalk with your hands, over the fruit, or press your foot on it: others roll a barrel over the whole board; all this is pretty much equal, provided that the sap is interrupted, and remains in the root, which is more profitable. The people of Aubervilliers don't take this approach, and their onions are no less beautiful for it; but their terrain gives them privileges, as I've said on other occasions. When at last the leaf begins to fall to the side in case it has not been pulled, or begins to yellow, supposing it has been; without waiting, for it preserves better to be pulled a little green, especially the white; and, as it is pulled, the leaf should be cut a good two inches above the fruit, rather more than less : when it is cut closer, the heart grows; and, as it doesn't come to maturity all at once, it must be pulled in two stages, so that it is all set at the point it should be, and left on the ground lying clear for eight to ten days, to finish ripening; But if you fear that it will be stolen during the night, bring it close to the house and lay it out in a courtyard or under a shed, so that it can breathe and dry well. Those who have this convenience of being able to put it under cover, do even better to put it there right away, than to leave it in the open air; because, when the season is rainy, M 4 the humidity does it great harm, and it doesn't keep; this is what I've experienced more than once. Fifteen days later, remove it from there, and take it to the attic, or other place where it is to be kept; and another fifteen days after it is locked up, peel it, i.e., remove any earth that may be on it, and any loose skins, as well as the roots; because this sort of useless garbage sometimes heats it up and spoils it; cleanliness also requires it: It must also be stirred every month, and those that are beginning to sprout or rot removed; this little way, which gives it air, keeps it dry. If you have neglected this precaution, and have been surprised by the frost, you should not think that it has been lost, for it will return to its original state, provided you do not touch it until it has thawed out. There's another way to grow red onions that may seem surprising, but it's no less safe, because I've tried it. In June, when you thin out the planting beds sown in March, you pick up the onion you've pulled up, which most often gets lost; you lay it out very lightly in a well-ventilated place, and forget about it; you can even leave it out in the open in the garden, in some flowerbed, until autumn, when you cover it; The foliage dries out, but the stalk is preserved, and the onion grows to the size of a filbert, even though it receives no nourishment from the earth and is exposed to the sun and the air all summer long. It can be used throughout the summer, but would not be good for winter. To get the same onion in May, there's a second way, which I've also used several times, and which is just as successful; it's to sow a more or less large bed in the usual season, and to sow it so thickly that it touches each other: you let it come up without thinning it or wetting it, however much it seems to need it; you just have to weed it: This onion, which is pressed, remains small to the size of a hazelnut; we pull it out when it is at its peak, and treat it as I explained above; we then replant it in February, and it is good in May; but we must be careful, as it grows its upright, I mean the M 5 pipe that carries the seed, to cut it off at the level of the last leaves. Onions are of such a delicate nature, that in some areas, without taking any of the precautions I've just mentioned, they grow perfectly: our market gardeners in S. Our market gardeners in S. Denis and Aubervilliers, who have perfect soil for vegetables, do no more than plow it and then sow it: their method is to throw into each acre a pound of red onion, two pounds of pale, one pound of white and one pound of leek, all mixed together. They pull out the white onion first, which is the first to ripen, then the red, then the pale: the leek remains until Saint Martin's Day, when they dig small trenches, where they are kept all winter. The fertility of their soil is to be commended; but as there are few like them, we must not model ourselves on them; each must follow what experience has determined to be good in the terrain where he finds himself. There are years when most of the onion seed perishes, and when this happens you have to turn to your neighbors to make sure you're not left out in the cold: so you take what you can pick up from them when they thin out their beds, in May or June, and replant it; but you have to be careful in this respect: quite often this replanted onion succeeds well, and quite often it remains as a spring onion: everyone must know his own terrain; and those whose land, like mine, does not suffer from replanted onions, must not waste costs. There is a kind of capriciousness in soils that would be very difficult to explain; I know of some where this vegetable only does well when replanted, and many others where it can only succeed from seed; we must follow nature's indications, without always wanting to ask her for the reason for her operations. I've said all I can about red and pale onions; now I'll move on to white. There are two types, one of which is earlier than the other; they are distinguished by the leaf, the late variety having a much larger leaf than the other; otherwise, they are perfectly alike. These two species commonly come a little smaller than the red; both are cultivated in the same way, but are not sown at the same time. The early species is sown in July and August, up to mid-September, on light soil like our marshes, and replanted in October, three inches apart. It survives the winter very well, especially if covered with a little bedding or dry leaves during severe frosts and snowy weather, and starts to grow as soon as the fine weather returns: it is replanted in March, if it has lost some during the winter, and is good again in May. If necessary, weed it, and give it plenty of water; as it is not intended to be kept, we should only try to bring it forward and make it grow: this species supplies all summer, but when winter approaches, it is very prone to sprouting or rotting. So as not to lose anything, all those that start to grow should be planted on the coast in November and December: they stand up well to bad weather, and give their seed rather than the one that is replanted after winter; they supply themselves better, i.e., they grow more mounts. The late species can be sown in February and March, and the fruit can be stored over winter; for the rest, it must be cultivated and harvested with the same precautions as the red. These two species are the most prized here, especially as the fruit is sweeter; it is also the only one used from May to autumn, and is still eaten in winter. It is particularly appreciated as a large filbert, for garnishing soups and various kinds of stews: it is easy to obtain by sowing it very thickly; and, although it does not produce so much per bushel, it is not of lesser value, because it always sells for double or triple the price. If you sow it in July or August, make sure you don't water it again as soon as it's emerged; too much moisture causes the worm to grow and die. It should also be noted that the first crop sown in July never turns out as well as the one sown the following month; the only advantage is that, although it is less well formed, it is in a better condition to be used than the other. In addition, depending on the soil, you need to decide whether to sow it earlier or later; in light soils, you need to be in less of a hurry than in heavy soils. I said that the tai dive species would keep better over winter than the hâtive; but I must explain that it is as much as the latter was sown before winter; because, sown in March, it goes almost as far as the tardive. One, for example, is a fortnight or three weeks ahead of the other: this is a species originally grown in Grand Caire; another is harder, and more resistant to winter humidity, snow and frost. Another has the particular merit, when replanted for seed, of yielding extraordinarily well, so that one onion grows up to ten or twelve mounds, forming as many heads, while others grow only one or two. Another has the defect of coming double or twin, which makes it a poor seller. It is only in the long run, I confess, and after a particular study, that one can know these different qualities; each one, according to the idea which I give, and relatively to his views, will try to get the species which will be appropriate to him, by addressing directly the maraïchers, who make a particular traffic of this vegetable, and who are informed by their experiment, of all these differences. The long onion is not well known in the Paris area, but it is well known in Provence; it is almost wrist-sized and up to eight inches long, equal in size at both ends and in the middle. There are red and white varieties, the latter being the mildest and most esteemed; both are essentially good only in salads, or eaten with salt, according to Provençal taste. They are sown in spring, and cultivated like the others; but there are few soils suitable for them: they are kept all winter. The Catalan onion is good only raw, being very sweet: it is extraordinarily large, and spiky, both at the root and at the heart: there are white and red; it does not keep long; it is also cultivated like the others. The Florence onion is a small white onion about the size of a hazelnut, extremely soft and tender, which is eaten green throughout the summer in salads with lettuce: it is split in two with part of its leaf. It is the most weepy of all, and has the advantage of leaving almost no taste in the mouth. It is sown at different times to ensure a constant supply, and is sown very thickly; it requires nothing in particular for cultivation, other than frequent wetting. Onions of all kinds have one major enemy, which is the nightingale worm, and another small white worm common in light soils and dry years. These two insects suck and gnaw at the base of the plant, and sometimes kill entire planks; I know of no remedy. The mole also wreaks havoc in the early stages of the season, and must be kept on sentry duty to destroy it. It is also prone to clouding, an ailment that can neither be preserved nor cured. You must always sow more than less, and in different places; this is the only precaution you can take to avoid running out. Many gardeners are in the bad habit of mixing a little lettuce, turnip or carrot seed into their onion seed; it's easy to see that this does harm to the onion, because these overabundant plants consume the salts in the soil, and by their spread suffocate the plant in its youth; it's therefore a practice that needs to be reformed. Whether or not an onion comes into its own depends to a large extent on the quality of the seeds, which are often poorly ripened and not full, or too old, which is indistinguishable; and this is what you need to be very careful about: the safest way is to collect the seeds yourself. It is collected in August and September, from onions planted before or after winter, as they can be planted in both seasons, as I said above. The best place to plant them is on the south or east coast, six inches apart and about two inches deep in the ground. The custom of many gardeners is to place them flush with the ground; but, either because their method is worthless in itself, or because the difference in situations or soils contributes to it, I have tested both ways in the same row: the one that was flush with the ground was bare, and the other is perfectly fine; I therefore stick to my experience, and I advise everyone to do the same, to know more surely what to stick to. However, it is important to distinguish the season in which it is planted; onions planted before winter need to be buried less than those planted in spring, due to the humidity that causes them to rot when they are too far underground; I would also add, in this respect, that it is very dangerous to plant them before winter in damp soils; it is better to wait until the end of February. The onion planted in this way begins to grow its stem in May! By the end of June, when it is almost at its full height, and its head has formed, it must be supported, either by stilts to which several heads are tied together, or by running battens; for without this support, the hollow, weak stem is easily blown over by the winds: those who cannot find any wood of their own should at least tie five or six heads together with straw or rushes. Care must be taken not to bind them at the top until they have reached their full height, because if this is done earlier, the stem, which is stopped and cannot rise, will burst in the middle and perish. They should be weeded and watered occasionally in very hot weather, especially when planted along a wall: there is no other precaution to take until the seed has reached maturity, which is announced by showing the middle of the head; then it should be cut off, leaving a foot of stem to bind them together in bundles, and hang them on the floor or against a wall, head up, so that the seed does not fall off as it dries. But first, leave them to dry in the sun for a few days, spread out on a sheet; the seed that comes off naturally is the best, and it's a good idea to set it aside: as for the rest, if you're not in a hurry, leave it as it is until you need it; because the seed keeps for up to four years, thus remaining in its stuffing; and winnowed in the field, it hardly makes it through the second year. It's a good idea to always have a year's supply in advance, as it often fails due to the effect of the clouds that attach themselves to the stem, causing it to perish. It's better to sow in the second year than the first; it lifts more easily, and the fruit turns out better: when it's so new, there's a lot left over as chives. Description of the sorrel; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. The sorrel, known in some provinces as Vinette or Surelle, is one of the best-known and most useful vegetable garden plants. Four different species are grown: the large, the long, the round and the perennial yellow. The first, called the grande espèce or virgin sorrel, has an extraordinarily large leaf, up to eighteen inches long and five or six wide. Its color is meadow green, and its root yellow: it is little used in cooking, as it is hard and has little juice, making it more curious than useful; it is, however, agreed that it is sweeter than the others. This species bears no seeds, although it does grow a few mounds: it multiplies from old plants, which are divided into several. Long sorrel, which is the most widely cultivated, comes in two varieties, one with a much larger, blonder leaf than the other, known as Belleville sorrel; otherwise, they are alike in shape, with a long, elongated leaf, preceded by a long, slender, pointed, notched tail, with ears at the base, of meadow green, edged with red when it begins to grow in spring: its root is fibrous, long, yellowish and bitter. When it goes to seed in the second and subsequent years, it sprouts a three-foot-long, fluted, branching stem: it bears a number of petalless flowers, composed of several stamens topped with yellowish peaks, rising from a calyx composed of six leaves; the pistil that emerges from the middle then changes into a triangular, blackish, shiny seed, enclosed in a reddish, leafy, three-sided capsule. There is a third species, similar in shape and size to Belleville, but much blonder, and beginning to spread widely. The round sorrel is shaped quite differently from the preceding ones; its root is small, and runs between two lands; its leaf varies, sometimes being almost round, sometimes pointed and eared, sometimes earless; its color is sea-green, with a sour taste; its stem is low and creeping; but as far as the flower and seed are concerned, it resembles the long sorrel. The yellow perennial has a fairly large leaf, more round than long, and very blond. There is also a wild species that grows in meadows, which could be used in place of the others, although it is drier, harder and more sour. I know of another which is found in the gardens of the curious, and which grows as a shrub; its leaf is quite similar to that of the poplar, smooth, glossy, and plain on the edges, of a light green, which has more or less the taste of the other sorrels; but it is drier, and its most real merit consists in its rarity. The four main species I have described have more or less the same virtues and qualities: however, only the two long sorrels and the perennial yellow one are commonly used for living. They are used in soups, mixed with pear and other herbs: they make a stuffing that can be eaten under œuss, fricandeaux, and various fish: they are also used to color purées, and for many other purposes. Its sour taste awakens the appetite and is generally appreciated, especially as it has no unhealthy qualities. On the contrary, Elie is aperitive and refreshing, and its use is sovereign in bilious temperaments: it quenches thirst and stimulates the appetite: its leaf moderates blood fermentation, and relieves scorbutic patients, mixed in their broths with watercress and spoon grass or cochlearia; this remedy has often cured them radically, and the peoples of the North, who are very prone to scurvy, use it with great success. Stuffed with eggs, it is equally beneficial. Applied as a poultice with sourdough, after cooking under hot ashes in a cabbage leaf, it advances the suppuration of tumors, and suppurates eye humors. Soaked in vinegar and eaten in the morning on an empty stomach, it is a preservative against all kinds of contagious diseases: it also cures fickle fire by applying it to the diseased part after having thoroughly bathed it. Its decoction is excellent against the bite of rabid dogs; it must be drunk several times a day, and the wound wrapped in the leaf washed until healed: the same decoction is effective against jaundice, at a dose of one pint a day. Its root gives the water in which it has been infused a red color, which serves to deceive sick people who want to drink wine: it is also used in most apozemas and refreshing herbal teas: it helps blood circulation when it is thickened or slowed down. The pulverized seed, drunk with water and wine, stops dysentery: it even enters into the composition of many other remedies: and, in all respects, it is a most estimable plant, and one of which a vegetable garden should never be lacking. This leaf also has a number of special virtues: it removes ink stains from linen; it removes rust from copper and iron, and polishes them: used with sand, it perfectly cleans glass, and colors new parquet floors. When your teeth are irritated, chew a few leaves and the irritation passes. There's nothing unusual about growing this plant; it comes in all kinds of soil, and can be sown on the ground from March to August: however, it is very prone to perish from spring frosts, or to be eaten by loaches, when sown too early, especially in heavy soils; the safest thing is to wait until the beginning of May. It can also be sown in beds or in borders around quarries; but it lasts longer in borders, being more at ease and more aerated; it is even better to transplant it eight or ten inches apart than to sow it: it comes out more beautiful. Wherever it is planted, the soil must be well-prepared, loose and healthy; for its seed is so fine that, if there are any clods or stones, it will only rise in places. In the border as well as in the bed, we make small rays, slightly dug, and we spread the seed on them as evenly as we can, and very clear, which we cover with half an inch of earth at the most; we then put back on top a little compost, if we have some, or well broken dung : If the weather is dry, it must be wetted every day until it is well established. Some time later, we thin it out, if we judge it appropriate, and it becomes more beautiful. It is good to cut six weeks after sowing, and the more often it is cut, the more tender the leaf: but care must be taken to cut it close to the ground; it is better to pull it up when you have the time. Finally, it produces without interruption until the frosts: at that time, i.e. in December, it should be cut flush with the ground, and the beds should be completely covered with compost or henhouse dung; it comes out much more beautiful the following spring: for this reason, it is a good idea to have it in beds as well as in borders. When it starts to grow in February, it's a good idea to cover it with burnt grass; and if it is prone to being eaten by partridges, as it is in the capitaineries around Paris, where the game cannot be touched, it is necessary to spread a quantity of vine shoots over it, or to stretch a net, which can be made as long and wide as you like, and which rests on hoops pricked into the ground at both ends, from height to height, and tied together in the middle by a running batten: This is the expedient I resorted to, finding myself so overwhelmed by this game that it was impossible for me to see any sorrel or spinach leaves at home until April. The leaf is finally ready to be picked in February, a little earlier or later, depending on the year, so it must be plucked with its tail, not cut off; it provides until May, when its stem begins to rise; and if you don't care to collect the seed, you cut it off as many times as the plant throws out: it sprouts new leaves, which you use as the first ones: but as it has much more strength in this season than in the first, you need a much smaller quantity for the uses to which it is put. N much smaller quantity for the uses to which it is put. This plant can be kept for ten to twelve years, but care must be taken to cut off its head when it begins to age; it sprouts new suckers which rejuvenate it: care must also be taken to destroy the weeds that intertwine in its roots, particularly couch grass and tern. The seed of this species is harvested in July: it is cut when the calyx has turned from green to reddish-brown, and laid out on a sheet in the sun for a few days, to improve: others pull it by hand all around the stem without cutting it, and in this way it takes longer to collect; but it dries more easily, and takes up less space. It keeps well for two years if winnowed immediately, and for four years if left in its wadding. Birds are very fond of it when it's standing, so you have to defend it as best you can. When you buy this seed, you are often deceived, because it has been picked up in meadows, and this type of sorrel degenerates, for the most part, into patience. There is no mark to distinguish it, so you have to be on your guard. It remains for me to talk about the other two species. The yellow perennial, which is not subject to climbing like the previous one, is not subject to any constraint, and provides a useful supply in this vein of time when the old seedling is climbing, and the new one is not yet in cut; it is moreover less acidic and less green, and therefore pleases many people more; this is why it is advantageous to always have some beds of it. It multiplies by small shoots which are detached from the old plants, and planted a foot apart; the clump grows from year to year, and can be kept for ten years. Our market gardeners don't like it, because it takes longer to regrow than the other variety, once it has been cut; but when you have a certain quantity, you don't notice this defect, which is nothing for people who are not obliged to live as they do on the multiplied produce of their land. Rondo sorrel, which is where I end, can multiply from seed like long sorrel, but it is usually from its offshoots that old plants are detached: it is planted and cultivated in the same way; it also lasts up to ten or twelve years. Some people esteem it more highly than other varieties, but the fact that so little is eaten of it seems to rule it out: I attribute this to the fact that it has little juice, although it is good, N 2 as it is known to provide much less than the long variety. When we want to warm this plant, I mean the long one, to enjoy it during the winter, we have to lay out boards only two feet wide, at the sides of which we dig trenches twelve or fifteen inches wide and two feet deep, which we fill with warm manure, and change every two weeks, from mid-November to the end of January. In times of frost and snow, we keep the beds covered with dry manure, which we remove as soon as the weather softens or the sun comes out. It can also be replanted on beds after All Saints' Day, producing even faster and more abundantly. A bed, more or less, is set aside for this purpose, three feet high and filled with eight to ten inches of potting soil, on which parsley and other plants with strong roots can be transplanted at the same time. Some people are content to cover it with straw mats, supported on a trellis which they load with dry litter, in proportion to the severity of the weather; others put it under a bell; the latter is the safest way, both to advance it and to preserve it: in either case, you need to give it air as much as you can, otherwise the leaf grows white and has no taste. Sorrel is preserved for winter, mixed with other herbs, and is very useful in times of snow and frost. All the necessary herbs are picked at the end of August or September: sorrel, which should make up a third or at most half the quantity; pear, lettuce, spinach, purslane, parsley and chervil, in equal quantities, with a little spring onion, if you don't hate the taste. All these herbs are peeled and washed in several waters: they are left to drain and dry for a while, after which they are chopped coarsely: they are cooked without water in a pot which is filled to the brim, pressing them as hard as possible, taking care to make only a very small sill underneath so that they don't burn: from time to time, we stir them; and when they are sufficiently cooked, we put them in pots which we fill to within an inch, and which we immediately transport to the place where they are to remain; and when they are in place, we pour over them a thickness of about a finger of melted butter, or olive oil; we leave them in this state until they are needed; they keep perfectly well throughout the winter. However, it should be noted that, when they are covered with butter, they fan and toast easily as soon as the jar is opened: they should be eaten immediately; and for this reason, oil should be preferred, as it always comes to the surface, and keeps them in the same state for as long as desired. CHAPTER LVII. Description of the parsnip; its various species, properties, cultivation, etc. Parsnip, otherwise known as Pastenade, is a plant whose entire merit lies in its root. There are three species: the Long, the Round and the Siamese parsnip. The long parsnip has a very long root, almost equal in size throughout its length, white inside and out, uneven and rough on the outside, usually topped with a few filaments or small roots, giving off a strong, sweet smell; its leaves are deeply cut, toothed on the edges, and preceded by a very long tail where they hold; round, slightly fluted, light green and glossy, with no down: the parts of which they are composed are placed two by two, ten to twelve in number, opposite each other, and ending in an odd one; its stem is very thick, deeply grooved and branched, reddening a little on one side: At the end of the branches is a very large parasol, made up of small pink flowers with five equal yellow petals, surmounted by a few stamens, whose calyx turns into an oval, flattened cinnamon-colored fruit that lightens at the edges. The second species, called the round parsnip or panais à la royale, is equally shaped in leaves, stems, flowers and fruit, but the root is larger and shorter, resembling a round turnip. The third species, called Siam parsnip or parsnip bastard, differs from the first only in its root, which holds the middle ground between the other two, being neither as long as the first nor as short as the second, but much more swollen on the head side than in the rest of its length: its flesh is also a little more yellowish. Cultivation of this plant is no different from that of the carrot. It is also sown in two seasons: what I have said for the one will serve for the other, and repetition would not be more instructive. All three species are very good; however, the Siam parsnip is more highly esteemed, as its skin is thinner and its flesh more tender and mellow: in addition, the N4 PANAIS. terrain must play a large part in the choice, as I observed for the carrot. It is also used for soups and juices; but it is not usual to eat it fricasseed or stewed with meats; its sweet taste pleases some, but not most. Beware that there is a sort of nerve in the heart of the root, which must be removed by cutting it, as it is unpleasant for those who eat it. It is of little use in medicine; however, its seed, which is carminative and diuretic, is used in the same dose as aniseed, along with all the other minor hot seeds, which are used to dissipate winds and vapors, to soothe colic and to stop the running of the stomach: but, although it is recognized as good, the seed of the wild parsnip is preferred. This root has no fear of frost, so only as much as can be consumed during the rigors of winter should be kept in the greenhouse. In March, however, the quantity needed to produce seed should be removed, and immediately replanted like carrots, a foot or eighteen inches apart. Then, in July, when the stems have reached about their full height, it's a good idea to support them with stilts, otherwise the wind will blow them over and ruin them. The seed ripens at the end of August, and is only good during the first year, that is, for the two seeds of March and September. CHAPTER LVIII. Description of PATIENCE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. There are eight species of Patience, which I will reduce to three that are the only ones cultivated and the most useful: these are the common Patience, otherwise known as Parelle; the red Patience, also known as Sang-dragon; and the garden Patience, known under the two names of Mountain Rapontic or Monk's Rhubarb. All three are perennial. The first species has a straight, long, thick, yellow, bitter-tasting root; its leaf is roughly similar to that of sorrel, from which it derives its original origin; for we still notice every day that it often degenerates into patience in sandy soils: this leaf is nevertheless longer, firmer, narrower N5 and more pointed, with a bitter and very sour taste; its stem is gnarled, and rises to four or five feet; its flowers are placed along the branches and in rings; They are small, petalless, and composed of six short green stamens with straight white tips, which emerge from a seven-leaf calyx, as in sorrel; the pistil then changes into a triangular seed, enveloped in a membranous capsule composed of three large calyx leaves. This plant is cultivated in gardens, to mix with sorrel and other herbs, but few people use it: it is mainly intended for health purposes. Its root is an aperitif and laxative: it is used for dropsy, pallor, jaundice and other diseases caused by obstruction: it is also used externally for scabs and gravel. Red patience is quite similar to the previous one in some respects; but the leaf is shorter, and crossed by a number of red veins, from which, when broken, a blood-red juice emerges, giving it its name. It is used in food, like the previous one, mixed with other herbs, and is very useful when you need to keep your stomach a little loose. It is also sometimes prescribed in emollient and refreshing broths. Its seed strengthens, tightens and soothes pain: a dram or a dram and a half is taken in any suitable liquor, to stop excessive discharge from the womb, and belly flow accompanied by trenches. A learned author claims to have cured a number of people suffering from the latter disease, by macerating half a drag of this seed in hot wine, which is passed over before drinking. Garden patience, or rapontic, has a long, thick, multi-fibered root, brown on the outside and very yellow on the inside; its stem rises to a man's height; it is fluted, reddish, and divided upwards into many branches; Its leaves are a foot to a foot and a half long, broad, pointed, firm and smooth, dark green, sometimes folded over at the edges, but plain and without crenation, borne on long reddish tails; its flowers are petalless, with stamens similar to those of sorrel, placed all around the branches. The flowers are followed by angular seeds enveloped in membranous follicles. This plant has almost the same principles as bastard rhubarb, whose virtues it also shares. It fortifies the stomach and aids digestion; it slightly purges Nó the bile, is highly astringent, and lifts obstructions of the liver, either by dissolving thick humors or by restoring the tone of slackened fibers; it is also sometimes very usefully employed, in powder or decoction, for flux of the stomach and obstruction of the viscera. The dose is half a dram in powder form, or one and a half drams in infusion. This plant grows naturally on mountains, and is also widely cultivated in gardens. Its cultivation, like that of the preceding plants, requires nothing special. All three are sown in March, with the same care as sorrel. The seed is harvested in August, when the stems are dry and the seed begins to detach. It keeps well for two or three years. CHAPTER LIX. Description of the PERCEPIERRE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. PERCEPIERRE is called by various names: Passepierre, Bacille, Criste marine, Fenouil marin, or Herbe de Saint-Pierre. There are two species, both perennial; the large ex the small. The first has a large, long, woody, whitish root, with a few fibers; its stems are from fifteen to eighteen inches long, paddle-shaped, thick, woody, and usually fall to the ground; its leaves are cut, small, narrow, firm, fleshy, subdivided three by three, watery green, with the odor of ache, and a salty taste; its flowers are born in umbels, made up of a large number of leaves.After the flower has passed, the calyx changes into a fruit filled with seeds that are joined two by two, flat, striped on the back, white, fragrant and pungent-tasting. The second species, which is more commonly cultivated than the larger one, grows to no more than a foot, and is much broader; its root is quite similar to the preceding one; and its leaves are likewise narrow, fleshy, subdivided three by three, but a little wider, green-brown in color, with a salty taste; its flowers are arranged like the other, and yellowish in color: it grows, like the previous one, by the sea in rocks that it seems to pierce, from which it gets its name of percepierre; but with care, it also succeeds in gardens. Its life uses are limited to winter salads, where it is mixed with anchovies, beet, capers, gherkins and so on. Pickled in vinegar, it stimulates the appetite and flatters the taste. It is candied in the same way as gherkins, with which it is usually mixed. Its medicinal properties are scarcely more considerable; however, it is one of the aperitive plants, and is used to cure obstructions of the viscera, for gravel, to alleviate kidney and bladder stones, to stimulate urine and women's months, and for jaundice. In the absence of the candied variety, take a decoction of the leaf, root and seed. It is propagated from seed, which is sown on a bed in March, or in pots filled with potting soil, exposed to full sun; when it has reached a certain strength, it is transplanted to the foot of walls facing south or east. It must be raised with care, as it is very delicate in this climate: the open air and cold are harmful to it; it is therefore a good idea to cover it with some foliage during frosts. Its leaves are cut off at the end of summer, when you want to make use of them. There is no garden, however small, where parsley does not have its place, marked by its continual usefulness in a household. There are six types, namely Common, Big Leaf, Big Root, Macedonian, Curly and Mixed parsley. Common parsley has a long, white root, fairly straight, with a few fibers; the leaves rising from its heart are numerous, extremely indented and toothed, and composed of three or four pairs of small thresholds, arranged on a rib ending in an odd number; The rib is small, rounded on one side and fluted on the other; the stem is thick, fluted and branched; it reaches three or four feet high: the tops of all its branches end in a bouquet of umbrella-shaped flowers with five unequal petals, russet in color, borne on a small calyx that changes PERSIL. into a small, round, gray seed with a very strong odor. Parsley with large leaves is similar in all respects to the preceding variety, except that its leaves are much larger. Parsley with a large root is also similar to the first, except that the rib of its leaves is larger, and its root is also three times as large, as is the seed. There are two species, one with an early green leaf, the other a coarse green. Macedonian parsley has a leaf that is more regularly cut, more hairy and more serrated, and its segments are more rounded and pressed together; its color is also less dark, and the rib is covered with a white down. The tops of all its branches end in bunches of whitish, five-petaled flowers, arranged in a parasol shape, in the same way as common parsley, but larger: its seed is also different, being elongated, swollen at one end and pointed at the other, rounded on one side and convex on the other, ash-colored, and with a strong, odorless flavor. Curly parsley has the same leaf shape as its name suggests, and thus resembles curly cress; moreover, it is shaped like the common variety: same stem, same flower and same seed. The variegated variety imitates the common variety in all respects, except for the color of its leaves, which are mottled with white veins tending to yellow. Of these six species, common parsley is the most commonly cultivated, although they all have more or less the same virtues and properties. It is widely used in cooking to enhance the flavour of meats, fish, eggs and most vegetables: this is its only life-giving property, as it has no inherent appeal as a substitute for food; its root is also used in many stews, and gives a very good flavour to soup. This plant has many health benefits: a decoction of the leaf and root, taken as a drink, provokes vomiting and clears the passages that lead to the heart; the chopped leaf, mixed with breadcrumbs and a little water and placed in a pan over a fire, cures scabs and resolves hardness of the udder; the same remedy causes women in childbirth to lose milk. Its crushed leaf, mixed with a little brandy, is sovereign for cuts and all kinds of wounds, as well as for bruises; it also removes the stench of breath, or at least stops the bad effect for a while. Its root is used in herbal teas and aperitif broths, and its decoction is very useful for smallpox and malignant fevers. Its seed is one of the four major hot seeds, and is also used in the composition of several remedies. This plant is very easy to grow: the seed is sown in March or April, either in borders around quarries, or in beds two inches deep, with five rows in each five-foot bed. Our market gardeners sow it broadcast to get more profit out of it, but it's cleaner to lay it out as I say, and at the same time gives the ease of crimping the plant in its youth, besides being more convenient to cut in this situation. It sprouts after three weeks: weed it, wet it, crimp it until it has taken the upper hand, and then leave it to grow at will, without further care. Any kind of soil is almost equally suited to it, provided it is a little loose, and it requires no expenditure of manure; but if you are abundantly supplied with compost or fine manure, it is not useless to put some on top of the seed, especially in soils prone to cracking. When you want to make use of the root, you need to thin out the plant a lot after it has gained a certain strength, so that it can grow; and you pull up part of it on the eve of frost, which you take to the greenhouse to find it if you need it. Care should be taken in September to cut it flush with the ground, so that it can regrow new leaves in the autumn; they are softer and greener: but in this case you must be prepared to cover it with plenty of litter in times of frost and snow, otherwise it will perish; and if you are not in a position to do this, it is much better not to cut it: its old leaves serve as a shelter for the heart and preserve it. Those who want to heat it on a bed to have it all winter, must take care to pull it out before the ground is sealed by frosts. Replanting is very simple: you put eight to ten feet of it under each bell, after having shortened the root a little, and cut all the foliage down to the heart: it picks up easily and soon sprouts new leaves. Air the plants as much as the weather allows, or at least uncover the bottom of the bells for a few hours. After three weeks, the plant can be cut, and it always grows again as long as you leave it, provided you keep the bed warm; but after February, the plant in the ground starts to produce, and no longer needs to be forced; it only needs eight to ten inches of potting soil. This plant doesn't come up in the first year, and the more you cut off its leaves, the more it grows back; but in the second year it makes its stem: however, when you cut it off in May, the stem grows suckers that last for another year: this means that it doesn't give any seed; but when you leave it free, it starts to come up in May: it flowers in June, and its seed is ripe in August. The stems are cut off at the base, and left for a few days exposed to the sun, spread out on a cloth: this precaution is necessary, otherwise more of the seed will detach and be lost; it is then winnowed and enclosed: it keeps well for four or five years. Parsley leaves are dried in October, to make up for the green ones in winter, and give the same taste to the stews in which they are used. The best way to dry them is to throw them into boiling water for a while, after they have been thoroughly washed and peeled, lay them out in the sun on racks, and then put them in a warm oven; after which they are locked in a dry place, wrapped in paper bags or boxes: others dry them in the shade, tied in bundles and hung from the floor. Now it's time to talk about the other species. Large-leaf parsley has all the virtues and properties of the common variety, and grows in the same way; but it has a defect that has caused it to be abandoned, which is that it aborts in the heart after it has sprouted its first leaves. For this reason, our market gardeners don't grow it. Parsley with a large root is not sufficiently well known in France, and it is inappropriately neglected. The Germans are justly fond of it, and it is the species to which they are most attached: its leaf has no particular merit, but its root, which is about the size of a carrot, and is therefore of great benefit, has the double advantage of being softer and sweeter. It is used in all soups, and gives a perfect taste to the broth: it is also mixed into many stews, where it has a very useful place. There are two species; the dark green leaf is the most cultivated, because it is more resistant to frost than the other, which is prone to yellowing and perishing. Macedonian parsley is not used in green like the others; its taste is different too. It is only used in salads, and even then only after it has been blanched. To make it white, we cut off all the leaves on All Saints' Day, and cover it with a thick layer of dry straw, which we increase in proportion to the weather, so that frosts cannot reach it: it grows new, tender yellow leaves under this covering, which we cut a month or six weeks later. Its taste is not to everyone's liking: we don't even see it in public markets any more. It is sown and raised like any other; it is not very delicate and can be grown in any kind of soil. Curly parsley has the same taste as the others, and can be cultivated just the same; but it has the disadvantage of being very tender in frost, and of perishing easily, which means that it is little cultivated. The variegated variety is more or less the same in taste, but it is very delicate to raise, and yields little: these two reasons prevent it from being grown. There are also two species of parsley that grow naturally, known as Wild Parsley and Marsh Parsley, which are not used for living, but are used for many purposes in pharmacy. As they are not allowed in gardens, and the others are sufficient for our purposes, I will not say more about them. Description of PIMPRENELLE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Pimprenelle is only a salad ingredient, but it is aperitive and refreshing; it purifies the blood. Its leaves are used in broths and in aperitif and vulnerary decoctions; it stimulates sweating and urinates; it also stops haemorrhages: infused in common water for some time, and drunk on an empty stomach, it relieves those prone to gravel; and the same drink is very good when you feel overheated. The distilled juice of its leaves is used in the composition of several balms and syrups, and some ointments: it is a very healthy plant. It grows quite commonly in meadows, and is no less good than the garden variety, which differs only in cultivation. There are two species, called the small and the large, which differ only in their leaves; those of the first being round, and those of the second more elongated, both throw many leaves, which fall to the ground half a foot around the heart: these leaves are toothed, and arranged two by two along the rib from which they sprout; their color is quite dark: the heart does not rise, unless it goes to seed; for then it throws a weak and rowy stem, which rises to about two feet; and at the end of the

A kind of elongated bud forms on the twigs, flowering imperceptibly and giving eight or ten seeds; this is one of the first to ripen. Picked in June, it is reddish, fairly large, four-sided, gravelly and pointed at the ends. It keeps well for three years, when picked at the right time. Cultivation of this plant is very simple; it is sown in March in rows, or broadcast; it is weeded as needed, and watered a little in hot weather: the more it is cut, the more it grows back; and the younger the leaves, the more tender and tasty they are; it is always the small ones in the heart that should be used for salads. It is very prone to having its root cut by cockchafer worms; I have said enough elsewhere about what to do to protect yourself from these insects. CHAPTER CHAPTER LXII. Description of POIREAV; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. THIS plant, which some call leek and others porreau, forms an upright, united and compact body, which is composed of leaves pressed and stuck together, and turned round to the size of a finger; it rises to nearly a foot and a half; and retains the same consistency at 6 or 8 inches from the ground; it then develops, and throws out leaves whose tips fold back against the ground, which are long, narrow and gutter-shaped, bluish-green, smooth and fairly thick, bearing a strong and unpleasant odor: All that is in the ground is white and tender, and this is the best; the rest is green; however, it is used like the foot as long as it has consistency. Its root is nothing more than a group of white, highly multiplied filaments, much like those of the onion. It is mainly used in soups, and is one of the most commonly used plants. It is also mixed into pea purées and stews, but it is not usually used in any particular preparation. O 13 no special preparation. It would not even be healthy to make too much use of it, as it is certain to engender ventosities and bad humors: it is also accused of producing other extraordinary effects during the night; but I say this only according to a few authors who are not the law, and without any other certainty than their testimony. Its medicinal properties are far superior to its uses in life; it is aperitive, resolutive and bechic: it is one of the most sovereign remedies for pleurisy. Cook one or two handfuls of the white in a cabbage leaf under the ashes, and apply to the side; or fry in a pan with good vinegar, crushed or lightly boiled, and apply to the tumors of the articles, it dissipates them. Broths made with leeks and turnips are good for extinguishing voices and chest weaknesses; they also make a favorable syrup for lung disease. The seed is as aperitive as the plant itself; for the same ailments, a large piece is crushed and infused in a glass of wine. The leaves, cooked and applied to swollen hemorrhoids, relax them and remove the inflammation. I have read that a handful of its seeds placed in a barrel of wine prevents it from souring, and corrects sourness when it does occur: but I have not experienced this. There are two types of leek, long and short, which differ only in length. The long leek, however, is the most cultivated, because it provides more by its length; but the short one also has the merit of being more resistant to frosts; and for the end of winter, it should always be preferred; it also has the advantage that the worm doesn't attach itself to it so much. The long one should occupy the stage until the frosts. In all likelihood, these two species originate from the wild leek, commonly found in vineyards, and have been perfected through cultivation. The seed is sown in March in loose, well-prepared soil: The seed is sown in the month of March in loose, well-prepared soil: after sowing, it is harrowed and top-dressed, but first walked on to ensure that the soil is healthy; it is wetted to help the seed germinate, and continued as needed; the seedling is weeded exactly, and replanted around Midsummer, when it is the size of a quill or a little larger; but if you want to bring it forward, it can be planted in the first days of June. The beds are set as wide as you like, with the rows six inches apart, and the plants only four inches apart: O2 first wet the bed before pulling it out, for ease of pulling; then cut off half the leaf and all the root, as close to the heel as you can: after this little preparation, we plant it with a planter that we push in, six inches apart, and in each hole we sink a leek, without pressing the earth against the foot in any way: we water it generously immediately afterwards, and the water that runs down the holes carries away as much earth as is needed for the moment: we continue for two days at a time, as this is one of the plants that requires the most water: It soon picks up again, and so easily, that three days later you can see the leaf lengthening; some time later you crimp it, and trim its leaves two or three times during the summer; this little method contributes greatly to making the plant grow larger: it can be eaten until All Saints' Day; but if you want to eat it earlier, it's just as good; and our market gardeners, who have the art of bringing it forward, bring quite large quantities to the market as early as July. In some provinces, it is eaten green in its earliest youth, without having been replanted, and is preferred to the white variety: everyone can be satisfied in this respect, as the taste is the same at all times. As Christmas approaches, we pull up the large species, which is very prone to perish on the vine, and bury it close by in a small trench, which we cover with litter during the frosts; but we leave the short one in place, because it resists bad weather, and keeps well until it goes to seed, i.e. until May: However, we take care to dig up a certain quantity and bury it in the greenhouse, to supply it during the frosts, if we don't have any of the larger species enclosed. After winter, you mark the quantity you want to let go to seed, and destroy the surplus if you have too much. In May, it begins to grow its stem, which rises to four or five feet, and bears at its tip a kind of very large tuft, covered all around with purplish bell-shaped flowers, followed by a triangular cup, which encloses the seed in three separate compartments: This seed is black in color, shaped much like the onion, but larger; it is cut when the hulls begin to open, and placed on a sheet to ripen: the one that comes off naturally is the best; and to draw out the other, it is crumpled with the hands, or if you like, placed in a wicker manna, and rubbed against the edges; it is then winnowed and enclosed. It's good for 2 years; but if you keep it in its shell attached to a floor, as some people do for onions, it keeps for three or four years. As this plant is extremely hard on the soil, it requires a good manuring afterwards, to be able to produce something else; it is also very prone in certain years to be eaten by a small white worm, which engenders itself in the heart: which cannot be remedied. The plant is replanted as it dies, and care is taken to ensure that a little plant remains. The beetle worm also sometimes destroys some: the progress of the disease can be prevented by looking for it at the foot of the plant, as I have said for many others. CHAPTER LXIII. Description of PCIRÉE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. THIS plant, called Bette in several provinces, is an annual: two species are grown, the white and the red. The white pear has a cylindrical, woody, white, long, thick root; its thresholds are large, broad, smooth, succulent; sometimes yellowish-green, sometimes true green, nitrous in flavor, odorless, with a thick, broad, white rib; its stem is fluted and branched, rising to 3 or 4 feet: its flowers arise from the leaf axils on long spikes; they are small, composed of several stamens topped with yellowish tops, and emerge from a five-leafed, greenish calyx, which then changes into an unevenly round, gravelly, ashy or russet seed the size of a pea. Red pear differs from the previous variety in that its leaf is smaller, reddish-green and the rib is bright red. It is of no use for life, and is only used medicinally when the former is lacking. The white variety is used in food, where it is mixed with sorrel to soften it, either for soups or stuffings; it is mild and very healthy. Its health properties are much more considerable: its leaf is emollient, soothing, laxative, desiccative and abstersive; it is used in ordinary decoctions and in enemas; its particular juice, well strained and purified, given in a clyster, is singular for emptying fecal matter that resists other laxative clysters; the leaf applied externally to the skin, when it has been removed by bladders or O4 caustics, facilitates the draining of the humor: it can also be applied to a tumor to attract the matter, and is a great help in bringing it to an end: it is also used against inflamed hemorrhoids; and if it doesn't make them suppurate, it at least dissipates the inflammation, and makes them withdraw; it's a good idea to steam them beforehand with the expressed juice. Sucking the juice through the nose, mixed with a little salt-free pot broth, unclogs the ducts and dissolves the pituita that has thickened there. A piece of the rib or root chopped and crushed in the same way, and introduced into the nostrils, has the same effect. The juice of the root is a good sternutatory, and when used with its pomace in the nostrils to relieve migraine or headache, it brings great relief by draining the serosities. The root is also used to loosen children's stomachs; to do this, a piece must be introduced into the foundation, after having been sprinkled with salt. This plant is very easy to grow, and any soil is good for it, as long as it is prepared with a good ploughing. It is sown in March in light soils, and in April in heavy soils. It can be sown broadcast, as our market gardeners do, or in rays eight inches apart, as is more common in private gardens: the latter is more convenient for crimping and cutting. Six weeks after it has been sown, you can start using it; and in this season, when the root is still weak, you cut it flush with the ground: it sprouts new leaves, and the more often it is cut, the softer and smoother the leaf becomes; it becomes hard and dry when it is old. It can be sown every month until August, and this last sowing is the one that yields the most and the most abundantly the following spring; but it is also more delicate to overwinter; it must be covered if you don't want to run the risk of losing it. The first plant, sown in March, is stronger and more resilient, but yields later; this one should be cut to the ground in September, so that it can regrow new leaves in autumn. After the frosts, the one that has been covered is uncovered, and given a little shaking to start it growing; when it is ready to be picked, the leaves are blown off at ground level, without the use of any instrument; the heart grows successively for two or three months, and when it begins to curl up to make its amount, it is abandoned; the new seedling then replaces the old one. 5 Pear for chard is a particular species of which there are two types, one extremely blond, the other darker in color, called demi-verte. The first has a wider, softer rib, but it has difficulty surviving the winter; the second is a little less perfect, but it is much more resistant to frost: the blond should therefore only be sown in spring, to be enjoyed in summer and autumn, after which time it is destroyed, with only a few plants left for seed, which is covered as best as possible during the winter: the other should be sown at the end of June, and replanted in mid-August, in borders or beds, eighteen inches apart in all directions, after cutting off half its leaves and the root tip. Both require frequent watering during hot spells, which is what makes the rib tender; during frosts, it must be covered exactly with dry litter, and in spring it is uncovered little by little in the same way as Partichaut: its carding is good by mid-May. Our market gardeners cut off the entire stalk, because custom forces them to do so, and because it would not be saleable in detached leaves: it might also be thought that it is the need they have for space in this circumstance of the weather, which gave rise to this custom; but private individuals who are quite happy to extend its duration, should be content to burst the widest leaves, pulling them to one side; those that remain around the heart strengthen, and are good successively for a month or six weeks. When it finally begins to rise, mark the plants you wish to keep for seed, and destroy the rest. 2 Many people, and our market gardeners in particular, plant these chard plants between their artichokes; I do not approve of this method, for the reasons I gave in the chapter on artichokes. Many people particularly like it with Gruyère or Parma cheese, grated on top: many others don't like it at all; it's true that it's a bit bland, and even in some areas it smells only of earth. This plant, both the simple pear and the two species of chard, multiplies only from seed, which is collected in September from overwintered plants; as they spread out and rise very high, they must be tied to stilts to support them, otherwise the wind will blow them over: they are cut when the seed is partly ripe, i.e. when it turns from green to an ashen or russet colorâO6 POIS. They are then left in the sun for a few days, and immediately locked up. It keeps well for 8 or 10 years. CHAPTER LXIV. Description of the pea; its different species, cultivation, etc. Although peas are widely known and cultivated almost as much as wheat, in order to follow my plan of giving an exact description of all vegetable plants, I will describe this one. The pea in general, of all species, is conformed in more or less the same way; its stem is single, smooth, hollow and weak, rising more or less, according to the species; its leaves are of a small bluish or celadon green, placed from distance to distance along its stem: the leaves are of a small bluish or celadon green, placed at intervals along the stem: they first form two kinds of ears attached to the stem, and from the middle emerges a rib which throws out four or six oval leaves, placed regularly at its sides, and ending in several tendrils which serve to cling to the others to support itself, when it doesn't have the help of oars: from the armpits of these same ears, higher or lower, depending on the species, emerges the flower whose calyx is a toothed cup, which grows the pistil; this flower is composed of four unequal florets, whose color is white or red, depending on the species, marked with a purpurine spot : each floret is usually composed of two equal flowers, sometimes only one, and along the length of the stem there may be as many as six or eight: these flowers are followed by the pod which contains the pea, which is more or less elongated, depending on the species. If this vegetable were as beneficial as it is pleasant to eat, I think most people would want to eat it all year round; but it is rightly criticized for being windy and indigestible: this does not prevent people from being extremely keen on them, especially in the new market, where they are sold in Paris for as much as 100 and 150 pounds a litron, a measure that contains about three half-setiers, or three quarters of a pint. Peas in general are of little use in medicine, apart from chickpeas and lupins, which I'll discuss in more detail; however, their flour is substituted for that of lupins and vetches when necessary; it is equally resolutive and emollient; its decoction is also laxative and soothing. Some claim that peas of all kinds soothe coughs, and one author maintains that they are useful for epileptics. For those who suffer from gravel, they must be avoided at all costs. There are an infinite number of species, of which we know only a few here; but we can make do with the ones we have: besides, nature likes to discover new ones from time to time, or, if you like, to produce new ones, such as the Baron, the Dominé and the Michaux, named after the farmers who discovered them today. These three species are the earliest to ripen, followed by the Lorrain and the Suisse. I will reduce the other most commonly sown peas to the small number of the best that do well in our vicinity, and that can suffice for all seasons; except for those who have other species more suited to their climate and terrain, to cultivate them. I therefore chose the common pea, the Normand, the white and green quarrels, the culpoir, the English green pea, the longuecosse and the pea without parchment. These eight species are all perfectly good, each in its own season. I'll say a word about their cultivation in general, before moving on to their specific cultivation. This grain, though rustic in appearance, must not be planted indiscriminately in all types of soil; it requires a certain combination for sowing; some species require light soil, another wants it to be a little oily, and another is better suited to soil that holds the middle; but all agree in wanting to occupy the same land only from time to time: well-meaning farmers make it a rule to sow their land with this vegetable only once every six years, and this is their method. One year they bring in wheat, and the next year beans; the third they sow in rye or March, and the fourth in vetch or broad beans; the fifth in oats or barley, and the sixth in peas; so that every year, out of six acres, they have one in peas, for which they choose the species appropriate to its vein; And when they have to turn over a meadow, uproot a vineyard or destroy a wood, that place is always reserved for peas, because they don't do any better than in this kind of new land; because manure, which helps other vegetables to bear fruit when the soil is tired, is harmful to them, far from being advantageous; these peas are carried away in wood, and don't bear fruit. This vegetable, more voracious than any other of the earth's natural salts, cannot tolerate any borrowed salts, such as those found in manure. What I have just said should serve as a rule, from the most to the least, for those who grow it in their gardens, to distribute the land they have, so that each year they have a place sufficiently rested to sow this vegetable: If they are careful, they will recognize, as I have often found, that one pole of soil used at the right time will yield more than four used at the wrong time; it even happens sometimes, when you persist in putting it in the same place for several years in a row, that it turns yellow as soon as it sprouts, and yields nothing at all. In small gardens, it is usual to grow a few early peas; but in large plots of land with large houses, it is very common to sow whole quarters of them to supply kitchen needs all year round, and their cultivation is then the same as in the fields; The same species are also used, which is why it's a good idea for me to outline the practice of our farmers with regard to each species in particular, and to begin with everything that relates to their cultivation in general, following the plan I've started with. Peas can be sown in two ways: with a plow or a hoe. The first is not suitable for a garden, so the hoe is the best, because it loosens the soil better. Two people are needed for this operation; one opens the gauge from one end of the square to the other, and the other, who follows, spreads the seed as the square is made; once the gauge is finished, the second is taken up, and the same earth that was lifted is used to cover the first: it is seeded in the same way, and as long as there is land, the same procedure is continued. But, as in a garden we want all the plants to have a certain air of arrangement, which at the same time facilitates the small operations they require, such as crimping them, watering them as needed, picking the fruit, etc., it is advisable to leave an inter valle for the paths, after four rows of seed have been sown. Many gardeners do not know how to handle the hoe; this tool is not known beyond the outskirts of Paris; in this case, four-foot planks must be drawn up, and four rays equally spaced from foot to foot and two or three inches deep, either with the hoe or the corner of the rake; and after spreading the seed and walking it, it is covered with the rake; the soil must have been freshly ploughed beforehand. Eight or ten days later, the seed sprouts, and when the plants are five or six inches high, they should be crimped and shod, making sure that the weather is fine, so that the weeds die right away. If you want to row them, go back two days later, when the weeds are burnt, and plug the oars, making sure to lay them down inside, two by two rows, one on top of the other, so that they don't obstruct the pathways: at the same time, the fruit that follows the oar is picked up more easily on the pathway side. I'll move on to the description of the species, and start with the Michaux pea, which gardeners take great pride in presenting first to their masters, or which is bred mainly by those who make peas an object of their small trade, and who sell them dearly in the primeur, as I've already noted. This pea is white, round, plain, fairly large, very tender, and sweet when eaten green, but of mediocre value, especially as there is usually only one pod in each bunch, and they are stopped at the first blossom, so as to have the fruit instead: it is almost the only one that is grown today for early harvest, although it competes with Baron and Dominé for earliness. Soft soil suits it better than any other, and even the most arid sands will support it, provided the spring is a little tender, or it is helped by watering. In free and black soils, it also grows well, and more reliably, but later. In cold, damp soils, it only languishes, most often rotting during the winter; even when it does escape, it comes so late that it gives no pleasure, and is not worth the care it costs; so the shortest way is to get rid of it when the soil is ungrateful. Here's how to grow it, which requires a great deal of detail. It is sown in mid-November in free soils, and at the beginning of December in light soils, so that it can rise before the frosts; and as it always perishes during the winter, it is a good idea to sow it a little thickly: it should be placed on the south or east coasts, where it is sheltered from bad winds, and within reach of all the sun's rays. Some people sow it in clumps of seven or eight, a foot apart; others sow it in rays two or three inches deep, and form two or three rows in the bed, depending on how wide it is, because you always need to leave two feet free along the walls, to be able to carry out the operations required for espaliers. The latter has always seemed to me the best, because 1. the peas are not piled up on top of each other, so they feed better; 2. the field mice, crows and pigeons, which are very avid eaters, destroy them less in this arrangement, because once they have smelled a clump, they eat every last one. Nor do they pull them so easily from a comb, especially if care has been taken to walk them after sowing them, as should be done; this binds them, so to speak, to the soil; but care must be taken not to sow them, especially in fat soil, until it is healthy; for in damp weather, the operation of walking them would be worthless. After they have been sown and marketed, they are immediately covered, and a little pigeon droppings is thrown on top, if available; this gives the soil a little warmth, which prevents them from melting so easily: after they have risen, they are topped up again with an inch of coarse compost, or horse dung. In the Paris area, there is a type of compost even more favorable than pigeon droppings, either for preserving them or for advancing them: it is commonly called gadoue (sludge); it comes from the roads where the city's sludge and refuse are transported: these materials, matured for a few years, are reduced to compost, and contain wonderful salts for all kinds of plants. It should be removed in the summer, when the weather is dry and it is, so to speak, dusty. Put an inch of it on the bottom of the shelves before sowing peas, and you'll soon realize what a great effect it has. You could make a supply of it anywhere, by collecting the sludge from the streets or nearby roads, and leaving it to ripen in some hole: there is no manure that has as much virtue as this material. Those who have a lot of walls, and who can place a single row of peas at the foot of the walls, without harming the trees, which are often bare at the bottom, enjoy the fruit eight days longer than those who have peas only two feet away, and this eight-day difference certainly makes a big difference to pleasure or profit. Peas sown at the times and in the manner I have just described, are raised, and even having three or four leaves require great care to be defended from the inclemency of the sky: each one, according to his industry and convenience, must preserve them, either with straw mats supported on a kind of trellis that we make at the height of the peas, or with large litter supported in the same way by several poles tied together, so that its weight does not crush these young plants, especially when it is loaded with snow: between the rays, we interweave a little short straw to keep them straight: when the frost becomes stronger, we increase the covers in proportion. Sometimes, for lack of convenience, you don't cover them at all, but they still escape when winters are neither long nor harsh; but it's always risky to leave them to chance. Care must be taken to uncover them a little when there is a fine day of sunshine, provided that the frost has not attacked them under the blankets, in which case the sun would lose them; and as soon as the weather is milder, they must be uncovered completely, always leaving the blankets beside them, so that they can be put back on quickly if necessary: when they remain too long suffocated under the blankets, without air or sun, they turn yellow and melt. Those who have no walls to shelter them, raise slopes of land facing south, and make little straw shelters on the ridge, four feet high: they are no worse off in this situation; but as much as possible, choose light soil, as it warms up much more easily in spring, and the plants are less likely to melt than in greasy, damp bottoms. Once you're past the hard frosts, which usually last until the end of February, at which time the sun begins to gain strength, you remove the blankets, crimp the peas and shoe them; this helps the soil to warm up, and you row them as soon as they are seven to eight inches old: They then begin to show their flower, which is called a loquette; for this kind of pea only grows to eighteen inches or two feet, all the more so as care must be taken to stop them at the third flower; and this operation, which is the last, brings them forward a long way: when only two, or even one, is left, the fruit is still rather ripe. It is often difficult to deprive oneself of half of one's expectations, so everyone can do as he or she sees fit. These pinched tips of the stalk can be used to good effect in soup, giving it a pea-like flavour. After this operation, the pods are visibly fuller, and can be found in April or May, depending on the weather. Care should have been taken to weed them where necessary, and to pull out those that have degenerated; it's easy to identify them, in that the flower has not shown itself as in the others, and the plants are more vigorous. The heat of March sometimes dries out the soil, especially coastal soil, to the point where the plants need to be helped by a little watering; in this case, they should be wetted according to their needs, in the morning with dew, because during the main part of the day, wetting is of no use to them; the fresher they are kept, but without excess, the bigger and more tender they become. It sometimes happens that they perish, despite all the precautions you've taken to preserve them: here's what you can do in such a case to make up for lost time, as far as possible. As soon as you notice them, sow new ones in thick rays on a new layer; they grow quickly and profitably; and when they are four to five inches old, pull them out and replant them in good shelters, reasonably spaced; they regrow very easily, and you gain nearly a month by this advance. Those who have a great eagerness for this vegetable, and who are in a position to make certain expenses, can give themselves the pleasure of enjoying them a month earlier than those who have them in the ground, despite shelter and care, and they can also keep them until Christmas; here's how. Sow them in the first days of November, in baskets 7 to 8 inches high and 10 to 12 inches in diameter, filled with earth and potting soil mixed together, with an inch of manure on top; twenty to twenty-five seeds in each basket are more than enough; We leave them in the open air, sheltered by a wall, until the hard frost; by then they have grown five or six leaves, if autumn is a little fine; we then move them to a greenhouse that is not too hot, and to which we can give air whenever the weather permits: As soon as the weather gets milder, we put them outside, but not too far apart, so as to be quick to bring them in when the frost starts again, and until mid-February we continue to keep them in sight so as not to be surprised: we then change their situation, and put them on warm beds, which we must have prepared for this purpose. These layers must be buried 2 feet deep, and are, strictly speaking, deaf layers; in the middle of the thickness of the manures, we put five to six inches of tan, and two or three inches on the surface, which we then cover with potting soil in such quantity that the baskets are filled all around without exceeding: these baskets are placed on the surface of the manures, and arranged in a chessboard Tome II. I in three rows, so that they are six inches apart from each other: it is important to let the great fire pass through the layers, before putting them in place. They bloom promptly as soon as they have felt this air of warmth; but as they still have to fear the frosts that occur in March, here are the precautions you need to take to guarantee them. Take circles of large barrels; support the two ends, and make them enter the ground on the two edges of the layers which are level with the ground; space them from three to three feet along the whole length, and to maintain them take running laths, with which you will bind them: three rows are enough; and for greater solidity, drive a few stilts into the middle of the layers and tie them to the circles with good wicker; over this trellis, if necessary, throw down straw mats made with string, which envelop the whole circuit, and double them if one is not enough; you will also close the two ends of the layers, so that frost cannot enter. If trained and cared for in this way, they will bear fruit as early as the first days of April, provided the month of March is fine; but whatever the weather, they will always be three weeks ahead of the coastal ones, and once the fruit has been harvested, your layers, which, thanks to the tannin, remain warm for three months, can still be used to grow whatever you see fit. It is understood that you must stop them at the second or third flower, as I said for the others, and that you must empty the baskets when the fruit is picked, dry them, and lock them up, to serve again when you want to use them. As for peas that you want to raise for the late season, sow them at the end of August or in the first days of September, in the same baskets and in the same way as I said. You arrange them along some well-exposed wall, and take care to wet them after they are sown, which you continue to do from two to two days, unless it rains; a few days later they rise, and when they are six to seven inches old you row them; you let them enjoy as long as the weather is fine: they are in full flower a month later, and the pod follows closely. Corn is often subject to frosts in this season, which could ruin it, so bring it close to the house and be ready to lock it up as soon as the weather threatens; and as these kinds of frosts don't last long, put it in the air as soon as it's over, and keep taking it out or bringing it in whenever the weather changes. The fruit starts to taste good at All Saints' Day, and you can pick them from one or the other until Christmas, just as good and just as tender as the spring ones, provided they are always well moistened: I've tried this two or three times. It should be noted that only the Michaux pea succeeds in this season. This quality of pea is not only the best for both spring and autumn, but I find it equally good for all months of the year, and I use it in preference to the others: they are tender and sweet in all seasons, provided they are wetted exactly with morning dew, and eaten as soon as they are shelled, (this circumstance makes a lot:) and you don't languish to enjoy them; in six weeks from the day you sow them, when it's the right season, they give their fruit. The last ones to be sown in the ground are sown in mid-August, and bear fruit in October: if there are no heavy frosts in that month, they can be kept, or, to put it better, they succeed one another until after Saint-Martin's Day, depending on the climate; in any case, sowing can be brought forward or delayed by a few days. In spite of my particular affection for this species of pea, I have no wish to subjugate anyone's taste to my own; each person, according to his or her terrain, will choose the ones that are most successful. It is much better to sow alternately a bed of peas and one of some other plant that is not shaded, such as chervil, parsley, pear and others. When you want to keep a pea bed for seed, you must take care to uproot the plants that degenerate; you can tell by their wood, which is thicker, and their flowers, which are higher; sometimes they don't flower at all. I shouldn't omit to say that whatever the species, they must always be rowed if you want to make a real profit from them, otherwise the field mice and pigeons that prey on them ruin most of them; the free sparrows, which you can't defend them from, already do them enough harm. You don't have to wait until the grain is completely dry to harvest them; as soon as the pods turn yellow, even though the peas are still green, you can pull them out; and they finish ripening exposed to the sun in a courtyard, where birds and other animals don't get in so easily: when they are dry, you beat them and winnow them right away; because rats and mice destroy them in attics, when you lock them up with the cossat. They are good for sowing for two years; in the third year, only part of them come up, and sometimes none at all; but when you are lucky enough to have places free of these insects, and they can stay in their cossat, they keep for four or five years, provided you don't beat them until you want to sow them. To preserve the free species, you need to do what I've said elsewhere, change every year or two with someone a little away from you. With regard to peas that are left to dry to be eaten dry, they should be exposed to the sun for a few days after they have been winnowed, in order to improve their quality and keep them in better condition. One thing should also be kept in mind when cooking them, and that is to use water that is suitable for them, as the more they boil, the harder they become, and the quality of the pea is often blamed for a defect that comes solely from the water. I'll move on to describe the other species. The Dominé pea is the earliest after the Michaux pea, to which it succeeds; and although there is no difference between them other than the fact that one comes eight days earlier than the other, this is always a lot for people who are eager for it, and especially for those who trade in it; However, one does not give way to the other, and for those who are not in a hurry to enjoy it, it is much better value than Michaux, its pods being regularly doubled and fuller; it also rises higher, and requires proportionate oars. It is grown in the same way, and has the advantage of withstanding bad weather better than Michaux, particularly in slightly damp soils: it should be sown light, especially after winter; the grain is white, fairly round and of a good size; it can be sown at any time, but spring is its most favorable season. The Baron pea follows the Dominé very closely, but is very inferior; the pod is extremely small, the grain the same, without sugar or finesse; it was known before the two preceding peas, and its credit was established on its earliness; but since these peas appeared, it has lost a lot, and with 4 justice: however, as it provides a lot, and the flower is not prone to run, it still has some supporters; perhaps also that in other climates it would be better than here. The Lorrain pea is the successor to the previous three, and supplies more abundantly: it is large and fairly sweet, but only succeeds in spring; in the other seasons, the nile attaches itself to it, and the flower perishes: light soil suits it better than any other. It can be eaten dry or green, but is neither as tender nor as soft as many others; its color is white, its shape round and fairly plain. The Swiss pea, otherwise known as the large early pod, is a close successor to the previous varieties, and is more resistant to bad weather. It is grown equally in gardens and in the countryside, and is sown as early as December: Its shape is round and plain, its color a small greenish-yellow and of good size; it fruits a lot, and is not prone to run; its pod is long and full, its grain very tender when green, but when dry it is not used; it is sown until Midsummer, and is very good for the late season, not being prone to nililil like some others: it is one of the most profitable species; it requires good soil. The common pea is about the same in terms of earliness and yield: it is sown like the previous one in December, and bears its fruit within a few days of the other, i.e. at the end of May or the beginning of June, depending on the soil and the year: it is round in circumference, a little flattened on the ridges, which is the effect of the hindrance in which it finds itself in the pod, which is so full that the seeds can barely fit inside: it is of medium size: its color is russet: it must be picked under the flower, i.e., the flower, although dried out, must still hold on to the tail, and it is very tender when picked at this time; but if you wait until the flower has detached, it hardens; it is sown until the end of March, and the last ones sown are good for Midsummer: We don't sow it later, even though it will also come, because the following month the white quarry arrives, and excludes all the others; it requires good soil. The white quarry is the one which, generally speaking, is desired by everyone, and which almost alone occupies the scene as long as it lasts: it is rightly warned in its favor; it is tender and soft, better nourished, fatter, and of a sweeter taste: its color is white as its name announces, its shape uneven and more quarried than round, either green or dry; it is a little late to bring in, rises very high, and does not provide much; these are its faults. We start to sow it at the end of March, and this first sowing is good in July: we continue until the end of May, and we don't go any further; because beyond that it yields almost nothing: it has little taste in the dry, and we must only let it dry for the seed: it requires mediocre soil; in good soil, it only grows wood. This is the species chosen for green drying, and for eating during winter and Lent: it is very delicate and very good, prepared as follows. Select the most tender grains; put them freshly shelled in a boiler with boiling water; after they have made a broth, remove them and put them in fresh water; then lay them out in the air on a white cloth for two or three days, turning them over from time to time; Then put them in a lukewarm oven, clearly laid out on racks, with paper underneath, until they are completely dry. Finally, put them in paper bags and lock them in a dry place. When you want to use them, fry them in lukewarm water, or put a piece of butter married to the flour, and leave them to soak for twenty-four hours; then cook them in the same water, and season them with butter or cream, as you please. Cul noir comes in two varieties, one round and the other quarré, both with a black germ, from which they take their name; the quarré is more highly prized. The former is russet in color; the latter is green, and is used during Lent for purées: it provides a lot, and picked green, it is tender and good. It should not be sown until the end of April, or the beginning of June; sooner or later, the fogs attach themselves to it and make it cloudy: only what is needed for sowing should be kept from the first species, as it is not good to eat dry; it requires good soil. Green quarry differs from white quarry only in its outer color, which is green: it is not so delicate or soft when green, but as a reward it is very useful when dry for purées: it must be very dry before being enclosed, because if it retains any moisture, it will go off and take on a bad taste: it does not provide much, which is its defect like the other. It should be sown at the same time, and placed in slightly worn soil, for the same reason that it grows too much in wood when the soil is too good: some soils make it so hard that it cannot be cooked, particularly in strong soils; care must be taken to place it properly, or to detach it from the soil, if the soil is contrary to it. The Normandy pea is square-shaped, whitish-green and very large: it is tender and soft, eaten green; and dry, it is equally good, and yields more puree than any other species, having an extremely thin skin: it does not fruit much, which is its defect. It is sown from the end of March to Midsummer's Day; later the blossom sinks, and nothing comes of it: the first sown yield much more than the second sown; it requires good soil. The long pod is round, white, plain and clear; its size is mediocre: it fruits a lot and quickly; its pod, which is very long and very full, contains twelve to fourteen grains; it is of all the species that yields the most, and is the most successful for the late season; it does not nuile or curl. It is sown from mid-April to the beginning of July; mediocre soil is more favorable to it than better. For these last seven species, it should be noted that you don't need as much seed for some as for others. The Swiss pea, the common pea, the Norman pea and the cultivated pea want to be sown a little thickly, because they are only one crop; farmers use seven to eight bushels per acre; with regard to the white and green peas, and the long pea pod, they only use five to six bushels, because they fork a lot, and would choke if they were pressed harder. The English green pea was recently brought to us from the country whose name it bears, and is known to only a few people; it is very large, plain, a little oval, of a whitish green, and perfectly good, either green or dry, for purées: it grows quite high, supplies from the stem to the tip, makes its pod large and full, with no flower missing. I sowed it last year for the first time in three or four seasons, and it has always done well: I said elsewhere that my soil was quite strong; I don't know if it would do as well in poorer soil. The pea without parchment, which in some provinces is called the gourmand pea, has very valuable qualities, which make it very popular, except in the vicinity of Paris: I don't know why it is so little appreciated in this capital, where it is hardly to be found in the public markets. It is eaten with the pod like green beans: its taste is sweet and fine, and it is more profitable than any other. There are many species, which I will reduce to 5, as the others seem to me to be degenerated from this one. The most common has a white flower, rises from 5 to 6 feet, and produces a pod of mediocre size: it is the most widely cultivated, the others not being well known: it is quite fertile in grain, provided it is sown light and well branched: the pea is white, uneven, and of mediocre size. The second species has a red flower and grows to seven or eight feet; it therefore requires long, strong oars to withstand the shocks of the wind: it fruits a lot, and gives pods once as big as the previous one, which are very tender and very sweet; the pea is partly reddish and greenish, speckled with purple spots, round, large and smooth. The third has a white flower, rises to the same height and supplies a lot of the same produce as the previous species, but the pod is less wide and more curly; the pea is large and white, fairly smooth and fairly round. The fourth species has a white flower, rises only three or four feet, and produces surprising pods; I have collected some that are eighteen lines wide by four to five inches long, tender and sweet as can be; they do not fruit as much as the previous two; However, their beauty and goodness compensate for this defect, in addition to the fact that they are a fortnight earlier than their predecessors; it should also be taken into account that they are held in a mediocre elevation, which costs neither so many oars, nor so much subjection to defend them from the strong winds: All these advantages make it well worth preferring to any other, when you can get the real thing, which is very hard to find; you have to sow it light like the others; the pea is white, large, smooth and round. The fifth species is the dwarf pea without parchment, which forms a small, rounded, low tuft: its pod is very small, and its taste similar to the others; it is not very heavy, which makes it less useful than curious. These 5 species are cultivated a little differently than the other peas: they are sown in March and April, until the end of May; later on, they are prone to mildew: they are crimped like the others when they are well up, and they are often wet; this is what tenderizes them: They necessarily need to be branched, and when you want to get the most beautiful and earliest fruit, you have to pinch them at the third or fourth flower: three rows in a four-foot plank are enough; the thicker they get, the less they fruit: for the same reason, don't put two planks in a row. This species of pea is extremely sensitive to thunder and lightning, which can ruin it if they occur at flowering time; this is the main reason why it should be sown every two weeks, from the beginning of March to the end of May, because if the first seeds perish, the others, which are more or less advanced, make up for those ruined by the storm. They are eaten fat and lean, with the fillets removed and cooked in boiling water to make them more tender. They are also eaten as green beans, when they are of a reasonable size, and are preferred by connoisseurs over all others: they are tender, soft and have a distinguished taste; they are also very good dry, and cook perfectly; but it is the white kind that should be taken. We reserve as much as we need for seed, and leave them for a long time to dry, because their husk is fat and thick, and only dries out with time and good weather; because if it rains heavily when they are at this point, this husk, which retains water like a sponge, is prone to rot and cause the grain to rot; That's why it's always a good idea to have some from one year to the next, and to tear out any plants that degenerate, which I've found to be particularly the case with the white species. When they come to good, we pull them out, and if we have the time, we seed them right away: I say we shell them, because when they are beaten, half of them remain in the pods, which cannot be detached, the grain being stuck to the pod; this has led me to take the decision in my particular case to tear off the pods as they dry, and I don't even wait until they are completely dry, as I am beset by birds that devour them; they finish drying in the sun, where I expose them for as long as they need. If you can close them safely without shelling them, so that rats can't damage them, they keep much longer. I have experimented this year with drying them green, picked tender, in the same way as beans, the recipe for which can be found in the chapter on this vegetable, and I have found them to be better; it will be very easy to put them to the test. In addition to the fourteen species of peas I have just mentioned, there are a few more of a fancy nature, of which I shall say a word, and a few others about which I feel I must disabuse those who are prejudiced in their favor on the basis of their former reputation; such is, for example, the Charantonneau, of which we were eager before we knew those who now occupy the scene with greater justification: It's a small, hard pea, without sugar or finesse, and much less hasty than the first three species I've named; such is also the small dwarf pea with bouquet, which is not as abandoned as the Charantonneau, but which is hardly better: all its merit is that it takes up little space, and can be stored anywhere; a poor merit, when it is not accompanied by any other quality. The large bouquet pea is of the same order; its singularity is all that recommends it: it rises to six feet, and carries at its summit a group of flowers and pods in a row gathered one on top of the other, which give a very mediocre grain in taste, and it is only by dint of small poles that it can be held upright, a pain it certainly does not deserve. I include in the same class the crown pea, the horn pea, the gray pea, the grosset and others. There is, however, one in the provinces near the Rhône, called Quarantain, which is said to be good and early; I don't know it; it's up to those who grow it to consider whether it wouldn't be even more advantageous for them to sacrifice it to Michaux; for one must always strive for the best. Among the fancy peas (with respect to us), I give first place to the chickpea, which is highly esteemed in Languedoc, as well as in Italy; it is pointed on one side and sunken on the other, resembling the head of a ram: It has a peculiar taste, but one that pleases its enthusiasts; it is very hard and difficult to digest: for this reason, no one pays any attention to it in Paris, where it comes just as well and just as good as in warmer countries; I have tried it several times. I will say, however, for the satisfaction of those who like its taste, but fear its defects even more, that soaking it for twenty-four hours in lukewarm water, with a small bag of ash, before cooking it, makes it lose much of its hardness: you can also, as is the practice in Languedoc, put it in a bowl, pour in a spoonful of olive oil, and rub the grains together; then put it in lukewarm water, with a little salt; leave it there from evening to the next day; then cook it in half-boiling water; this little preparation tenderizes it a lot: We must be careful not to use well water, which is too raw and hardens it; any other water is good. There are two types, one white and large, with a white flower; the other reddish and smaller, with a red flower: the latter is better for pharmacy, being more aperitive; the other is better for life, and is almost exclusively consumed, both in Italy and in our southern provinces: there is a third species which is black; but I don't know its particular qualities. The plant that produces the first two species is quite different from common peas: it only grows to about eighteen inches, and throws out a number of branches that spread out around the base: its leaves are water-green, arranged in twos like those of sain-foin, but shorter, serrated at the edges, and ending in an odd number: From the axils of each leaf, or at least from the largest part, a small flower emerges, with a hairy calyx, divided into six pointed parts, whose pistil turns into a bladder-like, swollen fruit, about an inch long, ending in a small thread that contains one or two seeds. Some people eat them not only when they are dry, but also when they are green, and not only cooked, but raw; however, they are difficult to digest, and in the latter case are only suitable for country people, whose stomachs are accustomed to digesting everything: They are usually only eaten dry in oil, so they are left to dry well and then plucked, beaten and winnowed without further precaution; they keep well for sowing for two or three years, but are best eaten in the first year. In hot countries, it is sometimes used in place of coffee; its taste is somewhat similar, but it is more bitter, and therefore requires more sugar: when it is mixed in equal portions, it is difficult to notice, and in the public cafés of Italy, it is very common to use it. It is sown in March or April in clumps like beans, eighteen inches apart, and five or six seeds are placed together; it is crimped exactly when young, and requires no other method: in Italy it is sown with a plough, but the climate is different. The decoction of this pea is good for suppressing urine, stone and nephritic colic; it is also used for jaundice, to kill worms, to bring milk to nursing mothers, restore menstruation and facilitate childbirth: its flour, used as a poultice, is also suitable for resolving tumors of the udder and testicles; it also cleanses gravel and fickle fire. The pea of every month has a particular merit, which is to flower for four to five months in a row, and to always give fruit successively after the flowers; this is what gives it entry to some gardens: but if you value it rightly, the fruit is worth nothing. The Lupin pea, which is where I end, is generally only cultivated for medicinal purposes, and is only successful in southern countries; however, the Greeks used to eat it in ancient times, as Galen and Pliny assure us with remarkable circumstances, adding that this grain has the virtue of appeasing both hunger and thirst; but they took the precaution of macerating it in hot water, to remove its bitterness and make it pleasant to the taste: This preparation also removes a harmful quality that some other authors have attributed to it, assuming it to be true; but the proof is not well established: even today, in some parts of Italy, the lower classes still eat it, cooked simply in water with salt or vinegar. The root is single, woody, with several fibers; the stem is 12 to 18 inches high, moderately thick, straight, cylindrical, a little hairy, hollow and full of marrow; the leaves are alternate, borne on long tails, composed.s most often of seven oblong, narrow, dark-green segmens, plain at the edges, hairy underneath, and topped with a silvery-white down, fan-shaped by their arrangement; the edges of these segmens approach and narrow at sunset, and incline towards the tail; the flowers are arranged in a spike at the top of the stems; They are leguminous, white, borne on short pedicels; a pistil emerges from the calyx, which turns into a thick, broad, flattened pod, about three inches long, straight, pulpy, yellowish, a little hairy on the outside, containing four or five fairly large, flattened seeds, reddish on the outside and yellow on the inside, and very bitter. The second species, of which I have never been able to see the plant, although I have sown it several times, is, as I have been told, identical in all respects to the previous one, except for the color of the flower and the seed. The flower is a ruddy blue, and the seed a dark purple. This species is almost unknown. The first is very commonly used in medicine; its flour, which is one of the four resolving flours, is used in all emollient poultices; its decoction is aperitive and specific for liver diseases and visceral obstructions; it stimulates months and urine, and kills worms: Its flour produces the same effect, mixed with honey and vinegar; the same decoction is detersive, curing scabies, scabs and ulcers; it also cleanses and decleanses the skin perfectly: boiled with vinegar and applied as a poultice to tumors and scabies, it gradually dissipates them, especially in their birth: the grain is also marvelous for fattening oxen; it is also used in some countries to make powder to powder. Lupin is sown in March in warm countries, where it is easy to raise, and its cultivation is no different from that of other grains; but here, where the climate is too cold, it can only be raised by first sowing it on a bed, from where it is replanted in the warmest possible location: some grow it in pots. CHAPTER LXV. Description of LONG PEPPER; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Three species are cultivated, differing only in the shape of the fruit they produce: one is elongated, slightly curved, and cone-shaped; the other is short and pointed at the tip, and the third is round: their similarities are perfect in all other respects, so I need only describe one of the three. It grows a branching, green, gnarled stem, formed into a shrub that rises to fifteen or eighteen inches; its leaves are oblong, pointed and smooth, of a beautiful glossy green; The flowers emerge in small bunches from the leaf axils, in the form of white stars, borne on a small calyx which changes into a fruit of different shape, depending on the species, which is green at first, and becomes a bright, shiny red, approaching coral as it ripens; it encloses the seed, which is round and flat, of medium size and russet in color. It is used very little in France for living, and is cultivated more for garden decoration and eye candy than for utility; however, it is used for many purposes: it is candied with sugar when green, and eaten at a dose of half an ounce, to fortify the stomach, aid digestion and dissipate the winds: yeast growers also use it to give more strength to vinegar; it is mixed with candied gherkins. Some people use it in their food instead of ordinary pepper, and find it tastier. But in foreign countries, in India, Spain, Italy and even Flanders, it is widely consumed; some eat it preserved in salt and vinegar; others, who have become accustomed to it from youth, eat it raw when it is green: I admit that this may seem surprising to those who are familiar with its pungent taste; but the fact is no less certain, and I have witnessed it a thousand times. This plant grows very easily in this climate, as well as in hot countries, and its cultivation is very simple; it is sown in beds in March, and replanted in May, either in beds a foot apart, or in pots; it requires good soil, a little moist, and a slightly shady situation; too much sun is detrimental to it: it is moistened as needed, and the fruit is cut as desired, green or dry: the seed keeps well for several years. different species, properties, cultivation, etc. THIS plant, although of little use to the table, nevertheless has good enough qualities to be considered one of the best in the garden. Its leaf is small, snowshoe-shaped, thick and fleshy, full of water, odorless, dark green or yellowish, depending on the species, and covered underneath with a snowy white down; its stem is of a very similar consistency, and is used in the same way as the leaf. It grows straight and fairly high, when forced to rise by others; but when placed at ease, it does not rise much, and its branches, which form in fairly large numbers, crawl on the ground. The leaves are arranged two by two, opposite each other, and from their axils come the second branches, which divide into several small twigs, at the end of which form a group of small yellowish flowers, followed by small pointed shells containing the seed. Q2 PURSLANE. When the plant is young and tender, it is used in salads; when stronger, it is used in soups, mixed with other herbs; it is also prepared with cream, and is a familiar dish in many countries, almost unheard of in Paris; but for this to happen, the chops must be the size of two feathers, plain and straight, with no lateral branches: at the same size, they are pickled in vinegar in the same way as gherkins, alone or mixed with pickles, and used in winter salads. Its medicinal properties are much more remarkable: distilled water or the juice of its leaves is used in hot fevers, at a dose of three or four ounces, to calm the impetuosity of the blood and spirits: the water in particular, taken at the same dose, is one of the most effective remedies for haemorrhage and blood loss in women; it is also good for killing worms in children, and in this latter respect the juice of distilled water has the same effect. The plant is also good for scurvy and spitting blood; its chewed leaf cures mouth ulcers and quenches thirst, as well as the pain of irritated teeth: it is also used in many other remedies, but as they are less tried and tested, I will pass over them in silence. Its excessive use in food would, however, be dangerous for those with weak stomachs, who need it more to heal than to refresh: this is what we must take care of. There are three species of purslane, Green, Golden and Wild, which grows in confusion in most gardens, and is a great nuisance to plants of all kinds, without being able to be destroyed: if the other two were lacking, it would be just as useful as a remedy; but for life, it is too dry and hard. There is a fourth, little-known species, formed into a shrub with a hard stem, and which is very delicate to raise and preserve; but as it is only useful for the pleasure of the curious, I will say no more about it. Its root is small and fibrous; it grows several weak, creeping stems, like wild purslane, which do not extend very far; its leaves are narrow and long, thick and fleshy, more or less like percepia, and arranged in a star shape around its leaves, eight or ten in number: the stems are round, smooth and reddish on the sunny side; the tops end in a group of small, petalless flowers, like those of wild purslane, which turn into small, green, elongated shells, wrapped 23 in a thick, white stuffing; they enclose the seed, which is black and even smaller than that of ordinary purslane: its taste is bitter; it would not be suitable, therefore, for the use of life; but it could have other properties that I do not know: it is sown on the bed like the other species, and it comes easily enough; but it must be enclosed during the winter. The first two can be propagated from seed, but are cultivated differently: the golden variety is delicate, and can only tolerate the open air when the heat begins; the green variety, on the contrary, is hard: it is therefore sown on a bed throughout the winter, and is hardly ever sown in the open air. The first seed is sown under a bell in January; however, as the cold can be very harmful, it is common to wait until the hard frosts have passed, i.e., around mid-February: it is buried with small lettuces; the same amount of soil is enough for them: the seed is sown very thickly, without burying it; if you wish, it is enough to beat it a little with the hand, and it rises very well and very quickly. When the plant has risen, care must be taken to keep it well covered, as the slightest hint of freshness will melt it; it does however need to see the sun, and whenever it appears, you must not fail to uncover the bells a little. We cut it as soon as it has two slightly formed leaves, and at this point it is more red than green; but it is such a pleasure, that it is on all new lettuces; we always sow a little from fortnight to fortnight, so as to have a succession until we can risk the other species, which, depending on the year, is sown in the middle or at the end of April, and under cloche as well, because in the open ground you have to wait until mid-May. There are no other precautions to be taken for these first seeds on a bed; but for those sown in the open ground in May, they should be placed along a well-exposed wall, in the loosest soil available; and if they are heavy by nature, they should be loosened with plenty of compost, or sand if there is none: after ploughing, harrow it well with a pitchfork, rake it over, then sow; and as the seed is extremely small, and always escapes more than you want, mix it with sawdust or ash, to control it better. After sowing, lightly beat the soil with the back of a wooden spade, and then spread an inch of loam over it as evenly as you can; lightly wet the spot the next day, and continue every day, until it has risen, unless it rains: if there is no loam, harrow the Q 4 POURPIER. If you don't have potting soil, you have to harrow the soil with a fork after sowing, and then beat it with a spade; but unless you keep it very wet at all times, it can hardly break through the crust; and if you don't have watering cans that sprinkle water in a fine shower, the sprinklings beat the soil so hard that the seed suffocates rather than emerges. In the months of June and July, when new seeds are sown, the coast is no longer so necessary; it can be sown in beds wherever you like, as it does very well everywhere, subject to the same precautions explained above. One important thing to remember is to wet it every day, and only at midday, when it is starting to take shape: watering in the evening or morning takes away its golden color and turns it green. Only a few should be sown at a time, as it is only good in salads when it is young and tender: of course, it must be weeded if necessary. To collect the seed, we replant it from the first seeds we've sown a foot apart: we water it as soon as we've planted it, and continue for two days at a time until the seed has formed; its maturity is revealed by the first hulls, which begin to peel off, revealing the seed; we must then carefully pull out the plants, and have a sheet ready to receive them: You leave them on for a few days to allow the seed to ripen, stirring them from time to time, and then rubbing them with your hands to loosen and enclose them. It's black, round and as fine as grains of sand; it keeps well for eight to ten years. Others put it in a barrel, well pressed with all its stalks, and leave it there until all its stalks are consumed with rot; the seed does not suffer, and is gathered at the bottom of the barrel, from where it is removed; and after washing it, it is dried and locked up. The reason for this practice is that the seed feeds better, and there is none left in the capsules, as it is air-dried: each person will follow whichever of these two methods is more convenient for him or her, because in either case, the seed lifts equally. CHAPTER LXVII. Description of RAIPONCE; its different Species, Properties, Calture, etc. Pumice grows naturally in meadows and hedges. There are four 25 species, all of which have their Latin name, but three of which are known only in botany, and are not used in food: I shall pass over them in silence, and speak only of the one with which we are familiar. Its root is fleshy, long and white, both inside and out, the size of a small turnip, with a mild flavor and no odor; it forms a group of small, oblong, tender-green leaves, similar to lamb's lettuce and arranged in the same way; its stem is branchy and slender, rising from twelve to eighteen inches; its branches are terminated by blue, bell-shaped flowers, in a single piece, cut into a five-rayed star; the calyx, from the middle of which rises a forked thread, becomes a fruit divided into three seed-filled chambers: this seed is one of the finest that can be produced, with a rounded, slightly elongated shape and a yellowish color. In spring, the root and leaf are eaten together, alone or mixed with lamb's lettuce: it is healthy, and many people are eager to eat it; its taste is a little like hazelnut. It is of little use in medicine: however, it is agreed that it is refreshing, and that its decoction is useful in the onset of throat inflammations. This plant comes without any cultivation, as I have said; nevertheless, it is much better nourished and more tender when grown in gardens; but it must be placed in fresh, soft, slightly shaded soil: it is sown in June; and as its seed is extraordinarily small, it must be mixed with sawdust and sown very lightly: one full dice is enough for a large bed; it requires more earth than any other plant, and a little burial. The best way to sow it is to pass the fine rake over the soil, after it has been well tilled, and to spread the seed over it as evenly as possible, without stirring it with a fork; it is then covered with no more than half an inch of potting soil, which is spread lightly with the same rake; it should be moistened often until it is well established, and then weeded: during droughts, it should also be watered regularly. Good raiponces come to us from Meaux en Brie, where the soil is more favorable to this plant than that around Paris; and it's also from there that good seed comes to us. There is no need to take any precautions to preserve it during the winter; it is left in the ground until needed, and we begin to enjoy it from the beginning of Lent until May, after which time it grows its stem, and is no longer good: the seed ripens in the month of July, and what is destined for seed should be left in the ground; for it should be noted that this little root recovers with difficulty when replanted, unless it is pulled out and replanted immediately, without having been washed. CHAPTER LXVIII. Description of RAVE and RADIS; their different species, properties, cultivation, etc. AS turnip and radish are two plants that are quite similar in both taste and form, I will treat them together in this article. Radish, more properly known as Raifort in most provinces, is the root or turnip of a plant that bears the same name; this turnip is more or less long and large, depending on the species, plain, straight, and mostly red on the outside; its flesh is white, firm, brittle, watery and pungent to the taste, with no odor; its leaf is elongated, deeply cut, coarse green, rough and hairy : from the center of its leaves, which are more or less numerous, depending on the species, emerges a stem about the size of a finger, hollow, fluted, reddish and branched, rising to about three feet; the ends of its branches are covered throughout with flowers placed alternately; Its flowers are arranged with four white or reddish petals, supported by an elongated calyx, in the middle of which rises a pistil that changes into a short, swollen, round and pointed silique, which contains five or six round seeds, the size of a grain of hare's lead, which are green at first, and become grooved as they ripen. There are three distinct species of turnip, not to mention several degenerate ones: the smallest is called the hâtive, or four-leaf turnip; the second is called the commune, and the other the grosse. They all resemble each other in foliage, stem, flower and seed, but differ in turnip shape, color and taste, and each has its own season. The early variety is very small, a beautiful red, very tender and sweet, with few leaves. The common variety is twice as big, also red, but a little less tender; it grows a lot of leaves before turning into turnips. The grosse is partly white and partly red, about the size of a thumb, and has a more pungent taste than the preceding varieties. The hâtive is the most esteemed, though the least profitable, because it comes first, and we manage to make it come against all the insults of the bad season. The common variety has the advantage of being large, and of succeeding perfectly in the open ground, either in spring or autumn; it is true, however, that there are areas where it cannot be grown in spring, unless the soil is extremely earthy. The large one has neither the delicacy nor the sweetness of the other two; but in addition to being more profitable, it grows quite well in the warmer months, an advantage that the others do not have. This plant, which can only be eaten raw with salt, has both good and bad qualities, which makes it loved by some and hated by others. Its good qualities are to be pleasant to the taste, to awaken the appetite, and to provide abundantly almost all year round, provided that all due care is taken. Its bad qualities are to be difficult to digest, and contrary to weak stomachs: it also has the defect of giving reports during all the day when one ate some; which is unbearable with many people. However, it is a vegetable which, generally speaking, everyone is eager to eat, especially in spring, and which is consumed immensely, both in Paris and in the provinces; it is also one of the main crops of our market gardeners during winter and spring. It has a number of medicinal virtues, which I must mention: when cooked, it is used for the same purposes as turnips; it is particularly good for kidney and bladder diseases caused by mucus or gravel: its juice is extracted, and three or four ounces are taken in the morning with half an ounce of honey, which is continued for three or four days. Its distilled water is also used up to four ounces in aperitif potions, but should not be given to those suffering from stone, as it carries too much urine salt into the bladder. The root, crushed and applied to the soles of the feet, is good for malignant fevers and dropsy. Some claim that frequent use of this plant is harmful to the eyes; those who perceive this bad effect should refrain from using it. I'll now move on to its cultivation (by which I mean early cultivation). To get it to the degree of perfection required, i.e., to be tender, soft and brittle, even, straight and very red, there is only the layer that can make it so, and this is also where our market gardeners turn all their attention: They prepare their first beds at All Saints' Day, for those which are to start the year in the following January; they give these first beds only two feet in height, and fill them with eight to nine inches of compost; they let them lose almost all their heat before sowing, so that it is only lukewarm; for the turnip comes covered with little filaments when it is hotter than I say, and this is a great defect. For the distribution of the seed, here is their method: some, after having marked the plaoe of their bells on the soil, make holes with their finger all over the place, two inches apart in all directions, and throw three seeds into each hole, where they run a little soil with the doïgt to simply cover them; if more escape, they pull them out after they have risen, and shoe at the same time those that must remain : others, to have it done better, broadcast it, stir up the soil to bury it; and when it's up, they pull out what's left over. The first way is the best; the turnip comes longer and straighter. For the rest, they leave the layers in the air until all the seeds have risen; then they put the bells on only during the nights and bad days, always leaving the plant uncovered as much as the weather allows. If there are frosts, they cover the bells with litter: when you have straw mats, safety is even greater; they are particularly necessary in times of rain, which makes them rust, of course they are placed so that the water runs off into the paths. These first-seeded turnips are usually good in January, provided they have been well cared for and properly warmed, and that the season has not been excessively harsh and contrary. In December, they sow them for the second time, to succeed the first ones; and these are the most difficult to raise all year round, as they only have bad days to go: however, by dint of care they manage to keep them; but they require a stronger layer, and much more covering and warming than the first ones: they also need clean weather, extreme rigor or too much mildness being equally contrary to them. We noted (in 1746) that January and the beginning of February had passed without any cold, so the turnip crop ran out of leaves and did not produce any turnips; most market gardeners were obliged to turn over their beds without having made any profit; but, as these cases do not happen often, this second sowing is always done in December, and the turnip crop is usually good in February or at the beginning of March. What I have just said forms an apparent contrast with what happened in this last winter (1748), when we quite commonly saw raves in the months of January and February, which were as mild as the most beautiful spring, except for two days of frost; But if we had taken a good look at the weather, we would have observed that the sun came out much more frequently in the latter period than in the former, which I mentioned earlier, and there is no doubt that it was the influence of this star that produced this effect, which was the opposite of the other. You can't be too careful, therefore, to take advantage of the slightest ray of sunlight to give this plant the benefit it deserves, and if you can't, you must at least give it as much air as you can; for if it remains suffocated under the covers, it will either wither away without doing any navét, or it will perish, which amounts to the same thing. The third sowing is done in January, and must be covered with bells as soon as it is put in the ground, to conserve heat; the layers must be even stronger than in the previous month, and cared for in the same way. Sow for the fourth time at the beginning of February, and then dispense with the bells, as the season becomes more favorable: we also reduce the volume of the bed, and sow it in full; we space the seed by two or three inches, as I explained above; and, if we want to give an air of cleanliness to the bed, after it is well erected, we stretch a string from end to end that we rub with lime, and this lime, applied to the soil in the distances we judge appropriate, forms straight lines to regulate the holes we make. The holes are made with the finger, as I said, or with a small planter of the same size, cut diametrically, so that the three grains thrown in, as they fall to the bottom, can move apart: we then cover the bed with straw mats, or large litter, until the seed begins to rise; then we remove the cover, and build a small trellis on both edges of the bed, six inches inside and four inches high, on which we place straw mats during the nights and days of bad weather: we load them again with dry litter, if the cold is severe, filling the sides with a good thickness of litter. When, in spite of all these precautions, frost has penetrated and the cowslip is attacked, you must be careful not to uncover it in the sun, which would destroy it: you must let it thaw little by little under the cover, simply removing the bedding that forms the sides, so that the air can pass through: but if the weather is mild without the sun shining through, you must put everything in the air. The rabe from this seed is usually good at the end of March, or the beginning of April, and is the best to eat; for those that have preceded, having suffered much, do not have nearly the same tenderness, nor the same taste; and those that follow begin to become too strong. However, we continue to sow them in March, and they are good in May; but after this month, we no longer sow them on the bed: we mix them with other seeds, when the soil is suitable, and we sow them in this way until the beginning of May, to eat them in June; and we use the common species, which is more beautiful and more profitable. However, those who like them so much that they can't be bored with them can continue to sow them, but as they would be too prickly in full sun, they should be placed in the shade, along a north-facing wall, where a foot of compost will have been added to replace the same amount of soil that has been removed, as the soil makes them hard and cordate in this season. If you don't have a suitably arranged wall, you can make a shelter with straw mats five to six feet high, and sow them behind, watering them exactly every day, and taking care to fill the place with compost. Until September, only people who are determined not to do without them grow these first two species of turnip; but you can sow a little of the larger variety, which doesn't harden so much, provided it is watered daily. Once September arrives, we start sowing them again in the open ground, where they are better than on the bed; and it's always the common species that is to be preferred: we sow them very lightly, they are redder and better; we then mix them into the spinach and lamb's lettuce seeds, into chicory, etc.; wherever we put them, they go well. We continue in October, but these require more attention, as the frosts that start in this month, coming upon them, cause them to perish. They should be sown in a bed under some shelter exposed to the sun, and covered with straw mats or pleyons during bad weather, and especially at night: it is even safer to sow them on old layers, or on ados of potting soil, where they are less likely to rust than in the ground, and are always sweeter to eat; they are also not so exposed to being eaten by insects. If they are well cared for, they provide a succession of crops until Christmas; but they lose much of their taste in the latter season, and if the slightest frost surprises them, they have none at all. The year is over there, and we start again in November, as we said before. To collect the seed, in March or April we replant a sheet, more or less, of the first ones that have been raised on the bed, and we choose the reddest and plainest; we space them a good foot apart, and we water them right away, which must be continued until they are well established: many people leave them free to spare themselves any care; but very often the winds and rainstorms break them and lay them on the ground, where the seed rots for the most part: the more this seed is aired and struck by the sun, the better it is. Birds wage a cruel war on it as it approaches maturity: you have to defend yourself as best you can. When, in August, most of the siliques are yellow, we pull out the stalks and leave them exposed to the sun for a few more days, after which we bind them in bundles and tie them to the floor in some dry place where mice cannot get at them; for this seed needs to remain in its siliques as long as possible: it feeds there and keeps much better. As a rule, I experimented with threshing and winnowing as soon as I had harvested it, and sowing it the following spring on the same bed where I had sown others that I had just threshed: the production was quite different: the new threshing made the turnip bigger, more even and more colorful. This seed keeps well for ten years or more, if left in its siliques. The radish I have yet to discuss is similar in many respects to the turnip, but differs in several others: its leaf is broader, more inverted on the ground, and less cut; its turnip is quite different, and its flesh firmer. not to mention a few others degenerated from these: these eight species are the small white and round radish of every month; the white and long; the gray and long; the long summer black; of the large species, the large winter black; the winter white; of Italy. The small radish of every month is white and round, ending in a slender tail, the size of a small walnut: it is very early, and is sown on the bed, as is the early turnip: it is raised in the same way; so what I have said for the one will serve for the other. It is tender and delicate, sweet and watery; many people prefer it to turnip, which has a more decided taste: it can also be sown on the ground at the end of February, but it doesn't come off as delicate there, unless the soil is top-dressed and always kept very cool. The small, long white radish is quite similar in taste to the previous one, but is less tender and a little more pungent; it is also less early: its size is like that of a finger, and its skin and flesh are a beautiful white: it can be sown on the ground and on the bed, and has the advantage of coming in well all year round, provided it is kept moist in the warmer months. The small gray radish is the same size as the previous one, but has less water, and therefore a stronger taste: its skin is gray, its flesh white, and its shape not very long: it is sown on the ground, like the previous one, throughout the summer, with the same care. The small black summer radish is still of the same size, but its shape is more elongated and its flesh harder and drier: it has a hazelnut taste which outweighs all the others, and which gives it preference over them when it is known: the difficulty is to find the real seed, which is very rare; its skin is completely black. The large radish is very long, about the size of a small egg; its skin is very white, as is its flesh: it is tender and full of water, quite sweet, but not very spicy in taste, and prone to glassiness: it also ropes if not thoroughly wetted, and does not succeed in summer; but in autumn it is very good, and the most profitable for its size: it requires very light soil. The large black radish, otherwise known as the Strasbourg radish, is quite different from the others; its turnip is black, as big as the wrist, and elongated in proportion: it keeps well throughout the winter, if sown in June, and watered frequently: if sown earlier, it rises: its flesh is hard and dry, and its taste extraordinarily pungent; moreover, it has Tome II. R the defect of being very indigestible; however, it has its supporters, and it pleases those who are unable to grow the other species of turnips and radishes during the winter, and find this one in their greenhouse throughout that season; this is the most real merit I know of it: it must be pulled up before the frosts, and buried in sand, or placed close by in a trench, and covered during the frosts. The large white radish differs from the previous one only in its dirty-white outer color and sweeter taste: in all other respects, the resemblance is perfect. The Italian radish, which is the Ravaneli of the Italians, so tasted and so cherished in their country, has truly superior qualities: it does not succeed as perfectly here; however, when you have Italian seed, it comes good enough to erase all the others: its length is commonly from six to eight inches, its size a good inch, and its external color a brilliant white, with some red shading on the side of the head; some are also quite white: its flesh is transparent, extremely soft, tender and brittle, with a lot of water: it requires very loose, well-soiled soil, and lots of watering: we sow it from spring to autumn, with a lot of water.

be sure to place it in the shade in the warmer months; it's a species everyone should be eager to grow. All these species multiply from seed like turnip, and are harvested in the same way: they are redder and smaller; that's the only difference: they can be kept for the same length of time, with the same precautions, which I won't repeat. For the two large winter radishes, the seed is better on the over-wintered fruit, which is replanted in March, than on the seed that could be sown in spring: it feeds better and ripens more surely. With regard to the others, we replant the fruits that come first, as I explained for turnip. It is used medicinally for the same purposes as sage. CHAPTER LXIX. Description of ROSEMARY; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Rosemary is a perennial shrub, fragrant and aromatic, which grows naturally in warm countries and is also cultivated in gardens. There are four species, but I know of only two, and whatever research I've done, I've been unable to find the other two, which M. Tournefort calls rosmarinus spontaneus latiore folio, and rosmarinus almeriensis flore majore purpurascente. The two cultivated species are common and variegated rosemary. The common rosemary grows to about three feet, and produces a large number of branches; its root is woody and covered with many sibers; its leaf is a large, slightly glossy green, white underneath, thick, fluted in the middle, long and very narrow, similar to that of lavender, with a strong, pleasant odor and a bitter, pungent taste: its stem is woody, very branchy, and its young branches are covered with a small white down: the flowers are born in small bunches from the leaf axils. The flower is bluish, shaped like a pipe, cut into two lips at the top, the upper of which is raised, indented and usually inverted: the lower lip is cut into three parts, the middle of which is hollowed out; the stamens are hooked; the calyx is a horn toothed with two or three points, at the bottom of which is a pistil that fits into the hole at the bottom of the flower: this pistil is composed of 4 embryos, which then become as many almost round, brown seeds, enclosed in the capsule that served as the flower's calyx. The second species of Rosemary differs from the first in that the stem is taller and fuller, and the leaf is smaller and accidentally yellowish; it also flowers earlier, and this year (1749) was in full bloom as early as January. In all other respects, it bears the same resemblance to the first, and has the same properties: both retain their leaves throughout the winter. This plant is of no use for food, but it has very great properties in medicine, especially in hot countries, where the heat of the sun makes it more spirituous: it is hot, desiccating, incisive, astringent, and essentially cephalic: it is mainly used for apoplexy, epilepsy, vertigo, paralysis and other head ailments: it clears the eyes, strengthens the memory, and revives the heart; it also corrects the stench of breath, and lifts obstructions of the liver and spleen; it is also good for jaundice and for white flowers, taken as an infusion. Simply macerate the leaves and flowers overnight in common water, R, several glasses of which are taken during the day: leaves boiled in wine fortify nerves and joints. Aromatic wine, so commonly used by surgeons as a fomentation to dissipate swelling in wounds, is made from this leaf, mixed with that of Thim and Sage: the leaves, infused like tea over a period of time, are useful in treating écrouelles. It is also claimed that vindind in which the leaves and flowers have been boiled, mixed with a little honey, and taken as a drink before going to bed, is an excellent remedy for asthmatics. Four or five drops of essence of this plant, taken in a suitable liqueur, will often cure third-grade fevers. A leading author also asserts that eau de vie distilled from wine in which rosemary leaves and flowers have been macerated cures scabies, cancers and fistulas that resist other remedies. The well-known eau de la reine de Hongrie is obtained by distilling the flowers of this plant, then digesting them in eau-de-vie, and if the young leaves are added, it is even stronger: it is used daily for fainting, dizziness and vertigo, as well as for hysterical and hypochondriacal vapors: two or three large spoonfuls are taken internally in a glass of water, and rubbed externally on the temples, nose and other nervous and muscular parts, weakened or afflicted by the pains of rheumatism: it is also used successfully for contusions, wounds and cold humours, toothache and even gangrene. Although this plant requires a warm climate, it is easy to grow everywhere, with the difference that in cold countries it must be locked up during the winter, or at least stuffed; but in this one, unless the winters are very harsh, these precautions are unnecessary; it withstands the rigors of bad weather, and needs no special care once rooted. It can be propagated from seed, but usually from cuttings or from rooted plants: in the first case, it must be bedded, or at least moistened often when placed in the ground, and kept covered for some time in the heat of the sun: usually, several cuttings are placed in a pot, kept in the shade until they begin to grow, and then separated for a while: this plant will remain in the same place for a very long time. R 4 AC 2 ===== CHAPTER LXX. Description of the ROQUETTE; its different species, properties, 56 cultivation, etc. There are two species of arugula, the cultivated and the wild, both perennials. The first is grown in gardens: its root is white and slender; its stem rises to eighteen inches or two feet, a little hairy; its leaves are white, long, narrow, deeply cut on both sides, tender, smooth and acrid; Its flowers are born at the top of four-petaled cross-shaped stems, pale yellow with blackish stripes, enclosed in a hairy calyx, from which emerges a pistil that changes into a long silique, borne on a short pedicel, and divided by a partition into two chambers that are filled with yellow, small, round and slightly elongated seeds. The smell and taste of this plant are equally strong; however, it has its enthusiasts, particularly in Italy, where no one expects to eat a good salad without it. This is the only use to which it is put for life, and from which we derive many health benefits; for it stimulates the appetite, aids digestion, and dissolves slimy matter in the stomach. It is good in disgust and indigestion: eaten alone, with oil and vinegar, it excites the urine and slightly irritates the parts destined for the secretion and evacuation of the seed; this is why it is used in compositions intended to awaken love; but as it is very hot by nature, it is not suitable for hot and bilious temperaments, nor for those with a burning stomach. Its seed is used in winter in place of the leaves, and produces the same effects; it ranks first among the anti-scorbutic seeds, and is included in all the medicines suitable for scurvy; it is prescribed in a dose of one large, crushed and infused in a glass of distilled cochlearia water; and in its place, the leaf is also used, which is eaten raw, or the juice extracted from it, which is drunk mixed with wine: the leaf is also boiled in the broths and apozems prescribed for this disease, taking care to boil them only lightly, as they lose their flavor and virtue if left too long in the fire. Its seed is also an excellentR 3 slow preservative against apoplexy, paralysis and soporific affections; chew fifteen to twenty seeds every morning on an empty stomach, alone or mixed with cumin seeds; its use is very favorable, especially for the elderly; and various authors claim to have seen surprising effects. It also has the virtue of making people salivate a lot, and is therefore beneficial to those suffering from pituitary problems. A decoction of its leaves, taken with sugar, is also good for curing children's coughs. Wild arugula has a slightly different shape to the preceding plant; its root is white, thick and long; its stem is very branchy, hollow, fluted and hairy; its leaves are cut like those of the dandelion, dark green, smooth, with a burning taste; its flowers are yellow, arranged like those of the preceding plant; and the flowers are followed by long, angular siliques, filled with seeds similar to those of wild mustard. The whole plant gives off a strong odor, which pleases some and displeases others; its flavor is also pungent, burning and bitter at the end. This plant grows naturally in uncultivated and arid places, and particularly in old walls: it has all the same qualities as the previous one, for medicine, it even surpasses it; but as food, it irritates the taste more because of its pungency; however, country people also eat it in salads, especially in hot countries. It is also eaten finely chopped on buttered toast, like cran. The first species is sown in gardens in March, and requires no special care: any soil is suitable. The seed is harvested in July and August, and keeps well for two years. "========= 1 CHAPTER LXXI. Description of RUE; its different species, properties, cullure, etc. Rue is a species of aromatic plant, which is perennial; there are three species, domestic, wild and small-leaved. The domestic rue has a woody, yellow root with several fibers; it grows like a shrub, and when well cultivated, can reach five to six feet; its stems are as thick as a finger, woody, twiggy, and covered with a whitish bark: its leaves are divided into several parts, small, oblong, fleshy, a little fatty, smooth, sea-green in color, arranged in pairs, on a rib ending in an odd one; its flowers are born at the tops of the branches, R 6 small, composed of four petals, pale yellow in color; The flowers are followed by fruits, usually composed of four capsules, assembled against a stone, and each capsule contains several seeds, most often in the shape of a small rooster's kidney, which are angular and black in color. The whole plant has a very unpleasant odor, and a bitter, acrid taste. The wild rue differs from the previous one in that its stem is lower, and its leaves are divided into longer, narrower parts, with a darker green color, a stronger odor and a more pungent taste: in all other respects, the same resemblance. The rue à feuille menue (small-leaved rue) has a rather large, white, woody root; its leaves turn over on the ground, and are divided very small, pale green in color, with a very strong odor and a pungent taste; between the leaves, two or three stems divided into twigs sometimes arise, which end in bunches of flowers similar to those of the preceding species, but smaller, pale yellow in color; they are followed by fruits, composed, like the others, of four capsules containing small, black, acrid seeds. These last two species grow naturally in Languedoc and Provence, in stony, uncultivated places. We'll confine ourselves here to the plant's nutritional qualities; but in Italy, its young shoots are eaten with pleasure in salads, and even without any seasoning: there, it doesn't have the pungency and bad odor it has here, and this is undoubtedly due to the climate. We'll confine ourselves here to its health-giving properties, the first of which is the most commonly used: it is hysterical, cephalic, stomachic, vermifuge, carminative, anti-scorbutic, cordial and vulnerary. One or two pinches of its fresh leaves, infused in a glass of white hemp, or a dragme of its powder, when dried, is very suitable for restoring the course of the months and soothing hysterical vapors. For the same illnesses, boil a small handful of its leaves with as much hyssop in wine, and drink a hot glass. Preserving the leaves and flowers dissipates indigestion, and the oil extracted from them kills worms. Soak a cotton ball in it and put it in children's navels; if this oil is not available, its expressed juice has the same effect: a few spoonfuls can even be drunk on an empty stomach, mixed with couch grass water. The decoction of its leaves, taken as an enema or applied as a poultice to the stomach, is sovereign for colic: the olive oil in which the leaves and seeds of this plant have been infused is still a powerful remedy for the same ailment; and the essential oil extracted from it is one of the best known for hysterical passion. The leaf is very suitable for treating écrouelles; children afflicted with this disease are made to eat three or four of them on an empty stomach with bread, over a period of time, and this simple remedy has often cured them. If they are too reluctant, they can be made to swallow three ounces of the juice purified from these leaves. Two spoonfuls of the same juice, mixed with the same amount of good wine, are still very good for protecting against bad air, in contagious diseases: the dose can even be increased to a glass, and one is taken in the morning, and another four hours after dinner. In Italy, a vinegar is made from it, which serves as a preservative in these kinds of cases, and especially during the bad weather that reigns every year on the Remne side, from Midsummer to All Saints' Day. It is made by infusing the leaves of this plant in the strongest vinegar, adding a little burnet, betony, a few cloves of garlic, walnuts, juniper berries and a little camphor; the dose is one spoonful in the morning, and as much in the afternoon. The leaf is also very useful for epileptics, being crumpled and introduced into the nostrils at the time of the attack. A decoction of the leaves is also an excellent gargle for the gums of scorbutic patients, and for those with smallpox: this gargle resolves the seeds around the throat; it can also be used to baste around the eyes. Three or four ounces are swallowed, and the pomace is applied to the bite. There is also experience that these leaves, applied to both pulses, prevent drunkenness. Here's another particular virtue of this plant. By boiling a few shirts in a decoction of its leaves and natural water, no pus is ever produced; a useful remedy for those who, by the nature of their flesh, are prone to this vermin. So many virtues indicate that a garden should never be without a few feet of rue, to find it when needed; it is a plant, moreover, that gives no care, and which, once planted, remains abandoned to itself. It has no fear of bad weather, can be kept for many years in the same place, and thrives in any kind of soil, as long as it is slightly exposed to the sun, which enhances its virtues: it can be propagated from seed, cuttings or rooted plants. The third species is sometimes prone to perish in the open ground, when winters are harsh and long: but as the other two suffice us well, and are foolproof, we can dispense with any expense for this one. "CHAPTER LXXII. Description of SALSIFIS from SPAIN; its properties, cultivation, etc. THE merit of Spanish salsify, otherwise known as Scorsonnera, lies in its root, which is one of the best and healthiest. This root is black on the outside, white on the inside, about the size of a little finger, almost equal at both ends, and very straight when the soil is very loose: but in many soils it becomes forked. The leaf is very narrow, up to a third of its length; it then widens precipitously, and ends in a very elongated point; so that its fullness, which is about an inch, is placed at two-thirds of its length, which is eight to nine inches: its edges are trimmed with small, sawtooth-shaped spikes, unevenly placed, and its color is a meadow green; its stem is round and loose, slightly fluted, soft and branchy, trimmed with a few leaves from interval to interval, and about three feet high: its flowers are placed at the end of its small branches, arranged like a daisy, yellow in color: the petals that compose it emerge from a kind of elongated bud, which grows as the flower passes, and which contains the seed, which, coming to ripen, breaks the calyx, and spreads out in the shape of a tassel, the size of a billiard ball, having a clip at the end of each of its seeds, which are long, small and white. Its root is used as a lean food, from All Saints' Day to Easter; but it's mainly used during Lent: it's seasoned with white sauce, or fried with a paste like artichokes. Good cooks accommodate it in many other ways, and give it different shapes; it is also used to make entremets en gras, which are highly esteemed. It has the same health-giving properties. Its main quality is to be cordial and sudorific: it is used in all the teas made for diseases suspected of malignancy, and mainly for smallpox. It is good against the bite of snakes and other venomous beasts; it is also used to provoke women's months: its leaves also have their virtues, and are used in the composition of several distilled waters for chest pains. This plant therefore deserves its place in a vegetable garden. The seed is sown at the end of April in dry soils, and in mid-May in heavy soils. When it is sown earlier, it is prone to rot; the soil must be warmed up a little before it germinates and sprouts: it usually remains for a fortnight or three weeks before coming out. It can also be sown in August. The soil must be perfectly loose and well-prepared, with no clods or stones; because the better it is worked, the more the root shoots forward and comes up straight and even, which is its main merit. In strong soils, it is prone to becoming forked, glassy, and consequently bad, unless you lighten it with a lot of loam, which you mix well with the soil. A very deep ploughing should be done first, in November, and a second one before sowing; and when it can be placed in newly broken ground, it does even better. If this is not possible, the soil should have been smoked the previous year, and occupied by plants that have not crumbled it too much, such as cabbages: furrowing the soil before sowing should be avoided, as all the roots would be counterfeit. The seed is sown in a border or bed, in rays seven to eight inches apart; after the seed is sown, or even before spreading it in the rays, the soil must be left to tan for a few hours; it is then sown, and lightly treaded; it is then covered, and the rake is passed over to unite the soil: the next day, when the soil is a little tanned, wet it well, and continue for two days at a time, if the weather is dry, until it has risen well: Our market gardeners in Aubervilliers, who sow whole fields of it, don't take so many precautions, but they owe the advantage of being able to do without it to the constitution of their soil. This soil, whose parts are supple and loose, almost never seals or cracks; nor does it dry out as quickly as many others, and the roots of all kinds of plants emerge from it with unusual ease: it may also have particular salts and nitrates, which make this root benefit in one year, as much as it does in two in most other soils; this means that it is lifted at the end of the year, and that everywhere else it is left in place for two years, in order to grow to a reasonable size: we must therefore not take them as models in this respect. Six weeks after this root has sprouted, it should be thinned out, leaving a good two inches between each plant: weed it at the same time and wet it afterwards, to reassure the soil and fill in the gaps: after that, we don't water it any more. This plant, different in this respect from all other roots, bears its seed the same year it is sown, without the root receiving any alteration. From the end of June, it begins to rise, and is ripe in July. Care must be taken to remove it as it blooms, as the slightest wind blows it away, and birds, which are very fond of it, shake it off and eat it. When it is completely picked, all the stems must be cut off flush to the ground, and the plant must be thoroughly wetted; it will soon green up again: there is no other way to grow it. If you want to eat it during the winter, you can pull out what you want at the end of November, and bury it in the greenhouse or in a trench, as I've explained for other plants. But if you're saving it for Lent, you only pull it out as and when you eat it; and it's always better fresh from the ground. What I have just said is as much as one would like to eat in the first year; but as this is not usual in private gardens, it is left in place without any care, until one wants to enjoy it, at the end of the second or third year: one is content simply to crimp it at the beginning of spring, when it begins to grow its new leaves which make it recognizable; for during the winter all its foliage perishes. Shortly afterwards, it sprouts its stem, which grows and provides much more than that of the first year; its seed also ripens earlier, and is good to pick at the beginning of July: it should be preferred to that of the first year; and the reason for this is that the stalk, which has more strength, feeds it better. It keeps well for two years. In areas close to woods where birds are common, it is very difficult to save it at this time of year, when neither the seeds nor any other seeds are yet ripe; and we are often obliged to keep it, if the scarecrows are not enough; for, without even waiting for it to ripen, they pierce the husk of the bud, and eat it green. To avoid, at least in part, their damage, when you don't have the convenience of keeping it, you can do what I do: cut off all the buds that are beginning to yellow, without waiting for them to open, and lay them on a sheet in the sun; soon after they develop, and the seed is equally good. This seed is also subject to another scourge, which is nail, which attaches itself to the stems and causes them to perish. There is no remedy for this: you need to reserve more than less, so as not to be deprived. This plant's enemy is the beetle worm, which cuts its roots. As soon as you see a plant with a wilting leaf, look for it quickly, otherwise it will ruin entire rays. The mole also sometimes wreaks havoc: watch out and catch it. CHAPTER LXXIII. Description of common salsify; its properties, cultivation, etc. Common salsify, otherwise known as white salsify, differs from Spanish salsify, which I have just described, in that its root is white both inside and out, and is also larger and less prone to forking. Its leaf is very narrow and smooth, shaped like a gutter, twelve to fifteen inches long, of a whitish water-green: its stem is branched, fairly large, three or four feet high; its flower is a violet-red, sun-shaped: it is placed at the end of its stems, and comes out of an elongated bud in the same way as the Spanish salsify; but the bud and flower are much larger. After the flower has passed, the bud opens, and the seed spreads out in the same way, in the shape of a tassel, each seed being accompanied by its aigrette. The seed is twice as large as that of black salsify, a little longer too, and gray or ashen in color. The root, although less effective than the first species, has the same uses for suspicious diseases. This root, although less spicy in taste than the other, is nevertheless very useful during Lent, and makes a very healthy food; it is eaten prepared in the same way. I won't repeat what I've said about it. It has the advantage over blackcurrants of occupying the land for only one year: it is sown in April or May, depending on the soil, and is ready for harvest as early as All Saints' Day; but it is commonly reserved for Lent. It is grown in the same way as the other variety, and requires the same quality of soil. It is quite resistant to frosts and bad weather, so you don't need to pull it up to use it during Lent: but if you want to use it during the winter, you need to pull up the quantity you think you'll need around Christmas, and put it in a greenhouse in fresh sand, or bury it in a trench dug in the garden, which you take care to cover well during frosts. Leave as much as you want to keep for seed, and if you're worried about frosts damaging it, although there's little risk of that, you can cover the spot with dry sills: manure is too precious to use for this purpose. Its foliage dries out entirely during the winter; but as soon as spring arrives, the leaf grows back, and we immediately give it a little hoeing; soon afterwards it makes its stem, and its seed is ripe in July. The same precautions need to be taken as for the other plant, to be able to preserve it: the birds devour part of it, and the wind carries away the rest, if you are not clever enough to pick it up as it opens out, to make its tassel: there is, however, a way I use to defend against the wind'; it's to cut the flower buds above the seed with scissors, when they start to yellow. It's easy to see how much space the seed occupies in the bud, so as not to damage it. This operation provides a second benefit, which is to pick up the seed clean, because the chisel takes away the burrs that catch the wind, and you don't have to go to the trouble of cleaning it, which is a hassle. After picking it up, leave it exposed to the sun on a sheet for a day or two, winnow it and lock it up: it's only good for sowing in the first year; in the second, some of it still rises, but you don't need to make a sure foundation. Volume II. S CHAPTER LXXIV. Description of the SARRIETTE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. CETTE plante n'est pas d'une grande elle sert quelquefois, et qu'elle a d'autres propriétés, il faut lui donner rang avec les autres: l'on appelle indifféremment Sarriette, Sadrée et Savorée. There are four species, but only one is cultivated usefully; the second is known to us only by relation; and the other two, which are not very widespread, have no merit other than to please the curious. The first species, which we cultivate, forms a rounded, regularly branched tuft, about a foot wide and of the same height; its root is simple, small and woody; its wood is hard, and resembles dry wood; its leaves are narrow and oblong, holding the middle ground between those of thyme and hyssop; its flowers emerge from leaf axils in places; they are mouth-shaped, perfectly similar to those of thyme, white in color, tending to purpurin. When they have passed, they are succeeded by small, almost round, slate-colored seeds enclosed in capsules that served as calyxes for the flowers. Its main cooking advantage is that it enhances the taste of marsh beans, with which it goes very well. To achieve this, sow a little on a bed, then replant it at the foot of a well-exposed wall, so that it comes up at the same time as the first beans: it is also sometimes used in certain sauces that call for strong herbs. The Germans put it in their candied cabbage, which they call Saurkraudt, and claim that it helps to preserve it longer. It is much more useful in medicine, and so good that it is called sauce aux pauvres gens (sauce for the poor); it restores and strengthens the stomach: its decoction, syringed into the ear, is very good in soporous affections, to awaken the sick: it is also useful as a gargle for loosening the uvula, and for inflammation of the tonsils. The powder of its dried leaves, drunk in a glass of wine, relieves chest pains. Some authors extend its virtues much further, but I'll confine myself to those that have proved most effective. S 2 Its cultivation is very simple; it grows easily in any soil, and so easily that it reproduces itself every year, without any care, in places where it has been grown once: it can be used in any degree of strength until it goes to seed; and to collect it, it is left to ripen to the point where it begins to detach from the first capsules; at this point, the whole feet are torn off, and tied into bundles, which are hung on a floor: it does not need to be exposed to the sun; the air is enough to perfect it. It keeps well for four or five years, when left in its capsules. Those who need this plant during the winter should pull out as much as they see fit, before it flowers, and dry it in the shade, attached to a floor that is not extremely exposed to flies. The second species, called Sariette de Candie, is known to us, as I said earlier, only by reputation, and I have never been able to see it. According to M. Chomel, who gives a short description, its scent is much more pleasant than the one I mentioned, and an essential oil with great virtues is extracted from it. He compares its properties to those of thyme, and says no more, but that's enough to make us regret not knowing about it. It seems to me, however, that being common in Candia, whose remoteness is not very considerable, those curious about botany should not remain privẽs of it. The other two, which I saw without having cultivated them, are both perennials, and form a fairly tall shrub: one has an oblong leaf much like that of tarragon, and bears at its apices clusters of bluish-white flowers, borne on a group of small calyxes piled one on top of the other, followed by a small, elongated, russet-colored seed, by which it is produced: it can also be multiplied by its offshoots. It can also be propagated by its offspring, but must be raised in pots and sown in the greenhouse when frost approaches. The other has a small, elongated leaf, and grows small white flowers all along the branches, which bloom imperceptibly; and as it is very delicate, it must be locked up early in a warm greenhouse: it keeps its leaf there all winter. I know of no useful qualities for these two species, and the authors have said nothing about them. - THE SAUGE. CHAPTER LXXV. Description of Sage; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Sage is a perennial and aromatic plant; I know of fourteen different species, and I know that there are a few other less remarkable ones, which I will pass over in silence. These fourteen species are the purplish-flowered grande saugrande, the white-flowered d'Espagne, the lavender-leaved d'Espagne, the variegated yellow, the curly, the berry-bearing, the broad-leaved petite du Levant, the large du Levant, the yellow-flowered d'Afrique, the purple-flowered d'Afrique, and the mountain sage. The large sage, otherwise known as the large species, and in botany as Spacellus Theophrasti, has a woody root with many fibers; Its leaf is oval-shaped, moderately pointed, thick and chagrined, water-green, covered with a small white down, borne on a reddish stalk, with a strong, aromatic odor and flavor; it grows several branching, woody stems, hairy and reddish at the tips, rising to about three feet: Its flowers are born at the end of the stems, and are borne on a kind of spike; they are ash-blue in color, and form a pipe cut into two lips at the top, the upper one arched, and the lower one divided into three parts. From the front of this flower rise the stamens, attached together and arranged in such a way that they do not misrepresent the hioid bone: the calyx is a cone that pushes out from the bottom a pistil composed of four embryos; this pistil fits into a hole at the bottom of the flower, and these embryos subsequently become so many almost round seeds, enclosed in a capsule that served as the flower's calyx. Sage franche, which botanists call Calvia minor aurita and not aurita, is similar in many respects to the preceding variety, but it has more leaves and does not grow so high. Its wood is also redder and more woody, and its leaf more elongated and narrower, sometimes having ears at its base; its grain and color are quite similar, as is its flower. Provence sage, called Salvia folio tenuiore, has the root and wood of its stems equally woody; but its leaves are much smaller, narrower, 4 1 and in greater quantity, being as if piled on top of each other at the end of the branches: its flower is arranged like the others, but bright blue. The large purpurine sage differs from the first only in that its flower is reddish, tending to purple, and its odor is stronger. White-flowered Spanish sage differs from the above in that its leaves are long and narrow, yellowish-green; its stems are also green, sparsely hairy, and its flower white. It grows to about two feet tall, and produces only a few, rather thin branches. Spanish sage, with a lavender leaf, is called by this name because its leaves are long and narrow, a little toothed, whiter than green, and strongly resembling the lavender leaf in all respects. Its stems are also more naked and whitish than the other species. The variegated yellow, otherwise known as omelette, has a leaf mottled with green and yellow, and is a little obtuse; in all other respects, it bears the same resemblance to the others. Frisée has a broad, almost round leaf, toothed and curled at the edges, carried on a long tail, pale water-green, soft on the finger like marshmallow, without any marked grain, and with a less penetrating odor than the others: it only grows to a foot or eighteen inches; its flower is blue, similar to the others. Botanists call it Salvia baccifera for this reason: its leaves are heart-shaped, tender green, yellowish and velvety; its stems are also regularly green, and its scent quite sweet: it forms a very tall shrub, and bears small pea-sized fruits, in which the seed is enclosed. Levant sage, with its broad leaves, is totally different from all the others in that its euilla is winged and arranged like that of the rosebush; but the impaire ending it is considerably larger than the segmens on the sides; it is also very hairy, toothed at the edges and meadow-green; it does not grow upwards, and its stems crawl on the ground; its flower is blue and very large. Levant sage differs from the first species only in its leaf, which is larger. African sage, with its yellow flower, grows like a shrub; its leaf is rounded, smooth at the edges, velvety and sea-green; its wood is ash-colored, and its flower golden yellow. African sage, with violet flowers, also grows as a shrub: its leaves are small, almost round, a little toothed, and whitish water-green; its wood is hazelnut-colored, and its flower violet. Mountain sage, otherwise known as wild sage, has a large, broad, soft leaf, with a garlic-like odor; its flower is yellowish, and grows to three feet or more; but its stems die every year; it must be cut flush with the ground in late autumn, and grows again in spring: it grows naturally in mountainous woods, around bushes and hedges. Some claim that all these species of sage are merely varieties of the first species, which grows naturally in Provence, and that the differences we notice there have gradually arisen from changes in terrain and climate, as well as from cultivation. I cannot accept this opinion; for these species differ too greatly from one another to be regarded as mere varieties: there is an extreme disproportion in size and grain, and even in smell: one grows higher, the other lower; one has a blue flower, the other purple or yellow; the latter bears fruit, etc. All these characteristics must be recognized in the plant. All these characteristics must be recognized as species differences, or they must no longer be admitted in any other plant; for it would then follow that there would only be one species of cabbage, one species of lettuce, etc., because their tastes and other properties are always the same, from the most to the least. I agree that changes of soil and climate diminish or increase a plant's vigor, as well as its virtues; but they don't cut the leaf, if it wasn't cut in the first place; they don't change the color of the flower from white to yellow. Let's take all these species of sage to the rocks of Provence, where they are said to have originated, and I'm convinced that they will always retain the same differences there as they do here. In a word, one came to us from Spain, the other from the Levant, the other from Africa, and so on. Why pretend that these regions, which are so far apart from one another, drew the species they have communicated to us from the same stem, and that these species did not originate naturally in their own bosom? Everyone will conclude as they see fit. The fourteen species I have described all have the same virtues, from the most to the least, and some can be used in the absence of others; however, Spanish sage is reputed by botanists to be the best; little Provence sage comes S6 after it, and frank sage after that; jumping sage has particular qualities, which I will discuss in a separate article. The leaves and flowers of this plant are very useful in aromatic decoctions and fomentations, for strengthening nerves, firming flesh, softening tumors and dissipating the swelling of wounds; It is also good for scurvy, especially if the gums are well bathed with half its juice, and as much cochlearia juice mixed with similar salse and balauste; it makes white flowers pass; but fat women should not be given it, because it promotes menstruation. An infusion of the leaves is taken internally for dizziness, vapors, drowsiness and other affections of the brain, which threaten apoplexy, paralysis and so on. At the same time, it revives the movement of liquors and blood circulation. Eight or ten leaves are infused in half a cup of boiling water, and drunk every morning on an empty stomach with a little sugar, for several days. The same infusion is very useful for suppressing menstruation and urination, indigestion and stomach weakness, wind, colic and spitting blood, killing worms and clearing the lungs of asthmatics; the effect is even more certain when the leaf is smoked like tobacco. The infusion of this leaf in wine is also sovereign for toothache, if two large quantities of good tobacco are added. Water distilled from sage, which is poured over wounds, mundializes them; drawn through the nose, it stops haemorrhaging, fortifies the brain and limbs, and by washing the mouth with it, tightens the gums. Finally, this plant has so many virtues that it is considered by many to be universal and suitable for all ailments; this is why an ancient saying goes: Cur moritur homo cui salvia crescit in horto? and this is why it is called Salvia, from Salvus, healthy. However, although salvia is beneficial in all countries, it is unanimously considered to have more virtues when grown in hot climates, such as Provence. It is said to attract the snakes and toads that intertwine in its branches, and that they spread their venom on the leaves, from which bad effects can ensue, in addition to stinging those who approach them; but the remedy for this inconvenience is to mix in a few feet of rue to keep them away. Wild sage, which, according to M. Tournefort, is a species of Germandrée, has the merit more than the others of removing jaundice and tierce fever, by taking its juice or an insusion in wine; and for dropsy, an infusion of this leaf is given daily in white wine, of which a glass is taken every four hours, with great effect. This plant could be propagated from seed, but as it is easier to propagate from cuttings or rooted plants, and is more enjoyable, we leave it at that for the species that can overwinter in the ground; an old separate plant provides a dozen more or less, which are replanted in spring or autumn, it's all the same; and as the most common use is to form borders around vegetable garden quarters, either outside or inside, a string is stretched out, and a small trench seven to eight inches deep by the same width is opened, and buried close to the end of the stems, i.e. to within four inches, treading the soil with the foot after the trench is filled in. It goes without saying that the roots must be shortened beforehand. No other preparation is required, and there is no lack of it, provided the plants have roots. This plant is by no means delicate; it fears neither frost, nor drought, nor humidity; however, it has more virtue in dry soils than in watery ones; so, as much as possible, it should be placed according to taste. It can be kept in the same place for as long as you like, but as it grows and spreads too much after three years, and makes an ugly effect on the eyes, it should be destroyed at this age, and renewed. When planted from cuttings, a little more care is needed, and it should be planted in spring to give it time to root during the summer. The most important thing is to lay the sprigs down, press them down firmly with your foot after they have been covered with soil, and water often until they are well established; but the safest way is to root them on the bed, and after six weeks, you can remove them with a little clod and place them wherever you like. It should be noted that the two African salges, the curly one and the berry-bearing one, do not overwinter in the open ground; they must be placed in pots, and locked up in the greenhouse when frost approaches; the following spring, they are buried with the pots in a well-exposed spot, as they require a lot of heat. THYM. CHAPTER LXXVI. Description of THYME; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. THYME is an aromatic perennial plant of which there are five main species, not to mention several kinds of wild thyme known as Serpolet. These five species are common garden thyme with small leaves, variegated thyme, Crete thyme, broad-leaved thyme and lemon thyme. Common thyme has a woody root with many fibers; it sprouts a number of small twigs, rising to eight or ten inches, and forming a full, rounded tuft; these twigs are covered throughout with small, oblong, narrow leaves, ash-colored, with a strong, aromatic odor and a pungent taste: The flowers are small, purplish, shaped like a maw and cut into two lips at the top. The flower is followed by a capsule containing four almost round seeds. Thyme panaché differs from the previous variety only in the plume of its leaves, which are partly white and partly ashy; consequently, it is more of a variety than a difference in species. Cretan thyme grows as a shrub to twelve or fifteen inches in height, and produces many large, woody branches with small, opposite, narrow, whitish, pungent-tasting leaves; its flowers are arranged in the same way as the others. Broad-leaved thyme grows lower than its predecessors; its branches fall to the ground in great numbers; its leaves are oblong and much larger, of an obscure green color, with a less penetrating odor. It is very similar to the others, either in root, flower or seed. Lemon thyme differs from the others only in its odor, which is similar to that of lemon, from which it takes its name. These five species have more or less the same virtues; however, Crete thyme would be preferred if it were more common; but as it is very difficult to grow in this climate, we stick to the others, and particularly to the first species, which can be found in every garden. It is used in food with other fine herbs, to enhance the flavor of meat and fish, especially in short broths; it has no other use. In medicine, it is used in many cases; it is resolving, desiccating, attenuating, incisive and discussing; it enters into the aromatic and cephalic decoctions and infusions, so commonly used in fomentation, to basin nervous and muscular parts that are weakened or too swollen. Its powder, mixed with honey and barley flour, relieves sciatic gout when applied to the affected part as a poultice. It fortifies the brain and alleviates pituitary. Its main use is in tartarous affections of the lungs, such as asthma and obstinate coughs: it is also used for windy colic, to stimulate appetite and aid digestion. It is also used externally for cold humors, eye contusions, gout and paralysis. This plant multiplies from seed, cuttings and rooted plants, but more commonly in the latter way than in the other two: it is replanted in autumn or spring, in the same way as I said for sage and lavender. The first, fourth and fifth species are winter-hardy, and require no special care; but the second and third need the greenhouse, and must therefore be raised in pots. The one in gardens is renewed every three years; it forms very clean borders around vegetable garden quarters; and at flowering time, it gives off a very pleasant odor; it is then that we cut what we deem appropriate, for the various uses to which we wish to put it, as the flower greatly increases its virtue; and as it is the sap's forte, all its parts are more spirituous. CHAPTER LXXVII. Description of TOPINAMBOUR; its uses, cultivation, etc. HERE is the worst of all vegetables, in the general opinion; yet the people, who are the most numerous part of humanity, feed on it: I must therefore place this vegetable with the others. Its root is an assembly of a multitude of small roots and fibers, between which bulbs are attached: Its stem is stalked and three to four feet high, about the size of a thumb, fluted, hollow and hairy; its leaves are large, oblong and pointed, a little hairy; each branch ends in a yellow, radiate, sun-shaped flower, all the petals of which are supported by a ball-shaped calyx, which encloses the seed; this seed is small and brown in color. The fruit is egg-sized, sometimes two or three times larger, baroque in shape, with spikes and knots around the circumference, white inside and reddish outside. This fruit, which is the whole point of the plant, is eaten with white sauce, after being cooked in water; others fricassee it in butter with onion: its taste is quite similar to artichoke or salsify, but it is soft and mushy: it keeps all winter until Easter. It is sometimes used medicinally to stop stomach upsets, being by nature detersive, astringent and pectoral: it is eaten cooked, or a decoction is drunk. This plant originated in America, in the land of the Topinambous, from which it takes its name; it is also called Potato. It multiplies from seed, or from its own fruit, which is replanted in March, in the same way as the truffle. Any loose soil is good for it, and it requires no special care: the fruit is pulled up when frost approaches, and placed in a heap in the greenhouse; others run through the winter event, and leave it in the ground until Lent. CHAPTER LXXVIII. Description of TRIQUE-MADAME; its properties, cultivation, etc. LA trique-madame, which others call Trippe-Madame, is a species of small houseleek that grows naturally on old walls, but which cultivation has perfected. Its stem is small, fibrous and blackish; it grows several fat, fleshy, tender, creeping stems, covered with many small, oblong, thick, fat, pointed, bluish-green or reddish leaves, filled with juice: its flowers, which are born at the top of the stems, are small, with several leaves arranged in a pink, and yellow in color; the flowers are followed by a small fruit containing five seeds. The use of this plant is limited to salads, where it is mixed with other supplies; it has its supporters, but not the greatest number. In medicine, it is sometimes substituted for houseleek, as it is humectant and refreshing; good, in particular, for haemorrhoids. It multiplies from seed, cuttings and offshoots; each foot makes many arms, which, when separated and replanted, form as many new feet; it is almost equally successful from cuttings, provided they are watered often and kept out of the sun for a few days. It is planted a foot apart, and watered often; this is what makes it tender. CHAPTER LXXIX. Description of the TRUFFLE; its different species, properties, cultivation, etc. Here is a plant of which no author has spoken, and probably it is out of contempt for it that it has been excluded from the class of vegetable plants; for it is too long known and too widespread for it to have escaped their knowledge; yet there is injustice in omitting a fruit that serves as food for a large proportion of men of all nations. I don't want to elevate it more than it deserves, because I know all its faults, which I'll talk about; but I feel it should have a place with the others, since it serves a useful purpose, and has its enthusiasts. In most of our provinces, it is not only the lower classes and country folk who make a living from it, but even the most affluent people in the cities; and I can also say, from the knowledge I have of it, that many people love it out of passion. Whether this is a well-placed affection, or a depravity of taste, I put aside; it has its supporters, that's enough for me. There are two species of truffle, differing from one another only in external color, one being red, the other white tending to yellow: the latter is preferred, having less pungency than the former. The fruit is born between two earths, and is held to the roots by a kind of pedicel numbering twenty or thirty, some larger, others smaller: this fruit is elongated, rounded at both ends, uneven, with a sort of sunken eyes all around, which are as many sprouts of the plant, three to four inches long, about eighteen lines in diameter: it is covered with a film that lifts easily when cooked: its flesh is white and firm, a little watery, with no odor. The plant grows several branches at a time, which are hard and woody, almost triangular, partly green and partly reddish in color, lined with thresholds and small twigs throughout; these leaves are arranged in the same way as those of the rose, and of similar size, dull green, hairy at the tops of the stems: from the leaf axils emerge a few bunches of flowers borne on a fairly long tail: these flowers are one-piece, star-shaped, flax-gray in color, with a few yellow stamens in the center, whose tips meet and form a sort of keel; they are borne on an embryo at the bottom of the calyx, which turns into a round fruit, the size of a small walnut, which is green at first, turning yellow as it ripens. This fruit is fleshy and contains a number of small seeds, by which the plant can multiply if necessary, but they are not used. This fruit can be seasoned in all sorts of ways: sliced thinly and fried in butter or oil, with a light dusting of flour; cooked in water, with the skin removed, sliced and fried in butter with onion: Others cook it in wine, but the best way is to chop it after cooking, and make a paste with breadcrumbs, a few egg yolks and fine herbs, from which we make dumplings, which are browned in butter in the pan. Common people eat it simply cooked in ashes, with a little salt; and in the mountains, it's made into bread. Finally, it is consumed in considerable quantities, particularly in the provinces near the Rhône; and, in addition to being used as human food, it is also used to fatten animals. I will admit, however, that it is a bland, insipid food, and very hard on the stomach; but it has a certain taste that pleases its lovers: what can one object against it? And when one is accustomed to a thing, how much of its defects does it not lose? One thing is certain: this fruit is nourishing, and by force of habit, it doesn't bother those who have been accustomed to it from youth. What's more, it's very economical for the lower classes: these advantages may well outweigh its faults. It is not unknown in Paris; but it is true that it is abandoned to the common people, and that people of a certain order put it below them to see it appear on their table: I do not want to inspire in them a taste for it, which I do not have myself; but one should not condemn those to whom it pleases and to whom it is profitable. I don't think it has any properties for Tome II. However, a few years ago, it was devised as a powder to be used as a substitute for ordinary powder in times of high grain prices. At first, it met with some success, and the Ministry helped the enterprise with its protection; but when it was put to use, it was found to be too heavy, and not suitable for hair, which caused it to fail, and it is no longer used. This plant is sown in March; it requires loose, fat soil, ploughed deeply: some people make holes with the planter, and throw the seed in: others make rays with the hoe, and spread it in, covering it with three or four inches of soil; this last method is the best. Besides, this seed is nothing other than the fruit itself, which is cut into six, eight or ten pieces, depending on its size; as long as there is an eye in each piece, no more is needed. You can also sow small, hazelnut-sized truffles, which you set aside every year when you dig them up: you space them twelve or fifteen inches apart; when they've risen to a certain height, you crimp them; you don't need any other cultivation. Some, however, cut the tops halfway off when they are at about their height, to make better use of the stalks; others knock them to the ground, and throw a spoonful of earth on top; but most do nothing about it, and I have found that they grow very well without any of these precautions. Around All Saints' Day, we pull out the stalks and detach the fruit, if the soil is not too well sealed; a fork is better for this than any sharp tool: we let the fruit dry out a little and then lock it up, noting that we don't want a greenhouse that's too hot, which would make it sprout, nor a cellar that's too damp, which would make it rot, nor any place where frost could penetrate; once it's in the right place, it keeps until after Easter. I'll say a word in passing about another species of truffle that grows naturally in the ponds of some provinces, particularly in Bourbonnois and Burgundy: it goes by many other names, truffle or water truffle, macer, cornouelle, water chestnut, echarbot, etc. This fruit is produced by an aquatic plant that grows in ponds. This fruit is produced by an aquatic plant; its shape is horny, walnut-sized, its rind brown, and its kernel white; its taste is sweet, approaching that of the chestnut. It is prepared for eating in various ways: some cook it in ash like chestnuts, others in boiling water; it is made into bread and a kind of porridge in Limosin, where children are very fond of it; some eat it raw like hazelnuts; and all the ancient and modern authors who have spoken of it, going back as far as Dioscorides and Theophrastus, have praised it as a refreshing dish and a useful food: It is even said to have properties for certain illnesses: when cooked and applied as a poultice to inflammations, it resolves them; its juice is also very good for eye diseases; and its decoction with honey as a gargle is very suitable for cleaning ulcerated gums. END. DISEASES that can be cured or relieved by the use of vegetable plants. A. AAICERS. See EsTomac. AIR. (Bad) See PEsTe. AMYGDALES. (Inflammation of the) tome 2, Sariette, page 411. APPETIT; to excite it, tome 1, Absinthe, 186. Garlic, 194. volume 2, Estragon, 76. Laurel, 175. Sorrel, 286. Rocket, 393. Thyme, 426. ATOPLEXIA. volume 2, Lemon balm, 190. Mustard, 253. Rosemary, 389. Rocket, 393. Sage, 420. ASSOUPISSEMENT; to divert it, volume 1, Basil, 253. volume 2, Lavender, 166. Mustard, 254. Rocket, 393. Savory, 411. Sage, 420. ASTUM. volume 1, Garlic, 194. Anise, 202. Chervil, 324. Red cabbage, 411. volume 2, Saffron, 55. Spinach, 68. Fennel, 84. Hyssop, 118. Lavender, 167. Marjoram, 187. Turnip, 256. Onion, 265. Rosemary, 390. Sage, 420. Thyme, 426. T 3 BÉGAYEMENT, tome 2, Lavender, 162. BILE. tome 1, Arroche, 205. tome 2, Spinach, 67. Sorrel, 285. Patience, 300. WOUNDING, vol. 2, Lavender, 166. Onion, 266. Parsley, 305. Rosemary, 391. BURNS, tomne 1, Alleluia, 200. toyne 2, Squash, 50. Melongene, 248. Onion, 265. C. CALCUL. See GRAVELLE. CANcen, vol. 1, Garlic, 195. Cabbage, 566, volume 2, Melongene, 248. Rosemary, 390. BRAIN; to strengthen it, volume 2, Hyssop, 118. Lavender, 166. Marjoram, 188. Lemon balm, 190. Sage, 420. Thyme, 426. HAIR; to make it grow. volume 2, Garderobe, 95. COLIQUES. volume 1, Absinthe, 186. Garlic, 194. Anise, 202. Balsam, 258. Chervil, 324. volume 2, Fennel, 84. Laurel, 174. Lemon balm, 190. Parsnip, 296. Rue, 398. Sage, 420. Thyme, 426. NEPHRETIC COLIQUE. volume 2, Corne-de-Cerf, 48. Onion, 265. Chickpea, 357. CONTUSIONS. volume 1, Balsam, 258. volume 2, Hyssop, 118. Parsley, 305. Rosemary, 391. CONVULSIONS, volume 2, Lavender, 167. Laurel, 175. CORS DES PIEDS, tome 1, Garlic, 195. CôTés. (ailments) vol. 1, Red cabbage, 411. COUPURES, vol. 1, Balsam, 258. vol. 2, Parsley, 305. VENTRAL RUNS. volume 1, Absinthe, 186. Anise, 202. Wild chicory, 357, volume 2, Hornbeam, 48. Marsh bean, 88. Parsnip, 296i. Patience, 299. Topinambourg, 427. BLOOD CRACK, volume 2, Purslane, 564. Sage, 420. D. DARTRES; to make them pass, vol. 1, Cabbage, 366. vol. 2, Parsley, 305. Pois Lupin, 560 - To bring them back, volume 2, Mustard, 254. DEFAULANCES ou MAUX DE COEUR, tome 2. Lavender, 166. Lemon balm, 190. Parsley, 305. Rosemary, 389. DÉGOUr. tome 2, Roquette, 393. DENTS (Mal de) tome 1, Garlic, 195, torte 2, Watercress, 59. Laurel, 175. Marjoram, 187. Onion, 265. Rosemary, 391. Sage, 420. DENTS ACACÉES, tome 2, Sorrel, 287. Purslane, 364. DIARRHEA. See VENTER COURSE. DIGESTION; for easier digestion, toms 1, Garlic, 195. Anise, 201. Balsam, 258. Chervil, 324. tome 2. Fennel, 85. Laurel, 174. Long pepper, 561. Rocket, 393. Thyme, 426. DYSSENTERIE. volume 2, Sorrel, 287. E. ECORCRURES, tome 1, Artichoke, 208. T4 0 ECROUELLES, tome 2, Lupin pea, 360. Rosemary, 590. Rue, 398. See HUMEURS FROIDES, ENCUIFRENEMERT. Lome 2, Poirée, 320. ENTLURES DES PLAIES, tome 2, Hyssop, 117. Rosemary, 390. Sage, 420. ENGELURES, tome 2, Turnip, 257. ENGOURDISSERENT, volume 2, Laurel, 174. ENTRAILLES. (Chaleur d') volume 2, Pumpkin, 15. Cucumber, 32. Squash, 50. Spinach, 69. Melon, 194. Burnet, 311. EPILEPSIE. volume a, Lavender, 166. Marjoram, 188. Lemon balm, 190. Pea, 326. Rosemary, 389. Rue, 399. ERYSIPÈLE. tome 1, Chervil, 324. ESQUINANCIE, volume 2, Shallot, 62. ESTOMAC (Aigreurs ou foiblesses d') volume 1, Absinthe, 186. Garlic, 194. Anise, 201. Balsam, 258. volume a, Spinach, 67. Tarragon, 76. Fennel, 83. Lavender, 166. Laurel, 174. Marjoram, 187. Long pepper, 361. Savory, 411. Sage, 420. ETERN UEMENT; to provoke it, tome a, Mustard, 253. Pear, 320. ETOURDISSEMENT. tome 2, Rosemary, 390. EXTINCTION DE VoIX, tome 1, Red cabbage, 411. tome 2, Leek, 314. F. FIRE, volume 2, Sorrel, 286. Chickpea, 558. ARDENT FIRE. volume 1, Alleluia, 199. volume 2. Lettuce, 121, Lamb's lettuce, 180. Melon, 194. Purslane, 364. FIÈVRE INTERMITTENTE. volume 1, Absinthe, 187. Celery, 308. volume 2, Fennel, 85 - LENTE. See PATHISY. - MALIGNE. tome 1, Alleluia, 199. tome 2, Fennel, 84. Parsley, 306. Rave and Radish, 375. Salsify, 401. - PUTRIDE. volume 2, Fennel, 84. - QUARTE, tome 1, Celery, 309. tome 2, Fennel, 84. TIERCE, tome 2, Rosemary, 390. Sage, 421. FISTULE. tome 1, Cabbage, 366. tome 2, Rosemary, .390. FLEURS-BLANCHES, tome 2, Sage, 420. HEAD FLUXION, vol. 1. Basil, 253. LIVER. (Diseases of) vol. 1, Absinthe, 186. Alleluia, 199. Caper, 279. Wild chicory, 357. volume 2, Spinach, 68. Laurel, 175. Lupin pea, 360. WILLS, vol. 2, Lavender, 166. FROISSURE, vol. 1, Artichoke, 208. G. GALE. volume 1, Garlic, 195, volume 2, Watercress, 56. Lupine Pea, 360. Rosemary, 390. GANGREN. volume 2, Rosemary, 391. ULCERATED GUMS. See Mouth ulcers. GLAIRS, vol. 2, Fennel, 85. GORGE. (Sickness) vol. 2, Rapunzel, 370. GOUTTE. tome 1, Arroche, 205. Wild chicory, 557. Cabbage, 365, volume 2, Squash, 5o. T 5 0 Cresson de Fontaines, 59. Mache, 181. Mustard, 254. Thyme, 426. See SCIATICS. GRATTELLE, tome 1. Cresson de Fontaines, 57. GRAVELLE. volume 1, Garlic, 194. volume 2, Cucumber, 32. Bean, 98. Patience, 298. Percepierre, 502. Burnet, 311. Chickpea, 358. H. HALEINE. (Bad) vol. 2, Parsley, 305. Rosemary, 389. HÉMORACIE. volume 2, Corne-de-Cerf, 48. Pimprenelle, 311. Purslane, 364. Sage, 420. HEMORROIDS, volume 1, Beetroot, 263. Chervil, 523. volume 2, Lettuce, 121. Melongene, 248. Onion, 266. Leek, 314. Poirée, 320. Trique-Madame, 429. HOQUET, vol. 1, Anise, 301. HUMEURS ÉPAISSES, tome 1, Borage, 274. - COLD, volume 1, Garlic, 195. volume 2, Mustard, 254. Rosemary, 391. Thyme, 426. See EECROUELLES. HUMEURS (Acreté d') volume 2, Lamb's lettuce, 181. HYDRORISUE, volume 1, Absinthe, 186. Garlic, 194- Chervil, 324, tome a, Cran, 55. Cresson de fontaines, 58. Fève de Marais, 88. Patience, 298. Rave, 375. Sage, 421. I. JAUNISSE. tome 1, Absinthe, 186. Chervil, 323- Chicory, 346. Chicory, 35q. tome2, Sorrel, 286. Patience, 298. Percepierre, 302. Chickpea, 359. Rosemary, 389. Sage, 421, IDIGESTIONS, tome 2, Fennel, 85, Marjoram, 187. Mustard, 253. Rocket, 393. Rue, 397 Sage, 420 INFLAMMATION, tome 1, Arroche, 205. Chervil, 524. Chicory, 546. Red cabbage, 411. Volume 2, Spinach, 67. Lettuce, 121. Melongene, 248. Water truffle, 455. INSomnia, volume 2, Lettuce, 121. L. LAIT; to dispel it, volume 1, Red cabbage, 411. volume 2, Squash, 50. Parsley, 305. - To make it come, volume 1, Cabbage, 366, volume 2, Fennel, 85. Groceries, 179. Chickpea, 357. - Pour le résoudre quand il est grumelé, tome 1, Baume, 258. LÈrRe. tome 1, Cabbage, 566. LÉTHARGIE, tome 2, Lemon balm, 190. Mustard, 253. LUETTE. (Relaxation of) vol. 2, Savory, 411. M. MAL CADUC, volume 2, Lemon balm, 190. MAMELLES. (Hardness of) vol. 2, Parsley, 505- Chickpea, 357. RECIPIENT FECAL MATERIAL; to soak and evacuate, volume 1, Arroche, 205, volume 2, Poirée, 319. MESLANCOLIA, or HYPOCONDRIAC AFFECTION: volume 1, Borage, 274, volume 2, Cresson de Fontaines, 58. Lamb's lettuce, 181. Mustard, 245 Ramarin, 390. T6 L0 MEURTRISSURES, tome 1, Chervil, 524. MIGRAINE, tome 2, Lettuce, 121. Lavender, 166. Onion, 265. Poirée, 320. Months, see RÈcLes. MORSURES DE CHIENS ENRAGÉS, tome 2, Echalote, 62. Onion, 265. Sorrel, 286, Street, 399 - OF HORSES, volume 2, Beans, 98. - DE SERPENS et DE VIPÈRES, tome 2, Rosemary, 391. Rue, 399. Spanish salsify, 402. MULES DES TALONS, volume 2, Onion, 266. N. NÉPHRÉTIQUE, tome a, Lamb's lettuce, 181. Onion, 265. NERrS. (Diseases of) volume 2, Lavender, 166. Laurel, 175. Rosemary, 391. Sage, 419. Thyme, 425. NEZ. (Bleeding from) volume 1, Alleluia, 199. O. OBSTRUCTIONS, vol. 1, Absinthe, 186. Celery, 309. Wild chicory, 35q. tome 2, Wild cucumber, 29. Hyssop, 318. Laurel, 175. Patience, 298. Percepierre, 302. Lupine pea, 360. Rosemary, 389. ODOR; (Bad) to ward it off, vol. 2, Lavender, 166. EARS. (Muddling) volume 2, Onion, 266. P. Moutarde, 253. Patience, 298. 4 HEART PALPITATIONS, vol. 2, Lemon balm, 190. PARALYSIA. vol. 2, Lavender, 167. Laurel, 175. Lemon balm, 190. Mustard, 253. Rosemary, 589. Rocket, 393. Sage, 420. Thyme, 426 - DE LA LANGUE, tome 2, Cresson de Fontaines, 59. SKIN. (Diseases of the) See Scabies, Leprosy, etc. PEAU enlevée par les caustiques, Vol. 2, Poirée, 319. BLOOD LOSS, Vol. 2, Purslane, 364. PESTE et MAUVais Air, Vol. 1, Garlic, 194. Alleluia, 199, tome 2, Echalotte, 62. Estragon, 77. Grocery, 179. Onion, 264. Sorrel, 286. Rue, 398. PHRÉNÉSIE. volume 2, Cucumber, 32. PHTIYSIA. vol. 1, Nasturtium, 285. vol. 2, Cran, 53. STONE. volume 1, Garlic, 194. Carrot, 298. volume 2, Corne-de-Cerf, 48. Echalotte, 62. Percepierre, 302. Chickpea, 357. PITUITE. volume 2, Mustard, 253. Rocket, 394. Thyme, 425. PLAIES; to dig them up and mundialize them, Vol. 2, Deerhorn, 48. Sage, 420. PLEURESY. volume 1, Borage, 274. Chervil, 525, volume 2, Leek, 314. POITRINE. volume 1, Celery, 309. Red cabbage, 411. volume 2, Cresson de Fontaines, 58. Spinach, 67. Hyssop, 118. Marjoram, 188. Turnip, 256. Leek, 314. Spanish salsify, 402. Sariette, 411. X0) NOSE POLYPES. volume 2, Cresson de Fontaines, 59. LUNG (Diseases of) volume 1, Red cabbage, 411.volume 2, Watercress, 56. Hyssop, 118. Leek, 314. Lice; to kill them, vol. 1, Garlic, 195. vol. a, Lavender, 167. Rue, 599. PUNAISES; to destroy them. tome 2, Lavender, 167. R. RATE (Diseases of) vol. 1, Wormwood, 186. Caper, 279. volume 2, Cress, 56. Laurel, 175. RULES. (Suppression des) tome 1, Absinthe, 188. Balsam, 258. Carrot, 298. Celery, 509tome 2, Wild cucumber, 30. Cresson de Fontaines, 58. Garderobe, 95. Hyssop, 118. Laurel, 175. Grocery, 179. Marjoram, 187. Lemon balm, 190. Percepierre, 302. Pois Lupin, 360. Rue, 397. Salsify, 402. Sage, 420. RHEINS. (Diseases of) volume 1, Alleluia, 199. volume 2, Cucumber, 32. Garderobe, 95. Rave, 365. RESPIRATION (Difficulty of) volume 1, Anise, 201. RHUMATISM, volume 2, Lavender, 166. Laurel, 174. Lamb's lettuce, 181. Mustard, 254. Onion, 266. Rosemary, 391. RHUME, tome 2, Marjoram, 188. 0 ROUGEOLE. tome a, Watercress, 56. Fennel, 84. ROUSSEUR ou TACHES AU VISAGE. tome a, Fève de Marais, 88. Onion, 266. S. SALIVATION; to excite it, volume 2, Estragon, 76. BLOOD (Fermentation of) tome 1, Alleluia, 199. Chicory, 346. volume 2, Sorrel, 286. - To make it fluid, tome r, Chervil, 524, tome 2, Hyssop, 118. Sorrel, 286. Sage, 420 - To purify it, volume 1, Chervil, 524. Chicory, 557, tome 2, Cresson de Fontaines, 58 - CAILLÉ; to dissolve, tome 1, Chervil, 324. - GRUMELÉ, EXTRAVASE, vol. 2, Hyssop, 118. SCIATIQUE, tome a, Mustard, 254. Thyme, 425. SCORBUT. tome r, Garlic, 194. Alleluia, 199. Celery, 508, tome 2, Cran, 53. Cresson, 56. Cresson de Fontaines, 58. Estragon, 77. Lamb's lettuce, 181. Mustard, 253. Sorrel, 286. Purslane, 364. Rocket, 393. Rue, 399. Sage, 420. SEROSITY. volume 1, Basil, 265. volume 2, Marjoram, 187. Soir; pour l'appaiser, tome 1, Alleluia, 198. tome 2, Courge, 50. Oseille, 286. Purslane, 354. SUEURS; to excite them, volume 1, Borage, 274. volume 2, Fenouil, 84. Burnet, 311. 0 T. TEICNE. volume 1. Garlic, 195. HEAD. (Headache) volume 1, Alleluia, 199. Anise, 201. Basil, 253, volume 2, Poirée, 320. TESTICULES. (Tumors of) vol. a, Chickpea, 358. TORTICOLIS, vol. 2, Marjoram, 188. Cough. vol. 1, Red cabbage, 411. vol. 2, Spinach, 67. Fennel, 84. Hyssop, 118. Marjoram, 187. Turnip, 256. Onion, 265. Peas, 325. Rocket, 394. Thyme, 425. SHEETS. Volume 1, Garlic, 194. Anise, 202. - DES ENFANS, vol. 1, Balsam, 259. TREMBLEMENT, vol. 1, Cabbage, 365, vol. 2, Lavender, 167. TUMEURS, tome 1, Arroche, 205, tome 2, Fenouil, 84. Marsh bean, 88. Bean, 98. Laurel, 174. Sorrel, 286. Leek, 314. Pear, 320. Lupin pea, 360. Sage, 419. VAPORS, vol. 2, Wild cucumber, 30. Lavender, 166. Lemon balm, 190. Mustard, 255. Parsnip, 296. Sage, 420. VAPEURS HYSTÉRIQUES, tome a, Lavender, 166. Mustard, 255. Rosemary, 390. Rue, 597. VENIN; to resist it, tome 2, Estragon, 76. Grocery, 179. VENTRE (Hardness of) volume 1, Arroche, 205. Asparagus, 227. Red cabbage, 411. volume 2, Spinach, 67. Patience, 298. Poirée, 319. 0 VENTS. volume 1, Anise, 202. Arroche, 205. Balsam, 258. Celery, 309, volume 2, Estragon, 76. Fennel, 84. Garderobe, 95. Laurel, 174. Grocery, 179. Marjoram, 187. Parsnip, 296. Long pepper, 561. Sage, 420. VÉROLE. (Small) tome 2, Fennel, 84. Parsley, 306. Rue, 599. Spanish salsify, 4o2. VERRUES, volume 1, Alleluia, 198. Cabbage, 365. Worms; to make them die, volume 1, Absinthe, 186. Garlic, 194. Wild chicory, 357. Cabbage, 366. volume 2, Watercress, 56. Gardenia, 95. Lavender, 167. Groceries, 179. Chickpea, 357. Lupin pea, 560. Purslane, 364. Rue, 397. Sage, 420. VERTIGES, volume 2, Lavender, 167. Marjoram, 188. Lemon balm, 190. Rosemary, 389. Sage, 420. VESSIE. (Maux de la) tome 2, Cucumber, 32. Laurel, 175. Turnip, 375. ULCERES, volume 1, Cabbage, 366. Red cabbage, 412. volume 2, Lupin peas, 360. - OF THE MOUTH, volume 1, Celery, 309, volume 2, Purslane, 364. Truffled with water, 435. VOICE. See ExTINCTION. VOMISSEMENT; to stop it, tome 1, Baume, 258. tome 2, Estragon, 77. - Pour le provo, quer, Persil, 305. URINE (Retention or difficulty of) volume 1, Absinthe, 186. Garlic, 194. Artichoke, 208. Asparagus, 227. Borage, 274. Nasturtium, 285. Celery, 309. Chervil, 324. tome 2, Corne-de-Cerf, 48. Cran, 53. Echalotte, 62. Estragon, 76. Fève de de Marais, 88. Garderobe, 95. Hyssop, 118. Laurel, 175. Marjoram, 187. Lemon balm, 190. Melon, 195. Percepierre, 302. Burnet, 311. Chickpea, 357. Lupine pea, 360. Rocket, 393. Sage, 420. EYES. (Disease of) volume a, Squash, 50. Fennel, 84. Hyssop, 118. Sorrel, 286. Rosemary, 389. Thyme, 426. Water truffle, 435. End of Table of Diseases. GO DES PECHERS. NOUVELLE EDITION, Revue, corrigée et augmentée. A PARIS Chez DELALAIN fils, Libraire, quai des Augustins, Ne. 38. An XI, 1802. EEI Google IERUET Google A misplaced wisdom is a real follyWanting to bring men back to one's taste, however reasonable it may be, is of all enterprises the least sensible. Each century has its own mores, which must not be contradicted. It would be useless to try to introduce even wiser ones; the shortest way is to follow one's own, without exhausting oneself in reasoning to try to bend others to it. A philosopher by temperament, and perhaps by reflection, will I go and extol to the worldly the charms of retirement, incomprehensible to those whose hearts are not made for it? Gardening is my attraction; for many years I have made it the amusement of my leisure, and the most solid occupation of my life. Is this a reason to flaunt the merits of this exercise? It seems to me that I would do as well as anyone else in painting the golden age, when cultivating the land was the noblest of arts, as it still is the most useful. I could recall men to their natural vocation, and adorn this discourse with touching descriptions, which would hardly make more of an impression on most of my readers, than the sight of a beautiful landscape placed in the cabinet of a rich man, does on these men of the century, accustomed to the pomp and noise of cities; but that is neither my mission, nor my object. I'm not trying to inspire a taste for gardening; I'm writing for those who already have it, and this little work, intended for their instruction, should offer nothing strange to the goal I propose. My birth and the course of affairs in which I was engaged from my youth, should, it seems to me, have left me forever ignorant of all that belongs to Gardening; but who can answer for events? From a hectic and constrained life, I passed almost all of a sudden to a free and quiet life; and the circumstances which detached me from all kinds of business, made me leave the city at the same time. I retired to a country house just outside Paris, which, having belonged to a Minister of State before me, had all the advantages one could imagine. Its happy situation, the good quality of the bottom, its extent and the convenience of the water, attracted me more and more. Finally, I resolved to settle there, and to do so usefully, I made a regular occupation of it. The cultivation of my land was the object to which my taste turned. At first, like many others, I was handed over to an ignorant gardener in bad faith, and I allowed myself to be led by his advice in the first operations I tried, but I soon recognized that they were wrong. Consequently, on other occasions, I wanted to go to the council; but the diversity of feelings and the variety of practices embarrassed me more often than they decided me. I visited all the houses whose gardens seemed to me to be well maintained; I read all the authors who had written most on the subject; in a word, I left no stone unturned in my quest for knowledge: but all this study only served to make me realize that without practice and experience, one acquires only very superficial knowledge. I therefore decided to carry out, by myself, all the operations that were within my reach; and, with the exception of the hard work, I can assure you that I put my hand to everything, i.e., I sowed, planted, pruned, palmed, grafted, etc. I wanted to know everything there was to know. I wanted to know everything inside out, and by doing this myself, I was more likely to notice any defects in the work. My mind worked even harder than my hand; I sought the good and the best; and experience, which I took as my guide, served either to assure me or to disabuse me. It was through this long application that I acquired the knowledge I share with the public. The success of my plantations introduced me to many honored people, who had the same passion, and whom curiosity attracted to me. Finally, a person of the highest esteem asked me one day for some instruction on the cultivation of peach trees, whose fruit she particularly liked, so I made it my duty to oblige her, and wrote down all my views. This little treatise, which pleased her very much, then passed from her hands into those of several curious people, who found it to their taste, and I was urged to publish it. This is the work I am giving today, with no other interest than that of being useful, and of sparing an amateur the mistakes to which inexperience can lead him. If the success of this piece fulfills my intention, I shall successively give some on the cultivation of other fruits, and on all the other parts of gardening. Although several authors have already written on this subject, I think I can say that it has never been more than sketched out, and that none of them has made a sufficient study of it to be able to serve as a guide; however, I rightly exclude M. de la Quintinie, who has given very judicious rules, based on experience and good reasoning: but he has not given his subjects an order that puts the reader at his ease, and he has not said all that the subject requires. I flatter myself that one will find in the manner in which I treat more clearness and exactitude. Perhaps the curious and the true connoisseurs will find it a little too detailed; but they must consider that they form a small number in society, and that the greater number are so little or so poorly instructed, that they need to be led, as it were, by the hand; it is essentially them that I have had in view, and my object will be fulfilled, if I succeed in being useful to them. FROM FISHING. CHAPTER ONE. Fishing in general. PEACH is one of the most excellent fruits of Europe; but in our climate, it is also the one that requires the most care, and consequently the most intelligence, to be cultivated usefully. We owe the abundance we enjoy in Paris and the surrounding area when the years are favorable to the large number of seedlings everyone has made of it; for the way they are usually managed means that we don't get out of a hundred trees what we could get out of twenty if they were managed with a certain art, and that of all the fruit trees that can be planted in a garden, there is none whose yield is so uncertain. It is true, on the other hand, that there is none that so pleasantly lines walls, that offers fruit so bright to the eye and more pleasing to the taste, and that yields so quickly. All these advantages are seductive: so people who are in a position to obtain this satisfaction, should not stop at difficulties or expense. As for those who plant for profit, they must detach themselves from the prejudice that peach tree espaliers are more profitable than other fruits. It is said that M. Girardot, a former King's Musketeer, earned up to thirty thousand pounds in income from a very small area of land he owned in Bagnolet. This example appealed to many, but it's important to distinguish the times. In the past, the cultivation of this fruit was known only to a few people; today, everyone is involved, plantations have multiplied extraordinarily, and this fruit, which has become more common, has decreased in value in proportion to its abundance. Another example is the village of Montreuil, which is said to produce nothing but peaches and a few red fruits, and which, on this simple income, pays the King fifty thousand pounds in taxes every year, to which must be added the rent for the land, which is commonly rented at 200, 250 and up to 300 pounds per acre. The conclusion is that the cultivation of peaches must in itself be very profitable. I don't dispute the Montreuil fact, but there are several things to consider. 1°. The product of these peaches is shared between four thousand inhabitants, who are dedicated to this crop, and who are, as it were, cradled in it. 2°. The location and quality of the soil are highly favorable to this species of tree, which takes five or six years to form and covers its wall from top to bottom, a feature rarely seen elsewhere. 3e. The layout of the espaliers is different from that of ordinary gardens; all the soil is cut by walls, twenty or twenty-five feet apart: these walls, forming shelter after shelter, defend the fruit from bad winds, and preserve it while it perishes elsewhere. 4°. The care that the inhabitants of Montreuil take to make the most of their fruits is inconceivable: they cultivate them with their own hands, and care for them with uncommon intelligence. They watch them night and day; they carry and sell them themselves, in the markets, with a particular art. And what private individual would want to buy them for the same price? I'm talking here about those who plant for their own benefit, and aim only for abundance; It is mainly for the latter that I am writing, and in order to do so with some order, I will begin by examining the different species of peaches, and mark those to be preferred to the others. CHAPTER II. Of the different kinds of Peaches, and the choice to be made. Sentiments vary widely on the different species of peaches. M. de la Quintinie has claimed to know thirty-two, which he has named, without the Brugnons and Pavies; others put the 3 number at forty or fifty. These, or I am very much mistaken, often use the same for two, especially as most have up to two and three names. As far as I'm concerned, I don't have anything specific to say in this regard; I've never even tried very hard to unravel this exact difference. It's a question of knowing the best; and we lose nothing by not knowing all those that are inferior to them. I declare, therefore, that I know of only about fifteen to which we should stop; the others are either very mediocre, or very bad. Others, though good, don't charge, and aren't worth the space they occupy; others are too prone to gum or ant; a few others, finally, are not fashionable, though of fairly good quality, because their elongated or biscornu shape doesn't appeal. But when it doesn't cost more to have the perfect than the defective, we must stick to the former: good exhibitions are too precious not to use them for the best we can get. Provided we have an uninterrupted succession of good peaches, from the sin of July to mid-October, after which time the fruit ripens only imperfectly, we need ask for nothing more. Finally, I would not like to enter into the fantasy of certain people who want to have everything known, good or bad, especially with regard to a fruit that costs so much care, and occupies an expensive place. The fifteen species I have chosen follow each other without interruption; and they are, without question, the most beautiful in color, the best made, the biggest, the best, and the most expensive, as everyone knows them. What I say about them is enough, without stopping to praise each one in particular. If you think it's a good idea to leave it at that, I'd advise you to distribute them as follows. Assuming you have room for 50 trees, you would plant 2. Petite Mignone. 6. Grosse Mignone. 5. Chevreuse. 4. Purple. 2. Madelaine rouge. 5. Persique. 4. Galande. 3. Tetons of Venus. 3. Italian peaches. 3. Early violets. 5. Beurdin. 4. Admirable. 3. Belgarde. 3. Royal. 2. Nivette. 2. Pavie de Pompone. If you have more or less space, you will make a proportionate distribution; and if you only have a very-small garden, where you only have room for 6 feet of trees, I advise you to choose in preference to the others, 1. Grosse Mignone. 1. Pourprée. 1. Early Violet. 1. Admirable. 1. galande. 1. Nivette. I give a place to the violet, which many people esteem only mediocrely, especially since not all soils are suitable for giving it taste and size; but when it comes in its perfection, I put it above all other peaches, and I have many supporters of my taste. V3 O I still put on the range the Pavie de Pompone, which many persoones disregard, and which I don't think much of myself, as far as taste is concerned; but I consider it for three reasons. The first is that its monstrous size and beautiful coloring perfectly decorate a table; the second is that it comes when all the last peaches are finished; and the third is that it is eaten all year long preserved in vinegar like gherkins, and that it surpasses in quality anything that is usually preserved in this way. It has been much sought-after for this reason for some years now, but there is a different way of pickling it from that used for gherkins. We also have a small dwarf peach tree raised in Orléans, which amuses the curious, but is only good for the pleasure of those who want it. It is cultivated in earthenware vases or small crates, where it is sufficiently nourished with the help of watering, and it hardly extends beyond the circumference of a clove plant; the fruit knots there very well, and it sometimes yields up to twenty or twenty-five rather large peaches: The fruit and the stem are served together on a table, and this makes a very pretty effect, especially in the eyes of those who don't know it; but the fruit is insipid, and it is even rare for it to ripen in this climate; perhaps it would be better in southern countries. Those who live in warmer climates than ours may add or subtract from the selection I have made above, whatever their climate may suggest. For example, I make no mention here of all the pavies, which I value highly in Italy and Provence. Nor do I take several kinds of late peaches, which ripen here only halfway, and which have no taste: perhaps they would be very good in these hot countries; it is up to each curious person to examine what is appropriate to his climate: but we must not envy anyone in this respect, because there is no country where this fruit has as many good qualities as it has here. I've eaten them in all the southern countries around us, right down to the depths of Italy and Sicily: our fine peaches don't do well there; the sun hits them too hard. It's a good idea to plant immediately, in the order I've just described, the fifteen species of peach and the pavia I've mentioned. I've never seen anyone do this, and I think it's important, because you don't need to run all your espaliers from one end to the other when you want to pick your fruit. When peaches of the same season are gathered together, you find everything under your hand. What's more, if you need to defend your fruit, either from people or beasts, you only have to watch over one spot. If it's necessary, in times of drought, to give water to trees whose fruit is maturing, you don't have to go so far, and you don't have to beat the ground so much along your espaliers: (I'm assuming, in saying this, that there are contr'espaliers). Finally, as it costs no more to plant them in this order, I strongly urge you to practice it. 4 On the right choice of trees, and how to raise them in nurseries. Iss environs de Paris sont remplis de pépinières; ainsi, on n'est pas embarrassé de trouver des arbres, quand les gelées de l'hiver n'ont pas fait périr les greffages, comme il est arrivé eu eu 1740 et 1742. Vitry, Fontenay-aux-Roses, le Pré-saint- Gervais, are particularly devoted to raising them; but as Vitry has the widest choice, it's the best place to get them. I've sometimes grown them in Orléans, and they've also worked well for me. The essential point is that a tree should not remain exposed to the ravages of time after being uprooted, and that its roots should be kept fresh by the help of moss and good wrapping. They must also be in the condition they should be in: the place where they were born makes no difference, as long as there is no significant difference between the land where they were grown and the land where they are put back, which is something to be careful of. They sell for 5 sous for low stems, 10 sous for half-stems and 15 sous for stems, when the year's grafts have been successful. Those who pay more are always fooled, either by the merchant's vainglorious reputation, or by the person hired to buy them. Nothing could be further from the truth than to imagine that by paying three times as much for them, as some people have the talent to sell them, you'll get better quality, or that you'll be more sure of the cash. With regard to the first point, one has eyes to see them; and with regard to the second, I admit that one can be deceived. In this profession, as in all states of life, there are people of bad faith; but there is this difference from that to the others, which is that they gain little from deceit. I will agree, however, that as there are species whose grafts are very difficult to reproduce, such as the Mignone and the Galande, certain merchants avoid giving as many as they can, and often substitute other, more common species; but this does not mean that they are all unfaithful: in this profession, as in all others, there are people who are jealous of their reputation, and who understand that their own interests depend on it. It's only a question of getting to know them, and to do that you have to get information: the advice I could give in this respect would only be of monientaneous help, since everything changes from one day to the next; so everyone will take the measures they think best. I will only say that it is customary for people of good taste to have a catalog of the plants in their nurseries and grafts, in which they list them as follows: Telle pièce de terre tenant ici, et aboutis sunt là, greffe en pécher, contient tant de rangs d'nne telle espèce, tant de telle autre, etc. You take a look at this catalog, which you have no reason to suspect is false, and by following the rows, you 4 choose what suits you best. If your dealer doesn't have a catalog, don't trust him, and go to another. These precautions are dispensed with for all other pome fruits whose species can be identified by their wood and leaf: but with the exception of four or five species of peaches, namely, grosse and petite Mignones, Madeleines, Violettes and some Pavies, all the others are so similar in wood and leaf that the merchant himself would not recognize them if he did not observe the order I have just described. For all these reasons, it is very important to make your choice yourself, when you are capable of judging it, or to be sure of the person you hire to do it: for, if you rely on your gardener, the bait of a penny per tree, which they have tyrannically subjugated the merchants to give them as a right, makes them docile to whatever they want; and this is the case where you are badly served, because in favor of this bait they pass on everything they have that is defective. With regard to those who live in the provinces, and who, by taste or necessity, are obliged to draw their trees from Paris, Orleans or other places, I wish them a true friend who is willing to make this choice for himself, with the attentions and precautions of which I will speak, and which are exactly in accordance with those I recommend in Chapter XIX, for the transport of trees. 1°. From mid-October onwards, you must go to the nurseries, as the first to arrive always take the best. Peach trees are good to lift at this time, even if the leaf has not yet fallen; and if your land is not ready to plant them, have them buried in a trench, one next to the other, and not in bundles, as those who like their work done quickly do. 2e. Make sure they have not been rebooted: (I'll explain this term for those who don't understand it). Peach trees are not like other trees, which can only be replanted after two, three or four years of grafting; they must be replanted after their first growth, i.e. at the end of the year; and as it often happens that merchants can't sell them all within the year, they cut back at the end of March or in April, what remains to the thickness of half an inch above the graft, from which it immediately grows one or more new shoots; but these kinds of trees usually do not do well, and we mustn't take any: they're easy to spot, and all you have to do is watch out for them. 3e. Make sure your trees are healthy, that the gum has not attacked them, and that they are strong enough. The biggest ones are not the best, because they usually don't have good eyes at the bottom of the stem, below the size they should be pruned; and the thinnest ones, whose thinness is a sign of weakness, don't promise to ever be very vigorous. Avoid some and

the others, and choose the medium-sized ones, in which you'll find well-fed eyes next to the fat, because that's what's important. Everything I've just said applies particularly to low stems. With regard to stems and half-stems, or the same disadvantages that must be avoided, you must take care that the stems are straight, united, clear, without moss, and that they have a good body, i.e., a good inch in diameter, or three inches in circumference at the bottom; for if they are weaker, count on your tree always being puny: it will truly take up like another, and live; but it will not do in four years what a good one will do in two, and will last much less, besides that the fruits will never be well nourished. Take care, moreover, that the graft has grown straight, and that it does not make what is called the trumpet; for the result is sometimes that, despite all your attention to dividing the branches of your tree equally, the side where the graft leans always prevails over the other, which makes your tree defective. When pulling them out, make sure the digging is done at a good distance from the base, so as not to offend the roots, and reject those that are pulled out incorrectly, or whose roots are damaged. "As soon as they are uprooted, have them put in bundles with labels to distinguish the species, and lots of straw around them, which you will take care to have carried to the nursery, so that the bindings and the pack animals that will be transporting them don't skin them: likewise have the roots wrapped in straw, to protect them from the sun and the sun. These precautions, though very important, are often overlooked. In this case, I advise them to find a good merchant, and to give him their commission in good faith, on condition that you receive only what meets all the conditions I have just prescribed. This merchant, who will spare what he is obliged to give to a third party, and who will want to acquire your practice, will have an interest in giving only good, and will find his advantage in doing so by doing yours. Peach trees can be grafted onto three types of subject: the peach pit itself, almond trees and plum trees. Few of the first type are grafted, however, as they are too prone to gum; they are commonly found only on the other two. It's the quality of your soil that should decide whether you choose one or the other. If your soil is light and sandy, you should choose almond trees, because their roots, which prick or pivot, in gardening terms, seek their nourishment further underground than plum trees, and therefore defend themselves better in dry weather. If your soil has body, and if the bottom is tuff or clay, take it from the plum tree, because its root is content with little soil, and only seeks to run on the supersiccia where it is sufficiently nourished. In addition, you should follow what has been practised before you in the place where you will find yourself; for there is scarcely a countryside where this fruit has not been cultivated, and the kind of subject in which it has been kept, after the experiments made, must naturally be the best. I make this observation here, because despite the general rule, which is the one I've just established, it sometimes happens that one of the two produces less gum than the other, especially in soils that hold the middle ground between the two extremes. You can also graft on apricot trees, and the grafting succeeds quite well; but this is only done when you have too many apricot trees, or when you want to graft on a peach of which you are curious, and whose fruit you want to see quickly. You can also, if necessary, graft onto the peach tree itself; and this is a very good practice, when you see a few bad species in a young plant. Grafting is done in escutcheon in September on the young wood of the year, or of two years at most; and to do it with more rule and safety, it is necessary to cut down in March at twelve or fifteen inches of ground the trees which you want to graft; they push back soon after of the young wood, which you take care to disbud, so that you leave only four good branches well spaced, which take all the force, and on which you apply your escutcheons at ease at the end of the summer. They usually do very well, as long as the gum doesn't set in; and that's why you have to make sure there's no sap left in the trees when you graft. CHAPTER IV. The location and exposure required for peach trees, and how to prepare the soil. THE tender peach, generally speaking, does not succeed in full wind in any country. In our climate, the red spring winds, cold rains and white frosts scramble the blossom as well as the leaf, and it is very rare for any fruit to set. In hot countries, the sun's great ardor alters the fruit after it has been tied, and it does not hold on to the tail, so that it falls off in the slightest wind that beats it, and very few are left to ripen; even those that do escape are unwise, and there is neither the water nor the finesse that a more temperate air gives them. The same is not true of certain common species, such as those found near Fontainebleau and in all our southern provinces, which, being harder by nature and of very mediocre coarseness, are quite resistant to the ravages of time, and grow in vineyards and gardens without any cultivation: However, compared to the peaches we grow here, they are almost nothing more than peaches; they are undesirable: consequently, I distinguish from this class the Pavies, which are called Presses, Auberges or Mirlicotons in some provinces: this kind of fruit succeeds perfectly in the open air in all hot countries, and its taste is much stronger there than it is here; but this is its greatest merit, in addition to the hard flesh and little water. However, for want of anything better, we do very well to make do with it, and to grow it abundantly: cultivation is simple and easy, and requires no instruction. Back to our tender peaches. Experience has shown that they can only succeed in espaliers; and in this climate, there are only two suitable exposures: south and east. I know, however, that many private individuals plant them in the sunset position; they do succeed in a few places, but this is rare. I had planted two espaliers of one hundred and fifty toises each at this exposure, which I had the patience to cultivate for 8 years, without getting anything out of them. Tired of such ungrateful cultivation, I cut off their heads a few years ago; I grafted them all into Reine-Claude plums, which, in four years, have almost covered my wall, and give me perfectly beautiful fruit. I would advise anyone in the same situation to do the same, if their trees are suitable for grafting, and others never to plant any at this exposure, at least in this climate, and in cold soils like mine; for, I repeat, there are some situations where this exposure is fairly good for them, especially when the gardens are well sheltered, and I would add that in southern countries, it may even be better for them than the other two. It's up to each individual to know what his or her climate requires. There is one particular care to be taken in this respect, and that is never to plant this species of fruit at the foot of walls that back onto land, and which serve, as it were, as terrace walls; for, although the trees flower, the humidity that these walls communicate almost always ruins the flower, which sinks instead of knotting. And it's also quite common for these walls to be full of ants, which destroy the trees, especially as you can't maintain the plaster, which is soon loosened by humidity. Finally, the place of your trees having been decided, in relation to what I've just said, all that remains to be done is to put them in the ground; and this requires no less attention than the rest. I suppose you are making a new espalier: you must have begun by having your land broken up in fine weather, six feet from your wall, and three feet or at least two and a half feet down, if the clay or tuff has not been found closer to the surface, at which caz OF CULTIVATION you must stop where you find it; for the agsured loss of trees is when you want to pierce the tuff. and substitute good soil. Experience has convinced me of this, and the reason is that rainwater, having stayed in this sort of tuff or clay box that you form, rots all the roots after a few years, and the more you plant, the more die, because the soil itself becomes putrescent and has no more virtue; so you must give up putting any more in. However, don't be discouraged when you come across this kind of matter; as long as you have a foot and a half or two feet of good soil, your plum plants will do just fine, especially if it's new soil, or soil that has been occupied by other kinds of fruit; for I would observe that if your land has long been occupied by peach trees, the salts suitable for the production of this fruit are exhausted, and it is very rare for a new plantation to succeed. Here's the remedy. If you have new soil in the vicinity, have some brought in to replace the old; in other words, put in two and a half feet of prosoondeur, five or six feet wide; if you don't have any, or if you have to look for it far away, and the expense of transport is too great, have used manure brought in, and mix it well with a fork with your old soil, as you break it up, so that there is an equal quality from the bottom to the surface. Then, when you plant the trees, take care to keep the manure away from the root zone, where it could heat up and shrivel. I've tried both methods several times, and they worked, at least for a while, because this precaution keeps the trees in good shape for five or six years; but it's not equally certain that they'll continue to do well: often, at the end of this term, the roots, being obliged to work in the neighbouring soil, which they find sealed and worn, make useless efforts, and the tree only languishes. Use the same expedient when you want to replant old espaliers. The best way to get the most out of your land is to change species, i.e. to put stone fruit where there used to be stone fruit, and stone fruit where there used to be stone fruit. But as there are often few good exposures and you want to take advantage of them for fruit that necessarily requires them, stick to what I've just said. CHAPTER V. How to plant trees. Once you have prepared the ground, have your trees dressed, i.e. the roots shortened and cooled, so that the cut is on the ground, and have all the hair cut off; then have a hole made in proportion to their roots, and have loose earth thrown all around, which you will push in between the roots with your fingers; when they are fully covered, you lead the foot, i.e., you press the foot mediocrely all around, to reassure the soil, and take care that the graft is flush with the surface of your land. If you can't avoid either of these extremes, in the first case, you'll always plant them as I've just said, and in the second, you'll dispense with lead; But in both cases, you'll need to build a water channel, to better bind the soil, and thus get your trees working more quickly. Before doing so, be sure to wet the trees, cut them down to six or eight inches above the graft, and turn the cut against the wall. Hold the tree steady with one hand, while you cut it down with the other, so that the effort of the cutter doesn't disturb the foot. I'm assuming here that the soil is greasy and well soaked, because if it's healthy, all you have to do is press your feet down on the root, so that the tip of the shoe rests lightly on the buttress. The same precautions apply to stems and half-stems if they are planted between two plants. But as the graft is at the tip, there's no harm in burying them a little more or a little less. The main thing is to ensure that the heads are all on the same line, or, to put it another way, at the same distance from the coping on your wall. Now it's a question of setting the distances in which they should be planted. If your walls are only six, seven or eight feet high, I advise you to plant only low stems of fifteen in fifteen feet, especially if it's new soil; because in seven or eight years, your well-mannered trees will cover your wall with trellises. If it's old soil, and your walls are nine feet high, you can plant half-stems four feet apart, provided your low stems do well, you prune the underside of your half-stems from year to year, and after about six years, when your low stems have reached the middle of your wall's height, you remove your half-stems altogether, to give the others a chance to grow. In the latter case, to avoid losing anything, you can do what I've done, which is to graft them in March, into plums or apricots, below the old graft, if it's on a plum tree; and the following autumn, you pull them out and give them another place: this makes mid-wind trees, of very good quality, and which defend themselves better from the winds than the others, as they have more body. I have grafted many in this way, all of which have succeeded perfectly; and out of eighty that I replanted in one year, only one failed. Lift them and replant them with the precautions I recommend in Chapter XVI. If you like it better, instead of half-stems, you can plant a marcotte of grapes, either Muscat or Chasselas, which will give you fruit for a few years, and which you will pull up in the same way as the half-stems I have just mentioned, as soon as the lower stems need the space. But make sure that there is always at least a foot and a half between the winter pruning of your low stems and the lowest branches, either of the half-stems, or of the base of your stock; for, in order for the latter to rise easily, they must not be bothered by the shade of the others, and moreover you need space to trellis the new shoots. If your walls are ten to twelve feet or more high, then you must necessarily plant six-foot stems in between your low stems, otherwise you run the risk of not seeing your walls covered for a long time, if ever; there is even enough space for both to survive together without harming each other. For the sake of your trees, I now ask only two things: one, that your walls be in good condition; the other, that they be covered with trellises. For your walls to be in good condition, they must be well plastered on the tree side, and in good lime and sand mortar on the outside, if you want to spare the expense of plaster. In countries where there is none, and where mortar is all that is needed, it must be extremely fatty, i.e. two-fifths good freshly slaked lime on three-fifths water-free sand. If your mortar is thin, frosts will cause it to flake, and rains will soak it and make it run: and insects of all kinds, especially leeches and mice, settle in your walls on all sides, ruining your fruit as it ripens. Happy are those who can build them in brick, as they are in a large part of Italy! Once these walls are built, they can't be touched up again, and insects can't penetrate them; so our plasters and mortars only last a short time, and every ten to twelve years we have to redo the coping and sometimes the plaster. Secondly, your walls need to be lined with trellises. This requires a great deal of detail, because outside the Paris area they are rarely used, and only a small number of people even know how useful they are. Moreover, the expense is a monster, and those who would like to do it often don't know how to go about it in countries far from Paris. To make up for trellises, various expedients are used, all of which are rather poor: some use large iron wires, of which they make five or six runs along their walls, and which they stop from distance to distance with large nails; some even form meshes with this iron wire, as is done with wood. Both methods are equally damaging to the young branches of our peach trees: The wind, which blows them against the iron, causes them to bark, and the gum which soon follows, kills most of them; moreover, these strands of wire are too far apart for the branches to space themselves properly and attach themselves firmly; it is even impossible to secure certain large branches, which sometimes have to be moved from one place to another, and raised or lowered as necessary: I'm omitting other reasons which I could add. The rods that some people use are no more solid: a gust of wind sometimes blows down an entire tree, the branches break on one side, crumple on the other, and the fruit falls off; moreover, arranging all these rods is time-consuming work: You have to drive in pegs or nails to stop them; this spoils the plaster on your wall, and then forms a series of little holes, which are a haven for insects; moreover, you have to renew them often: it's a miserable expedient, all things considered. Some others, when building their walls, insert sheep bones into the masonry, about six inches apart, and protruding three or four times, on which they attach their branches; but, if I am allowed to judge by my eyes, it makes a hideous sight; moreover, one is often obliged to pile several branches on top of each other, and this becomes a very irregular trellis. The nail-pierced loquettes used 24 ** M ul 43 R 4 U 121 D"- 4 R 4 DU PECHER. 25 used by the people of Montreuil and the surrounding area are less dangerous in all respects, and I admit that you can spread out and place your branches as you like, with enough solidity and cleanliness; perhaps they even have some reason to claim that the fruit that is stuck against the wall ripens a little more, because of the reflection of the heat, than when there is a trellis in between. But what work is it not to have to prick three or four hundred nails on the expanse of a tree that is in its strength, and to have as many pieces of cloth to turn around the branches to embrace them? The people who are the most experienced at it, through the observations and comparisons I have made, could not do in less than two and a half hours what is done on trellis in an hour at most. This difference in time is considerable; moreover, the cost of nails and brackets, many of which have to be renewed every year, is a considerable expense. What's more, what is practiced in Montreuil would not be practicable elsewhere. These people have plaster on their doorstep; it costs them only four pounds a muid, while everywhere else it costs eight, ten, twelve, and even fifteen pounds; moreover, their land is full of small stones that they excavate themselves, and which they mix with plaster from the demolition of their old walls. These are the materials they use, and the cost is very low. When these walls are filled with joints and plastered with a good inch of plaster, they are easy to nail wherever they are spiked. X that they are driven in; but in ordinary walls, which are built of hard stone and mortar, often even built of earth, or at the very most re-created in plaster with an open stump, the nails can only encounter the stone, on which they cannot bite, or the mortar, which does not hold them securely. This method of trellising is therefore impractical, and the only good one I know of is trellising, without which I maintain that a tree can never be raised properly. Experience will convince us better than anything I could say: it is by the very operation that we recognize how useful it is, both for giving it the shape we want, and keeping it always full and without confusion, and for dispatching the work in the trellising season, and for preserving the fruit. CHAPTER VI. Description of Trellising, and how to do it. The UTILITY of trellising is not disputed by anyone; but the expense, it is said, is considerable, and one sometimes finds oneself unable to do it. I pity those for whom this expense is an object capable of depriving them of it, and I announce to them that whatever expedient they use to make up for the trellis, they will never see their espaliers regularly furnished, nor their fruit generally well conditioned. Let them restrict themselves to a lesser quantity, twenty toises in good condition will give them 27 more pleasure and more prosit than the ill-understood triple: I have no other advice to give them. But to be useful to everyone, I'm going to give some ways of saving money. It's not by the hands of a garden decorator that we need to pass here: the job of these kinds of people is to make money on the worker; nor by those of certain famous trellis makers who charge a lot for their reputation: for our trellis is not like a cradle where all we're looking for is ornament, and which therefore requires the hand of a skilled man. Trellising is the simplest of all operations: if you're smart enough, you can learn to do it in twenty-four hours, like someone who's been doing it all his life; and around Paris, there are twenty people for every one you can use. A bundle of ready-to-use trellis, which Paris merchants commonly sell for forty cents or more, can be bought for twenty-five or thirty cents at the wood sales where it is made, or from country merchants who have it made: the bundle contains twenty-five mounts, called strands, nine feet long, and when the strands are shorter, the number is proportionately greater; for there must always be two hundred and twenty-five effective feet in the bundle: this is the rule. But, both because of the assemblies that absorb six inches, and for the greater solidity of the work, there is a double advantage in taking all strands of nine feet, X 2 as much as merchants are willing; on which they are not always well treatable. In this respect, care must be taken to ensure that the wood is not greasy, because then it is brittle, and much is lost in dressing. To be of good quality, it must be made from young poles, in which case it is white, straight and knotless, or at least not very. A bundle of trellis is about 2 toises quarrées of work, counting the mesh of eight inches by seven, as it should be; so that half a bundle per toise enters, which, at the price marked below, is worth 15 sous, ci. o l. 15s. There are four hooks per toise, which sell for 5 to 6 sous a dozen, for this... . . . . . . . ........ Iron sil comes in, which costs to s. a pound, for... ... ............ The custom of each toise is commonly paid............... And to paint the trellis with oil, two coats in wood color... 2 2 6 10 Total.....1 1. 14s. Those who wish to have it painted green, must count on triple the expense; but this no longer concerns the utility of the trees, which is our object. It seems to me that this expense should not be so excessive as to be unattainable, since the account I have just given shows that for twenty-five pistols a wall one hundred toises long and nine feet high can be lined. I will now describe these trellises for those who have never seen them, so that they can have them made wherever they are to be found. The wood, as I've just said, should be young chestnut poles, ten to twelve years old; failing that, oak heartwood can be used, which I value no less; but the former is easier to work, and is quite commonly found everywhere. We choose the longest, straightest poles in the coppice, which have not been eaten away by wild cattle, which can damage them badly in some places. Any size is good, as they can be split in two or four if necessary. Each strand, planed and quarried, should be one inch or fourteen lines wide, and nine or ten lines thick; and it is up to the workman who has his wood in front of him, to take care of the thickness of his pole before putting the instrument on it, so that it has the thickness I have just mentioned. He shapes it with the plane, helped by an easel that stops it at one end, while he works on the other. However careful you are in choosing straight poles, it almost always happens that there is still some curved part in the length: but this defect is corrected by a second operaX5 tion. When you're ready to put your wood to work - and this is called dressing the trellis, i.e. straightening it - you hold your wood with your left hand, resting it on a log, and under the curved parts you make a half-wood slanting notch with the sickle; Then, by pressing the hand gently at some distance from the notch, while the strand is held a little above by a sort of iron hinge driven into the end of the trestle, the wood is made to make a little cry which straightens it; and as many curved parts there are, as many notches must be made, until it is straight, and the eye is satisfied. Now that the wood has been prepared, it's time to use it, and here's how. The first thing to do is to calculate how many running laths you'll need to line your wall, according to the mesh you want to make. I assume nine by eight inches, including the wood thicknesses. On this foot, for example, you'll find that a nine-foot wall needs twelve; because nine multiplied by twelve makes one hundred and eight, which is the same height as nine feet reduced to inches. These divisions are marked on the wall, with black chalk or charcoal, approximately from eight toises to eight toises. When all the divisions are marked, two iron pegs are driven into the wall, from one division to the other, on the lines where the hooks are to be set; and a rope is stretched from one peg to the other, to regulate the position of the hooks. To make this clearer, I first assume that three rows of hooks are needed to stop the trellis, the first at the top penultimate stitch, the second at the bottom penultimate dernic̀re, and the third in the middle of these two stitches, i.e., at the sixth or seventh. This arrangement made, we seal the hooks in a chessboard, from three to three feet, with plaster and a few pieces of pipe. Mortar in its present state would be of no value, unless you give it time to dry thoroughly before starting work. When you're in a hurry and don't have any plaster, you can use large hardwood dowels, which you force into the stone joints; and in these dowels you prick the hooks, which in this case should be four to five inches long, instead of the plaster hooks, which should be six to seven inches long, and split at the end into a swallowtail, so that they are better retained in the wall. But both must be angled out by about an inch, to retain the laths. This explanation is only for those who know nothing about it. The hooks must protrude one inch above the wall level, to receive the battens that fit into them, and which are fastened to them with a strand of iron silk, for greater solidity; they must also be flat, and one and a half lines thick by four or five lines wide. As for those intended for wood, they should be round or square, roughly like a large nail, but with the elbow flattened. Once the hooks have been placed along the entire length of X4 your wall, you first lay your three rows of laths on top (I use the terms laths, strands and trellises interchangeably, which are all synonymous here). We must not omit a third operation that the laths require, which is to sharpen them at the ends, i.e., to reduce the thickness of the wood to six inches from the end, so that it comes to nothing (this term is dedicated to what it expresses): we understand that this circumstance is necessary to couple the laths, which by this means are more easily bound together with two meshes of wire. With these three rows of laths in place, the hardest part of the job is done. All that remains to be done is to divide the spaces between the upright strands, which, in the above supposition, should be eight by eight inches, including the thickness of the wood. This division is marked like the first with black chalk, on the lowest and highest of these three rows of laths, taking care to throw a plumb line from distance to distance, so that they are all plumb; and it's especially important to do this at the beginning. To make it easier to pass the superfluous running battens behind the mounts, first lay only one mound, about six feet by six feet; stop the nine running battens on it with lé fil de fer, which remain to be placed of the twelve that should be there, as I said. When they are all in place, the rest of the mounts are put in place, and the whole thing is tied together with the wire. I don't think anyone in any country is unaware of how this is done. I'll just say that you have to tighten the ties as much as you can, with the pliers in your right hand, while with your left you hold the wire, which you always leave in a ball while you use it; then, with a little turn of your hand, you break it between the pliers themselves, when you've made three or four turns back and forth. It should be noted that the finer the wire, the shorter it runs, i.e. the more work it does and the better it does, provided it can withstand the work. To do this, it must be burned, and burned properly, because when it is burned too much or too little, it breaks under the pliers. The time it should remain in the fire is about a quarter of an hour. To return to the trellis, I must not forget that, whether the walls are level or sloping, the mounts must always be plumb, and the running battens placed as I have indicated above. When the wall is on a slope, take care to set the hooks so that the lines of the chalk line are closer together, so that the battens follow the slope of the wall. If it happens that a wall is higher in one part than in another, so that twelve battens are needed at one end, and ten are sufficient at the other, the mesh size must not be changed; and the irregularity of the running battens must fall to the bottom of the wall, and not under the coping. X5 Once the trellis is in place, all that remains is to paint it. Now, as painting is done everywhere, I will only observe in this respect that it is necessary to take a good weather, and not to spare in the color the litarge or the spirit of turpentine, so that it dries promptly; because, when it comes to rain before it is dry, the rain makes it run. If you follow this description exactly, you can, with a little intelligence, obtain the satisfaction of decorating your walls with trellises in any country; otherwise, I repeat, you can never expect real satisfaction from your espaliers, and all the less so, as there are few gardeners in a position to make up by their industry for the lack of conveniences. CHAPTER VII. Pruning. Peach trees are commonly pruned when they are in bloom; some even wait until they have deflowered, and the fruit is knotted, based on the fact that they are more sure of what they leave; but this last usage is subject to many inconveniences. When you start pruning so late, assuming your trees are in full bloom, how many of them don't fall off, no matter how skilful you are? If, on the other hand, they are more advanced, what harm are you doing to them? The sap that would have fed the bottom of your branches, if they had been stopped early, has all gone to the ends; it's only in these ends that the fruit has stopped, and to keep it, you are obliged to leave your branches excessively long, which ruins your trees, or you have to abandon the fruit to keep the tree: a cruel alternative for amateurs. In my first assumption, that the tree is only in full bloom, what constraint is there to trellis it after pruning? What damage would you do to the flowers, and how much more time would you spend on pruning than you would if you had done it sooner? What's more, the eyes that start to grow at the same time as the flowers bloom, partly hide your work, and you can no longer get your pruning close to the eye; so that as many pruned branches produce as many snags to remove for the following year. Your ties, moreover, can be neither so clean nor so well secured, because of the embarrassment caused by the multitude of these flowers. You can no longer see the defects in the wood, if any, nor the old snags that need to be brought together: in short, you work haphazardly. I experienced all these inconveniences the first few years I wanted to work by myself, following the general method. But having subsequently tried the effect of pruning a few trees, the fear I had, according to popular opinion, that they would get too far ahead, and that the spring frosts would ruin the blossom, soon vanished. These trees, which I pruned at the end of January and February X6, were no further advanced than the others I pruned in April: neither the flower nor the wood had suffered. The following year, I continued to prune a greater number with the same success; and in the third year, I pruned them all in the same months, and have continued to do so for many years with complete satisfaction. I therefore advise everyone to do the same: despite the public prejudice that may arise against this novelty, you will soon see that the work is done better, faster and more rapidly. We can see clearly at least in everything we do, and we can distinguish very well in these months between the good flowers and the bad ones; for the dry weather has begun to make the good ones swell, unless the winter has been very long and very hard, in which case, we must postpone it a little later. For it is important, as I have just observed, to be able to distinguish the good buds from the bad ones, and for this purpose, the sap must have acted on the good ones; I mean, they must have swollen to a certain extent. It will be argued that winter has not yet passed in January or February; that such and such a bud may be good then, and perish in the following months; and that we then have no resource left to skirt a few branches in favor of fruit. I agree with this fact: but I would reply that if bad winds blight the blossom in March and April, trees that are not pruned are no more exempt than others. What's more, as four times as many buds are left as could be left if everything went well, I have three quarters to lose through the uncertain accidents I am confronted with before making an actual loss. So I don't run much of a risk: but if it were even more real, the advantages I find in the method I've adopted would make me overlook it. And what's the point of having an abundance of knotting fruit, when you have to sacrifice everything that passes the tree's reach in May or June? Last but not least, my fruit, once tied, is much more profitable than that of trees that are cut in full bloom; and the reason is obvious. The sap has dissipated much less, because it doesn't have to nourish the quantity of branches that are pruned so late, and is carried much more abundantly in the tree's nourishing fibers. I've experienced all of the above, and since I've been following this practice, I've never had any problems. I have always had an abundance of fruit, except in the year 1741, which was generally so fatal to all fruit. Such a complete experience should reassure against all the reasoning of people attached to their prejudices, and warned against all the roads they do not know. I must not omit a circumstance that is more important than you might think: for the sake of the work, and to avoid breaking branches, you should never start pruning a tree until it is completely untrimmed, and well cleaned of all the old rushes and wicker, and the dry leaves that often gather between the wall and the trellis. Apart from the fact that cleanliness is detrimental, it destroys the retreats of many insects that hide there and damage your fruit, especially purple peaches, which limas and limacons are so fond of. This brings me to the description of pruning. The peach trees you have to prune are young or old, vigorous or languid: it's the state of your subject that must regulate your operation; the work it has done tells you what you have to do: in two words, you have to treat it according to its strength and need. I'll start with this year's new plants. If they have only grown weak branches, you will reduce them to two or four well placed on the sides, and equal in strength, which you will prune to five or six inches. If there is a small one with fruit in the middle, you can leave it; but if it is of the same strength as those on the sides, remove it; for, as the middle always fills out enough, you should only be concerned with the sides, etc. It's on the bend you give your tree in the first and second years, that everything depends for the following ones. If your trees have grown two strong, well-placed branches, one on the right and the other on the left, keep them and prune them back to eight or ten inches; at the same time, you can leave a few small twigs here and there for fruit. The method of many gardeners, who regard these kinds of branches as leeches to which they have sworn to do no harm, is to remove them without mercy, and to fall back on the small ones: as for me, experience has taught me not to be always so severe. It has happened to me, when pruning certain stumpy trees, to cut off as many of these branches, which starve the others, as were present, and to be seven or eight years without being able to give them any shape, and without drawing any fruit from them. These same trees then went from one end to the other, and fell into languor. This phenomenon, I confess, has always been incomprehensible to me: but the fact is certain, and the cause is one of the secrets of vegetation, which I do not undertake to investigate. However, it may be conjectured that the roots, which operate and help each other with the branches, being stopped in their action by the repeated violence done to them, tire, so to speak, of acting uselessly, and that the sap, having withdrawn from the branches, is lost in some way in the roots, which likewise remain without action, as soon as the head no longer acts. I have found, on the contrary, that by following the inclination of these kinds of trees, and by pruning the strong branches with a certain amount of care, they soon form a beautiful tree, which after two or three years grows no more. When, in the second and third years, they continued to grow, I pruned not only on the large branches, but also on the small ones, born from those in the same year, to give more diversion to the sap. By doing this, my trees moderated themselves, and from these branches, which were vicious in their origin, a number of good ones sprang up, which quickly covered my wall, and yielded abundantly. The only disadvantage I've sometimes seen resulting from this practice, and which you have to watch out for, is that as the sap is always carried to the ends, the tree doesn't become bare at the bottom: but when you are careful to pinch off the new shoots in May, and to take a lot of pressure off the head of the trellis, you prevent this disadvantage, and the bottom is maintained full. If there is only one of these strong branches on your young trees, this is another case: you must remove it wherever it is; if there are two, one on the right or left, and the other in the middle, you must also cut them off, as the weak side will perish, and your tree will never take shape; you must also then throw your pruning onto the small branches, giving no more load on one side than on the other. I would observe in passing that you would never see these kinds of badly placed branches, if in the month of May you took care to do what I advise in the following chapter; for by unloading the strongest side, the sap would be rejected from the other; but as there are few people who want to take the trouble, it is a question of giving a means of repairing the defect of this operation, when you have missed it. That's how you should behave for the first year. Let's move on to the second through to the sixth. I've explained what to do with trees that get carried away by wood, and that need to be loaded to moderate their fire and force them to set fruit. As for those that grow only moderately, treat them in proportion, and in all things, keep the middle short, and don't load one side more than the other. It very often happens that one side is stronger than the other; you must not let yourself be seduced by the lure of the fruit it promises. Withdraw everything that exceeds the strength of the other, and don't tolerate any branch that is stronger on one side than on the other. As a fundamental rule, the whole economy of your tree should be based on two or four good branches of equal strength, which should be like the mothers of all the others: it's on these that you should take particular care to space them evenly, and allow them as much scope as they can bear. You can give them up to twelve or sixteen inches in height, when they are of reasonable strength. As for the medium-sized buds, leave them in proportion to the vigor of the tree, and prune them from six to eight inches, depending on the place they occupy, and whether the flowering buds are more or less distant from the foot of the branch; for they are often very far from it, especially in certain species; and, as the fruit is our main object, we can sometimes, in its favor, deviate a little from the rules, and prune longer. In this respect, it should be noted that good flowering buds are only those that are double, and have a wood eye between them: those that are single, albeit with a wood eye, flower well, but do not knot, or at least rarely: however, try not to let yourself be tempted too much by the fruit: too much load would first throw confusion into your trees, and then ruin the middle and bottom. With regard to small branches, both those called rags, and the twigs so respected by most gardeners for their fruit, I eliminate them as long as I have better ones, I don't mean big ones, but medium ones, it being unquestionable that a branch with a certain body feeds its fruit better than a weak one, and that it also stops on it, despite the common prejudice that small ones hold it better, as those who want to pay attention will remain convinced. It is therefore only in the absence of the former that I retain the latter: there are, however, exceptions to be made in this respect. 1°. If your tree is extraordinarily vigorous, and needs to be fatigued by the load in order to stop it, you should leave a good portion of these twigs. 2°. If your middle branches don't have flower buds below the right size, and you're curious to have some fruit, you should also leave some of the shortest and most fruit-bearing branches. Besides, I don't understand certain short branches under the name of twigs, which it would be more appropriate to call bunches, since they are usually only one or two inches long. These are precious, and usually yield very fine fruit: I am therefore careful not to detach myself from them. The use I sometimes make of these small branches, which I condemn, is to cut them off at the first eye when they are placed in a spot where I foresee a gap forming. If one of these branches is pruned in this way, it may produce a better one the following year; and if it is still useless to me, even though it is good, I always prune it back to one eye until it is needed: these kinds of branches are resources that it is important to save in order to maintain a tree that is always full, and to make up for branches that have worn out in bearing fruit; this should be done equally on medium-sized branches as on the small ones I am dealing with here. In the case of trees that grow only weakly, it is necessary to examine whether the evil is in the root; in this case, it must be uprooted: but if the root is good, it must be preserved, and smoked in the way I indicate in Chapter XVIII. Manure often restores vigor to these kinds of trees; but as long as they languish, they should be pruned very short and on the best branches. This is my method for managing peach trees during their first few years; to which I'll add, so as not to omit anything, that great care must be taken to trellis them properly after pruning. .1e. As the inclination of trees is always to grow upwards, it is essential to keep the lower part of the tree trimmed, as I have observed, and this is achieved in two ways: firstly, by the effect of good pruning, which I have discussed at some length; secondly, by taking care to bend or constrain the branches on the sides, when training them, and to space them evenly. At the same time, care must be taken to ensure that they don't take on any bad bends; and, if the damage has already been done, this defect must be corrected by removing branches that are piled on top of each other, and those that have been crossed at the wrong time, or that are curved. These are straightened with the help of wickerwork and chopsticks, and skill alone must guide these small operations, which I won't go into here. 2°. Another point to bear in mind when trellising branches is to make sure that the eye at the end of the branch is always turned so that the branch that is to grow from it naturally takes its course over the trellis, and not behind it: this can be seen without a great deal of study; and in this case, with a small rod supported and attached to the trellis if necessary, you can easily make the branches that seek the wall return to the front. To these observations, I would add that wicker should not be tightened too much, because it often happens that being too tight, it cuts the branch when it grows; you should also avoid passing your wicker over the branch's eyes when tying it: a little skill prevents these little faults, which are of no great consequence, but which nevertheless have their disadvantages. As there are often pruned branches that cannot reach the trellis, we use small sticks that are interwoven into the trellis, where we pass a piece of wicker at the end, in the form of a noose, which is attached to the trellis by the other end, and which secures the branch: this is all the more necessary, as when fruit comes to these branches, and they are not supported, it often carries the branch away. These last observations apply to peach trees of all ages. Now back to pruning. I've indicated everything that's appropriate for first-age trees: let's move on to second- and third-age trees. I call second-age peach trees those that are in their full strength; third-age trees are those that are a little on the decline: these cannot be too sparingly cared for; they must be pruned short and only on the best branches: the small ones must not be kept at all, because on old subjects, they give only etic fruit. When, by chance, a vigorous branch emerges from one of these old trees and is capable of renewing the tree, it should be treated with this in mind, and carefully preserved to replace the old branches that are gradually being destroyed; but if it emerges from an old branch, it should be removed. I have nothing more to say about these old trees, except that they should only be cared for when, despite their old age, they are still bearing good fruit; for as soon as this condition is lacking, they must be uprooted. As for the trees of the second age, which are in all their strength, and which load abundantly, as they are those which make our wealth, they deserve the most particular attention. Most gardeners who work without principles, without reasoning, and without concern for the future, manage them in such a way that they are soon ruined. This is why it is generally said that peach trees only have a life span of twelve to fifteen years. I've got a few that are over forty years old, and they're still going strong. They were not under my care for the first twenty years, but they have had the advantage of being well looked after, and since they have been in my hands, I have looked after them so well that they are still bearing good fruit. I have quite a few others that I planted 15 to 18 years ago, which are undoubtedly of great beauty, and which I still only regard as children; so that if I could count on thirty years of life, and if I could always manage them myself, I would be sure that they would still survive all that time. To convince yourself of this, all you have to do is visit the Montreuil plantations: you'll see trees of the age I'm talking about in the homes of certain individuals who have no doubt taken better care of them than is usually the case in this very place, where trees are forced to produce, without bothering about their duration, because the tenants of the land are in a hurry to enjoy it. I have seen trees up to today's toises in length, equally healthy and vigorous throughout, and which I have judged to be fifty years old. So let's get rid of the prejudice that this tree doesn't last: it's bad behavior that makes it perish when it doesn't live about as long as another fruit tree. However, in saying this, I'm assuming that it's in a good soil, and that no accidents happen to it: for, despite good conduct, if the soil is worthless, if it's infested with gum, if the bug or the ant attacks it violently, it must perish. I have the advantage, along with many others, of being free from all these scourges: they should not therefore be considered as inseparably attached to the species, and consequently all care should be given to keep it alive. Pruning is the operation that contributes most to their longevity. This is the art of pruning, which may appear simple, but which is not without its difficulties, given the choice of branches, the work the tree has done, the position of flowering buds, the type of fruit, and many other circumstances on which a few rules can be based. I'm not going to talk about certain cases that can only be decided in relation to the object in question, and which can only be taught by practice. Everyone has his own method, and prunes according to his own ideas. Some prune short on all branches, others lengthen the branches they intend to bear fruit, and leave spurs to give them wood the following year. Mine is quite different, and it's only after much study and experience that I stick to it as the best. I assume that the tree I'm dealing with has been managed in its youth more or less according to my principles, and that it is regularly well stocked; for, if it is defective in any part, it must be treated according to its needs. Starting from my assumption, and finding my tree in good condition, after it has been stripped, I like to make a search for the worn branches, which it is easy to see from their thinness, and the bad sprays they have made, I cut off the worn branch as far as the large branch from which it comes, unless in its extent it has grown some good branch, on which I gully it, if there is nothing in the vicinity to fill the place. I then move on to the current year's branches, and remove any large ones that have grown. By large branches, I mean all those exceeding the average size; I also remove all the small ones, unless one is needed to fill a gap, or to serve as a resource; in which case I trim it to about the thickness of an ecu, as I indicated above. I always exclude the small ones I've mentioned. Once this first retrenchment has been made, I'm left with branches that are equal in strength: I can then see my work clearly, and at last I only have one reform to make in terms of quantity, and here is my rule for that. I leave only one of all those that have grown on the branch I pruned the previous year, and it's the lowest one I leave, because it's always good, thanks to the precautions I took at the time of the pruning. Those who have not done so, will choose the best of the lowest. After this second reform, I move on to the third, which is pruning these branches. I then examine whether my tree was heavily loaded the previous year, and what species it is; depending on these two cases, I shorten or lengthen my pruning. If my tree has loaded a lot, I spare it; and if it's, for example, a Madelaine or a Violet, as these trees are more vigorous than the others, I give them more load: but if my tree is of any other species, and has not been tired of the load, I lengthen my pruning to eight inches, if the place allows, but if I find myself constricted, and if I have nothing below to replace what is exhausted, I keep my pruning short, and give it only three or four inches. It is common to find, by the different arrangement of the places, that half of my branches are lined, and that the other is kept short. In this way, I keep my tree full, and I don't tire it. I said that I never leave more than one branch of all those that came on the branch pruned the previous year. However, there are cases (such as that of a neighboring branch that the gum Tome II. Y will have caused it to perish) where, when I find two good branches equal in strength that have come from the bottom of this pruned branch, and I have a large space to fill, I prune both to five to six inches. If I don't have a definite need, and I'm only afraid that the space will become bare after my branch is exhausted, I give the above pruning to the higher one, and cut back the lower one on its first eye, in order to ensure a good branch for the following year. As far as the tips are concerned, I'm governed by the space I have. If my tree completely covers its wall, I prune so that there is always a good foot's distance between the end of my pruned branch and the edge of the coping, to be able to support the new branches, to which end I cut off everything that has borne fruit during the year, and replace it with new branches, which the underside must provide. M. de la Quintinie, in dealing with this subject, recommends always leaving three feet of distance: I confess that this seems outrageous to me, as walls are too precious to individuals to leave such a large space cu worthless. It may be objected that, by my method of pruning only one fruiting branch, and keeping none for wood, I expose myself to having no good wood left for subsequent years. People will say that these branches, which are exhausted with fruit, only grow thin branches between them, not very capable of bearing fruit; they perish in the end, and consequently your tree is thinning out on all sides. This objection is specious, because in the common order of pruning, most of the fruiting branches are ruined under the load, and are no longer capable of any function, either for wood or for fruit, so that we are obliged to cut off some of them at the end of the same year, and the others at the second or third; but they don't have quite the same fate with me, and don't perish until very late, as I'm going to demonstrate. When you leave two branches, one intended solely for fruit, the other for wood, you naturally feel that the sap is obliged to divide between the two, and that the woody branch, which has no fruit to nourish, benefits much more than the other: Moreover, some of my branches are kept short, as I have just observed, and I spare myself resources wherever I see the slightest danger of emptiness. So I don't run the risks that might frighten people; but above all I have experience, which will convince, as I have, all those who try my method. The method used in Montreuil is similar in some respects to mine, in that they leave few branches, and cut back all the small ones; but it differs in that they load their trees extraordinaiY 2 rement, especially in the first years; they lengthen their main branches up to two and two-and-a-half feet, and at the same time prune a good proportion of the small ones that have grown between their leaves. It's true that the quality of their soil in some way authorizes this practice; and besides, they don't bother about the duration of the tree, nor about its beautiful shape: their whole object is to gather quickly and abundantly; so that the bottom of their wall, after the first four years, is almost always bare: a defect that a curious person must not suffer. But if someone, following their example, wanted to pass over this wall to enjoy a quick harvest, he would certainly fail, unless he came across a vein of earth perfectly similar to theirs. This circumstance may occur, but it is so rare that of all those of my acquaintance who have attempted this practice, not one has succeeded. In a word, I can say, in general, that it is more admirable than imitable. CHAPTER VIII. De l'Ebourgeonnement. In peach tree cultivation, disbudding is the most important operation, and yet the most neglected. When I say most important, I'm excluding pruning, which is a necessity. The usefulness of disbudding lies in the fact that it facilitates all the other operations, and gives the fruit these three advantages: safety, beauty and goodness. M. de la Quintinie has given some very judicious rules on this subject, but he hasn't put his money where his mouth is, and he's even a little vague on the subject at times. I must, however, do him the justice to say that I have benefited greatly from his insights in the remarks I have made based on him, and that his observations have led me to make new ones, which will be of benefit to others after me. Disbudding has a large number of equally interesting objects, and I shall follow them in order. The word "disbudding" carries its meaning with it. Disbudding means removing buds. Nothing could be easier on the face of it; but to remove them properly and with choice requires a perfect understanding of the subject. The best time for disbudding is May, when the buds are sufficiently formed to fix our choice, and are still tender enough to be easily removed by thumb action alone, without the aid of any instrument. Disbudding is usually confused with a second operation, called pinching, and a third, called arresting, since all three are performed together. It's enough to have seen a peach tree once in your life, to know that in spring it's teeming with branches that necessarily need to be thinned out. Now, disbudding means making this retrenchment early on, which should be done at the first Y3 trellising, if it hasn't already been done; but there is an infinite difference in doing it earlier. All peach tree work, as I have already said, can be reduced to two objectives: the tree's beautiful appearance, and an honest yield of good fruit. With this in mind, it must be relieved of everything that is either useless or harmful: I call useless everything that is misplaced, though good; and harmful, everything that is bad in itself. It's these two vices that need to be cut out, and it's particularly on the pruned branches of the year that they are found. Now, as these branches, according to my method, are for the most part seven to eight inches long, and sometimes more, there are as many as eight and ten eyes in this expanse, which are as many branches. This quantity of branches would not feed equally well, and would necessarily form a confusion. I therefore reduce them, according to my place, to two or three, and I choose one or two of the lowest, opposite each other, with the one at the end, in case there is fruit attached, and there is none lower down. If he has tied only at the bottom, or if he has tied all over my brancha, where the number of eyes may be eight or ten; in either case, I cut my branch down to about half, and keep only three or four fruits as far apart as possible, of course I always leave a good branch of the new arrivals at the end; At the same time, I pinch off with my fingernail, to the thickness of two ecus, the surplus branches holding the fruit (which is called stopping), and if there are others without fruit next to them, I cut them off completely, always limiting myself to two or three. If my branch has not retained any fruit, I cut it back to the second of those it has grown, that is, I keep only the two lowest, unless the great vigor of the tree obliges me to leave more to consume and divide the sap. With regard to the branches I have pruned short, I keep only two of the new additions, the highest and the lowest on the opposite side; I remove the others which have no fruit on their side, or I pinch them, if there is fruit; and, when it would not have retained any, I always treat it more or less the same way; sometimes, however, I leave only one of these new branches, and that is the lowest. If a large branch arises, either from my pruned branches of the year, or from the body of my tree itself, I consult its need and vigor. If it is harmful to its neighbors, and useless to me, I cut it off; but if it is useful, either to fill a gap, or to prevent it, or to consume the sap that is too abundant, I pinch it off at four or five leaves; and as from each leaf a new branch comes out, I soon find four or five mediocre ones, Y 4 F from the number of which I choose at the first trellising the one that suits me best. As for the small ones that may emerge from the old wood, I remove them, unless they are needed to fill a gap, or I see them as a resource for the future. But I do keep those little bouquets I mentioned in the previous chapter, wherever they come from. You need to pay close attention to the base of your tree; often branches come out of it that are very useful for replacing others that are beginning to wear out: you need to keep them carefully, and if they grow very strong, pinch them off at five or six eyes. As for the greedy branches, which can be identified, as I said, by their green color, spotted with red spots, and by their size, you must carefully remove them wherever they are, unless they are extremely needed to repair a gap, and you have no other resource; but in this case, they must be pinched back and even re-pinched a second time in June. It often happens that two or three branches grow together from the same eye, especially at the end of your pruning: in this case, leave only one, and choose the one in the best position. When you come across twin peaches, if one is smaller than the other, as is usually the case, you must skillfully detach the smaller one, without shaking the other: but if they are of equal size, remove them, or leave them; it's all one, they'll never work out. These are just about all the attentions that disbudding requires. Now it's time to show how useful it can be. First of all, it's easy to understand that this timely pruning infinitely strengthens what's left, both the fruit and the branches. As they go from mediocre food to good, it's only natural that they should do better. What's more, the branch you cut off, which was poorly placed, and which you would have had to cut off at the first trellising, if you hadn't done so then, was often the one best favored by the sap, and would have made the well-placed branch suffer. You have another advantage in this retrenchment, which is that you detach these branches cleanly, instead of cutting them with the serpette, when you are waiting for the trellising, the confusion in which you are working means that you would not be able to approach your cut, and your branches become covered with snags which are unpleasant to the eye, and which take up a lot of your time when you have to bring them closer for winter pruning, or which make a very ugly effect if you neglect to remove them; In fact, it almost always happens that these snags, left on the trellis, immediately sprout two or three bad shoots that uselessly consume sap, cause confusion and harm the fruit. It also happens that, when cutting off all these superfluous and misplaced branches, the jarring effect of the force of your serpette, and the embarrassment of the worker who cannot see his work, cause part of the fruit to fall off, which must then be greatly regretted, because it has, in a way, passed all the risks. What can I say! these much-desired fruits would be, so to speak, in complete safety, if disbudding had not been neglected. But what happens then? The fruits, hidden, smothered and as if buried in this thick foliage, become tender, as their whiter-than-green color visibly indicates; and suddenly breathing the fresh air, combined with the scorching rays of the sun, which is new to them, they wither for the most part, and fall off: For it should be noted that as the sap is always carried to the extremities, and that moreover it is only these extremities, by which I mean the ends of the branches, that enjoy the benefit of the air and the sun, most of the branches that are suffocated at the bottom are stripped of their leaves, which dry up to a certain distance, and can no longer, therefore, cover the fruit, or cover it only imperfectly. All this does not happen when, on the one hand, these branches have been exposed to the air throughout, and, on the other, you have accustomed your fruit from youth to the small insults of the air and the rays of the sun; they harden in this situation, and once they have reached the size of a walnut, it is very rare for them to fall off, when there are not more of them than the tree can feed. The same operation I'm talking about also has another benefit for the fruit: insects, especially snails, don't try to eat it when it's a little uncovered, as they do when it's smothered under the tenderizing leaves. It's also easy to get some of the fruit off the ground when it's caught between the wicker and the trellis, or between the trellis and the wall. In the first case, all you have to do is let go of the ties, and in the second, pull them out; but if you wait until the trellis is up, the fruit, which has by then reached more than half its size, is counterfeited without remedy. With regard to the branches, it was easy for you to remove those that slipped in at the wrong time from behind the trellis; instead, if you had waited until the trellising, these branches, which are sometimes very important, would have become hard and strong, and broken off when you tried to remove them. This is a good opportunity to talk about Cloaca, but as not everyone understands this term, I'll explain it first. This disease, very common in this climate, is the result of a bad wind, which causes the tree's leaves to curl up. They thicken and become yellow, red and scabby, which is unpleasant to look at, and very harmful to the fruit, in that they uselessly absorb all the sap at the expense of the fruit. When your trees are affected by this blister, Y6 you must not only remove all the bad leaves, but also cut off the branches that are infected with it, which form a sort of hideous tuft. This operation allows the sap to grow new branches underneath, which are also good for the following year. Note, however, that if your tree is completely infected, as sometimes happens, and there are no healthy leaves left to cover the fruit, you must leave some of the bad ones behind, to shelter it until good ones grow again. If you neglect this operation, all these infected leaves consume the sap, and prevent it from seeking other outlets; they then dry out and fall: your fruit, which is then slender, is uncovered; the sun catches it, it withers, and it falls to such an extent that sometimes no watch remains on the tree. The ant and the aphid sometimes cause the same disorder to leaves and branches; in this case, we must use the expedient I have just given; but these insects usually insist on poisoning all the eyes of the branches, and the sap cannot take over: we will see in Chapter XII the remedy that can be applied. If the gum has attacked a branch, you cut it back an inch below the damage, and prevent it from perishing altogether: by cutting it off, it immediately regrows one or two branches below it, and the damage is then of little consequence. The final advantage of disbudding is that the time spent on this operation is amply repaid when it comes to trellising, since there is almost nothing left to cut, and no need to reflect on your work: Each branch that has been left indicates to the worker the place he should give it; it goes there, so to speak, of its own accord, and all he has to do is attach it; which is such a great advance, that I have more than once found that it took no longer to trellis three disbudded trees, than one that had not been disbudded. However, even if this operation has been carried out with the utmost precision, it is still necessary to check the espaliers every eight days, either to remove from under the trellis any branches that slip back in, or to destroy more and more snails and other insects (and it's always after some rain, or after the morning dew, that you find them at work) or to observe the ravages of gum, and remedy them, which is a matter of a few hours, which are very usefully employed. When you have all the time in the world, it's even better to divide everything I've just said about this operation into two stages, and here's how I do it: at the end of April, I start by removing all the misplaced buds, i.e. those on the front and back of my branches, and at the end of May, when the fruit has stopped, I do the rest: everyone can do as much as their leisure allows. The rule I've laid down for doing this disbudding properly does, however, require some distinctions in relation to the different ages of the trees. For those planted this year, I give them a first disbudding at the end of April; in other words, I remove all the buds on the front and back of the stem, leaving only those on the sides; and when one side grows much more than the other, I unload that side to release the sap on the other, and at the end of the following May, I do a second review; and when I find a branch much stronger than the others, I cut it off or pinch it. I do more or less the same thing for the first three or four years, with the difference that if the tree is vigorous, I unload much less at disbudding, the big braches that I left at the first pruning, than the badly placed shoots, keeping everything that comes on the sides, as much as I find room to store it. As for old trees, I remove not only all that is badly placed, but also all that is weak to a certain point, to strengthen the rest. I limit myself to a small number of the best branches, and leave only a small quantity of fruit. I also wait to disbud those after all the others, because their growth is later. I have nothing special to say about trees that are in their full strength: you will find at the beginning of this Chapter, everything that needs to be observed with regard to them. CHAPTER IX. The first trellising. Peach trees are first trellised in June, a little earlier or a little later, depending on how far advanced the year is. Trellising means tying new branches neatly and in order to the trellis. If you have not neglected disbudding, this is the simplest and easiest of all operations: as I have already said, there is almost nothing left to cut. No more reasoning about the choice of branches, no more cutting back on fruit, or very little; no more subjection of any kind: all you have to do is tie up what you find. The whole science consists in spacing the branches well, spreading them out, and making them take the turn they require, to form a pleasing fullness throughout the tree. As for the rest, care must be taken to keep the fruit covered by the leaves as much as possible, so that it can grow bigger and better. You must also be careful never to cross the branches without extreme necessity. The defect of emptiness is the biggest one in the peach tree: this reason alone may excuse it, when it cannot be filled otherwise; for a small evil is to be preferred to a great one. One or two of the small branches born between the leaves of the current year's branches should be kept as far as possible, and it is the lowest ones that should be chosen; for it is often more appropriate the following year to prune on these small branches than on the mother, which its excessive strength, or lack of flower buds, forces to be cut back; and when the tree gets too carried away from the top, the strongest branches should then be cut back on these small ones, to fortify the rest. Small green marsh rush is the best for trellising: Marseille rush, though soaked in hot water, is too hard, and bruises young branches easily; in addition to not being as flexible as the other, it doesn't bind so securely, so you don't get the job done as quickly, and it also spoils the pruning shears badly. The straw or the large horbe that some people use, makes a rather ugly effect, and stops the branches badly. That's all I have to say about this operation, assuming the trees are disbudded: if they weren't, what wouldn't I have to say? With a great deal of time, trouble and precaution, you have to do everything that should have been done a month earlier, with the greatest of ease. It is necessary, in a way, to pierce the chaos, and to make oneself light in the darkness, to arbitrate the retrenchments that must be made, both on the wood and on the fruit. I cannot think of such a work without fear: so I refer the reader to the previous chapter; he will judge what he must do by what has not been done. He must always work on the same principles. The same causes, the same objects, the same disadvantages: it is up to the person who finds himself in the predicament I have described, to come out of it as unscathed as possible. CHAPTER X. The second Palissage. As the sap acts without discontinuity from February to September, we find ourselves obliged, a month or six weeks after the first trellising, to start the same work again; but it is much easier then. If the trees have been disbudded, only a few new branches are formed, because the removed branches have been broken off at birth, and the sap has not been able to penetrate the same places, and has all been carried to the retained branches, or to the fruit. If they have not been disbudded, it is quite common for false shoots to sprout from the feet of branches that have been snipped at the first trellising, and these should be broken off with the thumb, if they are soft enough not to need an instrument. If in any other place some have come up that are useless or misplaced, as they almost always are, in this case, they are removed in the same way: but observe to detach with the thumb, only that which bursts easily; for, if the wood has begun to eudurcate, you would damage the mother branch; and the gum that couldroit̀ occur afterwards, would cause it to perish: use a serpette then, and bring it as close as you can. If one of the branches that was trellised when the first trellis was put up, having found itself next to a greedy branch that has been cut back, has itself become greedy by the abundance of sap that has flowed to it, as often happens with vigorous trees, this branch must be removed, or at least cut back to the lowest of those it has produced. The remainder of this operation consists in giving an extra link to all the branches that have grown up since the first trellising, and cutting back those that exceed it to roughly the level of the coping. Some espaliers are so vigorous that they sometimes need to be trellised a third time in September: if necessary, this should be done in the same way as above. CHAPTER XI. How to uncover the fruit, and when to pick it. As much as it has been necessary to keep fruits covered by their leaves until they are ripe, to protect them from the sun's excessive heat and to give them more nourishment, they also need the sun's view to perfect their taste and give them the beautiful color that is their main ornament. However, it would be dangerous to expose them too soon to the sun's burning rays: they need to be accustomed to it gradually, that is, in three stages. We start to uncover them when the fruit begins to turn, i.e. when it whitens a little; we first remove a few leaves on the west or north side, depending on the exposure of the espalier: three or four days later, we remove a few more on the opposite side; and the same number of days later, we remove those opposite; finally, we put it completely out in the open, so that it doesn't lose any of the sun's rays. Soon after, it takes on color, it ripens; and we pick it when we see that the color is yellowing where the sun hasn't struck, i.e., on the side of the wall: If you're in the habit of picking it, you can tell for sure by looking at it; if you're not, you should observe that it comes off without violence: all you have to do is kiss it whole, pulling it slightly towards you. If the fruit has reached maturity, it remains in the hand, and you must be careful not to press your thumb against it to test it, as some people do, as this bruises the fruit: But if you're picking it to be sold, or to be transported some distance away, you need to pick it firmer, i.e., so that it resists your hand a little when you detach it. An important thing to observe when 1 uncovering the fruit in the manner I have just described, is not to tear off the leaves, but to tear them with the fingernail close to the tail; when they are torn off violently, this evades and spoils the eye of the branch where they are held, and prevents the flower bud from forming for the following year. CHAPTER XII. The various insects that damage the wood and fruit of the peach tree, and the remedies available. First of all, there is a species of green caterpillar which eats the flower bud before it has bloomed: when this damage is noticed, you must look for them; you will surely find them behind some branch, and crush them. Lories, field mice, rats, mice, mezcrines, all these animals with more or less the same coat and face, are the greatest scourges of the peach tree. They sometimes ruin the espalier, so that the master doesn't have the pleasure of tasting a single peach before them. If they stuck to the ones they start, the pain would be more bearable; but they try them all one after the other on the sunny side, as they ripen, and that's as much lost. There are two ways of destroying these kinds of insects: the first is to use dobbies and four ciphers, which should be placed on the walls from distance to distance, and especially around the trees where the fruit is ripening, with the proviso that they should be visited every day, and the bait changed from time to time; but, for the best results, it would be better not to wait until the fruit is ripe, as they are much less eager to use the bait when they have plenty of fruit than when they find nothing to eat. The second means, which does not exclude the first, is to have all the holes in your walls, both inside and out, plugged up to the letter; because when you take away all their retreat, they don't multiply on your premises; they go and find a home elsewhere; and if the species isn't destroyed altogether, it at least thins out considerably: you can still put arsenic kneaded with flour or minced meat along the chaperones; but at the same time you have to beware of the accidents that can result. How easy it would be to find remedies for the ant! This little insect ruins the peach trees it attacks, and we can't guarantee that they won't be affected: we can reduce the quantity; there are various means that we can use: But I don't think it's possible to destroy them completely, and if it's true that they could be made to give up their place by the antipathic virtue of some drug, as some people claim, I maintain, from my own experience, that the evil would only change object; for in that case, they would be thrown back further onto another tree: this is what I've sometimes seen happen quite naturally, without having been able to identify the cause. You must therefore avoid them as much as possible, and be content to clear them up as much as you can to reduce the damage. Of all the methods I've used, the one I've found most successful is to place a freshly killed ox foot at the foot of each afflicted tree, with the skin half removed, and place a half-full tub of water next to it; This foot is then skilfully lifted and thrown into the water, where it drowns all the insects; it is immediately removed and placed back in its original position, where the same effect follows a few hours later; so that the operation can be repeated five or six times a day, destroying many of them; and the foot is changed after a few days, when it is seen to be dried out by the sun and no longer has any virtue. I would observe, however, that this expedient is only effective when the weather is a little warm; for, having tried it in the spring, the ant has not attached itself to it. There is a distinction to be made with regard to what I have just said, which is that it is not possible to guarantee peach trees against this wretched insect: strictly speaking, this should only apply to low stems; as for high and medium stems, it can be avoided, and here's how. First, if the stem is a little flexible, you shake it several times to make the insects fall off, until you can no longer see them. You then need to have the patience to remove all the leaves that are poisoned with their spawn, and the aphid that is inseparable from it: once this is done, you stop it about a foot away from the wall, with a kind of wooden fork, which holds it firm in the position you want; and above this fork, you make a small basin of soft wax all around the stem of the tree, which you then evaporate. By this expedient, the ant, which doesn't like to swim, withdraws at the sight of water, and the tree recovers. There's one more thing to bear in mind in this respect, and that's to pass two or three laths behind your tree, to secure the branches that the wind and the load of the fruit would ruin; it goes without saying that these branches must be tied to the laths as well as possible. Another expedient is used instead of the soft wax basin. Take cotton or oak twine soaked in oil, and tie it around the tree stem: aspic oil is the best; olive oil is good, but neither is always an effective barrier against this insect, although it often keeps it at bay. From time to time, you need to refresh this filasse with oil. The ant is also the scourge of orange trees; and, to defend against it in Italy, where most of the walls are covered with this species of fruit, more suited to the climate than any other, here is the practice observed, and which I noticed in the garden of a curious man in Naples. His trees were planted a good foot from the wall, each with a small stem about a foot and a half long. On this same alignment were buried ten by ten feet, oak poles, four inches square, and the height of the wall, to receive a trellis in the fashion of the country, which, though very different from ours, had the mềme destination. Trees were placed between two of them, and trellised underneath in the same way we erect our contr'espaliers. At the foot of each post and each tree, there was oiled cotton, as I described above. The virtue of the remedy was demonstrated by the beauty of the trees, where the master assured me that the ant had never touched since the espalier was planted; and I saw others a few paces away, set against the wall, which were infected with it. Nothing would be easier than to raise our peach trees in the same way; but by guaranteeing ourselves against one evil, I can't answer that it wouldn't result in another, perhaps even worse. Our climate is very different from that of Italy; the cold winds that slip between the trees and the wall could do them great harm: moreover, fruit deprived of the reflection of the wall could ripen later, and have less taste. If someone finds himself excessively tired of this insect, he can try it out on a few ques toises of espaliers; in any case, the expense and risk are not great. Bugs often attract ants, so during the winter you must take care to rake with a wooden knife all the branches where their brood is found: this attention is absolutely necessary. Slugs and snails also like to eat our peach trees, and especially the violet, of which they are very fond; but if you take care to do a few inspections, either in the morning after the dew, or after some gentle rain, you'll manage to destroy them. Birds are just as curious to taste them, especially when some insect has damaged them; but they can be kept away with scarecrows; and when they don't work, a child can be walked along the espaliers to keep them away. Failing that, here's another method I've seen practised recently by some curious people, but which I haven't tried myself: it's to stretch six inches by six inches over the tree, in all its extent, of red spun wool such as we use for tapestry; we positively assure that this keeps them away, by I don't know what antipathy that it's not easy to understand; and this, it is said, preserves in the same way the grapes of the espaliers: the test is easy, and will cost little to those who will want to do it. It's not as easy to protect against earwigs and wasp flies as it is against other insects. These two enemies sometimes cause Tome II. Z of great damage to this fruit, especially to the small and large cukes, which ripen first. To defend against the former, there is no better remedy than to keep the walls well plastered to prevent them from retreating; and if, despite this, you are still bothered by them, you must put a few sheep's horns or pig's hooves behind the branches, into which this insect retreats: every morning you shake it, and you kill whatever is in it. As far as flies are concerned, we can destroy a few with half-full bottles of water beaten with honey, where they come to drown; but this is a small reduction in the evil, and several other similar expedients are no better. What I've always found really useful is to place a few peaches, already tainted, on the trellis, at a distance from each other, and leave them there, or some other sweet, anti-chewy fruit, such as plum, fig, pear, etc.; they stick to these as long as they can find life in them, and they don't attack the whole fruit. You can even destroy many of them, if you have the courage, several times in the heat of the day, to seize and crush them with your full hand, when you see a certain quantity picked up on these bad fruits, which is very extraordinary; and, to avoid being offended by their sting, you use a bad glove. CHAPTER XIII. Precautions to take during the summer heat. IN good soils, and especially in damp ones, provided your espaliers are well tended with ploughing, unless there is an extraordinary drought, there is nothing to fear, nor any precautions to take; but in arid and scorching sands, drought often causes trees to perish, or at least makes them languid, and the fruit they yield is of neither quality nor size. In this kind of land, I strongly advise all those who have the misfortune to be located there, to throw three lanes of water at the foot of each tree every two weeks, and a few hours later, with a rake, to give it a little polish. At the same time, throw a good load of large litter on top to maintain freshness. As for the stems, I recommend wrapping the body of the trees in long straw, tied with wicker; this will preserve your trees, and you'll see the good effect on your fruit. In southern countries, trees should be covered with straw mats during the hottest part of the day, otherwise the heat of the sun will burn the fruit and cause the tree to perish in a short time. 22 20 Blankets. The delicacy of our peach trees, or, to put it better, the inordinate fear we have of seeing them perish, based on the great affection we have for them, has led us to look for every means capable of defending them from the insults of time; but after having experienced all kinds like the others, I declare that I have recognized the abuse: there is, however, a good one which I will talk about; but it is so expensive, that it suits few people. There are those who, at flowering time, which is the critical time, cover their peach trees with pea cossats, a bad expedient; for, of two things, one is either clear or thick, i.e., if you put on little, it protects neither from frost nor from the sun's rays, which cause the greatest harm after frost; if you put on a lot, it can truly protect against frost, or at least against the sun; but how many inconveniences does this not cause? The risk period lasts at least six weeks: during this time, your tree, suffocated under the blanket, and yet docile to the movements of nature, which goes its own way, grows its branches, as well as its flowers and its fruit; but how does it grow? like chicory in a cellar, that is, the leaves and fruit are whiter than green; and when you come to discover it at the end of April, or the beginning of May, half of these tender young branches are gone,

The tender, delicate fruit cannot withstand the slightest cold air, nor the faintest ray of sunlight; it dries out and falls: this is usually the success of your work. Others use doormats, which are made in two ways: some with string or gut rope, others with trellis wood. The former are very bad, and I say this in full knowledge of the facts. 1°. They are applied too close to the tree, and the agitation of the wind ruins half the flowers and buds, not to mention what is destroyed every time they are removed and replaced. 2°. The fruit becomes too tender under these mats, and doesn't get enough air, so that, accustomed to this softness, the slightest breath of fresh air that it comes to feel (if you neglect to put them back on in good time) causes it to perish, which makes for great subjection. Even supposing that, with great accuracy, this expedient had a good effect, who can rely enough on the vigilance of his gardener, to be sure that, throughout the risky season, he will not once forget to cover and uncover your peach trees in good time? This consideration alone should disillusion everyone, for it has been shown that it only takes an hour too early or too late for the fruit to perish. Doormats, made from trellis and wire, are more useful, in that they don't touch the tree, and the blossom has air underneath; but they also have their drawbacks: first, they need to be the full height of your wall, and 23 they need to go from one end of your espalier to the other; for if you only put a few here and there, you're doing nothing; the slushy winds, which come through the sides, are as damaging as full frost. Now, to cover large walls from one end to the other in this way, you need a large quantity, and it's a real expense. A doormat nine feet high and four feet wide, which is the usual measure, costs almost twenty sols, all told, and hardly lasts more than two years. The daily wear and tear of carrying and returning them, the ravages of time, the damage done by mice while they are locked up, all this makes them wither away: Besides, how much work is it for a gardener to put up and take down twice a day, and sometimes more, this quantity of straw mats that are not easy to move when they are soaked with water or covered with snow? What a mess that makes at the foot of your trees! Besides, you can hardly use your flowerbeds to grow peas, early lettuces or other vegetables. What's more, you'll be subject to the same constraints as the others, when it comes to putting them in and taking them out. All things considered, the expedient is costly, and certainly does more harm than good; so I don't recommend it any more than the other. Heavy canvas curtains, or glass frames, are quite different, and I consider them of good use, since it takes little time to open or close them; this can be done without much trouble, and without any of the inconveniences to which doormats are prone. Indeed, the fruit has air, it is not crumpled, it is protected from all the ravages of time; and, if they are glass frames, ii ripens three weeks before the others; but these means are expensive: with canvas curtains, there is a risk of having them taken away overnight, if you don't have them guarded. As for the frames, how many fractures are caused by the wind, and sometimes by hail! What a job it is to assemble and dismantle them every year, along with the framework that depends on them! They are therefore only suitable for people who want to spare nothing to satisfy themselves, and who are in a position to make this expenditure. A few years ago, someone tried to persuade me that by having half-consumed manure carried from distance to distance along my walls, and set on fire at the approach of daylight, in times of frost, the smoke that came from it prevented the cold from biting so hard on the flower and on the fruit when it was knotted, and that it also blunted the first rays of the sun, which burns after the frost, so that it surely preserved the trees. I found something specious in the advice, and put it to the test; but it was at my expense, for lack of reasoning, for one must always operate on a few principles. Now, frost doesn't set when there's wind; everyone knows that: so it's only when there's no wind that there's a risk, and in that case, the smoke wouldn't have the effect you'd expect of it, which is to fall back like a riz 4 deau on your espaliers, it goes straight up, like a chimney, and is useless: that's precisely what happened to me. From all that I have just said, my reader will no doubt conclude that I am teaching him nothing that can defend his fruit from the insults of time. I agree that I am inadequate in this respect, but since my aim is only to disabuse him of the bad practices of which he may be the dupe, he must count my observations for something. In the absence of a sure expedient, since I don't know of any, I have nevertheless to propose a use whose success I experience every day; to have perfected it in some way. Mr Girardot, a former King's Musketeer, so well known for the beautiful plantations he planted in Bagnolet, and for the immense yield he obtained from them, is the inventor of this practice, which has since been used by many of the local inhabitants. All along his walls, below the copings, and from one toe to the next, he had pieces of wood projecting two feet or so: He had boards laid on them when the risk season arrived, claiming that spring frosts only fell perpendicularly, and that by covering his fruit from above, they were safe, not only against frosts, but also against cold rains, which are also harmful to fruit: this is what he practiced constantly, and others after him, proof of success. You can walk boldly in similar footsteps, and that's what I've done too, but differently. Instead of these pieces of wood, permanently embedded in the walls, which make an ugly sight in summer, I had small gallows made of light wood, the top of which slopes a little to help the water run off the roof they support; They are attached with wicker to the last mesh of the trellis, from six feet to six feet; and instead of planks, I have made, in imitation of the inhabitants of Montreuil, small doormats about two feet wide by twelve and a half feet long, linked by two battens. In February, I place my straw mats on these gallows, and secure them with wicker; they remain in this state until May, when I untie everything and bring it back to my greenhouse: only two days are needed for this operation, the costs are low, and this cover protects the fruit well, although it doesn't make it completely safe. That's all I can advise: for the rest, we have to rely on Providence, which takes care of all our needs. I have twice seen the fruit buds of pear, plum, apricot and cherry trees freeze for the most part, and the blossoms of peach trees suffer very little. The last expedient I have just described can only be used as long as there is a trellis on the espaliers; a new reason which should make us realize its advantage more and more. Z5 CHAPTER XV. Sin diseases. THE most considerable disease that the peach tree has to endure, and one that is without remedy, as it is so far without a determined name, is when all the branches of the tree, the leaves. It's a kind of contagious leprosy that spreads to everything around it; and if you don't take care, as soon as a tree is attacked by it, to have it uprooted, and to have the wall that contracts the disease coated with lime, so to speak, and that blackens as well as the tree, all the plants in your espalier will perish one after the other. I can't say where this contagion originates: the common opinion, that it's the bug, doesn't seem likely to me, or, if it's there, there's some other cause mixed in, either some bad fog that attaches itself to one place rather than another, or a corrupted wind, or some bad disposition in the body of the tree, or finally a sunburn after the fog. Whatever the cause, the ailment is certain; and, as it is absolutely without remedy, we must content ourselves with halting its progress by promptly sacrificing the patient. The second disease that most afflicts our sins is gum, for which there is no remedy. If it only damages a few branches, and the rest is worth preserving, try to maintain what is good; but if the ravage spreads to all parts of the tree, uproot it and replant another of a different species. Red and white Madalaines, and violets, suffer the most: they should be given up if they cannot be raised. The depredation of ants is also one of the greatest scourges of peach trees. I have said all I know about this in Chapters IX and XII: I will only add that, if they persist two or three years in a row on the same tree, as often happens, the shortest thing to do is to uproot it; for they do not leave it until they have destroyed it, and a new plant does not always have the same attraction for them, especially when it is a different species. If a tree is languishing, and you don't know the cause, have it dug up, and look at its roots; sometimes it's cockchafer worms that eat them, and this happens quite often to young trees: in that case, have them look for exactly where you see gnawed roots: sometimes the red ant attaches itself to them, and makes them wilt; the remedy is to destroy as many as you can. Rake the roots well, discard the infected soil and replace it with new soil. If the disease comes from a few rotten, spoiled roots, cut them to the quick, and have new soil brought in: with these attentions, your tree will recover. But before you do this, test whether some water might revive it, supposing it is in the height of summer that it is languishing. In the months of June and July, the peach trees are sometimes hit by a white cloud that makes them very tired, and also damages the fruit. There is no other remedy for this accident, which cannot be prevented, than to shorten the branches; others grow from the last eyes, which are sometimes healthy, and other times they inherit the contagion: there is no disadvantage in running the risks. The last disease common to all trees is old age: you can tell by the yellowish leaves, the thinness of the shoots and the smallness of the fruit. If you can rejuvenate your tree by means of a few good branches that it will have sprouted from the foot, you must cut it back on these young branches, or promptly give it a successor who must be at its side, if you practice what I advise in the following Chapter. If you cut it back on its large branches, as some people do, it is very unlikely to regrow new wood: the sap hardly penetrates its bark, which is the hardest of all trees. There is no point in smoking it or changing your land; it has had its day. CHAPTER XVI. Precautions to take when replanting Espaliers. E strongly advises all those who plant new trees to set aside a small reserve to meet their needs: gum, or some other unforeseen cause, sometimes kills a tree when it is least expected. There's nothing more unpleasant than to see a gap in an espalier: it's like a hole in a tapestry. You should prevent this by planting elsewhere, at any exposure, a dozen trees of the same fruit species as your plant, which you should label on pieces of slate attached to each tree, or to the trellis; and when you miss one, you use the same species to fill the gap. Whether they are four, six or up to eight years old, lift them carefully, they will pick up perfectly - I've made a thousand experiments. These attentions consist in making a small trench all around the tree you want to raise, about two and a half feet from its base, and three feet deep by twelve or fifteen inches wide: Once the trench has been made, you gradually uncover the roots, and to avoid offending them, you use a winegrower's tool called a forked hoe, resembling an iron hook; you gradually raise your soil to the right and to the left, until your roots are clear, and as you pull the tree, you feel that it comes easily to you: if any large root resists too much, you cut it off as far as you can. As soon as it's uprooted, you carry it to the place you want to give it: after refreshing the root tips and trimming it short, you sit it at the same height as the others, or rather six inches higher, because the soil you've just dug up sags accordingly: A few months later, you spread all these roots to the right and left, and while one man throws loose earth over them, a second man, who must be in the hole, insinuates this earth, with his hands, between the roots, so that they are not piled up one on top of the other; you finally fill in your hole, and throw over it three channels of water, which reassure and bind the earth to the roots. Once you've taken these precautions, you can be sure that the following spring it will be just like the others, and that you'll even get some fruit from it, but don't let it bear too much. Then, during the heat of the following summer, take care to give it a wetting from time to time, and a hoeing afterwards. For extra safety, you can also throw a load of large litter at the foot of the plant. This transplant should be done around Saint Martin's Day, and it's easy to see that it needs to be relieved of much of its wood. If you have not taken the precaution of making this small reserve body for your needs, and you are obliged to replace your dead trees with young ones from the nursery, plant them in this case in the way I have indicated in Chapter III. Everything I have just said should only be applied to young espaliers, as old trees should be treated quite differently. As for old trees, you need to get as much out of them as you can while they are still alive, and prepare successors for them as soon as you see that they are coming to an end. To do this, plant young trees in the middle of the old ones, taking care (as they grow) to prune all the branches of the old ones that could shade them and prevent them from growing. Then, when they start to appear after four or five years, you uproot all the old ones, and find yourself a new espalier. In Montreuil, this is how the trees follow on from one another without let-up, and are always perfectly formed. However, this does not mean that they must be equally successful everywhere, as the terrain in this village seems to have been created expressly for this fruit; but it must always be tested, especially as if they do not succeed in this way, one must not flatter oneself that by making a new plant, after having uprooted all the old ones and broken up the soil, they will succeed better. 1 CHAPTER XVIL Ploughing. It is common knowledge that weeds absorb salts from the soil and impoverish it. They cannot therefore be destroyed with too much care: this is the first reason why all trees are ploughed. These weeds are unpleasant to the eye, another reason for eradicating them: they attract many insects which then spread to trees and fruit; this is the third reason: they dry out the soil, the fourth reason; finally, they prevent light rain from penetrating easily and usefully; this is the fifth reason. To this we can add that all unshaped soil cracks during droughts, and the sun's heat, which penetrates through these cracks to the tree's roots, causes considerable damage. For all these reasons, we can't maintain our espalier trees too well with ploughing. First, in autumn, they need a good spade ploughing, a second in April; and during the summer, they need to be ploughed with the hoe or the rake, as often as they need, and always in good weather, so that the weeds dry out and die. Spade ploughing in this season is not suitable; it alters and fans the tree roots. 89 CHAPTER XVIII. Whether it's a good idea to smoke Espaliers. Sentiments are very divided on this subject, and each finds reasons that seem solid to support his opinion. M. de la Quintinie is formally opposed to any kind of manure; and after establishing, by specious reasoning and seductive comparisons, that it can do no good to trees, he apprehends that it can do them harm. I respect this great arbiter more than anyone else; but, whether he was susceptible to prejudice, as all men are, more or less, or whether the Versailles grounds, where he exercised his talents, had a particular and unique quality, which would be to need no foreign help, his feeling could not prevail against the experience of a thousand people who smoke, and who find it very good. I don't want us to rely on the feelings of a few individuals, since opinions are divided, and there are many people who pronounce lightly for or against, and rather on the basis of their prejudices, than on exact knowledge. But I believe that the practice of a whole country, whose inhabitants, from father to son, have for a long time made their sole occupation and their trade from their espaliers, should serve as a rule. It is the general practice of the inhabitants of Montreuil, Bagnolet and other neighboring towns to smoke their trees every three years at a brisk rate, i.e. those that are of a certain age and beginning to tire of the manure; young trees that are growing vigorously don't need it; the manure could even harm them, preventing them from bearing fruit. Those who lack manure notice the difference and, by their own admission, their fruit loses much of its quality and size. To argue against the experience gained over such a long period of time is to contradict the truth. But, you may say, their soil may need a help that others don't ask for? that's still trying to fool oneself. In their extensive terroir, they have veins of strong soil, others lighter, others stony, etc., some situated in amphitheaters, others on plains. Manure has the same effect everywhere, and it must be said that they recognize the need for it, for if the use of it were equivocal, they would not incur the expense, which is a real object. Some people who are stubborn on this point, and who are nonetheless obliged to agree on the good effect of manure, because it has been demonstrated to them (which has happened to me sometimes), retrench to say that it is true that manure gives vigor to the tree, and size to the fruit, but that it takes away the taste, just as it takes away the quality of the wine. All this reasoning is wrong, and I have experience to back me up. I have found, on the contrary, that fruits that have been smoked have more water and delicacy than others, and this because they are better nourished. As for the quality of sumier, as much as possible, horse, mule or donkey sumier should be used in strong soils, both because it warms the soil while imparting its salts, and because it makes it looser, i.e. softer and easier to cultivate. Cow's milk, on the other hand, is much better in dry, scorching soils, fattening them and keeping them cool. The best time to bury it is in November, because frost often arrives in the following month, and you're no longer in time. One thing to remember the following spring, when you give the espaliers their second ploughing, is to put the manure that the spade brings back to the surface of the ploughing back into the bottom of the gauge. I shouldn't omit to mention here that if the beds of your espaliers are only three or four feet wide, as too many of this type are, your trees benefit only slightly from the manure; because it doesn't act on the body of the large raciues, it only acts on their extremities, which we call the hair. As a result, it must be kept away from the base of trees, in proportion to their size: anything put at the base is pure waste, and can sometimes harm the tree, either by wilting the roots, if it bears on them, or by attracting various insects that attach themselves to them and cause them to perish. In addition to the disadvantages I have just mentioned, this manure forms a kind of floor at the foot of the tree, which consolidates and prevents rain from penetrating. It would therefore be much better to leave them without manure. Those who find themselves in the situation I've just described, i.e. whose beds are so narrow, should not hesitate to widen them to at least six feet, if they want their trees to benefit from both manure and ploughing. In some cases, a border of grapes that closes off the flower bed and that you don't want to destroy, holds you back; but in this case, all you have to do is leave a long wood at each foot, lay it down the following year at two or three feet in the alley, and in the autumn wean it off, and pull up the old plant; in this way, you lose nothing of the ratio, you find yourself with a renewed plant, and you remedy the defect in question. It remains for me to justify the use of manure, by the experience I've had with it for twenty years. I use it not only for my espaliers, but also for all kinds of other trees, both espaliers and bushes, with the exception of a few species, and trees on hardwoods, which grow quite well on their own. This practice has always worked so well for me, that I don't understand how anyone can dispute its usefulness. The fruit I harvest in the years I smoke increases by a third in size. What more perfect proof could one wish for? What's more, depending on the quality of the soil, and whether the trees are more or less full of fruit, you need to smoke more or less often. Some plants require fertilization every six years, while others need it every three, four or five years. CHAPTER XIX. Transporting trees to distant lands. The life of the peach tree, like that of all plants, lies in the moisture that is spread throughout all its parts: as long as this moisture exists, the tree is alive. It must therefore be maintained, and prevented from being consumed by the open air and the sun; for a tree that has been uprooted no longer has the same resources as a rooted tree, which pumps daily into the juices of the earth what it needs to repair the losses that its outer parts make through the action of the air and the sun. It has to subsist on its own, and consequently not allow anything to be lost. As soon as your trees are uprooted, shorten the roots a little, as well as the head; form bundles of twenty or twenty-five at the most, if they are dwarfs, and of twelve, if they are stems. Skilfully arrange their roots one between the other; spread straw between the bodies, so that they don't bruise when crumpled, and tighten the whole with a wicker; then take some fresh moss, and insinuate it between the roots, pressing it as hard as you can, until they are all covered; on top of that, put long straw, tied with rope, and wrap the body of the trees with a good thickness of straw, tightly tied with the same rope. For the final façosi, wrap the body of the roots with a mop, secured all around. Conditioned in this way, you can ship them to any country you like, and be sure that when they remain on the road from the end of October to March, they will not perish. I have sent some to Muscovy and deep into Italy, and they have been perfectly successful. There are still a few other precautions to take when they make a long journey by land, and when it's very hot and sunny, as sometimes happens in October and November; it's to recommend to the valet to throw a few jugs of water over the roots' bodies from time to time; and if, on the contrary, they find themselves on the road during severe frosts, to cover them with lots of straw, and even blankets, if possible. When you take them out to sea, you don't need to take any of these precautions, because they're sheltered from the sun and the frost. As for the dwarfs, you can condition them in another way, which is preferable to the one I've just mentioned; that's to bring them down to within a foot of the graft, and to store them all tightly together in hatter's mantles, which are known everywhere; it goes without saying that before doing so, you'll have lined the mantle with straw all around, and that you'll also line all the roots with moss, as you put them on top of each other. If, for added safety, you want to put another straw wrapping around the manna, you can rest easy about their fate. When your trees have happily arrived at their destination, we recommend that you soak the roots in water for two days before planting them. CHAPTER XX. How to raise and graft Peach trees. I have said that there is more embarrassment than economy in the convenience of finding as many as one wants from one moment to the next, and at a fair price; but as not everyone is within easy reach of Paris, and as these trees often arrive poorly conditioned when you are some distance away, whatever recommendations you may have made, and as it costs you money, time and uncertainty, it is a good idea to grow some yourself, to find them when you need them, and to be more sure of the species. I therefore advise all those who are far from nurseries to make their own, in proportion to their needs. The first thing to do is to prepare the soil, which should be broken up by about two feet, and always choose a good bed. It is then a good idea, as far as possible, to let it rest for a year before forming the nursery, and to give it a few hoeings during the summer. Peach trees can be grafted onto three types of tree, as mentioned in Chapter III: peach stones, almond trees and plum trees. The first is almost no longer used, although the body of these trees is more beautiful than that of the others, and the tree is also more vigorous, because it is too prone to gum: we must therefore stick to the other two species; and each, according to the quality of his land, will choose the one that suits him best. The almond tree is best suited to light, stony soils, and the plum tree to all other types of soil: I won't repeat the reasons I've given for this. As for the almond tree, here's how to raise it. In the bottom of this vessel (whatever it may be), you will put two inches of fresh, greasy sand, and a bed of almonds on top, an inch apart, with the point down; two more inches of sand on top of the almonds, and another bed of almonds on top, continuing in this way until your vessel is full: this is done in November. You leave them in this state all winter; and the following spring, you remove your almonds from the sand, and put them in the soil you've prepared eighteen or or twenty inches apart, and about four inches deep. These almonds, which have begun to germinate in the sand, soon sprout out of the earth. However, this practice is not widespread: many individuals only put the almonds in the ground in January, as they don't want them to get so far ahead of time : and, instead of locking them up, they leave them out in the open air, in tubs exposed to the sun, taking care to cover them during heavy frosts, should they occur; others put them in even later, and soak them for two days in hot water, before burying them, to get them ready to germinate; still others sow them in their garden, along a well-exposed bed, and cover them during frosts: But there is a real risk that field mice or crows will destroy many of them, if they are not kept free of these animals. In this respect, everyone has their own ideas, but climate and terrain must play an important role. The essential point of view must always be that the almonds germinate reliably, and that they are not too far advanced when you want to replant them in March; for however skilful you are, you break a large proportion of the sprouts, which are extremely tender, by removing them from the ground when they are too much lined up; and, even if you don't break them, they are very prone to perish after being replanted. When the last operation has been carried out, they should be planted with a straight line, Tome II. A a and make sure that from one row to the next, there is a distance of two and a half or three feet, for ease of passage, and to give the soil more freedom of movement during the summer; for great care must be taken to destroy the weeds that grow around them. In the first edition of this work, I said that the tender almonds of Provence were more successful than all the others, having indeed recognized that the peach graft was perfectly suited to them, and produced very fine sprays; but I have since realized that this species was more prone to gum than the others, and I therefore retract my first statement. At the end of August of the same year, the shoots are strong enough to receive the escutcheon, and you then graft them two inches from the ground, observing that the eyes of the branches you take are double and accompanied by two or three good leaves: single eyes, which are accompanied by only one leaf, never make good subjects. Everyone knows how to graft, so I won't say any more about it; I'll just recommend that you take care to loosen the twine a little in the following month, if you see that it's tightening the graft too much. I say spun yarn, but I must explain that it is much better to use spun wool, which is not prone to cutting the crest, like hemp and linen, because it lends itself more. In the following spring, as soon as the eye of the crest begins to open, let go of the ligature without removing it, and bend the subject downwards precisely above the graft: the eye soon lengthens and forms its shoot. By the following October, the peach tree is fully formed, and you can then uproot it and replant it in any location you wish; for it should not remain in the nursery any longer, by which I mean a second year; but it can stay there all winter until March. What I've just said only applies to dwarf trees, because when you want to grow stems and half-stems, you have to let the almond trees grow for three or four years, and help them to grow their stems straight by tying them to a few stilts; at the same time, from year to year, you have to cut off the lower branches; but you mustn't cut them off at first, i.e. at the top of the stem: The first time, they are cut a few inches apart, and the following year, they are cut back to flower; and the reason for this is that the sap must be allowed to emerge several times, so that the plant can root better; for the more roots are formed, the more the body grows and draws nourishment. Nor should the sap be allowed to dissipate too much, so that the master shoot can benefit and grow; as this is the object you are aiming for, you must therefore maintain a middle ground: when it has reached a reasonable size, you graft it at the same time, and in the same way as the dwarfs, at four, five or six feet from the ground, depending on whether the stem allows it, and whether you deem it suitable. A to 2 To form stems and half-stems, choose those most likely to grow upright, and use for dwarfing those that fork. For the first, we take offshoots or cuttings from some old damask plum stump, which is a common plum everywhere; so we're never at a loss for cuttings, and the cuttings that grow at the end of fruit-bearing trees are just as good as those from stumps that have been reseeded on purpose; we pull them out in November, and immediately replant them in the nursery, in the same way as almonds, observing the same distances. They are then cut back to five or six inches, and left for two years, i.e. until August of the second year, to be grafted in the same way as almond trees, and replanted at the end of the year. When it comes to raising stems and half-stems, follow the same procedure as for almond trees. I would like to warn you that for the violet peach and the chevreuse, you must take offshoots of a plum called Saint Julien joré; only this type of plum is suitable for these two species. I don't want to go into the reasons for this; it's enough that experience has convinced all those who are in the business of raising trees around Paris, From all that I have noted above, it is easy to conclude that those who want to have peach trees every year, must, from year to year, prepare a piece of land, and observe that the bottom that has once grown, can no longer be used for the same purpose until three or four years later; but it is very good for yielding grain or vegetables. To shorten the calculations for those who want to know how much land is needed for how many seedlings, by establishing, as I said, the distance between rows at three feet, and that between trees at eighteen inches; the perch of land, worth eighteen feet of king in all directions, contains seventy-two, which, multiplied by one hundred that make the arpent, gives for each seven thousand two hundred. There are provinces where the perch is twenty and twenty-two feet; this has nothing to do with our object: it is enough to know what an eighteen-foot perch should contain; it is then easy to know the increase in plants, in proportion to that given to the perch. CHAPTER XXI. Special method for a new plantation. In the course of this little work, I have explained everything that could be most useful for planting peach trees, but in this I have only followed ordinary practice. Since then, events have shown me (I mean since the first edition) the good effect of a practice I had conceived a long time ago, but which I had not yet tested enough to propose. My experience now entitles me to recommend it, and I dare to assure you that those who wish to A a 3 follow it, can count on deriving from their plantation all the satisfaction that the thing can give: but, before coming to the point, it is essential that I make a few observations relating to the object, to make the usefulness of the method in question clear. There is always something to fear when planting, whatever precautions you take. 1°. Lack of security in the species. 2°. The uncertainty of the subjects on which they have been grafted. 3°. The quality of the grafts used, and finally, the recovery of the trees: these four points need to be well understood. The safety of the species is self-explanatory, and consists in having them as free as one desires; it is on this that one must necessarily run the risks of the merchant's good faith, and of the order he has maintained in his plantations, which may have been disturbed in many ways. As I have already observed, there are few species that are known by wood and leaf, and consequently the most accurate precautions cannot establish anything as certain: this is the first disadvantage. The uncertainty of the subjects to which the grafts have been applied is a second point, the importance of which almost no-one is aware, and which is nevertheless a capital issue. I'll start by saying, with regard to the almond tree, that some merchants have no qualms about grafting on bitter almonds, because the growth of crests is stronger than on sweet almonds, and this is more favorable for their sales: but for the buyer, the effect is quite different; for the tree never fruits more than imperfectly, and is consumed as wood; the very fruit it yields is bitter and loses its size, which is an irreparable harm, and the most skilful merchant would not be able to avoid this inconvenience. Other merchants, through poor economy, look for the smallest almonds they can find, especially as this fruit is bought by the bushel, and the smaller it is, the more it fits into the measure, therefore costing them less for the seed; but the result is that the shoot they grow is much weaker than that of a well-fed almond, and the tree it forms afterwards feels this weakness all its life. When almonds are in short supply in the Paris area, nurserymen often use almonds from Provence, which, according to my experience, produce much more gum than the others in peach trees grafted onto them, as I observed in the previous chapter; and this is something that no one can discern when trees are raised in nurseries: this is what concerns the almond tree. The same disadvantages apply to the plum tree: there are an infinite number of types of plum, all of which produce cuttings equally capable of taking peach tree escutcheons, but which have a very different effect on the quality of the fruit they produce. It is important to know which cuttings are suitable for each species, and merchants often graft indiscriminately on all A to 5 types of cuttings, sometimes without even knowing them themselves; for they buy them right and left, and use them as they find them. The result is sometimes that the trees don't bear fruit, or that the fruit is poor, and this defect is often attributed to the soil, which has its source in the quality of the grafted subject. This is another pitfall that cannot be avoided, as there is no way of recognizing it when the trees are lifted: there are still other things to say about the age and quality of cuttings, which I'll mention shortly. The choice of branches for grafting is another important point for good tree production, and this is the third disadvantage I have to mention, where it is no easier to become acquainted. Merchants, whose sole aim is to produce trees that look good in order to sell them better, choose, as much as they can, the largest branches of the trees from which they draw them, because the crests are stronger, stick together more easily, and grow more vigorously : but these large branches are usually gourmands, whose escutcheons do produce beautiful shoots, which is their main merit; for the trees they form are exhausted of wood, and only produce fruit very late and in small quantities, because they always retain the vice of their origin. However, there is a considerable difference in the quality of the fruit, even when they are of the same species: the grosse mignonne, for example, when it is quite clean, can be recognized by its almost round shape, and by an insininity of small red dots on the side that the sun has hit, while the opposite side is a yellowish white: the false cutie, on the other hand, which is nevertheless the most widespread, is longer than round; these small dots do not occur, and it always retains a background of greenness on the side of the wall. This outward difference would be nothing, if the quality were the same; but it's far from it; it's not nearly so fine, nor so melting, nor so high in sugar; yet they're both cute in general terms: but how can you tell them apart in the nursery? and on what can you base your confidence that the nurseryman will have applied himself to seeking out the best in preference to the least? More often than not, he takes the branches as he has them, or as he finds them elsewhere, and doesn't believe himself obliged to take any more particular care. This is what sometimes causes the difference in quality in fruit that you find better or worse in your neighbor's nursery than in your own, without understanding the reason for it. It's much the same with all other kinds of peaches, and you can see how little you can be sure of what you're buying. Finally, who can promise that the trees planted will do well in the soil in which they are placed, in the ignorance in which we often find ourselves, if the soil in which they were raised was of more or less the same temperament? conA a 5 dition necessary for their perfect success; and this is something that almost no one pays attention to: yet we must be persuaded that when a tree is moved from a strong soil to a light one, or from a light one to a strong one, this change of situation usually exposes it to languish, and sometimes to perish, whatever precautions are taken when planting. Who knows, moreover, if it does not have some bad disposition in the foot, which the eyes do not perceive, or if its root has not suffered any alteration since it was raised? How often does it happen that cankers form on large roots that have to be shortened? It's all too common, in all tree plantations, to have a part of a tree missing; where does this come from, if not from unknown causes or unforeseen accidents, since everything we plant is judged to be good to look at? All these considerations should make you realize how many different risks are involved in planting fully-formed trees; and you will find yourself (I think) inclined to follow the advice I'm going to give to protect yourself, which is to graft yourself in place the species you want to have; and here's how you should proceed. First of all, you lay out the location of your espalier, as I explained in Chap. IV, and, depending on the quality of your soil, you decide whether to plant almonds or plums; in the same way, you regulate the distance between your trees, depending on the height of your walls, as I explained in Chap. V. Suppose, then, that you are set for the almond tree: in November, plant three almond trees in the set places, eight or nine inches apart from each other, and six inches from the wall; just push the tip down four inches, and plumb the earth over it with your foot; cover them during the heavy frosts with a little short manure, and uncover them as soon as they have gone: They'll sprout the following spring, and you'll care for them as I recommended in the previous chapter. At the end of August or in mid-September, when the sap has completely run its course, you will graft them into an escutcheon two inches from the ground, as explained; finally, in the following spring, the escutcheon will make its throw, and you will observe to pinch it at the fourth or fifth leaf, as soon as it is seven to eight inches long, the reason for which I will soon explain : but beforehand (I mean as soon as the eye begins to grow) you will cut your plums back into a slope very close to the graft, covering the wound with a bit of soft wax, or failing that, you will use loam. If your soil is suitable for plum trees, plant three plum cuttings of a suitable species in the same season as I said, in the set places and at the same distance as the almonds. In March, cut them back to two inches of soil, turning the cut towards the wall: this branch will strengthen, and in August or September, you'll graft it into a scion, provided it's strong enough; failing that, you'll postpone the operation until the following year; and in the following spring, that is, as soon as the hard frosts of winter have passed, you will cut your trees back into a slope, as mentioned above, and release the ligature; the escutcheon will sprout immediately, and you will pinch it at the same point and in the same way as I said for almond trees. If you don't graft the first year, remember to cut the new shoot back to half an inch in March, so that you can graft in August on the new shoot that will grow from it. Grafting is always more successful on this year's wood than on the old one, even though you graft equally on both. I recommend planting three almonds or plum tree cuttings, but this is only to ensure that at least one of the three comes to fruition, as only one should remain, and many things would have to happen if we did not have the good fortune to escape it. But this precaution is necessary, because, on the one hand, field mice and large birds, i.e. magpies and crows, are very greedy for almonds, and always destroy some of them; on the other hand, not all grafts succeed: but when you have both tiera to lose, you can put your mind at rest about the event. If, however, the site is infected to some extent with field mice, it would be better not to plant the almonds until March, after having germinated them in the sand, as I said in the previous chapter. At the same time as you are pinching the shoots of the escutcheons, as I explained above, you must reduce yourself to a single subject, if all three have come to fruition, by which I mean leaving only one that you choose as the best, and pulling out the rest; for they would harm each other if left to remain together any longer; and in pulling them out, you must avoid undermining the one you leave. When the plant left behind has grown three or four good branches, after the pinching operation which produces this effect, care must be taken to trellis and space them properly. But when your walls necessarily require stems or half-stems, this is the case where the operation makes you sigh a little; because you can only graft them in the second or third year; and I know how much these two or three years of waiting cost those who are in a hurry to enjoy; but it cannot be avoided. In this case, you have to train the plants differently, and train them relatively to the point of view you have of grafting them four, five or six feet above ground: To do this, as soon as your almond or plum trees have started to grow, reduce the shoots to a single one, choose the strongest and best-placed one, and tie it to a rod or stile so that it stands upright. So you let it grow as much as it wants for two or three years, until you judge the branch strong enough to be grafted; and it must therefore be at least the size of a good finger in the part that is to be budded. At this point, you graft it in the same way, and observe the same precautions as I have recommended for low stems; but there's one extra precaution to be taken, and that's to leave only two of the three that you first plant, assuming that all three have recovered well, and to remove the middle one to give the other two more room to grow; as they occupy the earth longer than the low-stems, their roots would get mixed up together if you left them all: It's enough to leave two of them, and you even need to use skill when you come to cut the second, after they have been grafted, so as not to tire the one that remains. For greater security that the grafts do not fail, i.e. that one fails and the other succeeds, you can put two grafts on each subject, four inches apart, opposite each other; and as soon as you see that the eyes are ready to grow, you fold the stem over to the better of the two, and the lower one should always be preferred. We must now explain the care we must take, both with regard to the subjects we choose for grafting, and with regard to the mềmes grafts. If it is almonds you are planting, you must choose the most beautiful you can find, the whitest, the sweetest species, and observe that they are new this year. You should also take care, when the germ starts to emerge from the ground (which is the most critical time), to defend it as best you can from destructive animals, especially field mice, which scrape the earth around it and break it open to find the almond underneath. You can destroy many of them with bells, which you bury flush with the ground at the foot of the walls, and fill halfway with water: as these animals come and go, they rush in and drown. If you don't have bells, use earthen pots; you can also put two pieces of tile to the right and left of the sprout, and leave them there until they are strong enough: this prevents them from scratching. If it's plum cuttings you're planting, you need to take current-year cuttings of good strength, i.e. the size of your little finger, with good roots and clear wood, and bury them about eight inches deep. As far as grafts are concerned, they should be taken from healthy, vigorous trees in full bearing, free from gum and cankers, and whose fruit you have seen.I say more: every amateur should cut the branches himself; for a gardener, to whom one relies, can make many equivocations for lack of a certain orderly mind; and how many there are who feel no interest in their master, and who would be capable of taking them at random, to save themselves a few pains or a few steps? There's nothing easier, in the fruit season, than to go for a walk in the gardens of Montreuil, or of some of its neighbors, and mark the trees whose fruit you like, by putting labels on them; You then come back when it's time to graft your seedlings, and make sure that the branches you choose are of average strength, with good double eyes; the biggest ones are usually gourmands, which should be avoided, as I said earlier; and the weakest branches don't have eyes capable of serving as a crest. If you are not in a position to carry out this operation yourself, and you absolutely must rely on someone else to do it for you, then take all the precautions that prudence suggests, so that the choice of branches is good, and the species carefully marked. For this purpose, you can give a substitute to your gardener, by the proverbial ruison that four eyes see better than two. In the case of those who are isolated in the provinces, and who have no supplies of their own in their vicinity, they should advise the person entrusted with their commission to arrange the branches they bring in neatly in boxes, sorted by bundle and number, and to prick their feet in small cucumbers to keep them fresh: with this precaution, they could remain there for a month without spoiling. A similar precaution when grafting is to keep the branches in a vessel with two inches of water, for as long as the grafting operation lasts, so that the air and sun do not dry them out. I'm not talking about the specific operation of grafting, which is now commonplace in every country; but I will not fail to point out that there is a skill involved in doing it well, which is not common to all those who take part in it: so, as far as possible, you should enlist the services of an intelligent workman, who is commonly found near Paris. In more distant countries, each person will do as he or she sees fit. I'd now like to talk about cuttings, i.e. plum species suitable for grafting peach trees. We have only three species which require a particular subject, the two violets, early and late, and the chevreuse; these, by well-recognized experience, want to be grafted onto the Saint-Julien, of which there are two species, the common and the joré: the first can be used for want of the second; but the latter is much more reliable, and should always be taken by preference. All other types of peach require damask, either large or small, which are known everywhere, but the former is preferable. The difference between the two is that the large damask has a changing gray wood, a little mealy, and the heart of the shoot is whitish; the small damask, on the other hand, has a large even brown wood, and its shoot is reddish: sometimes these species are bred from pits, and in this case, they are perfectly safe; but usually, cuttings are taken from the foot of old fruit-bearing trees, or from some old resprouted stump, and they are equally good, provided they are well rooted, and are not attached to old snags that are worthless for replanting. As far as possible, they should be taken from the current year's crop; however, they are still good after two years. If you don't have any at home or in your neighborhood, you can buy them at La Vallée, where they are sold regularly from All Saints' Day to March. It will undoubtedly be found that there is far more care and subjection involved in shaping an espalier plant, as I have just said, than in planting grafted trees: I agree; but at the same time, let's consider how many kinds of risks are involved in planting them in the latter way, and how mortifying it is to have cultivated a plant for several years, and to find oneself deceived at the moment of enjoyment; I mean to find fruits that are all different from what was expected, either in taste or in fruitfulness. There are all too many people, however, who experience this disgrace, which is cruel for an amateur, and their example can serve as a lesson. The method I propose removes all the disadvantages, and prevents all that can be feared; moreover, there is nothing difficult about its execution, and what's more, I suggest that you can enjoy the fruit more immediately than by planting fully grafted trees, if you only have to bud low stems; for it is well known that this replanted tree, in addition to the particular risks it runs, loses the firstic̀re year to take up and form new roots; but the same is not true of one that is grafted in place. In the same year that the crest grows, we begin to form its head by means of the pinch we make on the new shoot, and it is much easier to give it the shape it requires, because it is morally certain that its second branches, born from the first shoot, are all uniform in size, and that by this the sap is equally divided. Moreover, it is constant that a subject that remains where it was born always behaves better in all its ages than another that has been transplanted: the interruption of its action in the latter, and the change of soil, necessarily make impressions on it, which not only delay its growth, but disrupt its entire economy; for what happens? The stem, which suddenly finds itself deprived of the nourishing juices that give it life, falls into a kind of lethargy, and remains there until the foot has formed new roots that provide it with new help; and, in this state of suffering, although it does not perish, it is certain that its external parts, prey to the air and the sun, experience an alteration that they never repair sufficiently to return to their first state: from which it follows that vigor is never the same again, and that, in the order of nature, its duration must be less. I go further, and say that if we were to experiment with the different effects that result, we would find that, as a consequence of this first disorder, the fruits that come from it afterwards lose something of their quality. My opinion is based on the avowal of several nurserymen, who have often assured me that the fruit they sometimes gather by chance in their nurseries, from high-stemmed trees destined for replanting, is far superior in taste to anything that comes from gardens; and I even tasted some once, and was obliged to agree with them. I'd like to return to the subject of tree vigour and duration, and to justify my sentiment, I'd like to offer a few thoughts for public consideration. It has been noted a hundred times that a walnut tree left in place grows its stem and head much more quickly and more regularly than one that is transplanted: it is also known that a replanted oak never makes a fine tree, and that it must be produced from the acorn; it is also our experience that cherry trees and wild cherry trees, which come from a core, grow with an ease quite different from those transplanted in the countryside. I could move on from trees to garden plants, and I would point out a number that do much better in situ than when transplanted, such as (for example) lettuces, chicories, onions, cardoons, vegetables and roots of all kinds, etc. All this is too well demonstrated for me to go into detail here. All this is too well proven to be disputed. But the constitution is not the same (one might say) in all plants, nor in trees: I agree; but I say that order is always the same in vegetation, and that nature is always more pleased in her free and uninterrupted productions, than in those where she is disturbed. A few years ago, a private individual of my acquaintance destroyed ten to twelve acres of bad wood, and having noticed that, among the undergrowth with which it was filled, there were many wild apple and pear trees, which came naturally from the seeds, he had all the young trees that could be grafted reserved, and had them grafted the following spring, some in the form of splits, others in the form of crowns, according to their size: The grafts succeeded perfectly, and from the third year onwards, he harvested fruit of admirable goodness; but it must be said at the same time, that in destroying the other trees, he had them uprooted as far in advance as he could, and that he had a sort of general clearing done throughout the land, which contributed greatly to the profit of these grafted wildlings; in such a way that in ten years they produced larger heads than replanted trees would have produced in twenty-five, and this plant, formed by chance, became an orchard of excellent quality, which I saw with amazement. I have also observed something that comes to my mind in the way plantations are made in the cider-producing countries around Paris. Intelligent individuals come here every year to remove all the wild plants they can find in nurseries of suitable strength; they transplant them at home, and graft them after two years when they are well established. I have met them several times in the nurseries, and in discussions with them, they have all unanimously assured me that their species, grafted in this way onto trees taken from the ground, are much more successful in every respect than when the grafted trees are planted. I have confined myself to the facts, without wishing to go any further into the causes, and I believe that this little digression may suffice to justify at least that my opinion is not based on mere conjecture, and to make the usefulness of the practice I am advising more and more seusible. END. Contents of this work. PREFACE. CHAP. I. Du Pêcher en général, Page CHAP. II. Of the different kinds of Peaches, ,and the choice to be made of them, CHAP. III. Du bon choix des Arbres, et de la manière de les élever dans les pépinières, 8 CHAP. IV. De la situation et de l'exposition que exigent les Péchers, et de la manière de préparer les terres, 1 CHAP. V. De la manière de planter les Arbres, CHAP. VI. Description of Trellising, and how to do it, CHAP. VII. Of Pruning, CHAP. VIII. De l'Ebourgeonnement, CHAP. IX. Du premier Palissage, CHAP. X. Du second Palissage, 26 34 52 63 65 CHAP. XI. How to uncover fruit, and the proper time to pick it, 66 CRAP. XII. Insects that damage the wood and fruit of the Peach tree, and how to cure them, 68 CHAP. XIII. Precautions to be taken during the heat of summer, CHAP. XIV. Blankets, CHAP. XV. Diseases of Peach Trees, 82 CHAP. XVI. Precautions to be taken to regarair Espaliers, CHAr. XVII. Ploughing, 85 88 CHAr. XVIII. Sil est bon de fumer les Espaliers, 4 CRAP. XIX. Du transport des Arbres danles pays éloignés, CHAP. XX. De la manière d'élever et de gresfer les Péchers, CHAr. XXI Méthode particulière pour faire une plantation neuve, 101 End of Table of Chapters. ERUEN GOOgle ..-..-.--------...-- 080