Les jardiniers de Par nford University Libraries 6105 047 021 469 Estate of Dr. Herman Knoche S - DouEEOS GOOgle ---- -- Deuinegn, COOgle poiteeds Coogle JARDINIERS DE PARIS et leur culture Demiged p, GOOgle OgHES4D COOQlO -- -- -4- i - . --- -- 15 ---o de Paris ET LEUR CULTURE A TRAVERS LES SIÈCLES CONSIDÉRATIONS HISTORIQUES LES DÉVELOPPEMENTS SUCCESSIFS DU JARDINAGE AU MOY-AGE L'ÉVOLUTION DE LA CULTURE MARAICHÈRE DEPUIS LA QUINTINIE LES MARAICHERS DE L'ÉPOQUE CONTEMPORAINE PAR J. CURÉ Secrétaire du Syndicat des Maraîchers de la région parisienne Available from: A LA LIBRAIRIE AGRICOLE DE LA MAISON RUSTIQUE 26, RUE JACOB, 26 ET CHEZ L'AUTEUR, 72, ROUTE DE CHATILLON, A MALAKOFF (SEINE) 1900 DEuESdS GOOgle -. -.----------- -- " --. -- D - . - The 1900 Exhibition, like its predecessors, will be an expressive portrayal of the great economic struggle that exists between all civilized peoples, in terms of culture, commerce, the arts and sciences. From the point of view of land production, it will show the improvements made in different crops, in different climates, the intensity given to these crops by the use of chemical fertilizers, the rotation in crops imposed by this new scientific method, the selection of plants, etc. The aim of this "fin de siècle" exhibition is not only to showcase current production, but above all to illustrate the progress made during the 19th century in all areas covered by the exhibition. Horticulture, that important branch of agriculture, has made a giant leap forward in this century, and so it will have a considerable place in this exhibition, with all its different specialties widely represented. Today, when everything is becoming more specialized than ever, each of the classes within it will be keen to highlight the progress it has made, both culturally and commercially. This is the most practical way of creating new outlets for French products, which can compete advantageously with all foreign countries. Class 44 of Group VIII (vegetable growing) will play a major role in this economic demonstration, showing the many visitors from all over the world all the products it can supply to the trade, both as early crops and seasonal plants. Parisian market gardening has reached a degree of intensity that is unequalled anywhere. As Reclus put it in his Géographie Universelle: "It's the article of agricultural Paris". It will be represented at all competitions, where amateurs will be able to judge the selection and beauty of the produce. This important industry has made such great strides from every point of view in the course of this century, that we have decided to retrace its history through the centuries: the first courtiers of Paris, the locations they occupied, the plants they cultivated and how long they have been in existence; the new ones with the times of their introduction; the types of cultivation, the progress made in cultivation methods, fertilizers and their use. The tools used at each period, as well as the equipment, the transformations made in this equipment, the innovations. Trade in different eras and its successive advances, the causes of these advances, the value of current production. Packaging of vegetables for sale at markets, progress made in this area, means of transporting produce to bales, etc. The professors' way of life, and the well-being they have derived from the various social and economic transformations. We will also trace the origins of most of the corporation's members, their social status during the century, and the role played by some of them in society, socially and politically speaking. We will also describe their successive moves, as the big city expanded, the causes of these moves; the value of the land they have 98 occupied since the end of the last century, as well as its rental value. In a word, we'll follow them in their perambulations, their types of cultivation, their innovations, the progress they've made in every respect, whether in their crops, their equipment, or their social status. We'll look at the first market gardeners in Paris, worthy of the name, around the Châtelet and Halles Centrales, those at the end of the last century, around the Bastille, the lower suburbs around Charles V's enclosure, and the lower Champs-Elysées, le Gros-Caillou, the Ecole Militaire district and the Faubourg Saint-Marceau to Maisons-Alfort, Créteil, Bobigny, Gennevilliers, Bagneux and Vitry, where they were found in greater numbers in 1900. Diuired p (OOgle - == -. - HISTORICAL CONSIDERATIONS of a general nature OEtEEdS GOOgle DEEEed9 GOOgle .- ITS FOUNDATION - ITS FIRST GARDENS It is essential, despite the fact that this is beyond the scope of our book, to devote the first few chapters to saying a few words about the general history, character and customs of the oldest of the peoples who have occupied our territory. The importance of the successive social transformations that have taken place since the land of France was first occupied will only become clearer with time. It is generally agreed that the Celts or Gaels, whose Latin name Galli was later changed to "Gauls", had descended from the high plateaus of Central Asia, as had the peoples who followed them in Europe. Their people lived in a state bordering on barbarism. There were only two orders among them: the priests or druids, and the chiefs (Brenn). They were all ploughmen and had no towns, only large open villages, which later enabled Caesar to easily take control of their country. Their government was a federative republic, and the General Assemblies met in the Chartrain country. As long as there was agreement between the various tribes, they enjoyed their provinces peacefully; but when discord broke out, the Romans took advantage of the situation to conquer these immense and rich lands; this conquest took place some 56 years before our era. The seven small islands (1) that today form only two in the heart of Paris, the Cité and the ile Saint-Louis, were first occupied by the Senones, a people who had settled along the banks of the Seine. They were later joined by an immigration of Belgians (Volhes). This mixture gave rise to the Parisii. The Ile de la Cité, which today houses the Palais de Justice, the Tribunal de Commerce, the Préfecture de Police, the Hôtel-Dieu and Notre-Dame, became their main fort, Louhtès, which the Romans translated as Lucotecia and then Lutecia, hence the French name Lutèce. This island was then covered with swamps and scrub. The Parisii built their round houses here, made of wood and earth, covered with reeds and without chimneys. The Parisii, like other Gauls, were pagans; they had three temples close to their village: the first, which the Romans later dedicated to Ceres, the Isis of the Egyptians, located roughly where the church of Saint-Germain-des-Prés now stands; the second to Mathra or Mercury, in the vicinity of the Pantheon, on Mount Lucotitius; and the third to Heus or Mars, in a wood located on a mountain that later bore its name: Mons Martis, from which Montmartre is derived. Mistletoe, a parasite that grows on almost all trees - poplars, willows, lindens, etc., but rarely on oaks - was venerated among them. The most famous ceremony in the cult of these peoples was the mistletoe ceremony. On the sixth day of the first moon of the year, priests would go around the country, shouting "au gui, l'an neuf", especially the mistletoe of the oak. The Pontiff, followed by a large procession, arrived at the foot of the tree, preferably an oak, burned a cake, poured drops of water onto a lawn, offered bread and water as a sacrifice and distributed them to those present. He then climbed (1) L'Ile Louviers, three islets that formed Ile Saint-Louis, Ile Notre-Dame, Ile du Passeur aux Vaches and Ile des Treilles (terre-plein du Pont-Neuf). 206 on the tree, cut off the mistletoe with a golden serpette, threw it on a tablecloth and ended the ceremony with the immolation of two white bulls. It was a kind of gift received as a present from heaven, a remedy against a great number of illnesses, but all these alleged qualities have disappeared with superstition. Our ancestors still venerated other plants, notably verbena, which also cured a great many illnesses, but since then, like mistletoe, it has lost much of its prestige (1). (1) Duhamel du Monceau. Delized s/ GO0 The Parisii cleared the land they found most fertile and easiest to cultivate. They concentrated their efforts on the left bank of the Seine, a lush, green valley. They built a wooden bridge over the river, so that they could send their herds to graze in the large wild meadows that existed in the surrounding area. Gardens were more likely to be found in the valley, close to the dwellings. The first Celts had to live on hunting and fishing, and on the products that the land spontaneously yielded in its wild state. However, there is no doubt that they brought with them seeds of plants from their homelands and the regions they crossed, and sowed them. The generations that followed after they took possession of the land multiplied these plants as they cleared it. The Gauls, and among them the people we're talking about here, the Parisii, must therefore be credited with a certain degree of agricultural civilization as early as the earliest historians can tell us. The traditions of ancient peoples," says De Candolle, "attribute the first steps in agriculture and the introduction of useful plants to some divinity, or to some emperor, Pharaoh or Inca. But the observation of cultivation trials among savages shows that things happened differently. In general, in the progress that led to civilization, the beginnings were weak, obscure and limited. There are reasons for this to be the case in agricultural and horticultural beginnings. Between the practice of harvesting fruits, vegetables, seeds or roots in the countryside, and the regular cultivation of these plants, there are several steps that sometimes took centuries to climb from one to the other. Wars, hunts and rivalries between the powerful have often halted attempts at cultivation. If some great personage orders the cultivation of a new plant, and institutes some ceremony to demonstrate its usefulness, it is surely because obscure, unknown cultivators have spoken of it before, and experiments already carried out have been successful. To make these attempts, to renew them and make them succeed, one must first have within one's reach such and such a plant, offering advantages that men seek. Even the most uncivilized people are familiar with plants indigenous to their own countries. Other conditions are also essential for certain plants: a climate that is not too rigorous; for others, droughts that are not too prolonged. Some degree of security, of fixity; finally, for these primitive peoples who had no taste for lucre, the need to live when hunting, fishing and the products of indigenous plants were not sufficient to meet their needs. Civilization has had the unfortunate side of making men egoists, giving them a taste for lucre and inciting them to exploit each other to pile up more than they can consume for some, when next to them, others don't have their sufficiency. If men had remained in their primitive state, would they be happier? It's a serious problem that mankind has been grappling with for centuries, but which we still haven't been able to resolve. Great revolutionary movements have taken place to achieve this result. First of all, Christianity, whose aim was the emancipation of mankind, and which the egoism of the then506 sants later turned towards a diametrically opposed goal. Finally, the Revolution of 1789, whose ideal was to make all men equal before the law, and to put into practice its great motto: Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité, inscribed on the frontispiece of our public monuments. But the further we move away from this great era, the more we seem to be moving towards the opposite goal. According to some authors, the spontaneous vegetation of our regions was characterized by oak, brambles and thorns. But under the influence of successive human migrations, our fertile land of France soon saw the acclimatization of root crops such as turnips and carrots, and, as herbs, cabbage, wild chicory, etc., as well as a number of southern plants. Many of these plants have since been considered to be spontaneously part of the French flora. With this approach, the Parisians cultivating the virgin lands on the left bank of the Seine were not long without a flourishing crop, which gave them a certain ease of living and a greater sense of well-being than other settlers, less well shared for the fertility of the soil. The right bank of Lutetia was nothing but an immense swamp, which these first settlers didn't even bother with, as they had enough good land to cultivate to support themselves, and were not yet familiar with trade (1). Several centuries passed in this simple, pastoral way of life. There's no doubt that these men lived happily, freely and free from all bondage. But there's a kind of civilization that consists in going to peoples who don't ask you for anything and don't even know you exist. You take over their country and dictate laws to them because they are weak. It was by suffering this injustice, like many other peoples after them, that the Gauls first became acquainted with civilization. (1) Delamare, Traité de Police. 99 "The common character of the Gallic race," says Strabo, "is that they are irritable and war-mad, quick to fight, otherwise simple, and without malignity. If you irritate them, they march together straight to the enemy, and attack him head-on, without inquiring about anything else. So, by rusc, you can easily get to Lout; you can draw them into battle whenever you want, wherever you want, whatever your motives, they're always ready. if they had no other weapon than their strength and audacity. However, by persuasion, they can be persuaded to do useful things; they are susceptible to culture and literary instruction. Strengthened by their height and numbers, they gather easily in large crowds, simple and spontaneous as they are, willingly taking up the cause of the oppressed. Wouldn't you think, when reading this quotation, that you were reading about the character of today's French, albeit with the veneer acquired through the experience of twenty centuries of civilization? The genius of these Gaels is first and foremost nothing other than movement, attack and conquest; it was through war that ancient nations mixed and drew closer together; as trade did not exist, there was no peaceful relationship between peoples. Peoples of war and noise, they run the world with swords in their hands, less, it seems, from greed than from a vague and vain desire to see, to know, to act; breaking, destroying, for want of being able to produce again. These are the children of the nascent world. The sky itself did not frighten them; they threw arrows at it when it thundered. If the waves of the sea broke against them, they did not refuse to fight, and marched towards them sword in hand. Their point of honor was never to back down. No nation was better off for its life. Their greatest pleasure, after fighting, was to surround the stranger, and make him tell tales of distant lands. These barbarians were insatiably curious, terrible talkers, tireless, and it was a business in their assemblies to keep the speaker talking in the midst of interruptions. Their banquets, moreover, did not end without a fight. They liked to associate, in large hordes, camping in villages in the middle of wide-open plains, bonding easily with strangers, familiar with strangers, talkers, laughers, orators mixing with everyone and everything. They were neither brutal nor drunkards - these vices belonged more to the Germans. In a word, our ancestors had all the qualities and all the vices of rapid sympathy. However, these cheerful companions were not to be trusted. They were not serious about words. They promised, then laughed, and all was said (1). This people would perhaps have rolled on for a long time in the ebb and flow of barbarism, if a new element, coming from outside, hadn't brought them a principle of stability, a social idea. UNDER ROMAN DOMINATION At that time, the Romans were ahead of all other peoples in all aspects of progress: civil and political organization, instruction, education, luxury, and so on. This was the real reason for the success of the Roman conquest over these proud warriors, who had made Rome tremble just a few centuries earlier. Caesar pounced on the Gauls as if they were prey for his avarice; he waged a war of brigandage. Slave traders followed the army, and Caesar sold the population to them body and soul. The Gauls lost both their homeland and their freedom, the most cherished possession in the world. Lutetia was attacked by Labienus fifty-six years BC. The first attack was on the marshes of the right bank, the Butte-des-Moulins, which Caesar described and called perpetua palus, perpetual marsh. He was forced to lift the siege. A second time by the same general, by the Seine. The Parisii set fire to their village, broke the bridges (they had also built a wooden bridge across the river to connect with the right bank of their island) and presented battle to the Romans. Labienus countered their resistance with cunning, pretending to retreat; then he divided his army into three corps and, by this stratagem, enveloped that of his enemies. 0 THE GARDENERS OF PARIS The Parisii were one of the clans that put up the greatest resistance to the conquerors; nevertheless, they suffered the same fate as all the other Gauls. Under Roman rule, Lutetia became the capital of Gaul. Julien pourvu proconsul, governor general of the Gauls, chose it as his home in 355. This city, he says, "is on a small island, entered from two sides by wooden bridges. The river rarely overflows, and winter is not too harsh. They grow very good vines, even fig trees, which they cover in winter with wheat straw (1). These few words from the proconsul on the products of the Parisii indicate that they already had a sophisticated culture. First, they had meadows on the river banks, then further afield they cultivated cereals: wheat, barley and oats. Mount Lucotitius was covered with vines. According to Julian, they certainly had gardens on their island, since there were artfully cultivated fig trees, other trees, roots, native and imported vegetables that must also have been well grown. But as this people knew nothing of trade, all these products were consumed by the producers themselves. The Gauls had none of the indifference to property ownership generally found among barbarian peoples. Having only two orders, the druids and the chiefs, they had divided their domains, honors and immunities among themselves, so that the people barely counted, tyrannized by the great and cultivating their lands. The masters had all the rights of the master over his slaves, over the ploughmen of their possessions. The Latin domination did not introduce any appreciable change in this order of things; the men of the land were already in slavery; they remained slaves; only, the yoke was heavier. This is how far this ancient and formidable race had come 1) Delamare, Traité de Police. D9 LES CULTIVATEURS PARISII SOUS LA DOMINATION ROMAIXE 13 des Gaulois, who had made other peoples, their neighbors, tremble, after having been among the great nations before them, because the two privileged classes, after having reduced to slavery the third, the most numerous, had found themselves isolated and without strength at the time of the invasion. Property not being as solidly established as it was among the Romans, the latter, following the example of all conquerors, easily dispossessed the chiefs; the ploughmen merely changed masters; but the latter were much more rapacious and harsh than the former. They had four methods of exploiting rural property: 1° the owner used a workshop of slaves, governed by an auctor; 2° they had slaves cultivate the land in perpetuity; 3° they gave land to farmers, who worked it as they saw fit; 4° they entrusted it to a slave who had other slaves under his command. All these men were attached to the land, and were sold along with the property, like the beasts of burden that shared their labor. The Roman republics had created smallholdings, the only way to give men true freedom. This is what our great Revolution of 1789 set out to do once again, with some success. Unfortunately, its conquests may not last much longer, for barely a century later, we are witnessing the reconstitution of large-scale property in all its forms. The Roman emperors destroyed small-scale property and founded large-scale property, which gave rise to the most odious slavery that men can endure. These were the advances made by the Romans, especially in Gaul. However, they left social organization and general administration intact; thanks to this concession, the qualities peculiar to their race, combined with their love of agriculture, were later to make this people one of the nations leading the way in civilization and progress. D08 However, the Gallic chiefs did not meekly submit to the yoke of their new masters; the Roman occupation was a long period of wars and revolts. All the insults and vexations they received were passed on to the slaves, colonists or dependent farmers, whose condition became more and more akin to slavery. It was to them that the owners paid back all the outrages and exactions inflicted on them by superior agents. Overburdened by taxation and growing poverty, their numbers were dwindling by the day. The Gauls were becoming depopulated, and lands once so fertile were turning into marshes and ponds. Roman tyranny weighed so heavily on these unfortunate farmers that almost an entire race perished (1). Did the Parisii farmers suffer the same fate? There's little doubt about it, but as they were more numerous, and closer to the powerful of the day, they were better able to voice their grievances, and thus manage to improve their lot to some extent. Men passed on and succumbed, but the organization that the victors had brought with them remained, and all too slowly, alas! brought greater well-being to subsequent generations. LES JARDINIERS DE PARIS (1) Lactantius (On the death of persecutors) The time of the founding of gardens can be traced back to the earliest days of man's existence, since one of the oldest stories in the world tells us that Adam and Eve were born in a garden. La Quintinie rightly claims that gardening was man's first profession. Before the use of animals to plough the land, centuries passed during which men ploughed it with their hands, using crude tools. These primitive men lived on fruit and vegetables; it was only later that they ventured to train animals to use them, then to kill them to eat their flesh, at first with disgust (1). Garden cultivation was passed on to the Greeks by the Phoenicians and Egyptians, but these peoples only grew vegetables and fruit suitable for human consumption. From the esteem in which they held these foods and the gardens that produced them, the ancients deified Aesculapius as the first to regulate the use of these products in medicine, and made him the father of the goddess Salus, who is none other than health, to whom the Romans had built a temple. They even went so far as to give divine honors and a religious cult to certain vegetables, through the services they rendered in people's diets. These included cabbage, onions, etc. (2). (1) Delamare Traité de Police. (2) Louis Noisette. The Persians seem to be the creators of pleasure gardens. The Greeks never mastered the art of enhancing the beauty of gardens through enlightened cultivation, contenting themselves with harvesting fruit and vegetables. The Romans, more conquerors than farmers, neglected the cultivation of flowers in the first centuries of their power. Their cultivation consisted of planting a few vegetables entrusted to the care of the mother of the family, who was then, as now, responsible for providing food for the family. Later, the Roman emperors brought with them a taste for beautiful gardens, and horticulture in these remote times and in these countries already took on a certain development (1). The Romans called the garden heredium (inheritance), and the word hortus was applied, in a broader sense, to the tenant farm. Gardening was divided into four types: vegetable, fruit, cork and medicinal, in much the same way as today, with the addition of ornamental plant beds to the cork garden (2). The use of terraces dates back to the time of the first patriarchs. Semiramis, queen of the Assyrians, had such a great taste for gardens that she had one made right up to her palace in Babylon, and with such art that it was counted as one of the Seven Wonders of the World. This taste was passed on to the Romans, and when Julian had his palace built on the site of the Cluny museum, he added one to the immense gardens that surrounded it, on the vault of the Thermes (or baths) hall. We'll come back to these gardens later. The taste for terraces is still very pronounced among southerners. In Algeria, in the beautiful villas surrounding Algiers, and on the steep slopes of the Sahel, we have seen terraces planted with admirable taste, a credit to (1) Louis Noisette. (21 Olivier de Serres. the gardeners who planted them. It's worth adding that all the houses have their own terraces, which contributes greatly to the fashion for gardens. All these terraces are very well maintained, whitewashed every year; so when you see Algiers from the open sea, you first see a white dot, which grows as you approach until you can make out the houses. These white terraces, which serve as roofs for the houses, give the town a very special appearance and character. The Arabs have nicknamed it Algiers-la-Blanche. When you leave Marseille by sea too, you can see the old town with its dirty black roofs gradually fading and disappearing. Twenty-four hours later, when you see Algiers-la-Blanche as the crow flies, the contrast in your mind's eye is all in favor of the latter. With the decline of the Roman Empire, people were so enslaved that the taste for beautiful gardens no longer existed; all that remained, as centuries before, was the cultivation of vegetables for human consumption. GARDENS, THEIR ORIGIN IN PARIS We mentioned in the previous chapter that Julian, proconsul of Gaul and later named emperor by the armies he commanded, had his palace built on the left bank of the Seine, not far from Lutetia. This palace was surrounded by immense gardens, extending on one side to where the church of Saint-Germain-des-Prés was later built, and on the other to the top of the nearby mountain (Mont Lucotitius), which later took the name MontagneSainte-Geneviève. After having these constructions built, he had the waters of Arcueil brought to him via an aqueduct, some remains of which can still be seen in this old commune. These waters were used for bathing, for the use of the palace and certainly also for the upkeep of the gardens. By this time, the Roman Empire was in all its splendor, and Julian undoubtedly sent from Rome practitioners skilled in the art of gardening to lay out and cultivate these beautiful gardens. These men were our first masters. With Lutetia now the capital of the Gauls, Julian, the Roman emperor, established his residence there, as did some of his successors, and the city continued to grow in size and population. Trade, which had already existed for several centuries among the Romans, passed to the Gauls. The grain trade, presumably one of the first, began under the consuls (1). (1) Delamare Traité de Police. At the time of Julian's arrival, Gaul had been a Roman province for at least three centuries, and there were undoubtedly a few small gardeners established in the more marshy parts of the islands, so that when he arrived he was able to say that they cultivated fig trees with a certain art, and that they were farmers for the most part. The Consuls had their palace on the Ile de la Cité, roughly where the Palais de Justice stands today, with a large garden occupying its entire western tip. This palace was inhabited by some of our kings, and the garden long kept the name of Jardin Royal, as can easily be seen in the old maps of Paris. It was only under Henri IV, when the Pont-Neuf was built, that this part of the island changed its appearance. The old writers say nothing of this former garden, which was a meadow when Henri IV undertook to embellish this part of Old Paris. Clovis, the first king of the Franks to enter Lutetia, disputing the power of the Gauls with the Romans, established a church on Mount Lucotitius; this became the church of Sainte-Geneviève. Nearby, he built his palace surrounded by large gardens, including the one that became the garden of the Iycée Henri I7. There were thus two royal palaces on the left bank, with immense gardens that largely occupied what are now the 5th and 6th arrondissements of Paris. Childebert (1), son of Clovis, founded the abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés around the year 563. When the church of this name was built, he left Clovis' palace to live in the Thermes palace, to be closer to this church, to which he communicated through a gate in his gardens. He also had a residence in Nogent. Ancient historians, including Fortunat, report that this prince and Queen Ultrogoth spent their leisure time (1) Dom Bouilland. D9 cultivating the plants in their gardens with their own hands, which was enough to inspire other powerful figures to imitate them, and thus to make some progress in nascent horticulture. The other Merovingian kings certainly followed these examples, and it was clearly under this initial impetus that the progress of this art was to continue unabated. Charlemagne did not choose Paris as the capital of his vast empire. He did, however, occasionally live in the palace of Clovis, or that of the Thermes. He also wanted to have gardens around the palaces he owned in all the provinces of his empire. This attention to detail greatly encouraged agriculture and horticulture. In his capitularies, he himself indicated to his gardeners the plants they should cultivate, of which there were barely sixty or so. We'll look at the names of these plants in a later chapter. The abbeys (1) at this time were in full prosperity, notably those of Saint-Germain-des-Prés and Saint-Denis; they also had immense gardens run by courtier monks (2), some of whom were given quite important responsibilities. As Edouard André (3) says, "For men who were usually confined to narrow spaces surrounded by walls, garden design was understandably superfluous. The main thing for them was the produce: vegetables and fruit trees... Under feudalism, the same obstacles stood in the way of garden development. The high and mighty barons, confined to their castles with crenellated walls, constantly thinking of attacking their neighbors or defending themselves, had little leisure for the embellishment of their estates. As for the people, crushed under taxes and the omnipotence of their masters, they were condemned to remain for a long time to come in the darkness of ignorance and misery. (1) Félicie d'Ayzac. (2) Derived from "courtil", garden, meaning gardener. (3) Ed. André, l'Art des Jardins. 08 Several centuries passed without the creation of any major gardens in Paris, with the exception of the Pré-aux-Clerc, next to the Louvre. The Louvre, from Lupara (louveterie), was built on the orders of Philippe-Auguste in 1204 (1). It was a fortified tower used as a prison, and was razed under François I to make way for the present palace. During the reign of Charles V (2), Jean Duduy, the king's gardener, planted twelve thousand strawberry plants and seventeen hundred vines, which climbed up on all sides. Jean Baril was a trellis-maker, and arranged the trellises on the rue Beauvoir and rue du Coq sides. A small garden overlooked rue Fromenteau, with a gate through which the King and Queen went when they wanted to go to the country. Charles V, known as the Wise Man, was one of the kings who most encouraged horticulture. He was particularly fond of the Saint-Antoine district, where he had two hôtels built with extensive gardens. In these gardens, there were lots of vegetables and tall fruit trees in the open air, while dwarf trees and espaliers were still unknown (2). All at once, he had one hundred pear trees, one hundred and fifteen apple trees, eleven hundred and twenty-five cherry trees and one hundred and fifty plum trees planted in his Tournelles garden. At the time, there were no flowerbeds other than courtyards, no paths other than trellis-covered cradles, no ornaments other than arbors and green pavilions, and no water other than fish tanks. In the Jardin des Tournelles, there was a labyrinth called the Daedal (3), located at the end of a small wood called the Parc, which later gave its name to the Rue du Parc-Royal. A number of other streets were also named after these gardens, notably rue de la Cerisaie. (1) Ed. André, l'Art des Jardins. (2) Ed. André, Paris à travers les âges. (3) Delamare, Traité de Police. 508 It was under Francis I, during the artistic movement known as the Renaissance, that considerable changes were made to the layout and maintenance of Parisian gardens. At the king's instigation, eminent artists of all kinds were summoned from Italy, where an era of prosperity reigned for the fine arts. The gardens created around the transformed or newly-built palaces were designed according to Italian taste. To appreciate the importance of this movement, we can do no better than refer to Ed. André's admirable treatise on the Art of Gardens. The rebirth of garden design in the late 15th and early 16th centuries was to be found in Florence. Lorenzo de' Medici, nicknamed the Magnificent, protector of Michelangelo and renovator of the arts, wanted superb gardens. His creations have now partly disappeared under the transformations to which the città dei fiori has been subjected, but there are enough traces of them to demonstrate that they were inspired by memories of the villas of ancient Rome. The symmetrical, architectural genre was thus given pride of place. It is even said that the taste for decorating gardens with statues came by chance from Cardinal d'Este, who, having to create gardens on the site of the ancient Villa Adriana, wanted to make use of the numerous statues and ruins he came across there. In 1544 or 1546, in Padua, the Senate of Venice founded the first botanical garden, where two and a half centuries later, Goethe conceived his theory of the metamorphosis of plant organs. Immediately after the Padua garden, the one in Pisa was planted, closely followed by the one in Bologna. Similar establishments in Leiden and Leipsig date from 1577 and 1579 respectively (1). The medical faculties of Paris, several of which were already famous, soon recognized the usefulness of these institutions. The Montpellier botanical garden was created in 1593 by the learned Richer de Belleval, who devoted the most (1) Rome also had a botanical garden in the 16th century, entrusted to the care of Polea and Della Valle. In 1591, Ferdinand I, son of Côma de Médicis, had the first temperate greenhouse built in Pisa (Author's note). 08 large part of his fortune and his life. In 1605, the city of Giessen, in 1620 that of Strasbourg, then Alfort in 1625, Jena in 1629, were the object of similar creations. At that time, Paris still only had the garden planted by the apothecary Robin in 1570, under the name of "jardin des simples", where he taught the science of plants to a few pupils. It wasn't until 1626 that the Royal Garden of Medicinal Plants - now the Natural History Museum - was founded by Guy de la Brosse and became the glorious cradle of the great établisscment exemplified by the Buffons, Lamarcks and Jussieus. Clusius, d'Arras and Mathias de L'Obel had already given a salutary direction to plant description and cultivation: botany had truly been created. The art of gardening was to change considerably with the resources made available to it by Curpean horticulturists and explorers of unknown regions of the earth. Growing security had led to the demolition of many walls and fortresses, and people began to love the open air and the countryside, breathing at last after long centuries of suffocating in dungeons. The king set the example: he repaired Fontainebleau and built Chambord. To achieve this, he had called to his court, at great expense, the leading artists of Italy: Benvenuto Cellini, Andrea del Sarto, Rosso, Primaticcio, Leonardo da Vinci, Vignole, while Pierre Lescot, Philibert Delorme, Jean Goujon and other French architects, painters and sculptors, followed in the footsteps of these geniuses from the other side of the Alps... In the embellishment of its avenues and flowerbeds, Fontainebleau was influenced by the Italian taste, derived from antiquity and applied by Rosso and Primaticcio, decorative artists par excellence (1). Saint-Germain, Madrid near Paris, Blois and Villers-Cotterets received similar embellishments, traces of which have not come down to us, but which were obviously conceived in the same style. Fontainebleau remained in the same state until Henry IV. The Gascon king made a number of modifications (1) The Château de Fontaincbleau had been founded by Robert le Pieux towards the end of the 10th century, rebuilt by Louis VII in the 12th century, then embellished by various reis (Author's note). DQ capitales, and commissioned an Italian engineer, Francini, to execute his plans. The Luxembourg garden in Paris (1) had been "designed" in 1612 by Decamp, master gardener, who laid out the parterres, boulingrins, etc., as appears from a manuscript of Marie de Médicis containing her expense accounts and kept at the Biblothèque nationale. This garden, after the embellishments made by Jacques Desbrosses, was bordered by two terraced walls of unequal height, with flowerbeds, fountains, basins and gutters, yew and boxwood. Part of this parterre still exists near the palace. The Italian style thus dominated, albeit with a few modifications, in the embellishment of Paris gardens until the reign of Louis XIV, when the first French-style gardens were created. This style is due to André Le Nôtre, whose genius began to assert itself with the layout of the gardens at Château de Vaux, and whose glory is to have designed those at Versailles. This immense park has sometimes been criticized for being too monotonous and severe in style, but no one would deny that its majestic perspectives were in keeping with the monumental lines of the château it accompanied. Versailles remains, moreover, the most grandiose and perfect model of the French genre. Le Nôtre designed the garden at Sceaux, on land purchased by Colbert (2). He completed the Tuileries garden, which had been started in 1564 by Catherine de Médicis, then enlarged under Henri IV and Louis XIII. He also transformed those at Saint-Germain and Chantilly. (1) Founded on the site of the famous Chartreux nursery, which flourished in the 17th century under the direction of P. François (Albert Lenoir, Architecture monastique). Luxembourg also had some fine nurseries, but lost them in 1867. There is still, however, a model fruit tree nursery, where courses in fruit arboriculture are given free of charge. This public garden is the only one reminiscent of the old royal gardens, where fruit trees were planted and vegetables grown (Author's note). (2) Jules Janin, Marie Aycard, etc., Les Environs de Paris. 08 Le Nôtre's emulators tried to continue his traditions. Le Blond created Péterhof, in St. Petersburg, for Catherine the Great of Russia. Duizé designed the park at Marly. Desgodets planted the Château de Bagnolet. The Mansard brothers used the French style in all their creations. "But excess, which corrupts the best things, does not wait," says Edouard André (1). "The pruned trees and shrubs praised by Olivier de Serres at the beginning of the seventeenth century had degenerated into ridiculous fantasies. In the garden of the Abbé des Dunes, there were standing men-at-arms trimmed in boxwood. The Abbé de Clairmarais, in Saint-Omer, was surrounded by a flock of turkeys, geese and cranes, in yew and rosemary. At Chambaudoise, in the Beauce region, a whole collection of musical instruments had been carved into the green trees, planted in labyrinths. These excesses were to provoke a reaction in the opposite direction, and it was from this reaction that landscape gardens, also known as "English" gardens, were born. Indeed, William Kent has long been credited with creating this genre. Kent had begun Earl Gainsborough's gardens at Exton-Park in the regular style, but after a trip to the Continent, he finished them in the landscape style. On the contrary, the first landscape gardens were created in France, by Dufresny. This landscape architect, who had started out as a valet de chambre, asserted his ideas by planting the Parc de Mignaux, near Poissy, the gardens of Abbé Pajot, in Vincennes, and those of Chemin Creux and Moulin, in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. "From a regular and flat site, he created a mountainous one, in order to vary the objects by multiplying them, and to guarantee neighboring views, by opposing them with elevations of earth that served at the same time as belvederes (2). (1) Ed. André, l'Art des Jardins. (2) Dufresny, Œuvres complètes. 200 In 1777, the Marquis de Girardin set out the fundamental principles of landscape style in a booklet. These principles were followed in the planting of Bagatelle, in 1779, by the Comte d'Artois, in the then Parc Monceau, designed by Carmontelle, and in the Petit Trianon, where Marie-Antoinette had her pleasures. During the last periods of the Revolution and the First Empire, the gardens were cluttered with statues, temples and symbolic monuments reminiscent of Greek and Roman mythology and history. The landscape style would also have fallen into disuse had it not been for Gabriel Thouin, who published the results of his work in 1819 (1). His finest creation was the SaintQuen park. From that time until the Second Empire, no major changes were made. With the exception of the Tuileries and Luxembourg, perfected according to Le Nôtre's principles, France's capital had few public gardens worthy of the city. It was at the beginning of the reign of Napoleon III that the Bois de Boulogne was transformed from top to bottom, first under the skilful direction of M. Varé, garden designer and contractor, then under that of the Service de la Voie Publique et des Promenades, which the Prefect of the Seine, M. Ilaussmann, had just set up by placing M. Alphand (2) at its head. It was at this time that the first municipal public gardens were created, which were later renamed squares. Those at Tour Saint-Jacques, Marclié des Innocepts, Place des Arts-et-Métiers, Place du Temple and Place de Sainte-Clotilde were the first to be planted. A little later, the Champs-Élysées were converted into magnificent promenades, adorned with beautiful clumps of trees and flowers. Parc Monceau was cleared of its (1) Thouin, Plans raisonnés de jardins. (2) Alphand may be called the greatest gardener of the xiXth century (Author's note). undergrowth, and its new style became the model of the luxurious genre. The Bois de Vincennes was then improved in the same way as the Bois de Boulogne. Finally, in 1864, work began on the "Carrières d'Amérique" and the "Buttes Chaumont", a haven for the disenfranchised in the center of one of Paris's most populous districts, and one of the most remarkable examples of a garden created from scratch on very uneven ground. The Buttes Chaumont park was completed in 1867. In the final years of the Second Empire, the Parc de Montsouris was designed and completed in 1877. This park covers almost 16 hectares. It was designed with a grandeur of views that make it one of the most beautiful landscape creations of modern times. Today, the number of public parks and gardens in Paris totals around one hundred; new squares are being added all the time, as and when the beautification of Paris requires them, and for the greater good of public hygiene. THE ESTIMATE OF THE OLD AND THE GREAT FOR GARDENERS The taste that civilized peoples profess for gardens makes them show a certain deference for skilled gardeners (1), and especially for those who create something new: using plants that previously lived in the wild and that nobody had thought of taking advantage of; improving other plants already cultivated, through selection, cross-breeding and grafting, which the Phoenicians were the first to practice. This people, who appeared on the Syrian coast from the earliest times in history, achieved a high degree of civilization; the practice of this art of fruit improvement is one of the many proofs of this. This is also sufficient to indicate that their other horticultural knowledge was on a par with this. They passed on the art of grafting to the Carthaginians and Greeks. The Romans received it from the latter, and spread it to the various peoples of Europe. Among these peoples, the art was at first considered more as a curiosity than as something useful, but it was not lost. Indeed, in the Middle Ages, to be accepted as a gardener in a good (1) Louis Noisette. Jigitized maison (1), it was necessary to know how to graft in slit and in escutcheon on trees and wildlings, such as pear trees, cognac trees, etc. It was only much later that the art of grafting was acquired. It was not until much later that La Quintinie brought grafting back into practical use, and it began to render real services in fruit improvement. Plato placed the art of the gardener between that of the physician and that of the geometer, and many princes indulged in it because it was highly regarded. Alexander the Great, whose conquests made him master of Asic, held the profession in such high esteem that he rewarded his gardener Abarthomius with the kingdom of Sydon (2). When Alexander heard that the king of Paphos had made himself unworthy of the crown, he asked if there was anyone left of the royal family; he was told that there was one named Alynomus, living from a garden he was cultivating. Alexander sent for him, and he was found in his garden, drawing water to water his plants. The king dressed him in purple and restored him to the throne of his ancestors. In the splendid days of the Roman Empire, one of the branches of the Valerian family, which had given masters to the empire, took the name of Lactucians, for having raised in its gardens a singular species of lettuce, more excellent than the others (3), and producing in greater abundance. This is probably Roman lettuce, which was not introduced into France until the reign of Charles V (4), brought from Avignon by Bureau de la Rivière. As we have seen, the Frankish kings spent all their leisure time in the art of gardening. Not until Charlemagne, one of the world's greatest conquerors, was he particularly concerned with the cultivation of his gardens. (1) Maison réglée, by Audiger. (2) Delamare, Traité de Police. (3) Delamare, Traité de Police. (4) Ménagier de Paris. niers, at that time, probably because the princes of the day wanted to keep all the honor for themselves. However, the taste they had for the upkeep of their gardens leads us to suppose that they were helped by obscure and modest gardeners with some experience in their art. Many centuries went by, and no great progress was made in the art of gardening in general. It wasn't until the fourteenth century, under Charles V, that this art, under the inspiration of the king, took off in a way that never stopped. From this period onwards, we'll find a few names of gardeners who have gone down in history. Charles V's gardener was called Philippot Persant, and his salary, which at the time seemed considerable, was sixty écus a year (1). The first names of gardeners we come across are, along with the one just mentioned, those of Jean Duduy, gardener to King Charles V at the Louvre palace, and Jean Baril, "trellis maker". The latter was undoubtedly involved in all aspects of arboriculture. Towards the end of the sixteenth century, a name that played a major role in French gardening appeared for the first time, that of the Mollets. "The Duc d'Aumale's gardener at Anet, Normandy, was the first of this small horticultural dynasty. His master held him in high esteem. Towards the end of the sixteenth century, the gardens of Anet were considered the most beautiful in France, thanks to their quality and the number of flowers grown. The second gardener, Claude Mollet, was trained by Anet in the practice of gardening, and was subsequently appointed gardener to King IIenri IV. In France, he created parterres à broderie, and in a rather naive book he wrote in 1614 (2), he published drawings of those he had executed (1) Ed. André, l'Art des Jardins. (2) C. Mollet, Traité des Plans et Jardinages. C first in Fontainebleau, then in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, in 1595. His three sons, whom he seems to have instructed more than himself, helped him realize his ideas (1). This man must have been a true practicing gardener, as his treatise indicates that with him, there was no theory, but only practice and an already well-developed knowledge of arboriculture and vegetable growing. Less educated than his brilliant successors, he seems to us more modest and more obscure, even though he knew his trade inside out. He undoubtedly lacked only the happiness of being placed at the head of a great undertaking, such as the creation of the gardens of Versailles, which came after him. Nevertheless, we rank Claude Mollet among the great gardeners who have gone before us. One of Claude Mollet's sons, André, succeeded him as intendant of the King of France's gardens under Louis XIII. Boyceau de la Baraudière, author of a Traité de jardinage, was asked to continue his work in the same capacity after his death. During the reign of Louis XIV, horticulture was honored in the person of André Le Nôtre, born in Paris in 1613, died in 1700. Le Nôtre succeeded his father as superintendent of the king's gardens. Having designed the gardens of the Château de Vaux for the minister Fouquet, he was called upon by the king to draw up plans for Versailles. Following his remarkable work, he was showered with dignities and honors. Louis XIV ennobled him in 1665. In 1678, Pope Innocent XI called on him for advice. "He had spread the love of gardens everywhere. Saint-Simon recounts many witty anecdotes about him. More than once, Boileau asked him for advice on his garden at Auteuil; Lamoignon took him to Baville; Bossuet himself chatted happily with him, and for a moment fell in love with (2) Ed. André, l'Art des Jardins. plants. It's surprising to think that the gardener to the great bishop of Meaux once said to his master: "If I planted Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom, you'd come and see them, but you don't care much about your trees (1)". Le Nôtre, who elevated gardening, not only by his talents, but by the charm of his relations and the distinctiveness of his person, has been called by the English author, Loudon, "the greatest French gardener who ever lived". Another distinguished gardener who shared with Le Nôtre, during the reign of "the Sun King", the favor of frequenting the Court as "conseiller-directeur des jardins des maisons royales", was La Quintinie, born in Angoumois in 1626, died in 1688. La Quintinie first studied to be a lawyer, then agriculture and gardening in Italy; he was then called upon by Louis XIV to create the vegetable and fruit gardens of Versailles, Chantilly, Rambouillet and many others. La Quintinic borrowed some of his techniques from Claude Mollet. He left a work on his art that was not published until after his death, in 1746. In this work (2), he is not afraid to say himself that he drew many examples from the "Parisian mareschais" (he is the first to refer to gardeners by this name). Having surrounded himself with competent men, he made rapid progress in vegetable growing. Agriculture," says La Quintinie, "is a truly noble art, and one that is even capable of giving nobility to those who make it their profession; so it is true that they are usually delighted that everyone sees their work; and when they happen to meet with success, their greatest joy is to declare to those who want to know, the (1) Ed. André, l'Art des Jardins. (2) La Quintinie, Instruction pour les jardins fruitiers et potagers. 4 means they have used to succeed. Instead of the common spirit of other workers, which is to make a mystery of everything, and to keep to themselves the enlightenment they have acquired in their art". These scholars, by virtue of the position they occupied, had no need to count, and rendered great services in all respects to the art of gardening. They were the most illustrious men of our corporation. After them came Gondouin, gardener to Louis XV, who followed in La Quintinic's footsteps, taking advantage of the progress he had made. But alongside these great names who have come down to us, how many generations of gardeners have remained obscure, working on their own account and who can be called public gardeners, since they supplied the markets with vegetables and fruit. Among these men who did not have the means to popularize their trials and improvements in cultivation. There were certainly some remarkable men who did not enjoy the glory of their innovations, which others, better placed to make a name for themselves, were able to take advantage of. This is the story of many inventors and innovators; simple, intelligent workers, finding and composing in their minds something new in the art they professed; but because of their situation, unable to put their ideas into practice, other more powerful, wealthier men seized upon them and became for posterity and history the true inventors, whereas they really only had to collect and popularize the ideas put forward by those more unfortunate than themselves. Sully, Henri IV's first minister, once said that "grazing and ploughing were the two breasts of France". In his time, gardening was not yet an industry important enough to be cited as a national asset. It was around this time that gardening began to flourish, and became completely detached from agriculture, taking the name of hortiD0 culture, as it did for the ancient Romans. As early as 1600, Olivier de Serres pointed out that the gardener was "the goldsmith of the earth", meaning that there was as much difference between a gardener and a farmer as there is between a blacksmith and a goldsmith. Horticulture was to grow rapidly, especially in the vicinity of large cities. There are several reasons for this: firstly, the flow of produce, especially at a time when means of locomotion were slow; secondly, the ease of obtaining fertilizers and transporting them on site, as cheaply as possible; thirdly, as men were more numerous and closer together, they more easily exchanged their ideas, theories, progress, etc. The selection of plants took place in these areas. The selection of plants took place more rapidly than in the countryside, where intellectual centers are more or less distant from one another. Paris, France's capital and most populous city, was no more backward in this industry than in others. Later on, we'll meet some of the eminent men who were involved in this art and helped it make giant strides. The Parisian horticulture of our century was well defined by our eminent geographer Elisée Reclus, in his Géographie L'n'universelle. He said: "C'est l'article Paris-agricole". We read in previous chapters that the term "mareschais" was first used by La Quintinie (I), and we found the word "courtilier" to refer to the monk-gardeners of the Middle Ages. In Old French, the garden was called a courtil, a word still used in Brittany. It's also the origin of the word courtilière, which refers to the insect that often wreaks havoc in market gardens. The Parisii had embraced Christianity around the middle of the third century, following the preaching of Saint-Denis and his companions, who were spreading the Gospel. In 360, a council was convened in Lutetia; it was on this occasion that it was first called Parisea Civitas, "City of the Parisians", and it was from the use of this locution that the word Paris took root. In 451, a young Christian woman, Sainte-Geneviève, the Virgin of Nanterre, saved Paris from the wrath of the invader Attila, king of the Huns. A few years later, it was she again who saved the capital from the resentment of Clovis, whose wife. Clotilde, niece of Gondebaud, king of the Burgundians (2), was already a Christian. Chief of the Frankish people, Clovis, catechized (1) See page 32. (2) Burgundians. by Saint-Remi, bishop of Reims, converted to Christianity after the battle of Tolbiac, which he won over the Alamanni. Following this conversion, the Parisians submitted to Clovis, who made Paris the capital of his kingdom. Even then, he said that the crown of the kingdom of France was worth a baptism, just as Henri IV would later say that Paris was worth a mass. It was after these memorable events that the first Parisian courtiers were established. Before Clovis built the church of Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois, a village soon sprang up around it. Between this village and the city, vast marshlands stretched to the foot of the Montmartre hill. This marshy area was known in ancient Latin titles (1) as Lampella, meaning "small fields". It was part of this land that the early kings granted to establish the Paris cemetery, known today as the Cimetière des Innocents (the name came later from the fact that the victims of St. Bartholomew's Day were buried there). The cattle market was also established here, and later became the Halles Centrales de la Capitalc. Around the cemetery and market, the most marshy areas were transformed into courtyards. This is where we find the first courtiliers worthy of the name. These marshes were called the Valley of Misery. There's no doubt that this name comes from the misery our unfortunate ancestors had to endure to dry out, clear and cultivate these sad lands. In the end, it was in the village of Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois that the first courtiliers settled, and long afterwards they formed the community of Maîtres-Jardiniers, whose grandsons have become the Master Gardeners of our time. (1) Delamare, Traité de Police. 99 When exactly did they begin to desiccate these lands? It's difficult to say, but if we put all the facts we've just cited together, it was certainly during the reigns of the Frankish kings who inhabited Paris. How many generations were born, toiled and died in these swamps? A very large number, since at the beginning of the fourteenth century (1), we find them in rue Merderel, near the Châtelet, at the Porte Montmartre, rue du Roi-de-Sezile, rue des Billettes, and so on. In any case, these early courtiers dried up the land for the construction of Paris's richest neighborhoods. As the city continued to grow, they retreated, starting again on other lands the work their ancestors had done on the first. They prepare the construction of the suburbs while supplying the city with all kinds of vegetables. It was their fate to work constantly on rehabilitating the land, to move backwards as the city advanced, and to start again on other plots of land, with no hope of ever benefiting from the added value they had given them; until the Revolution, which enabled them to become owners of the land they were cultivating, and thereby benefit from the increase in value that the expansion of Paris gave to the land around it. By following the expansion of the capital at the different periods when it took place, it will be easy to follow the gardeners in their peregrinations; this will be the means we will employ in this work, to achieve this goal and faithfully retrace the suburbs where they stayed, as well as the periods of their different retreats. (1) Guérard, Documents inédits sur l'Histoire de France. 208 Bguredp, COOgl0 LES DÉVELOPPEMENTS SUCCESSIFS du jardinage parisien AU MOYEN-AGE DEtiEed S GOO6 C Doibsd s (Oogle DES CITOYENS (1) Rien de plus divers, de plus discordant, de plus hétérogène que les populations, les états, les intérêts, les institutions, que la société présenteait en France, pendant les quatre premiers siècles de la monarchie. First, there were the conquerors and the conquered. The Franks, who came in great numbers during the Roman domination, had first established themselves as colonists, before becoming conquerors. Even the Merovingian kings ruled, or rather dominated, not so much the Gaulish country as the armed bands that roamed it, plundering friend and foe alike. In addition to the different races, there were free men, colonists and serfs. There were even several degrees of freedom and servitude. By studying these various categories of citizens, we can find out to which of them the ancestors of the market gardeners belonged. Inequality was also reproduced in terms of land: land was free, dependent or in servitude, and made up alleus, benefices or tenures. What's more, they had their own particular customs and uses, depending on the master and the country. So everywhere there was diversity and inequality, nothing was settled or definitive, there was struggle and war (1) L'Abbé Irminon. everywhere. Nothing presented a principle of life, order or duration: they were all elements of barbarism. The Franks were not very virtuous; likewise, the Gauls they subjugated were a bastardized people. Conquerors and conquered, all were in decadence. The political state, the moral state, the intellectual state, all remained the same from Clovis until the extinction of his descendants on the throne. The institution of the new religion alone took on great proportions and soon became the master of the country. There were then four categories of men: free men, colonists, leudes or vassals and serfs. Freedom diminished, and eventually the last three categories merged. The servitude of the first of the three was military; that of the second, landed, and that of the third, personal. War service was not dú by those who owned neither land nor serfs, and free men sometimes gave up their property to free themselves from this service. The free man was alienated with the land he inhabited, and passed under the domination of the new owner along with the serfs and their families. The leude, though dependent on a master, had far more freedom than the colonist or serf. He was generally attached to the lord when the latter was under arms, which frequently happened in these troubled times. The condition of colonists and serfs is the subject of the following two chapters. The colonist was a farmer attached to the land he cultivated, paying a certain number of royalties to the owner. Among these royalties was the dime. Tithing of the produce of the land had its origins in certain religious customs of ancient peoples. The Jews paid tithes to the Levites. Under the Merovingians, it was collected by the conquerors who became owners of the land, and it was only later, under Charlemagne, that it was reserved for the clergy. The dime consisted in the levying of a tenth of the products of cultivation, industry or commerce. It was paid either in kind or in money (1). The colonist was half free, half slave: 1° he contracted a true marriage; 2° he paid public taxes; 3° he could own property, but was not allowed to alienate it. As a slave: 1° he was not the owner of the colonial soil; 2° he was presumed to have a master or a patron; 3° what the colonist owned in his own right was called his "pécule" and could not be alienated without the consent of his master or patron; 4° the colonist was sold with the land he occupied; 5° the law declared him incapable of attaining honors, entering municipal offices or performing war service. He needed (1) B. Guérard (translation by Abbé Irminou). his master's approval to enter the clerkship, and if he did, it was on condition that he farm the land to which he was attached; 6° the colonist was included with the enclaves in the description of the land; 7° he could only bring an action against his master in three cases: when it concerned his origin, his condition, or the ownership of the land; when he was burdened with surtaxes; finally when the cause was criminal; 8° the fugitive colonist, like the slave, was deemed a thief in his own right; the master had the right to put him in irons and reduce him to the status of a slave; 9° personal punishments were, in certain cases, inflicted on colonists as on slaves, according to the brutality of the master. The colonial system, like most Roman institutions, fell into disrepair under the domination of barbarian peoples. What distinguished the Roman colonial system from that of the Middle Ages was that, under the emperors, the colonist was subject only to royalties owed to the master, whereas under the Frankish kings, the colonist descended to the rank of the unfree, subject to corporal services, later known as "corpées". These corporal services were, however, less severe than those imposed on serfs. To perform them, they owed their masters an average of three days a week, without pay. In other words, they worked half the time for free; part of the other half was taken from them by the dime and other duties at the master's discretion. Settlers were mainly established on church and monastery estates. Colonial land generally consisted of a manse (1), (we'll see later what the surface area of a manse was, often half a manse). The total fee for a manse could be (1) Manse, from the Bas-Latin mansia, itself derived from manere, to live on, to house. A measure of land deemed necessary to support a man and his family. The word mansia also gave rise to the word maïson. 99 be valued at a sum varying between two and three hundred francs of our current currency. It was not unusual for a single manse to be run by three or four settler households. In the vicinity of cities such as Paris, this was a very common occurrence. In fact, these settlers were able to engage in more remunerative farming than their fellow citizens living in the distant countryside, and didn't need as much land to support their families. In most cases, the manses they cultivated were described as ingenuous, livid or servile. We'll look at the difference between these labels and the degree of freedom they afforded the colonists later on. Although colonization was a regular state, the colonists were nonetheless subject to the common law of the time: the law of the strongest. As a result, they were often pillaged and robbed by powerful men, especially the ofliciers of royal lands. They themselves became plunderers when they felt strong enough. In the tenth century, many settlers became true landowners. From then on, royalties and services took on a different form, no longer representing the price of tenant farming, nor the charges of usufruct. They were feudal duties paid to the lords by the inhabitants of their fiefs. Villains are no longer challenged for ownership of their fields. If he has to fight, it's only to try to become a free man, by conquering his rights as a citizen one by one. THE CONDITION OF THE SERfs AND THEIR FIGHTING FOR FREEDOM Servitude has always been a social leprosy, from which many generations of men have suffered among ancient peoples, and even among modern ones, since it was not until the Revolution of 1848 that slavery was abolished in the French colonies. However, in our country, slavery has always been on the wane, officially speaking, for if the powerful, as civilization progressed, were obliged to let go on one side, they knew how to make up for it on the other to keep men in a more or less disguised state of servitude. After Caesar's conquest of Gaul, there was slavery, which reduced man to the status of a thing, to the level of a domestic animal. The Romans took their slaves to fairs, where they were sold like cattle. There were even, as today with horses, redhibitory cases, which had to be indicated at the time of sale. It was this terrible and unfortunate state of affairs that enabled Christianity to make rapid progress among the Gauls, a people so eager for freedom. The first evangelists from Asia Minor were persecuted by Roman and pagan jurisconsults. One of them, Ulspien, had written a treatise on the duties of a proconsul, outlining the punishments to be meted out to Christians. "It was not just a religious revolution, but a political and social one. In order to establish itself, Christianity had to overcome all kinds of enemies: governments, peoples, priests, pagan laymen, civil power as well as religious power, laws as well as morals (1)". These early Christians lived in community. They hid deep in the forests to celebrate the mysteries of their religion. Charity was their first law. A mass of slaves flocked around them, accepting their principles. All these newcomers in turn formed lay convents, where celibacy was not yet imposed. Accumulated suffering, spoliations and the rapacity of wealthy pagans had thrown the new converts into despair, but at one point, feeling strong enough to make their persecutors tremble, they took the offensive and organized bands under the name of bagaudes (2). They appointed leaders from among themselves. One of the main leaders was a woman: Victoria-Augusta, nicknamed the "Mother of Armies". The Bagaudes ransacked Roman villas and laid siege to cities. Around 270, they destroyed Antun. The insurrection became formidable in 284, with the accession of Diocletian, but his two generals, Amandus and Alianus, after ten years of heroic struggle, were crushed by Maximian at the confluence of the Seine and Marne rivers, at a place long known as Fosses aux Bagaudes, today Saint-Maur-les-Fossés. Later, there were further attempts at bagauderie, the last of which was destroyed by Aetius around 440. With the advent of Clovis, after his conversion to Christianity, (1) Guizot, Histoire de la civilisation en France. (2) From the Celtic bagad, insurgent. C tianism, slavery itself was replaced by serfdom. The hope of freedom and property may then have penetrated through some crack in the serf's hut. Nevertheless, this unfortunate still had, so to speak, neither city nor family before the law. Under feudalism, the serf freed himself and his property from the domination of his lord, no longer owing him everything, body and goods, but only a portion of his labor and income. The history of France was subsequently marked by the continual struggles of the enslaved against the dominators. Fifteen centuries later, this struggle culminated in the Revolution of 1789, which proclaimed man's individual freedom and equality before the law. But in these long stages of slavery or servitude through the centuries, there cu a great many kinds of serfs. There were : 1° those who were originally serfs, and those who, born free, had lost their freedom; 2° public slaves who belonged to the state, i.e. the king, churches or monasteries, and private slaves belonging to individuals; 3° urban slaves employed in the master's house, or in town, and rural slaves who worked in the fields, but who should not be confused with agricultural serfs; 4° agricultural serfs, attached to the cultivation of the land rather than to the personal service of their masters, were the same as those referred to in the third century by the Romans as servi tributarii. Their servitude was almost entirely real, i.e. restricted to the service of the soil, and their masters could dispose of them by transporting them from one domainc to another. After this rapid examination of the situation of men in this remote period, it is nevertheless easy to recognize to which class the first Parisian courtiers belonged. Established on an estate belonging to the king, they were half-free, half-slaves in the first centuries of church domination. Did their lot improve? This will be examined later in this book. The dogma of equality taught by Christianity, and the example of the first propagators of the faith, many of whom came from the lowest classes of society, gave reason to hope that the new religion would succeed in establishing the equality so eagerly sought by the underprivileged (1). As we have seen, slaves were the first to convert to Christianity. In the early centuries of the Church, it was customary to elevate men who had fallen into servitude to ecclesiastical positions. By the eighth century, however, there were so many serfs in the orders that the church resorted to injunctions to the contrary, prompting Michelet to say: "That the wooden cross would have saved men, whereas the golden cross adorned with diamonds has plunged them into the most odious servitude". In the Middle Ages, with the decadence of the Carlovingian empire, servitude no longer had any limits; it was more or less complete, depending on the temperament of the lords and great dignitaries of the church. The serf may no longer have been sold at fairs, as was the case with the Romans, but he belonged to the fiefdom to which he was attached and followed its fate. In other seigneuries, where the men were closer to the big cities, the lord was obliged to allow them more freedom. In the first centuries of the Church, as we said, the colonists were half free, half slaves; during feudalism they were reduced to the rank of serfs. However, century after century, serfs' revolts against their lords became more frequent and harder to suppress. Ideas of emancipation germinated especially in cities and towns. The secular and ecclesiastical lords, forced to make a few land concessions, and to allow these men a little more freedom, with the secret hope of attaching themselves to them even more, (1) L'Abbé Irminon. 908 could not prevent some communes from setting themselves up and freeing themselves from their despotism, even demanding charters and privileges. The emancipation of the communes is the greatest political event in our history (1), of which all the others were only the consecration and consequence. This act was purely revolutionary; the generosity of kings, bishops and lords had nothing to do with it. After some communes had drawn up their emancipation charters, some lords, unwilling to give them away and no longer daring to refuse them, decided to sell them. These charters were abrégements of fiefs, and were only valid as long as they had been confirmed by the king. It was Louis le Gros who was the first, towards the beginning of the twelfth century, to confirm them with the aim of weakening his vassals, while getting paid handsomely for his intervention. He would later go back on his word when the bishops and lords offered him a more considerable sum. When, in the eleventh century, the people began to count themselves and asked to be counted for something, there was not enough contempt at first, and then rage, to welcome the audacious claims of these serfs who wanted to be free. These enemies of the society of the time were running headlong into overthrowing religion, by enclosing the power of the bishop in the church, and the monks in the cloister; the family, in order to be able to dispose of themselves, as they wished, and of the fruits of their union; property, in order to found individual ownership, by guaranteeing their children their inheritance; and by ceasing to be, themselves, the property of others. All this to introduce a new element, a new order, into the enlarged society: the hitherto unknown Third Estate. Slavery largely disappeared in towns at this time, along with arbitrary pruning, corvée, mortaille and so on. The bourgeois became master of himself and his property, (1) Guizot, Histoire de France. he could give, sell and alienate during his lifetime or after his death; ceasing to be justiciable high and low, he could no longer be distracted from his jurisdiction, provided he gave good and sufficient security. This period was therefore the birth of the bourgeoisie, and these serfs of yesterday perhaps retained too much of the ruthless egoism of the parvenus for anything outside their association. But a careful examination of the state of society suggests that it could hardly have been otherwise. Although some authors claim that there were a few commercial rather than working-class communities before the communal movement, it's safe to say that the organization of the world of work in most large cities followed this communal movement. Fortunately for people, freedom is contagious, and the emancipation of large cities was the starting point. Workers belonging to the same trade wanted to take their place in the sun, but as they could not perform this act individually, they performed it as a community. The Romans had introduced the workers' guild (1), but this organization, like so many others, collapsed with Gallo-Roman society. Following the invasion of the Franks, some tradition of these guilds probably remained in the customs of the conquered countries, but what is most certain is that most, if not all, tradesmen were reduced to a state of servitude. Industrial and artistic work had lost none of its precious traditions, but the social role of the worker was nowhere to be seen. Courts, abbeys and castles had vast workshops, where serfs made clothes for their lords. With this way of doing things, how many artists in all professions have gone unrecognized! (1) René de Lespinasse. 909 WORKER COMMUNITIES It's hardly until the reign of Philip-Augustus that we find a few texts of worker community statutes. However, these successive concessions still offer only isolated regulations, lacking in coherence and extremely difficult to apply. The merchant and working classes suffered greatly from having no authentic laws to defend their interests, which were always compromised by taxes levied unevenly and most often arbitrarily. Philippe-Auguste had considerably enlarged Paris. The people felt stronger, and a few guilds, notably the butchers, talemeliers (bakers) and fripiers, had some of their prerogatives homologated, but these were not yet statutes. In those days, merchants had no means of obtaining protection from the municipal administration. The office of Provost of Paris was given on firm terms, and to the highest bidder. With such a procedure, it was bound to fall into unworthy hands; the provost compensated himself handsomely by taking from the world of work through exactions, rapine and iniquity. As a result, the entire mastery belonged to the dignitaries of the crown; it was a kind of fiefdom attached to the office held by the lord. The thirteenth century brought welcome improvements to this state of affairs. It may be called the great century of the Middle Ages, for it was a new era for the world of work, especially in the cities. The countryside benefited less from it, although there must have been a certain softening in its lot. We'll deal here only with gardeners, the "peasants of Paris", whose existence is hardly any different from that of their counterparts further from the capital, except that they are even more miserable than the latter, due to the higher cost of living. Around 1254, Louis IX changed the system for appointing the Provost of Paris. The office was no longer sold, but given to a man trusted by the king. Étienne Boileau's appointment was the consequence of a system of reforms applied by the king throughout his kingdom. It must have been an astonishing spectacle for this royal provost to bring order to the world of the trades, calling upon the large working-class family, represented by its jurors, whom he questioned about the traditions of their industry, consulting the few existing communities in the person of their syndics, who informed him of the few privileges they had acquired, and asking everyone for the right to work under the protection of the law. The Paris trades understood that it was better to be among the prolectors than among the protected. That's why they took their place in the feudal society of the time. This regulation has had its day. Unless we are narrow-minded, we cannot separate its application from the improvements that were then taking place in religious, political and social institutions. The wise Louis IX, canonized by the Church as Saint Louis, and his Provost, the illustrious Étienne Boileau, are therefore credited with the initiative to regulate the trades. Boileau could be called the protector of workers in the Middle Ages. He did not draw up the titles; the communities each drew up their own statutes and presented them to him508 for approval; he confined himself to deleting anything that might be contrary to the law, and to keeping the final statutes in the archives. Each community drew up its statutes as it saw fit. Some had more than fifty articles, while others had only five or six. Each trade transcribed the regulations in use in its community, but the man of progress that was Etienne Boileau, gave them such a perfectible character, that he was allowed to make the modifications demanded by the times. Thanks to this elasticity, Etienne Boileau's statutes remained for five centuries the code of laws, the arbiter of disputes between employers and workers, and earned them the name of the Golden Book of Trades. Around one hundred and twenty state bodies had their statutes approved. Courtiers were not among them. It did exist, however, with its own customs, but its members were few in number, uneducated and unfortunate; not a single man at the time could have taken the initiative to have his guild officially recognized. It was only much later that the guild accomplished this act, and when we arrive at this moment, we will salute the memory of the signatories who officially brought our trade to the number of Parisian guilds. The bodies thus constituted, with their statutes approved by the king, became collective seigneuries, when they had paid their dues to the king, or to the bishop, when they had paid in labor, in money in "guet" (1) all that feudal organization required of them; their situation, from the point of view of law, being the same as that of the nobility, supplying its men-at-arms, and that of the church granting the tribute of its prayers. In good standing with the king, his (1) From the German word Whata, to watch. Urban police force whose contingents were supplied by the inhabitants. C provost and his officers, as well as with the church, they stood proudly in their fiefdoms. No one would have dared to "cut" them arbitrarily; no one would have dared to molest with impunity a master, a valet, even a simple apprentice who had joined the workers' community. Individual freedom would then have had no effect; it would not have given independence, let alone security, since the laws took no account of private individuals, but only of constituted groups. The independent man could lay claim to no one, and was therefore dependent on all. On entering the community through the apprenticeship door, the young worker was faced with duties of various kinds, but also with rights, i.e. customs with the force of law; this was his worker's book. It's true that he was subject to the master's authority by virtue of his contract, but he benefited from his master's advice and that of the other workers, which provided him with serious compensation. As a member of a working-class community with its own code, he felt supported and defended, and indeed he was. Just as a man of the cloth is supported by his bishop, a man of the law by the Parliament and a cleric by the University, so the tradesman, supported by his employer, could appear before the corporation's jurors, then before the provost of Paris and the crown's grand officers; finally, in serious cases, he could go all the way up to the king. Urban workers had carved out a place for themselves in the feudal world, and could complain loudly and defend themselves against the enterprises of their enemies, opposing them with the industrial charter, the livre des métiers. Was the same true for field workers? The difference in their situation was profound; these unfortunate people, isolated on the surface of the territory, with no right to leave their fiefdoms, lived in close dependence on their lords, knowing only royalty in all its forms. There was no law, no labor organization to protect them, 008 only the lord's good or bad heart. Revolts were therefore frequent, and to reduce them, the bodies of the villains had to be crushed under the feet of the men of war. These unfortunates often preferred death to the state of servitude in which they were forced to live. Knowing full well that their urban brethren were better off than they were, they were bound to be even more exasperated by their situation. If, on the other hand, the urban workers rebelled, all it took to bring them back into line was to show them the page on which the jurors had written their obligations, alongside their privileges. Free from all exactions, sheltered from arbitrary measures, they had a sense of ownership and a love of home, the preliminaries of all emancipation. Masters owned trades they had bought or inherited from their fathers; workers aspired to mastery and apprentices followed the same path. It was a slow but sure ascent to freedom, given that these men owed the conquest of their independence solely to themselves. Gathered in their "chambres syndicales" (if we can use this term, unknown at the time), they deliberated on matters relating to their trades, with complete freedom, but with respect for existing laws, which form the basis of any civilized society. It was an apprenticeship in public life and a preparation for modern institutions. It was in this way that tradespeople, aware of the perils of isolation and the sterility of individual effort, achieved the greatest amount of freedom that could then be conquered, and the highest degree of influence to which they could aspire, through workers' association. Unfortunately, this institution, like so many others before and after it, was to deviate from its goal. In time, it became an instrument of oppression and a means of taxation. Other institutions, other mores changed our point of view, and directed our aspirations towards a different ideal. 909 Individualism, once a weakness, has become a strength; more equitable legislation has safeguarded the rights that trade statutes alone once protected, and made the collective stronghold, in which labor was forced to confine itself, less necessary. "Labor has left the corporate fortress, and destroyed the advanced works that bore the names of maitrises and jurandes, and defended their approaches (1). Louis XIV's advisors replaced these institutions with superintendencies and academies, i.e. a royal privilege for a popular monopoly. We shall see later that, at this time, the office of juror, formerly freely elected by the assembly of masters, became a lucrative function, bought from the State by private individuals. This state of affairs placed the guilds in debt, and forced them to increase the master's fees and jury visits. In other words, what had been wonderful earlier became an intolerable abuse. Finally, the economists of the late eighteenth century dealt the final blow to the feudal edifice. They abolished workers' communities, so that work could no longer be imprisoned within them, the spirit of the past could no longer hold sway, and individual effort would no longer be forbidden. This revolution, which came at the right time, would have been disastrous in the time of Louis IX, when, as we have seen, civilization was not yet sufficiently advanced to proclaim and effectively defend individual freedom. Five centuries later, it was to bring undeniable and immense progress. But does this mean that freedom was the last word in economics? Is everything in Etienne Boileau's Livre des métiers to be condemned? The answer lies in our own actions and institutions. Barely a century has passed since these institutions, full of abuses caused by the egoism of the powerful, were destroyed, and already we feel the need to reconstitute them in part by (1) René de Lespinasse, le Livre des Métiers. 909 adopting our modern ideas, our needs and our interests - in other words, by the same motives that guided our ancestors in creating them, and also because of new needs. Indeed, trade has taken on an extension that could not have been imagined a century ago. In the past, the trade of the old gardeners was absolutely local, whereas today, export has become the greatest concern of the market-gardening industry. Progress is so rapid today that the same legislation could not govern mankind for centuries; so it is quite possible that everything that seems just and equitable now will seem so in the future, just as what seemed abusive at the dawn of the Revolution had seemed wise to our ancestors. DEtEOOŒ First of all, it may seem to the reader that abbeys are irrelevant to the subject we are dealing with. However, in the course of this work, we shall see that gardeners, up until the Revolution, cultivated mainly the lands of these religious associations, and that monastic crops played a major role in their development.

in the progress of horticulture. With the conquest of the Gauls, the Frankish kings became the owners of a very large part of the land. Initially, they held an immense amount of land in favor of bishops and monasteries. It was on property that they founded the kingship. Later, when they wanted to make land concessions, they had to take from their own share or from property that had devolved to them either through confiscation, or through the death or flight of the Romans. Such was their short-sightedness that, after a few centuries, they were stripped almost completely of their possessions, while waiting to be stripped of royalty itself. As we have already seen, Clovis built a church on the right bank of the Seine, near Paris, and a town soon sprang up there. Childebert founded the abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés in the middle of a vast meadow, and endowed it with a large tract of land. These men, united in societies and organized administratively by religious brotherhoods, already represented a respectable force, which later imposed its will on the powerful themselves. It was from this association, which had eminent men and above all administrators (1), that the first application of a kind of cadastre, or classification of land since the domination of the Franks, emerged. Later. Dagobert founded the monastery of Saint-Denis, and gave it an immense amount of land. These monks (which was probably not their title at the time), or rather, for this period, these men of progress, having adopted the rule of Saint-Benoit, which consisted of manual labor and, above all, land clearing, cleared a large part of France, which had become uncultivated following the Roman invasion; the unfortunate Gauls having almost all succumbed to the tyranny of the conquerors. Saint-Benoît, a great man, rightly said that to clear the minds of the barbarians, it was first necessary to clear the land in which they lived, and thereby give them a sense of well-being unknown to them. These great associations, following his example, brought men back to the cultivation of the land, an indispensable quality for any progressive people. All around Paris, other abbeys were founded, less important than the two preceding ones, and perhaps under their dependence, which we don't need to examine. All these abbeys had very large gardens, and as monks subject to the rule of Saint-Benoit had to live on fruit and vegetables grown by their own hands, there is no doubt that it was among them that we find the first masters of arboriculturc and vegetable cultivation. Moreover, two monks in each abbey were entitled to mastery in each of the guilds practiced there (2). (1) Dom Bouillard. (2) Dom Bouillard, Histoire de l'Abbaye de Saint-Germaindes-Prés. 8 Needless to say, the most intelligent and educated were chosen. In this way, they could make progress in their respective arts. Félicie d'Ayzac describes the role played by the head courtier at the Saint-Denis monastery, a role not to be sneezed at. "The courtier (curticularis) is one of the dignitaries-beneficiaries and powers of the monastery. His name derives from the fact that he was in charge of the courtyards and courtils, i.e. the interior gardens belonging to the abbey. It was thanks to the courtier's care : that richness, freshness and a grandiose character strike and charm the eye in these silent gardens; that the hedges and walkways of hornbeam keep their regularity; that the quincunxes remain green until the last days of autumn; that the high shadows of the park are thicker every day and cast a more mysterious shadow on walkers; that the dwarf yew trees lining the flowerbeds and tracing the lines of the boulingrins retain their slender proportions and uniform silhouette; that the delicate shrubs and hothouse flowers, lined up in the courtyards in summer and sheltered in the refectory in winter, retain their brilliance for a long time to come, as well as their perennial fragrances. But the courtier's duties are not limited to this special care: he is also, and above all, responsible for overseeing the kitchen garden, espaliers, orchards, young prunings, vineyards, fields and meadows of the cousture. It is he who directs the cultivation, harvesting and income from many of the abbey's lands within the immediate radius. The courtilier also collected the cens of all the houses on some of the streets in the town of Saint-Denis, known for this reason as rue de la Courtille; that of three other houses in rue de la Fontaine and other properties of the same order. Some of these censes were ingenuous, i.e. consisting of a cash fee; others were 28 servile; the latter consisted of chores, labor, cartage, guard days, palisade work, barnstorming, earthworks, mowing, grape harvesting, brewing or pressing, piping or messaging, cutting and transporting wood, cultivating fields, and so on. After the reformed monks of Saint-Maur took possession of the monastery, the courtille des champs was ceded by them to Dom Etienne Cencier, sous-chantre and sous-cuisinier among the former monks; this monk then ceded it back to the abbey, with its courtyard, gardens, meadows and ditches covering an area of thirteen and a half acres, all of which was leased to Claude Beaucôté, gardener, for a fee of four hundred livres per year. The benefit of the "courtilier", conferred by the Court of Rome, gave this monk the right of medium and low justice in the entire domain of his property. His personal royalties stemmed from the nature of his management: the supply of all vegetables, greens and roots, i.e. cabbages, onions, garlic, pear, spinach, poreaux, turnips and roots, parsley, both for the kitchen and the refectory. He was also in charge of providing food for the Good Friday dinner: "a cargo of pears and spinach picked in the kitchen garden or courtyards, to be prepared with salt and water on that day only". This brief description shows the important role played by the master courtier in abbeys (1). His home was located alongside the treasury, and shared with it the premises of the former court or field house that King Robert owned in the eleventh century within the abbey walls. It was from the old sala that the courtier dated the acquittals of the cens and dimes sent to his suburbs and all over Europe to the tenants of his possessions. One of the leading courtiers in the sixteenth century was Dom (1) Félicie d'Ayzac, Histoire de l'Abbaye de Saint-Denis. O9 Louis de Lectier; under Henri IV, the courtier was Dom Jérôme de Chambellan. The knowledge, experience and skill these men brought to their profession enabled the abbey to produce exquisite products of all kinds. The system of cultivation adopted in ancient times was undoubtedly the one practiced by the first monks. By the time they had established cultivation not only in France, but throughout much of Europe, despite the invasions of the Barbarians, they had made numerous observations on how to improve the soil, as well as grains, vines, fruits and vegetables. For a long time, clearing the land and, above all, cultivating vines was the daily work prescribed to monks in accordance with the rule of Saint-Benoit. These monks also facilitated communications and encouraged industry in a number of ways, notably by perfecting the horse breed. The best vineyards belonged to them, and they already had a certain experience in choosing their land to produce good wines. The Côte-d'Or's main grands crûs were replanted by them. It's true that in the twelfth century, Abbot Suger, superior of the Abbey of Saint-Denis, brought in grape varieties from foreign countries at great expense, and specialist monks studied this crop in particular: the suitable soils, the exposure, one might even say the altitude, where these grape varieties should be planted. to harvest the world's first wines. Plans of monasteries from the first centuries show how vegetable gardens were laid out. They bear a strong resemblance to our own, with the name of each plant written in Latin on the square devoted to it: (cepas), onion; (poiros), leek; (apiumn), celery; (coliandrum), coriander; (anetum), anise; (papaver), poppy; (radices), turnip; (magones), carrot; (betas), pear; (allium), garlic; (ascolomis), shallot; (petrosilium), parsley; C (cerefolium), chervil; (lactuea), lettuce; (sataragea), savory; (pestinoeluis), parsnip; (caulos), cabbage; (getto), poirotte. With the exception of (magones), carrots, all these names are taken from the capitularies of Charlemagne (1). Later, vegetable gardens became more extensive, and in addition to those established within the monasteries, others were created in the surrounding area, also entrusted to the care of the master courtier. The long practice of these specialists taught them to know the most favorable exposures for particular fruit trees, as well as the most suitable soils for their cultivation, and how to improve fruit by grafting. The Carthusian monks had one of the finest fruit gardens in the world. In this garden, they had gathered together a large number of the fruit trees and varieties known at the time. We have already explained the purpose of this garden. As a curiosity, we have noted in Félicie d'Ayzac, the office of the cénier, which consisted in ordering dinners for the whole year. "Each moyne must have six pears of hostriel just as they are served to the dais and to monseigneur; the abbot five hundred, the prior and sub-prior, each one hundred and fifty item. Of all other new pears, item. He owes four cenas of cherries on the eve of St. John the Baptist and the eve of St. Peter and St. Pol, and the other two at supper, and must have each who takes cenas, full, couvent escuelle rase; rasc, item, he owes two cenas of peas in pods, item, he owes two cenas of fava beans in milk, and must have a quarter of pepper, paid by the cook, and must have each full escuelle of fava beans ; item, deux cènes de poirettes et de laitues; item, deux cènes de pêches, chascun huit; item, deux cènes de nèfles grosses, chascun douze; item, deux cènes de tartre, et doit avoir la tartre un pied de (1) Albert Lenoir, Architecture monastique. 8 long, et doit en avoir chascun une, item. La veille Monsieur Saint-Denys, chascun doit avoir trois poires de Nouel, et au dais (l), poires d'angoisse, si cailloutel est faible (fait défaut), cy doit être la cène d'autres poires, ou de poires d'angoisse, ou fromage fondu. From Nouel eve to my karesme until fons noviaux: Blandurel or Chapendu, each three. In karesme, four times a week, tartar of Martinet apples, and must have in said tartar six-twenty good apples, which tartar must be well powdered with ginger. Every Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday of karesme six pounds of figs for the canopy". The Benedictines, who made such great use of fruit and vegetables, certainly took great care with these crops. But where they put all their efforts was in the cultivation of vines. Throughout the order, vineyards were considered to be one of the first material necessities of an abbey. This chapter ends with a list of the main tools used by gardeners in Charlemagne's time (2): The hoe or pickaxe (fassorium), the spade (bessus), the axe (securis), the doloire (dolatoria), the large and small augers (staratrum majus and minus), the (scalprum), perhaps the grafting tool; the gouge (qulbium), the sickle (folcile), the scythe (falx), the (truneus), perhaps the billhook; the knife, coulter or serpette (culter), the saw (serra), plus wooden utensils such as the van, basket or banne (bansta) and others that the gardener might need. This description does not yet include the main tools that gardeners use today, such as the pitchfork and watering can. (1) Fat for winter use. (2) L'Abbé Irminon. 7I DE LA PROPRIÉTÉ TERRIENNE In a previous chapter, it was stated that the Romans, like all conquerors, had largely dispossessed the Gauls of their soil. When the Franks, in their turn, became masters of the country, they spared the first conquerors no more than the latter had spared their predecessors. The Frankish kings, in possession of almost the entire territory, were very generous to their vassals and especially to the fledgling associations. The latter took full advantage of the situation. Land under the Franks was granted in usufruct, i.e. in possession without right of ownership. All goods given to vassals by the king were to return to the domain after the death of the donee. This system enabled Charles Martel, for example, to seize the property of the clergy, as Dagobert had already done and as the men of the 1789 revolution would later do. Charles Martel gave this property to his soldiers as a benefit, so that all of a sudden, laymen found themselves in the place of abbots and bishops. During the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries, a large number of country churches were owned by laics. But Charlemagne, seeing that it was in his interest, and perhaps at that time also in the interest of civilization and progress, backed his empire on the power of these great associations, and gave them back a large part of their property, of which the Revolution of 1789 was to dispossess them momentarily for a third time. DIFFERENT KINDS OF POSSESSION (1) There were several types, namely: alleu, domain, colony or cencive, benefice, etc. The alleu is the most common type of property. Alleu appears to be nothing other than a patrimony, and was opposed to acquets. In the course of time, the name "alleu" was applied to everything owned outright, whether by inheritance, purchase or donation. Even the tenures of serfs, especially those of fiscaliers, i.e. royal serfs, were transformed into alleux, in the decadence of the Carlovingian dynasty, but most remained under the obligation to pay cens, and were therefore referred to as cencives. Land owned by monks from abbeys was more or less inalienable, and came to be known as mainmorte. In addition to their tenures, a certain number of tenants themselves owned property in the form of alleux, inheritance, propries or acquets, which they could dispose of as they wished. All landed property of a certain size consisted of two distinct parts: one, occupied by the master, constituted the estate proper; the other, distributed among more or less dependent individuals, formed what were known as tenures. The latter remained perpetually subject to the former, with obligations of various kinds. Tenures were divided into two sections, according to the obligations with which they were charged, and were either liberal or servile. In the first case, tenures were noble and owned (1) B. Guérard (translation by Abbé Irminon) by vassals, and were called benefices. The estate was the main part of the land, reserved by the possessor for direct collection of its fruits. Salic lands were noble lands derived from military benefices distributed by Clovis, and later by Charles Martel, to their principal lieutenants from the imperial domain left vacant by the demise of the Romans. According to Frankish law, daughters were excluded from any sharing with sons in the succession of Salic lands. Inferiority given to women, and from which they have not been able to recover until our century. In the second case, the land was despoiled and placed in the hands of colonists and serfs; it then constituted colonies and cencives. The land was divided into lots and distributed among people of low status. These people, by virtue of the lots of which they had usufruct, were subject to regulated obligations known as the law of the land. Usufruct was granted in several ways: perpetually and hereditarily, for life, for a term or at the master's discretion. Thus, the tenure of the colonist was hereditary and irrevocable; whereas the serf did not legally enjoy this property. From this account of land ownership, we can see that men had a greater or lesser degree of freedom, depending on the donation they possessed. Nothing was definitive, there was no stability, and each person's right was not clearly established. The free man placed himself under the protection of the powerful man, the serf under that of the free man. This practice of recommendation can only exist among barbaric peoples, devoid of the fundamental laws of society. In such cases, private force is most often used to make up for the absence of public force. The advent of Pepin-le-Bref paved the way for Charlemagne's heyday. He knew how to turn the diverse elements of his vast empire into the subjects of a great nation. This prince gave special encouragement to agriculture, and tried to put property and all existing institutions on a firmer footing. He had the officers of the estates give an account of their administration. Bishops, abbots and abbesses were ordered to submit annual statements of their property. Abbot Irminon, superior of the Saint-Germain-des-Prés monastery, was the first to draw up a sort of cadastre of the properties belonging to his monastery. He recorded the names and extent of the estates, the size and nature of the various holdings of which they were composed, and in general, the cultivation, produce, condition and administration of the land. It revealed the fate of the colonists and serfs, how many people made up a family, how they lived, to which class they belonged, and the services they were responsible for. In a word, he established not only the land registry, but a census, as accurate as possible, of the population existing on the abbey's lands. This was administration, order, political and rural economy. With the decadence of the Carlovingian empire, the tributary tenants, following the example of the vassals, appropriated the land of which they were merely the usufructuaries, and feudalism, as it developed, completed the process of fixing ownership in the hands of the possessor. Under Louis the Debonair, confusion became general, new men arose on all sides, petty vassals became great feudatories, and officers of the realm became independent lords. One settler, who had owned only as a farmer, became an owner and passed on his property to his posterity; another, who had lacked the audacity or strength to accomplish this act, fell into servitude. From this state of affairs, feudalism on the one hand, and the frequent uprising of serfs on the other. The difference between these revolts and those of the free citizens of antiquity was that the latter revolted for the love of freedom and the fatherland, while the former revolted out of sheer misery. It has been said that it was under Louis-le-Gros that the communes were officially freed, under what conditions, and what future this act brought to urban populations. DE COO In the following chapters, we will have occasion to quote an important article from Charlemagne's capitularies concerning gardens (1). At a time when very little was written, the article in question must have been of capital importance, along with others concerning cultivation in general. When you want to find out about the culture of our ancestors a thousand years ago, you don't always have all the information you need at hand. The main article dealing with the cultivation of gardens is article 70, which reads: We want them to have in the gardens, plants of all kinds, namely: lilies, roses, fennel, mint. sage, rhue, aurone, cucumbers, pumpkins, calabashes and Spanish artichokes, beans, cumin, rosemary, seille, glaieul, caraway, chickpea, serpentaria, anise, coloquintes, heliotropc, Athamante meum. sesili de Marseille, lettuces, spider's foot, rocket, cress alénois, burdock, poichot, maceron commun, parsley, cèleri, levêche, sabine, ancth, sweet fennel, dictame de Crête, chicory, mustard, savory, round-leaf garden mint, tanaisée, catnip, knapweed, garden poppy, chard, cabaret, marshmallows, tree and common mallows, carrots, parsnips, garden arrowroot, amaranth chard, kohlrabi, cabbage, onions, turnips and radishes, shallots, chives, garlic, madder, char(1) B. Guérard. Guérard. bounetier donations, bog beans, peas, coriander, chervil, épurges, orvale. Let the gardener have joubarbe on his house. As for trees, we want our stewards to have apples of various species: plum trees, idem; rowan trees, medlar trees, chestnut trees, peach trees of various species, cognac trees, avelin trees, almond trees, mulberry trees, laurel trees, pine trees, fig trees, walnut trees, cherry trees of various species. Apple names: Gozmaringa, géroldinéja, erevedella, spirança; some sweet, others sour, all for keeping, and those that are eaten as soon as picked, which are early. Mature pears of three or four species, sweet, cooking or late. In this collection of around seventy plants, including flowers cultivated at the time, medicinal and aromatic plants, we find all our old vegetables currently grown in our countries. There were also a dozen fruit trees that the emperor required to be planted in his gardens. Article 70 of the emperor's capitularies, needless to say, listed all the useful plants cultivated in gardens. Here are a few other articles from the capitularies that relate to agriculture in general, and will serve to edify us as to the interest this prince took in everything that depended on his vast empire. ARTICLE 1 "We want our lands, whose revenues we have allocated for our benefit, to be used entirely for our own purposes, and not for those of others". ARTICLE 2 "Let all those who belong to us be well cared for, and let them not be reduced to poverty by anyone". ARTICLE 3 "That our intendants refrain from putting them to their service, 00 C and from forcing them to do ploughing for them by chores, cutting, wood, or any other work; that they accept no present whatsoever, except a few bottles of wine, gardening, fruit, chickens, eggs". ARTICLE 4 "If our men wrong you by thefts or other faults, let them repair the damage, for the remainder of legal satisfaction, they undergo the punishment of whipping". ARTICLE 5 "When our stewards have to carry out work in the fields, they will regulate in each place how to do it". ARTICLE 6 "We want our intendants to tithe all produce to the churches, which belong to our ecclesiastics". ARTICLE 7 "That each steward perform the service prescribed for him". ARTICLE 8 "Let the intendants cultivate the vines well, and house the wine well". ARTICLE Q "That each intendant have measures in his district, muids, setiers, the silule being eight setiers, and corbus of the same capacity as those in our palace". ARTICLE 10 "Que les maires forestiers, proposés aux haras, celleries, remplissent bien leurs offices". ARTICLE 13 "That they take care of the stallions (waramones), if any die, replacing them before the season to put them with the mares". ARTICLE 14 That they take care of the mares, separate the foals in time". COOd 8 ARTICLE 17 "That they care for bees properly". ARTICLE 18 "That they keep chickens and geese in our mills, in proportion to their importance". ARTICLE 21 "That they have fish ponds wherever possible". ARTICLE 22 "Those who have vines should have no less than three or four crowns of grapes at home". ARTICLE 23 "On every piece of land, let there be cowsheds, pigsties, sheepfolds, goat and goat stables". ARTICLE 32 "That they take care to have first quality seed". ARTICLE 34 "To ensure that everything done with the hands is done properly". ARTICLE 37 "That they keep the fields and crops in good condition". ARTICLE 44 "That they send two-thirds of the produce each year". ARTICLE 48 "That the presses be in good condition, and that the grapes not be crushed with the feet". ARTICLE 62 "That they send every year, at Christmas, on separate statements, clear accounts of all income". ARTICLE 69 "That they give notice of the number of wolves each will have taken, in the month of May, that they hunt the cubs, either with poisoned powders and hooks, or with the help of pits and dogs". 2QM2ed D GOO8 We have only quoted the main articles of these capitularies, which sufficiently indicate how everything was regulated on the imperial farms; the others, which are not quoted, relate only to internal particularities that do not have the same interest for the reader as these. These capitularies show that civilization took a major step forward under Charlemagne, as he organized and regulated everything that contributed to the production of the land. The monarch's intentions towards his farmers were good, the only thing was to compel the intendants, sub-intendants and all the rest to carry them out. But these exploiters, instead of supporting the farmers, lived and grew rich at their expense, robbing them as best they could. During the decadence of the Carlovingian empire, the lot of farmers did not improve; for during feudalism, unlike the artisans of the towns who had organized themselves into communities to defend their rights and privileges, the unfortunate farmers had no organization to defend themselves, and remained subject to the goodwill of their lords, who treated them with no other rule than their own pleasure. UNDER THE CARLOVINGIANS It is absolutely essential to know the value of the weights and measures of this period, compared to the units of our metric system, in order to form an idea of the price of land, the value of rents or cens, the price of foodstuffs, and so on. In Merovingian times, weights and measures, like all other institutions, were in a state of disarray. In addition to the measures they brought with them from Germania, the Franks used those of the Gauls, the Romans, the Greeks and even the Jews. MEASURES OF LENGTH (1) The main measure used by the Franks was the foot, more or less the Roman foot, which measured Om 2963. The arpent of the Gauls, like that of the Franks, was equal to a square 120 feet on a side. The league contained 1,500 steps of 5 Roman feet, and was therefore worth 2,222m 25. Today's terrestrial league is given a length of 4444 meters, hence the custom of considering the league as measuring approximately four kilometers. (1) B. Guérard. paré à nos mesures, il y avait de 12 ares 64 centiares, de 13 ares 72 centiares, de 18 ares 26 centiares et de 25 ares. The acre was later enlarged. According to some accounts established on the basis of these data, it has been recognized that the ancients sowed their wheat more lightly than today. The ansange is a measure that remained in use around Paris until the fifteenth century, and was worth around 19 ares. The perch also varied from period to period and from country to country. The aune, used to measure cloth, was worth a foot and a half, or Om 44495. CAPACITY MEASUREMENTS The modius or muid would be worth around 52 liters today. Each country also had its own measures, with different capacities. This measure was used to measure grain, wine, water, milk, pulses and so on. The setier also varied in capacity. The hemin was also a measure of capacity (1). Abbot Irminon's hemin was worth one liter sixty-four centiliters, which was what the rule of Saint-Benoit allowed each monk to drink every day. There was also staupas, which was about half the hemin. WEIGHT The Frankish pound was worth 326 grams until Charlemagne, when it was raised to 406 grams. The ounce was one-twelfth of the pound; until 779, it was worth 27 grams, and later, like the pound, it was increased to 34 grams. The ounce was also a kind of money of account, and was counted in ounces, as well as in pounds of gold and silver. The pensa was used to measure a share, a (1) B Guérard (translation by Abbé Irminon). ration in general. It would have corresponded to 78 livres 79, Charlemagne's weight. CURRENCIES The Merovingian livre would have a value today of 69 fr. 57 c., the sou, which was the twenty-fifth of the livre, would be worth 2 fr. 782; the denier, which was the twelfth of the sou, would have a value of O fr. 2318. A gold penny worth 40 deniers would sell for 9 fr. 28. The pound of gold, which would produce 87 sous 3/20, would therefore be worth 808 fr. 40. Pepin-le-Bref's penny, being the twenty-second of the pound, would be worth 3 fr. 16 c. and the denarius of the same O fr. 2636. At that time, silver coins were manufactured at one twenty-second of their value. Pepin-le-Bref gave his monies one penny for every twenty-two pennies produced. Charlemagne increased the price of coins quite significantly. The Merovingian pound, as we said, had a value of 69 fr. 57, that of Charlemagne would be worth 86 fr. 97 c.; the sou, which was the twentieth, would now be worth 4 fr. 35 and the denarius of the same period O fr. 3624. This estimate represents the intrinsic value of the coins, but to get a more or less accurate idea of their relative value in our time, we need to quote the table drawn up by B. Guérard, Abbé Irminon's translator. This table required a colossal amount of work on the part of its author, and a great deal of knowledge to draw up. Therefore, we do not change any of the figures, but copy them verbatim. Relative value of coins before 755: one denarius 2 fr. 25; one silver penny 27 francs; one gold penny 90 francs; one silver pound 675 francs; one gold pound 7,841 francs. Relative value of coins from 755 to 778: Un denier 2 fr 56; un sou d'argent 31 francs; une livre d'argent 675 francs. Relative value of coins from 779 to 799: Un denier 3 fr. 52; un sou d'argent 42 francs; une livre d'argent 844 francs. Relative value of coins since 800: Un denier 2 fr. 35; un sou d'argent 28 francs; une livre d'argent 563 francs. After the discovery of America, gold and silver considerably decreased in value, and currencies followed suit. The ancient system of weights and measures certainly lacked the fundamental foundations of our metric system, which is based on our planet itself; but recognized by the competent authorities, it could render useful services to nascent trade and industry. Charlemagne prescribed it throughout his empire, but it was never properly observed, and despite his efforts and those of his successors, the institution went from strength to strength. Each province, each town had its own particular measures, and during feudalism, there were as many systems as there were seigneuries. It was the Revolution of 1789 that brought order to this institution, at least officially, by adopting the metric system. But customs are so difficult to eradicate that, a century after the Revolution, despite people's level of education, we still hear people talking about the old weights and measures, even in Paris. Certainly, in some provinces, the old system is still more widely used than the metric system, which is so simple and within everyone's reach. This institution, like so many others bequeathed by our fathers, is indestructible and imperishable. I say imperishable on purpose. Indeed, it could happen that any cataclysm would destroy all the types, all the standards of our weights and measures; all it would take is a single coin to reconstitute the system as complete and as perfect as it is today. To be edified on this subject, it is necessary to have attended, as a child, even if only for a few years, any of France's elementary school. 984-e8 GO LEUR LOCATION OU CENS SOUS CHARLEMAGNE A settler pays the abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés four silver cents (113 francs) for one year's arable land: one acre of vines (12 ares 64 centiares) and half an acre of meadow (6 ares 32 centiares). A courtil (cortilis) 120 feet long by 56 wide, or 5 ares 89 centiares, was sold for 20 sous d'argent, or 563 francs, nearly 1 franc per meter. In 867, 12 bonniers, 15 hectares that had cost five pounds of silver: 2,816 francs, yielded three sous of silver per year: 84 francs. A manse with 13 bonniers, around 17 hectares of arable land; 6 arpents, 76 ares of vines and 6 arpents 76 ares of meadow, yielded a cens of 5 sous 4 deniers, making an average of 8 fr. 57 per hectare. The abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés rents, of course, for the price of 9 deniers: 21 francs per year, nine days of arable land, located in a place called Chaisnes. Compared with today's measurements, a hectare of arable land around Paris used to fetch six to thirteen francs. Land prices have risen considerably since then. At the end of this century, in the suburbs of Paris, a hectare yields an average of three hundred francs in arable land; it's true that it's mainly special crops that are grown here, rather than grasses. In 794, a muid of oats could not be sold for more than one denier: 3 fr. 50; barley, two deniers: 7 francs; rye, 3 deniers: 10 fr. 50; and wheat, 4 deniers: 14 francs. It is estimated that the weight of bread is equal to the weight of grain, the muid being worth 52 liters, this gives us around 40 kilograms. One muid of wheat would have yielded 40 kilograms of bread. Milling and bread-making costs were estimated at a third of the value of the grain. Add 4.50 francs for these costs to the 14 francs for a muid of wheat, for a total of 18.50 francs. These figures bring the price of a kilogram of bread to O fr. 456 during Charlemagne's reign, a relatively high price for the time. As a result, people in the countryside ate only bread made from barley and oat flour, without removing the bran. Wheat bread was considered a luxury item. What can be considered one of the greatest modern advances is the lowering of the power of money over wheat, making wheat bread accessible to everyone. Since Louis XIII, wheat has risen by only 50 0/0, while all other commodities have risen by 300 0/0 (1). In our time, if we pay a high price for bread, relative to the price of wheat, we owe it to agiotage on wheat and flour. Using the calculation we've just made, wheat is worth around twenty francs per (1) Avenel (Richelieu et la Monarchie). (0 hundred kilograms, adding a third for milling and bread-making costs, this puts the price of bread at O fr. 27 per kilogram. But to this price must be added the profits of the miller, the baker and, more often than not, the middlemen who often take the lion's share. Nevertheless, these are the prices established for the two main stakeholders: the producer and the consumer. At the same time, a good horse was worth six sous d'or: 540 francs, and a good steer two sous d'or: 180 francs. These prices were exorbitant for the time, especially when compared to workers' wages. DEIESSS CO The love of society that men bring with them when they are born, and the mutual needs that they are continually obliged to meet, soon led the first men to approach each other and join forces, either to make their existence easier, or to defend themselves more effectively against their enemies. And so, from the earliest civilizations, we see them making attempts at association. Among the Romans, it was the collegium; among the peoples of Germania, it was known as the ghilde, i.e. a banquet at common expense. The purpose of these associations was to defend and help one another. There was mutual insurance for all the major accidents that can occur during a man's life. The qhildes appointed a leader from within their ranks, had a common treasury provided by the followers and the statutes, probably regulations agreed between them, which everyone had to respect at their word. What's more, in keeping with the spirit of the times, each association was under the patronage of a god or hero. The Germans retained the ghilde even after their conversion to Christianity. When the new religion became powerful enough to impose its doctrines, it was only necessary to substitute the invocation of saints for that of gods and heroes; in other words, to change the names, but without changing the principle. Moreover, the fundamental principle of Christianity was the association of the weak against the strong. Its followers knew how to make the most of these associations, and based on this principle, which is so typical of man, they gradually brought them into line with the spirit of the times. Admittedly, these developments were slow, as are all institutions created in a developing society. During the feudal era, ghilds were known as confraternities (confraternities were synonymous with meetings, associations or societies in our time). Today, when we say "confrérie", we mean a religious association. Christianity organized them in such a way that they had a major influence in Paris for several centuries. Especially in the thirteenth century, many had their statutes approved. Their organization was infinitely varied, depending on the trades they represented and the goals they set out to achieve. They followed the trend of the times, and almost all became religious. Despite many abuses, they remained generally moral, through the vigilance they exercised over the morals and conduct of each individual; they were often political, through their intervention in popular movements. These associations almost always worried the authorities, and on several occasions they were abolished by capitularies, and a synod (1) held in Rouen in 1189 reproduced these prohibitions. Despite this, they continued to exist in a spirit of mutual association. After the Wars of Religion, they were overseen by the officers in charge; banquets were attended by sermons, and each table had a pot de l'aumônc. They had dignitaries called provost, dean or alderman. All the emblems of the brotherhood were at home. This office was sought-after, but only the wealthiest could obtain it, as it was very costly for the holder. (1) Le Masson, Calendrier des Confréries de Paris. 908 Each brotherhood had its own banner, coat of arms, attendance tokens and mottos; they also had their chaplains, medals and statutes. Attendance fees were made of lead, sometimes gilded, in the case of the richest brotherhoods. With the invention of printing, these practices fell into disuse, and naive images were substituted to brighten up the craftsman's home. Each member received one as he or she entered, as a sort of diploma. These institutions, like all others, had their abuses. Inevitably, political passions took hold of them, and especially during the Wars of Religion, they became furious; a period to which some people today would like to take us back. The most frequent reproach levelled at them was: drunkenness among confreres (our fathers drank heavily when they were celebrating). There were many different kinds of brotherhoods: many devotional, banter-based, facetious, apocryphal, patriotic, scientific and literary, with a religious element at their core. The devotional brotherhoods included penitents of all colors: white, blue, black, red, gray, green, purple, etc. (1). Among the banter and bachique brotherhoods, one of the best known was the confrérie des fous or innocents; bachique: the drinking horn of the fashionable devotees of the time; satiriques: "les paresseux ou les saoulx d'ouvrer et enragez de rien faire, des baise-c..., des mal mariés, des cornards, dite des Jean". Among the serious ones, the bow and arquebus brotherhoods, the core of the French infantry that saved the monarchy at Bouvines; the first elements of our modern armies, so true is it that whatever has been organized by the public authorities has always been copied from private societies. (1) Le Masson, Calendrier des Confréries de Paris. C Among the scientific brotherhoods, we find the Pontiff brothers, who have facilitated communications and rendered great services to commerce and industry. That of the "master masons", who created and handed down to us the architecture from cathedrals to the humblest village churches - there were few other monuments at the time. The most illustrious of the literary brotherhoods was that of the Passion in 1438, which represented the mysteries of religion, and which Victor Hugo describes in Notre-Dame de Paris. This brotherhood is, in a way, the cradle of our French scènc, and from which the great authors, notably Molière, drew inspiration to create the theater; these entertainments so fashionable since that time. Many of these brotherhoods have now disappeared; the Revolution of 1789 destroyed a large number of them, especially those that were not serious. Of those that have survived to the present day, almost all have a religious character. A scientific brotherhood, that of the "Masonic Masters", has also survived the centuries and is still very powerful today. This brotherhood has taken the name of society and appears to be a mutual aid society, in the fullest sense of the term. One criticism we could level at it is that it has perhaps retained too much of its medieval practices, in its private ceremonies: emblems, rallying signs, etc., which are still very much in evidence today. If we have given all these details on brotherhoods, it's to clearly indicate the spirit of medieval men, who associated themselves for everything, even the most frivolous distractions; not even thieves had their brotherhoods. The oldest gardeners' brotherhoods in existence date back to the thirteenth century, at Saint-Roch, Saint-Nicolas-des-Champs, Saint-Yves, Saint-Sulpice and Mont Sainte-Geneviève; they were placed under the invocation of Saint-Jacques and Saint-Christophe. In 1415, under Charles VI, a 908 brotherhood at Saint-Josse was placed under the patronage of Saint-Fiacre. At the same time, another in Saint-Nicolas-des-Champs was given the patronage of Saint-Fiacre and Sainte-Véronique. In 1599, when the gardeners drew up their statutes and officially recognized their community, a chapel was granted to them in Saint-Nicolas-des-Champs. Saint-Médard has also had its own brotherhood since ancient times. The Revolution of 1789 destroyed all these associations, but in our century, as soon as the Bourbols returned, several were reconstituted, although not in the same churches, as the gardeners had retreated. Nevertheless, the Saint-Médard association was reconstituted in the same church; a donation had been made by a certain Durand to celebrate an eternal mass there on Saint-Fiacre's day, in honor of the former brotherhood. Almost forty years ago, we again saw the confrérie des jardiniers de Saint-Médard attend this mass. Its last president (or doyen under the ancien régime) was the honorable M. Charles Debille, descendant of an ancient family of market gardeners, about whom we'll have more to say later. Confraternities can be found in all religions and beliefs, since, as we have said, people are born to live in society and help each other. When they were more scattered and less numerous, they grouped together, forming hamlets, then villages, then towns and states. It was then that they formed guilds, choosing a god, a hero or a saint to patronize their society, according to their religious beliefs. At first, our ancestors placed their brotherhoods under the patronage of St. James and St. Christopher, and celebrated their feast day on July 25. Later, they placed them under the patronage of Saint-Fiacre and Saint-Véronique; of all these saints, only Saint-Fiacre remained. It's likely that this hermit, having devoted himself specifically to the cultivation of vegetables (D00), was closer to the gardener's guild than any other. What's more, he was an Irishman; generally speaking, one is not a prophet in one's own country, and the Irish, in those days, were held in very high esteem by the French; for the blood they had shed for our country. These societies were created mainly to help one another, the mutual aid societies of the time; but often the best institutions degenerate into abuses, especially if these charitable works are transformed into societies giving parties and banquets. What charity establishes, intemperance corrupts. A number of rulings by the Parliament, dating from different periods, forbid the establishment of brotherhoods, or the reunion of members of existing ones. François I, in an edict dated August 1539, abolished all brotherhoods of tradesmen and craftsmen. Only cloth merchants were exempted. Several other trades followed the same route as the clothmakers, and their brotherhoods were re-established. Charles IX, in an edict of 1560, ordered that the money and revenues of these brotherhoods should be used for divine service, and the surplus for the upkeep of schools or almsgiving. This re-establishment of the brotherhoods revived all the disorders that had been abolished. In a general edict issued in January 1563, the same king forbade them to hold any banquet or feast, on pain of a fine of five hundred livres for each person present. Following the example of the masters, the journeymen emancipated themselves by forming brotherhoods among themselves, and were forbidden to do so by an ordinance (1) issued by Charles IX on February 4, 1567, under penalty of a one hundred pound fine for each offender. Henri III confirmed this ordinance on November 21, 1577. (1) Ordinances issued by the kings of France. CONFRERIES D9 By parliamentary decree of December 13, 1660, it was forbidden to establish any assembly, congregation, brotherhood or community without the express permission of the king, and letters patent registered with the court. In compliance with all these regulations, the police magistrate issued an order on November 4, 1670, as follows: "The jurors and masters of the arts and crafts communities of Paris are forbidden to hold any assembly other than before us, and in the presence of the King's Prosecutor, on the pretext of raising money, confraternities or any other business whatsoever, except by virtue of our order and written permission, on pain of a fine of 100 livres against each of the jurors, dismissal from the jury, and a fine of 20 livres against each of the private masters who attend, with the exception however of the assemblies for the election of jurors, which will be continued in the future, on the customary days and places, in the ordinary manner". This was done and given by Messire Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie, Conseiller d'Etat Ordinaire, Lieutenant General of the City, Provosté and Vicomté of Paris, on the fourth day of November, one thousand six hundred and seventy. Signed: De la Reynie de Ryants; Sagot, Registrar. Los confréries having lost their primordial character of mutual aid, to become simply religious societies, were to be swept away with all the old institutions, by the Revolution of 1789. We'll come back to the brotherhoods of our century in due course. AND STATUTES OF THE FORMER COMMUNAUTÉ DES MAITRES-JARDINIERS When Etienne Boileau urged workers' communities to draw up their statutes, to have them approved, to constitute a kind of workers' legislation, gardeners must already have been numerous under Louis IX, since they fed a population of nearly one hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants. But, either through ignorance or negligence, they never had their trade officially recognized. However, given the large number of guilds in the same situation, we are tempted to believe that all these "retardaires" enjoyed the privileges conferred on them by their respective guilds. The earliest document we have been able to find concerning gardeners is a police order from the Provost of Paris, dated December 30, 1376, during the reign of Charles V, signed by Hugues Aubriot: (1) December 30, 1376, Ordonnance du Prévôt de Paris, que les échalas de merrien à treilles et vignes, amenés à Paris, seront visités par les jurés : To all those who will see these present letters. Hugues Aubriot, chevalier, garde de la Prévôté de Paris, et commis(1) Delamare, Traité de Police. ollized Dy saire donné et réputé par le roy, notre sire, sur le fait de la réformation des métiers de la ville de Paris: Salut. Comme nous avons été et soyons certainement et suffisamment adcertenez, tant par la complainte de plusieurs marchands, bourgeois, et autres gens de la ville de Paris et des villes voisines, comme autrement deument que sur le fait de la marchandise du merrein à treilles et à vignes que l'on amène à Paris pour vendre, a eu au temps passé, et encore à grandes fraudes et déception pour le peuple, parce que les dites denrées ne sont pas bonnes, loyal, nor merchantable, but are defrauded and of smaller harvest than they should be, which things to the great prejudice, damage and lézion of the common people, and still the said commodities worsen and appetize from day to day by the malice and covetousness of those who intermingle, and could worsen and several frauds and mischief, be committed there, if brief remedy were not put there: Knowing that we, desirous of our power of good government of the city of Paris, and of the commodities which are brought there, and to reform icelle of better and better, to the utility of the public thing, whose cure and diligence belongs to us by the king, our sire, as well for reason of our office, as by virtue of the power, to us given, and committed in this partic, we made assemble, and come before us, several merchants and other people of the aforementioned city of Paris, expert and knowing in the aforementioned merchandise; et avec ce, avons fait venir plusieurs vignerons et laboureurs notables des villes voisines d'entour Paris, et des lieux où les échalas que l'on amènc, sont allouez et distribuez; et finalement par leurs avis, et par bonne délibération du Conseil, avons fait et ordonné certaines constitutions et ordonnances sur le fait de ladite marchandise, en la manière qui s'ensuit : ARTICLE 1 "The perches and trellises which will be in quarterons, will have each at the end of five feet, the bulk of a pulse provided, at least, and the dozens to the quantity". ARTICLE 2 The sixaines will have each at the top of three feet full fist of gros, at least ". ARTICLE 3 "The quartaines will have each perch, at the top of six feet, full fist of wholesale, at least; and for what the handles of all are not equal, but have the some bigger handles than the others, and bigger poulce also. The measure of the handle and of the poulce, at which they will be measured, will be made in iron calf, for more justly tested". ARTICLE 4 "As for the round and red ozier of Saint-Marcel, which is the best, we order that it will be made into good, fair and merchantable jars, some of which will be four feet long, and others two feet long, for those who do not wish to have such large jars as four feet long, and there will be no other ozier measured in fur, inside the said jars, nor otherwise, and the prunings of the surranez oziers will not be put there. ARTICLE 5 " The river ozier will have each jar, three feet and a half of link, and there will be no dry ozier nor furs any faulx surranés ". ARTICLE 6 "The trimmings of overripe faulx will be sold on one side, and will not be measured, nor put with the other ozier". ARTICLE 7 " Les échalas qui seront faits dorénavant et amenez à Paris pour vendre, seront bons, loyaux et marchands, et auront chacun la moisson de six pieds et demiy de long, et les plus courts ne seront que d'un pied moindres, qui seront fournis à la valeur des autres bons; et seront cinququantaine, et n'y pourra y avoir que dix de la petite moisson". ARTICLE 8 "We order that the playon will be all green ozier, and there will be no dry fur, ny de heurdry, and whoever will misunderstand in the things above said, or in any of icelles, it will amend to the order of us, or of our successors provosts of Paris, or of our lieutenants, of arbitrary fine, of which fine of the swears who are established for the roy on the aforementioned fact, will have the third part for their punishment, and the roy will have the surplus; and with this, the commodities which will be found false, or ORDINANCES OF POLICE parts of icelles, will make arses in line of justice; if it seems good to us, or to our successors, or to our lieutenants. And to maintain and guard the above-mentioned things, we order that there shall be four jurors on the merreins à vignes; that they shall be established by us, or by our successors, provosts of Paris, or our lieutenants, and shall have the third part of said fines. In witness whereof, we have caused these present letters to be sealed with the seal of the Provost of Paris. "Ce fut fait en jugement au Chatelet de Paris, le mardy, penultième jour de décembre, l'an de grâce 1376". This ordinance of the Provost of Paris really only concerns the materials used by gardeners, but we shall see later that the jurors responsible for overseeing the sale of all these products were the jurors of the guild of master gardeners, mareschers and preoliers of Paris and its suburbs. We'll also see that every aspirant to mastery had to produce a masterpiece of his or her own. The masterpiece required of gardeners did not consist of a real horticultural operation, but simply consisted of: "a quarteron of merriens, in good and sufficient work, according to the statement and report of the maistres jurer gardener". The second police ordinance (1) concerning gardeners is dated February 8, 1473; it completes the first, and still has little to do with gardening. "Ordonnance de Police concernant le commerce de merrien à treilles, oziers et échalas pour les regrattiers de ces marchandises et les jardiniers". Pour ce qui est venu a la connaissance de justice, par la complainte de plusieurs bourgeois de Paris, de plusieurs laboureurs, marchands mareschers, jardiniers, et aussi d'autres de la ville de Paris et de villes voisines, et autrement que sur le fait de la marchandise, d'échalas que de merriens à treilles et à vignes, et aussi des oziers que l'on amène à Paris, pour vendre à très grandes fraudes et déception ou préjudice de la chose publique, tant pour ce que lesdites denrées ne sont pas bonnes (1) Collection Lamoignon, t. IV, f. 750. 908 ny marchandes, mais sont fraudées, et de plus petit moison, qu'elles ne doivent être, comme autrement, qui est préjudice et lézion de commun peuple, et contre les ordonnances anciennes faites sur lesdites marchandises. 1°. - L'en commande et est enjoint par le roy, notre sire, et Monsieur le Prévost de Paris, à tous marchands quelconques qui feront, dorénavant, en cette de ville Paris, amener merriens à treilles, ou échalas et oziers, ou autres merriens à vignes, tant par eau qu'autrement, that first and before they bring the said merriens ashore, exhibit them for sale, or put them in the yard, they have them seen and inspected by the swearers in the said merchandise, who are known and established to do so, under penalty of a fine of forty sols parisis to the king, our sire. 2° item. - Que nul ne soit sy osé ni hardy de contrefaire ou vendre merrien en treille, qu'il soit levé de Seine ou d'autres rivières, pour celui qui sera venu de la rivière de Marne, pour ce qu'il n'est pas si bon, ny suffisant, mais qu'on y faire des différences, de toute ancienneté, accoustumées pour connaitre et discerner l'un de l'autre. That is to say, the said merrien from the river Marne, which is better from all antiquity, should be bound with double ties and rewound from above, and that which comes from the Seine, or from any other river, instead of from Marne, should not be rewound from above, and be tied only with a single tie, and that it not be tied at two feet from the wood, in order to better know the difference one from the other, so that the people will not be disappointed, on similar peinc as above. 3° item. - Que toutes perches à treilles qui seront en quarteron, ayant chacune de haut cinq pieds et gros d'un pouce fourny du moins, et les douzaines à la qualité. 4° item. - Que les perches qui seront en fizenaires, ayant chacune en haut trois pieds, plein poing à tout le moins. 5° item. - Que les querreines ayant chacunes perches en haut de six pieds, plein poing de gros, à tout le moins selon les moules, à ce ordonnés de grande ancienneté étant au Châtelet de Paris; sur lesdites peines. 6° item. - Pareillement l'en commande et enjoint que nul ne soit sy osé ni hardy de contrefaire ou vendre oziers qui sont d'autre lieu que de Saint-Marcel, pour celuy de Seinc, ou que le peuple en soit déceu, pour que celui de Saint-Marcel vaut mieux ORDONNANCES DE POLICE 909 que tout autre. Et que chacun jarbe d'oziers, rond et rouge de Saint-Marcel qui est le meilleur, soit bon et loyal marchand, et ait au-dessus du lien quatre pieds de tour, et la petite jarbe d'iceluy lien, deux pieds de tour, et que parmi lesdites jarbes ne soit pas meslé, nor mixtionné of other oziers, and similarly that the ozier of river ct of another place that of Saint-Marcel, have each jarbe in top of the link three feet and half of turn, without there being dry ozier, ny other fourrements surranés, on the aforementioned penalties. 7° item. - Also that all merchants who bring or cause to be brought and come to this city of Paris, to sell any ozier, whether from Saint-Marcel or elsewhere, that such oziers be brought down, brought and arrive at the Place de Grève, at the place so ordered, without selling with the other, on said penalties. 8° item. - Que les émondées de seaulx surranés, soient venducs d'unc part, sans qu'elles ne soient meslées et mixtionnées avec l'autre ozier. 9° item. - L'en commande et enjoint à tous marchands qui feront venir en cette ville de Paris, aucuns échalas pour vendre, qu'avant qu'ils exposent en vente, ne mettent sur terre ou en chantier, qu'ils faites iceux échalas voir, et visité par les jurez commis sur ladite marchandise (assavoir), qu'ils seront loyaux et marchands, sous poine de confiscation desdites denrées et d'amende arbitraire. 10° item. - Que tous lesdits échalas qui, dorénavant, seront amenés à Paris pour vendre, seront bien loyaux et marchands et qu'ils ont moisons anciennement ordonnées et accoustumées et ordinaires cy devant faites. C'est assavoir la moison de cinq pieds et demy de long, et les plus courtes de quatre pieds et demy de long, et qu'en chaque javelle, il n'y ait au plus de dix échalas de ceux courts, et qui n'ait que quatre pieds et demy et qu'ils seront tous bien et suffisamment fournis et tous cinquanteniers, sur lesdites charges. 11° item. - L'en déffend que aucun marchand regrattier, ne achète pour vendre depuis le matin jusqu'à quatre heures après-midy, aucuns échalas de quelques personnes, que ce soit, soit marchand forain ou autre, sur peine de confiscation desdites denrées, ou peine arbitraire; et que cependant les bourgeois, C manans et habitants de Paris en peuvent acheter et en avoir pour leur fourniture et provision. 12° item. - That no one of the said regrattiers be so dared or so bold as to go before the merchants who will bring the said commodities and that the said commodities not be bought or sold elsewhere than in the customary places, and, after the hour before said. 13° item. - L'en déffend aussi que nul laboureur, ny autres personnes, ne seront sy osé ni hardy de prendre ou livrer ceps de vignes, ne les couper et marcotter en icelle; sur peine de la heurt ou autre punition, peine et amende publique, ou autre à la discrétion de la justice. 14° item. - That no one shall bring to Paris, sell any hairy vines, or other vine plants, nor anted trees, unless he has a certificate from justice, or at least from the local parish priest, that he has taken and raised them from his inheritance and not from any other, and that the sale be made publicly at the customary place. That is to say, on the great bridge of Paris, and not elsewhere, under the aforementioned penalty and other arbitrary fines. 15° item. - L'en commands and is enjoined to the four swearers of said merchandise, that they well and faithfully inspect said commodities and merchandise before declared, and all faults that they would have and could have been made and committed in icelles, well and diligently report to us and to the procurator of the king, our sire, at the said Châtelet, and if trade is, the delinquents they make arrest by the sergeants of the said Châtelet and bring prisoners, to ester, to right, and of all fines which for this, will be awarded to the said lord. They will have the third part, and if will be all the commodities which will be found false or part of icelles, arses in sign of justice. 16° item. - L'en deffend que nul jardinier ne soit sy osé ni hardy, sur peine de quarante sols d'amende et de tenir prison, d'entreprendre besongne au-dessus de sinq sols parisis, s'il n'est maistre ou bachelier. 17° item. - Que nul ne soit sy osé ni hardy d'entreprendre. besongne au-dessus de cinq sols, s'il ne met par manière de chefd'oeuvre, un quarteron de merrien en bon usage et suffisant au dire et rapport des maistres et jurez jardins. 18° item. - Et pour ce qu'il est venu à la connaissance de justice, que plusieurs qui se disent jardiniers, vont par les hôtels O00 des bourgeois de cette ville de Paris; marchandans de faire leurs jardins, et qu'il arrive souvent qu'il faut abbattre et dépecer les ouvrages qu'ils ont faites; parce qu'ils ne sont bons ni suffissamment fait; en quoi iceux bourgeois ct autres avant jardins, pour grande somme de deniers, qui sont de grande perte ou dommage, et n'y peuvent avoir aucune restitution, parce que lesdits jardiniers n'ont rien. It is hereby forbidden for any gardener to undertake any work in excess of five sols, unless he has given full and sufficient guarantee of restitution, if applicable, for any damages and interest incurred by the said burghers and others, who have gardens, through the fault of the said gardeners. Done and given under our signet, on Saturday the eighth day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred and seventy-three. Signed: DEPRASY. LE CORNU. This police ordinance supplements the ordinance of the Provost of Paris of 1376. It is a set of statutes, the first part of which, before dealing with trade, is a reproduction of the latter. The second part, the last three articles, deal with the privileges of the guild. It is certain that even before Etienne Boileau, these statutes existed verbally, but probably no abuses occurred, and it was when they did that the community felt the need to react. This ordinance is the first to deal with the work of gardeners, and is considered by some authors to be the oldest in the community. However, it is easy to see that it merely completes the first ordinance, just as the last articles of the last ordinance served as the basis for the statutes of 1599: 1576, August 29 Letters patent from Henri III, confirming purely and simply the regulations given to gardeners by the police ordinance of 1473. Lawsuits brought by gardener-jurors before the 1599 statutes. d August 11, 1576 Ruling confirming a sentence of the Hôtel-de-Ville for incompetence and referring a case brought by the gardeners to the Châtelet. "Between Pierre Boutault, Gcorges Destais and Thomas Frémit maistres jurés, et gardes-jardiniers de cette ville de Paris, appelans de certaine sentence, jugement et appointement contre eux donné par le prévost des marchands et échevins de cette ville de Paris, le seizième jour de janvier mil-cinq-cent-soixante-dixhuit passé, comme de juge incompétent d'une part; et lesdits sergents de l'Ilôtel-de-Ville, intimez. "And the said provosts of the merchants and aldermen intervening, on the other hand; without the qualities being able to prejudice. After Dennet, on behalf of the appellants, concluded in his appeal, that the Provosts of the merchants and échevins of this city of Paris, ordered that they proceed before them, to the summons given by them, to proceed before them, on the grounds that the said intimez claim that they cannot visit the merrien woods used to make gardens, and that it is up to them; the substitute of the royal prosecutor, in the Hôtel-de-Ville present. A requis être renvoyez par devant le Prévost de Paris, juge ordinaire; et que Desportes pour les intimez a dit: qu'ils ne font partie en cet appel, mais surtout que la connaissance en appartient au Prévost des marchands, et tendent à follement intimez; ont été ouis, ensemble le substitut du procureur du roy, en l'Hôtel-de-Ville, et l'un des échevins d'icelle; et que Brisson pour le procureur du roy, a dit : that the exploit is abusive, to make visitation of wood of gardening in the houses of the private individuals, he does not know with which title, they can have this power; the gardeners have their privileges checked in the Court, of céans, and make their reports of the malversasions to the Provost of Paris, who is ordinary judge. The Court says: that it was badly exploited by the sergeants of the Hôtel de Ville, badly ordered by the Provost of the merchants and aldermen, sends back the parts by in front of the Provost of Paris. or his lieutenant, to make them right, condemned the intimatez ès expenses, costs of the Court of appeal. "Fait au parlement le onzième jour d'août 1578". Signed: DU TILLET. Arrêt du Parlement concernant l'ordonnance de police de 1473: 1889, June 27 "La Cour fait inhilition et déffense auxdits jurez jardinsiers, troubler ou empêcher ledit Rigault, vendre ou faire vendre, aux places publiques, ou autres lieux de cette ville, et à tels jours que bon lui semblera, les fruits et herbes creus et recueillis sur les héritages qu'il tient et valoir entre ses mains, lesquels fruits et herbes, pourront être visités par lesdits jurez maîtresjardiniers, tant esdites places que jardins, sous dépens". These lawsuits show that although the old community of gardeners did not yet have definitive statutes, it did enjoy certain privileges, especially the right of inspection, both at market disputes and in the gardens. In those days, even more than today, custom was the rule. It also happened that these representatives of authority wanted to arrogate to themselves rights they didn't have, and that the courts were forced to call them to order so that they would simply return to their privileges. FIRST STATUTES OF THE COMMUNITY OF MASTER GARDENERS 1599, November New statutes presented by the gardeners in seventeen articles, and letters patent from Henri IV confirming them. "The community of master gardeners of our good city, suburb, suburbs, provostry and viscounty of Paris, most humbly point out to Your Majesty that, from time immemorial, they have been numbered among the sworn masters of your city of Paris, and governed by ordinances and statutes particular to their trade, which they have peacefully enjoyed without contradiction until now. Nevertheless, in the shadow that the suppliants would not have obtained letters of confirmation from 0 your Majesty, some private individuals are trying to disturb them, and undertake on their trade, so that the suppliants doubt that this undertaking, if it were tolerated, would harm them and their successors, and hinder the said undertakings, commit several abuses and deceptions which are not to ratify and confirm the articles which follow, and the suppliants will be all the more obliged to pray to God for your noble prosperity and health". 1°. - No one may become a master gardener, in this city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris, unless he has been received as a master in the said trade, and has made a masterpiece by his own hand, as is customary. This masterpiece will be awarded and evaluated by the sworn members of the said trade, in the presence of four former bachelors. 2° item. - Before the masterpiece is given by the swearers to the said journeymen who wish to become master craftsmen, the said swearers are required to inquire into their good life and morals, the master craftsmen they have served, and where they have served their apprenticeship, in order to give or refuse them the said masterpiece, according to the report they find. 3° item. - After the said inquisition has been made, the said journeymen, who aspire to the said maistrise, will be required to make a masterpiece, as will be devised to them by the swearers of iceluy done and perfect, and will make the said swearers their report in the accustomed manner. 4° item. - That no one shall be accepted for master craftsmanship, in order to attain the said maistrise, unless he has been apprenticed under a master of the said trade, in this town and suburbs, for the time and space of four years, and furthermore, served by the masters, after his said apprenticeship time, for the space of two years. 5° item. - The children of the said maistres will be admitted to the maistrise, without any masterpiece or experience, after they have been certified as having been apprenticed, either to their fathers or elsewhere, for the said period of four years. 6° item - That the said maistres jardiniers, after being admitted to the said trade, will give to the confraternity of the said mestier, their right to it, and to maintain the divine service, the sum of thirty-two sols, which they will be obliged to give to the confraternity maistres. 7° item. - That no master may withhold, debauch 08 or give work to any journeymen of the said trade, while they are allotted to another master, unless he first knows from his master whether he is satisfied with him, under penalty of six sous fine applicable as above. 8° item. - That each apprentice of the said trade shall be required, as soon as he is obliged, to pay to the brotherhood of the said trade, for the fees of the said brotherhood, and to maintain the service, the sum of twenty-four sols parisis, and the master with whom the said apprentice will be, shall be required to advance this sum. 9° item. - The widows of maistres, as long as they remain in viduité, will enjoy the same privileges as their deceased husbands, but if they remarry, or fail in their viduité, they will lose the said privilege, and will no longer be able to engage in the said trade. 10° item. -- The said widows may have apprentices who were obligated to their deceased husbands complete their apprenticeship under them, so that they may maintain and practice the said gardener's trade, and so that they do not remarry others of the said trade, otherwise the said widows will be required to place the said apprentices with the mayors of the said juries, who will be required to have them complete their apprenticeship under another sufficient master of the said trade. 11° item. - The said widows may not, as long as they continue to practice the said gardening trade, take on any new apprentices or have them obligated, but will have them trade and merchandise with a journeyman who requires the status. 12° item. - That all persons whatsoever are forbidden to bring or cause to be brought any melons, cucumbers, artichokes, herbs and other things dependent on the said gardening trade, unless they are masters of the said trade, except the burghers of the city and suburbs of Paris, who may have gardens and property, who may bring or cause to be brought on market days, which are Wednesday and Saturday, all kinds of produce growing in their said gardens; which produce. will be inspected by the said swearers, and if they are good, will be exhibited for sale; if they are not, they will be confiscated, and the person who exhibits them for sale will be fined twenty sols, half of which will go to the King, and the other half to the said swearers of the said trade. 008 buy any thing dependent on the state of gardening, in any place other than the said market hall and public markets, so that the swearers have knowledge of it, nor even hold in their houses, or elsewhere, their fruits and herbs at night, insofar as they will be subject to rot and attract the bad air. And to avoid the said abuses that may be committed, the sworn members of the said trade may search the houses of the said sellers for the faults and abuses that they find there, report them in the customary manner, and the said offender may be fined and punished if he so desires. 14° item. - That all persons are forbidden to smoke any garbage or pig droppings in order to plant or sow any goods that depend on their gardening; to avoid the abuses that are committed there, and could be committed hereafter, to avoid contagious and other diseases, on pain of having their goods spilled, and being fined two écus for each offender: 15° item. - That it is forbidden to all masters of the said trade, to purchase from other masters, any trees, or other goods to bring them to sell on the bridge of the said trees, or other public places, on penalty of confiscation of the said trees, and of two écus fine, applicable as above; but may the said masters, sell their trees and flowers there as of any seniority. 16° item. - That all master bachelors and journeymen of the said trade, shall be bound to recognize their former master-jurors, and to show them the respect, honor and reverence due to them. Assavoir à leurs anciens et à leurs jurez, chacun en son temps de ladite charge de jurez, comme ils ont promis lorsqu'ils ont été receus audit dudit mestier. 17° item. - That for the preservation of the said trade, four swearers of the said trade shall be raised, in the same form as the swearers of the other trades, by the community of the masters of the said trade, by whom swearers shall be made all necessary visits to be made to the said trade, both in the said city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris, without the said suburbs being required to request a license from the high justiciars, whatever privilege and right of high justice they may have, given that it is a question of 103 C police, of which, connoissance belongs to the Provost of Paris. Et ensuite est escrit plusieurs paraphes des anciens maistres bacheliers ct jurez dudit mestier. JEAN LE BOUTEUX, BENOIST, PETIT, RENÉ JACQUELIN, LA CRUCHE, BAUDOIN, PIERRE LENOSTRE, JEAN-LE-BREF, PIERRE BOUTON, BIENFAIT. "Henry, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, hereby confirm, certify, approve and authorize, will and please us that these articles, be henceforth kept, observed and maintained. "Donné à Paris, au mois de novembre, l'an mil-cinq-centquatre-ving-dix-neuf, et de notre règne, le onzième". DECREE OF HENRI IV CONFIRMING THESE STATUTES November 1599 "Henry, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all present and future: Salut. Ayant fait voir en notre conseil, la requête et articles à Nous en iceluy présentez par nos bons amis les maistres et communauté du mestier de jardinier, en notre bonne ville, faubourgs, banlieue, Prévosté et Vicomté de Paris, concernant leur état et mestier, à ce qu'il nous plaise, iceux ratifier et confirmer, ensemble l'avis, à nous donné par le Prévost de Paris, ou son lieutenant. Qüi, le substitut de notre procureur général en ladite Prévosté; suivant le renvoi que nous leur auraient fait, à cette fin par nos lettres patentes, le tout y attaché, sous le contre-scel de notre Chancellerie : Scavoir taisons, que nous désirons subvenir auxdits maistres et communauté du mestier de jardinier, en notre bonne ville, faubourgs, banlieuc, Prévosté et Vicomté de Paris, de l'avis de notre conseil et de notre certaine science, pleine puissance et authorité royale; conformément à ledit avis, même ayant égard, que par le moyen de l'entretennement et observation desdits articles, confirmiez, ratifiez, approuvez et authorisez; confirmons, ratifions, approuvons et authorisons par ces présentes. Voulons et nous plaist qu'ils soient, dorénavant, gardez, observez et entretenus en tout et chacun leurs points, sans il y soit contrevenu en quelque sorte et manière que ce soit, sur les peines y contenues. "If we mandcment, to our friends and seal advisors, the people holding our court of Parliament of Paris, and to the said Provost of Paris, or his lieutenant, that the said articles and the said present, they make register, maintain, keep, observe from point to point according to their form and content; the suppliants and their successors of the said gardener's trade, compelling to make themselves suffered and obeyed by all those who it shall appear, and who for this purpose shall compel by all ducous and reasonable means, notwithstanding any opposition or appellation for which we do not wish to be deferred; for such is our pleasure. And in order that it be a firm and stable thing forever; We have put our seal on these presents, excepting in other matters our right and the right of others in all matters. "Donné à Paris, au mois de novembre, l'an de grâce milcinq-cent-quatre-vingt-dix-neuf, et de notre règne, le onzième; ct au reply est escrit, par le roy, notre sire, à votre relation". Signed: THOMAS These statutes are the most important act of the ancient community of master jarniniers. From the documents that preceded them, it is easy to see that the community had only incomplete legislation, based on the police ordinance of February 3, 1473. However, as we've already mentioned, around 1260, when Etienne Boileau had a register drawn up and deposited at the Châtelet to record the customs practiced for centuries by the various Parisian trades, our ancestors were already numerous, but they neglected this formality which gave official recognition to their trade. What is certain is that these time-honored practices had the force of law, and successively produced the documents we have just cited. These statutes of 1599 were skilfully drafted for their time, and provided a sufficient guarantee in every respect for the community of master gardeners. They cover the rules of apprenticeship, the rights and duties of journeymen, the masterpieces accomplished 99 to achieve mastery, and the privileges of masters' sons and widows. The election of jurors, their functions and rights, the prohibition against poaching journeymen from one another, the obligation to inquire when hiring someone they didn't know, where he had apprenticed, with which masters he had worked, the reasons why he had left the house: in short, the community policed all its members. As a result, it was not uncommon for journeymen to stay with the same masters for a number of years. Hence the mutual esteem that existed between them, with the pastoral existence so dear to our ancestors. We'll come back to this subject at another time, and try to explain, as far as possible, the reasons why these pastoral customs changed. Masters were not allowed to buy goods from other masters for resale by regrat. They could not smoke their land with pig manure, Paris sludge that was too fresh, or fecal matter, the infection of which, said the Prévost de Paris, could cause contagious diseases. This was a hygiene measure taken by the police against gardeners, given that many of them lived in the city, or even on its outskirts, in fairly densely populated suburbs. Even today, don't we see these police measures taken against the sludge of Paris! The capital's neighboring towns no longer welcome them. The railroad stations where they are shipped create problems for farmers, giving them only a few hours' latitude to unload their wagons and transport the contents to a certain distance from their homes. All these difficulties increase the cost of the city's cleaning service. As a result, the city council has asked the Hygiene Commission to look for a practical way of getting rid of this refuse. The idea is to create large furnaces to incinerate it. This would produce chemical fertilizers that are easy to trans09 port to all parts of the country, but what is indisputable is that the Paris suburbs would suffer a great loss if this system were adopted. Growers and horticulturists within a fifty-kilometer radius have protested against this method, but the idea is still being pursued. However, large-scale cultivation would like nothing better than to receive the slush from Paris, but say the growers we spoke to, that the railway companies should give us the time we need to remove it. Certainly, today, the capital no longer fears famine, as in the old days, thanks to the rapid means of communication, the food we need comes from all sides, according to the season. It is no less true that this great suburb, which supplies the lion's share of the vegetables consumed in Paris, is entitled to some consideration from the big city. It has not even been proven that the price of these products would not rise significantly above current prices. The old police regulations before 1599, concerning gardeners, had to do with trade, the visit of jurors to markets and gardens. Four different people had the right to sell fruits and vegetables from their gardens in the public markets of the city of Paris: master gardeners, journeymen, suburban showmen, and the bourgeois of the city and suburbs who owned gardens they sold. There were regulations for all these different conditions, prescribing what they had to observe, and whose purpose was to provide citizens with an abundance of the simplest and most common healthy foods, often the only ones used to feed the people, and which even the rich would find hard to do without. The maitres alone had the right to display their wares for sale on the mornings of every weekday, ORDONNANCES DE POLICE 908 at the halle aux poirées, from the halle aux blés to the rue Saint-Ionoré. This community was the only one whose journeymen could trade like the masters; in the past, this was only granted to those who owned gardens or marshes that they managed, but since 1627, this right has been extended to those who rent them. Nevertheless, with these old conditions, they were still required to endure the visits of the jurors, to bring their goods to the market hall and other squares only on Wednesdays and Saturdays, which are market days, and to take their place there only after all the masters. These same journeymen also contributed to the community's expenses, even though they were not yet part of it as masters. The burghers of the city, suburbs and suburbs, as well as the showmen of the small surrounding localities, had only the same right as the journeymen gardeners, to exhibit their trees, fruit and vegetables for sale, on both market days, on condition that they also suffered the visits of the jurors. The community left no stone unturned to defend its interests, and it's easy to see that freedom of trade was very limited, and competition virtually impossible: such were the customs of the time. During the nearly two centuries that these statutes remained in force, they underwent no major changes, but simply followed the spirit of the times, one might say the whims of kings. Whereas under Louis XIV, instead of the communauiés appointing their jurors, they were appointed by the king, and the jurors became, so to speak, public servants. This state of affairs could only result in flagrant abuses, which helped to push the ancien régime into the abyss, perhaps even faster than it should have, had it respected the ancient regulations of the workers' communities. A word, in passing, about the signatories of the statutes of 18 1599; of these nine signatories, only one family has kept its name in the guild to this day. The first signatory is a Jean Le Bouteux, which certainly means that he was the principal, and what we today call the president. In our century, we also find a Le Bouteux, as one of the principal founders of the first mutual society created by gardeners. This venerable dean of our corporation was vice-president of this society for almost forty years, and at the end of this century, he is still its honorary vice-president. Another name that has left its mark on the history of gardens is Pierre Lenostre, who must undoubtedly have been one of the ancestors of the great landscape architect who designed the park at Versailles, and thus created a new art of garden design known as the French garden. We've already had occasion to talk about this illustrious gardener. Letters patent from the late King Louis XIII, confirming the statutes of the gardeners: "Louis, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all present and future, greetings: Our beloved masters and community of the gardener's trade, in our good city, suburbs, suburbs, Provost and Viscounty of Paris : We have been informed that for all time and antiquity, they have been numbered among the sworn maistres in our city, and that they are governed by the ordinances and statutes of the aforementioned trade, which they renewed on October 15, 1599, and which the late King Henrile-Grand, our honored lord and ayeul, would have advised the Provost of Paris, or his lieutenant; and oüi le substitut du procureur général, confirmé et approuvé par ses lettres patentes du mois de novembre ensuivant ledit an, registrées au Parlement de Paris, le 17 avril 1600, dont ils ont toujours paisiblement joui jusqu'à présent, craignant iceux exposants que pour n'avoir depuis notre avèncment à la couronne, obtenus nos lettres de confirmation d'iceux statuts et privilèges, pour lesquels ils ont payé la finance, à laquelle ils ont été taxés en notre conseil, nos officiers ou autres, voudussent les troubler; O8 they have most humbly begged us to grant them. Scavoir faisons, qu'après avoir fait voir en notre conseil lesdits privilèges et statuts, confirmz par lesdites lettres du feu roi Henri-le-Grand, avec l'arrest de registrement et quittance de finance payée par eux, en nos parties casuelles, pour ladite confirmation du trentième mars dernier, le tout cy attaché sous le contrescel de notre chancellerie; desiring to treat the exhibitors favorably, in consideration of the utility that the public receives from their work and gardening in the vicinity of the said city, by means of the maintenance and observance of their said privileges and statutes. We have, in accordance with the said letters, and the receipt of finance paid by them in our caseual parts to be preserved and confirmed by our special grace, full power and reyal authority, approved, confirmed and approved the said privileges and statutes. To be enjoyed by them and their successors to the said profession, fully, peacefully and perpetually, just as they have enjoyed and gently used, enjoy and still use at present. We hereby instruct our friends and advisors, the people holding our Court of Parliament in Paris, the provost of the said place or his lieutenant, that these presents be registered, and that the contents hereof be suffered and left for the exhibitors, fully, peacefully, compelling to the observance of the said privileges and statutes, all those whom it may please; for such is our pleasure. And so that it may be firm and stable forever. We have had our seal affixed to these presents, with the exception of our rights and the rights of others in all other matters. "Donné à Paris, au mois de juin, l'an de grâce mil-six-centquarante-cinq, et de notre règne le troisième. "And to the reply is signed by the king". RABOIS. July 26, 1646 Sentence of registration of the above statutes, with the proviso that inhabitants who hold heritages on annuity will enjoy the same privileges granted to owners by article eleven. "Louis Seguier, chancellor, baron de Saint-Brisson, seigneur des Ruaux et de 0 Saint-Firmain, king's counselor, gentleman ordinary of the Chamber, and guard of the Prévosté and Vicomté de Paris, salut : " Scavoir faisons, que vu les lettres patentes du roi, données au mois de juillet dernier, figurées sur le reply Vallois, et à côté visa, et scellés du grand sceau de cire verte, en lais de soye rouge et verte; par lesquelles. appert les maistres et communauté du métier de jardinier en cette ville, faubourgs, banlieue, Prévosté et Vicomté de Paris; to have remonstrated with His Majesty, that for all time and antiquity, they have been numbered among the maistres-jurez of this city, and would have governed themselves by the statutes and ordinances of the said gardening trade, which they would have renewed on October 25, 1599, which the late King HIenrile-Grand, His Majesty's ayeul would have, after having had the opinion of the Provost of Paris, or his lieutenant, and of the king's attorney, confirmed and approved by his letters patent of the following November, registered in parliament on April 17, 1600, which they have always peacefully enjoyed up to the present, and fearing the said master gardeners to be disturbed in the exercise of the said trade, for not having by them, since the advent of the crown to his Majesty; obtained letters of confirmation of the said statutes and privileges, for which they paid the finance, to which they were taxed, as appears by the receipt of the thirtieth of last March, attached under the counter-seal of the said letters. For these and other reasons, His Majesty, in accordance with the letters of the late King Ienri-le-Grand, the arrest of registration of the said letters, and the aforementioned receipt of finance, has by his royal authority approved, confirmed and endorsed the said privileges and statutes, to be enjoyed by them and their successors in the said profession of gardener fully, peacefully and perpetually; as they have well and dearly enjoyed and used, and still enjoy and use today. We, mandating His Majesty, have the said letters registered, and compel the observance of the said privileges and statutes by all those whom it may appear. Having regard also to the request presented to us by the said masters and community of the gardener's trade, that we be pleased to order the said letters and statutes to be registered at the registries of the said Châtelet, in order for them to enjoy the effect contained therein, which request was, by our order, communicated to the King's prosecutor, who requested the said letters to be registered in the registries of the banners of the said Châtelet, in order for the said masters to enjoy the content therein. according to their form and content, with the proviso that the burghers of the city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris, who have hereditaments under annuity, will enjoy the same privileges granted to the owners OOQ said hereditaments, by article 12 of said statutes. And all seen and considered, We have, with the consent of the king's prosecutor, to whom the whole has been communicated, ordered that the said letters and statutes be registered in the banners of the said Châtelet, for the enjoyment by the said maistres-jardiniers of the city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris, of the content of the said letters, according to their form and content, with the proviso that the burghers of the said places who will have heritages in annuity, either in the city, suburbs and suburbs, will enjoy the same privileges granted to the owners, by article 12 of the said statutes. In witness whereof, we have caused these presents to be sealed. This was done and given by Messire DREUX, DAUBRAY, CHEVALIER, SEIGNEUR DOFFOUSENT, VILLERS et autres lieux, conseiller du roi en ses conseils d'état et privé, et lieutenant civil de la ville, Prévosté et Vicomté de Paris, le mercredi, vingt-sixième jour de juillet mil-six-cent-quarantecinq". Signed: HABERT. Letters patent from Louis XIV confirming the statutes given to gardeners by Henri IV. "The jurés, body and community of master gardeners of the city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris, have humbly represented to us that in order to obey our orders, several of the said maitres, having made their submission, not only to pay the finance of the offices of auditors, examiners of accounts created by our edict of March 1694, with the two sols per livre of the said finance, but also to reimburse that which had been paid by the named Totin, Belard, Boivinet and Chevalier. for the finance of the offices of jurors created by our edict of March 1691, and the said Totin, Belard, Boivinet and Chevalier, having consented to receive their reimbursement by arrest of our council of October 27, 1696. We have ordered the reunion of the said sworn officers with the community, in reimbursement to the said Belard and Totin, what they would have paid for the finance of their charges and to the said Boivinet and Chevalier the price loaned for their acquisition contracts. For these reasons, we order: That the said officers of jurors shall be and remain bound from now on and forever united and incorporated purely and simply into the community of master gardeners, and the newly elected jurors, and those who will be elected in the future, shall exercise the said offices, by virtue of the commissions of our public prosecutor.

to the Châtelet, as practiced prior to the edict of March 1691. And by paying what remains due of the sum of 508 forty thousand livres, to which was moderated the finance of the said offices of auditors and examiners of the accounts, and of the two sols per livre of the said finance, the said offices will likewise be and remain united and incorporated forever into the said community of master gardeners, without being obliged to take letters of provision of which we have relieved and dispensed them. In so doing, the said community will enjoy forty pounds of wages, attributed to the said offices, in accordance with the arest of our Council, dated September 4, 1696. 2° - Debt of the owners of the offices mortgaged on all revenues. 3° - We hereby order that the rolle statement of distribution of the sum of fifteen-thousand-five-hundred livres, made both by them and by the jurors, in the opinion of six elders, be executed according to form and content; and the masters and journeymen named compelled to pay the sums, for which they will be included, as for our own money and affairs, without their being able to claim any restitution or reimbursement of said sums from the community, in accordance with the deliberation of the community of December 20 last, the sums mentioned in said distribution roll will be received by those named in said de "claration, each in the quarters mentioned therein, and used by them; firstly, to pay what remains due from the finance of auditors and examiners of accounts and the two sols per pound of said finance, and then to repay the sum of ten thousand four hundred and sixty livres, provided and advanced by the said Baudin, Pinson and others; which sums interest will be paid to them, starting only from February 7, until their full and perfect repayment" 1697, June Declaration of the king bearing arrest to the community of gardeners, of the offices of jurors and auditors of accounts, with twelve new articles of statutes. Louis, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all present and future, salut : 5° - Voulons que les statuts de la communauté, lettres patentes, confirmation, les arrests et règlements rendus en 0 conséquence, soient exécutés selon leur forme et teneur. And the said community maintained and guarded in all the privileges and exemptions granted to it from time immemorial. 6° - In so doing, we authorize the masters to bring or send their vegetables and herbs to be sold every morning in the pear market, from the wheat market to rue Saint-Honoré and adjacent streets. 7° - Without prejudice to the bourgeois who have gardens in the suburbs and suburbs of Paris and others who have the right to sell and debit their vegetables, bring them and have them brought to the market on Wednesday and Saturday of each week. 8° - In addition, we wish that aspiring maistres, in order to be admitted as maistres, be required to make a masterpiece and pay to the community twenty livres, including royal duty, for the confrairie, one hundred sols, for each juré, three livres, for each of the eight elders who will be called alternately each in turn to the receptions, thirty sols, and twenty sols for the community clerk. 9° - That the sons of maistres, whether born before or since their fathers' maistrise, be received as maistres without any experience, by them paying half duty to the swearers and elders, and similarly that for six months from the date of the present arrest, all journeymen may be received as maistres, by paying half duty only. 10° - The elected swearers, as subrogated to the rights of swearers, in title to offices that have been reimbursed to us, will make their visits according to the former custom, to all maistres and companions holding gardens, valuing marshes, or holding them for rent; for which, we want them to be paid by them, for all visiting rights, to each maistre ten sols, and to each companion twenty sols; to which, with their consent, we have reduced the visiting rights attributed to the swearers by our edict of March 1691, and by the provisions sent to them; as a result of which visiting rights, half will belong to the swearers for their expenses, and the other half will be used for community affairs. With regard to the visits they will make in the suburbs, they will be used in the same customary manner. 11° - Voulons que lesdits jurez soient obligés de tenir la main, à ce que les arrests et règlements de police qui contien208 nent la prohibi tion de fumier de boues de Paris fraiches et de matière fécale; gardens and lands on which vegetables are grown, are observed, and to this end, we will arrange for visits to be made twice a year to all marshland and gardening lands, which will be held by masters and journeymen gardeners, in the suburbs and suburbs of Paris, and to make their report in the customary manner, and of all contraventions they find to the police regulations on gardening. 12° - We expressly forbid all masters from poaching journeymen from other masters, nor from giving them work in the trade, unless they have first gone to the master whom the journeymen has served, to find out whether he is satisfied with the said journeymen's service. All in accordance with the provisions of the said arrests. Given at Marly, in the month of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and ninety-seven and of our reign the fifty-fifth. Signed: Louis. And at the bottom by the King: PHELYPPEAUX. Visa: BOUCHEROT. 1748, October 21 The gardeners asked the king for authorization to borrow the sum of ten thousand livres, imposed for the union of the offices of jury inspectors and to establish new rights; to secure this loan. In addition to the five hundred livres annual pledge granted by the state to the office of jury inspector, the community will demand twenty sols from each master for the right of inspection, and quaraite sols from journeymen practicing their trade alone. These ordinances and statutes gave rise to various lawsuits for and against the former community of master gardeners. January 26, 1618 Arrest condemning the inhabitants of Roule to suffer visits from the Paris gardening jurors four times a year, and regulating visiting fees. Entre Antoine Aubry, Jacques Rofly; se faisant fort des autres habitants du village du Roulc, demandeurs aux fins d'une com mission, du 30 juillet 1616, et défendeurs, d'une part ; et les maîtres jurés, jardiniers, préoliers de cette ville, faubourgs et banlieue de Paris, intimez. défendeurs et demandeurs, par le moyen de leurs défenses du mois de septembre 1616, respectivement baillées ; appointement à escrire par advertissement et produire : production desdites parties. Arrest of April 10, 1617, by which it was ordered that the parties' productions would be communicated, in order to provide counter-arguments and solvation against them within the time of the order. Contredits respectfully provided, conclusions of the King's Attorney General, and all considered. Dit a été que la Cour a débouté et déboute les habitants du village du Roule, des conclusions par eux prises contre les maistres jardiniers de cette ville de Paris. Ordonne, néanmoins, qu'ils seront tenus souffrir être visités quatre fois l'année par lesdits maistres jardiniers, à la charge qu'ils ne prennent pour chacune visitation de chacun d'eux que la somme de dix sols tournois; et sur le surplus des demandes respectueusement faites, a mis et met les parties hors de Cour et de procès, le tout sans dépens. Pronounced on the twentieth day of January, one thousand six hundred and ninety-eight. Signed: GUYET, clerk with collation. April 1620 Confirmation of previous ruling. Entre les manants et habitants du village du Roule, demandeurs aux fins d'une requête par eux présentée à la Cour le 26 juillet 1619, d'une part; les maistres jardiniers, préoliers de cette ville et banlieue de Paris, défendeurs, d'autre part. Veu par la Cour l'arrêt du 20 janvier 1618, par lequel entre autres choses, aurait été ordonné, que lesdits habitants du Roule seraient tenus souffrir être visités quatre fois l'année par lesdits maîtres jurés, jardiniers, à la charge qu'ils ne prendsront pour chacune visitation d'eux, que la somme de dix sols tournois; said request being for the opinion given by the King's Attorney General at the Châtelet de Paris on October 16, 1618 to be quashed and revoked by attack, and for the principal order; that in accordance with said judgment of January 20, 1618, said plaintiffs remain free of the rights and wages claimed by said defendants, by paying each of them, for each visitation, the sum of ten sols tournois, for all said inhabitants of the village of Roule. O8 117 March 17, 1688 Ban on journeymen acting as masters and bringing any merchandise to Paris. To all those whom these present letters will see: Pierre Seguier, chevalier, baron de Saint-Brisson, seigneur des Rueaux, de Saint-Firmain, l'Etang, la Ville et autres lieux, conseiller du roi, gentilhomme ordinaire de la Chambre et garde de la Prévosté de Paris; salut. Scavoir faisons, que sur la requête faite, en jugement devant nous, en la Chambre Civile, au Châtelet de Paris, par maître Nicolas Touxier, procureur des jurés-jardiniers de cette ville de Paris, demandeurs en confirmation, de l'avis du procureur du roi, du jour d'hier, et défendeurs en renvoi allan contre de maître Christophe Gravet, procureur de Germain Rivault, Jean Neveu, Hubert, Lellier, etc., tous compagnons jardiniers, défendeurs et demandeurs en renvoi dudit avis. Parties ouies: We have confirmed the aforementioned notice in accordance with its form and content, and in accordance with the same, we condemn the aforementioned Rivault and consorts, from passing themselves off as and receiving master gardeners in this city of Paris, and until such time, we forbid them to act as masters, nor to bring into this city any merchandise related to the aforementioned trade, under penalty of confiscation and a fine of four hundred livres, and we condemn them to pay the costs. In witness whereof, we have caused these presents to be sealed. Given by us, messire Dreux Daubray, conseiller d'Etat and lieutenant civil of the said Prévôté, holding office on Wednesday March 17, 1655, with collation. April 14, 1688 Arrêt d'enregistrement des lettres patentes du mois de Juin 1645, nonobstant l'opposition des compagnons, dont ils sont déboutés. Veu par la Cour, des lettres patentes du roi, données à Paris, au mois de janvier 1645, signées sur le reply, par le roi : Vabotet et scellées sur lacs de soie du grand sccau de cire verte, obtenues par les maîtres et communauté du métier de jardinier en la ville, faubourgs, banlieue, Prévôté et Vicomté de Paris, pour lesquels, ledit seigneur après avoir fait voir en son conseil, the privileges and statutes confirmed by letter of the late King Henry the Great, together with the registration decree and receipt of finance, by them paid, for said confirmation, would have confirmed and approved said privileges and statutes, to be enjoyed, by them and their successors to said gardener's trade; fully, peaceably and perpetually, and all as they enjoy, well and duly used, enjoy and still use at present, so and as more at length is carried by the said letters to the addressing Court. Lettres de surannation desdites lettres du 9 septembre 1654, lesdits statuts du 15 octobre 1599, et lettres de confirmation d'iceux, du mois de novembre ensuivant, et registrées en parlement le 17 avril 1600, et autres pièces attachées sous le contre scel, Arrêt de la Cour du 13 mars 1655, rendu sur l'opposition de Nicolas Louvet, Claude Givery, Nicolas Coipel et consorts, tous compagnons jardiniers de la ville et faubourgs de Paris, portant que sans en avoir égard, il sera passé outre à l'enregistrement desdites lettres; conclusions of the King's Attorney General, and all considered. The Court has ordered and decrees that the said letters shall be registered at the clerk's office of this court, in order for the said impetrants to enjoy the effect contained therein according to their form and content, as they have duly enjoyed and used, still enjoy and use, and the present judgment shall be executed by virtue of the extract of the same. Fait au Parlement, le 14 avril mil-six-cent-cinquante-cinq. Signed, DU TILLET. June 22, 1088 Jurés-jardiniers forbidden to prevent bourgeois and compaguons-jardiniers from bringing their léqumes to the market. Between the jurés and the community of master gardeners of the city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris. Plaintiffs in petition of November 26, 1655, on the one hand; and Pierre Tardu, Mathieu Martin, Thomas Mobbel, Jean Poisson and other journeymen gardeners of the said city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris, defendants. And between the said journeymen gardeners of the said city, suburbs and suburbs, plaintiffs at the request of the third of July in the said year 1655, and the said jurés and community of the said maîtres 28 jardiniers of the said city and suburbs of Paris, defendants, on the other hand. Considered by the Court, the petition of the third of July and request of the said journeymen gardeners, that they be received as opponents to the execution of the rulings of the preceding March 10 and April 14, obtained by the said jurors and community of master gardeners, against Nicolas Louvet and several other journeymen of the said city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris. That the contradictory rulings of the said Court and Council of April 13, 1641, January 16, June 21 and October 14, 1644 be executed: The aforementioned jurors and the community of the aforementioned master gardeners are forbidden to prevent, in the future, those who have gardens, owners and companion gardeners and other persons from bringing, selling herbs, vegetables and other plants, both at the halles and in the public squares of this city of Paris, under penalty of a thousand pounds in fines and all costs, damages and interest. The aforementioned petition of November 26 and request of the aforementioned jurors and community of master gardeners; that they be received as opponents to the execution of the decrees of July 24 and September 11 above; and granting the aforementioned opposition, the defenses brought by the aforementioned, lifted; and consequently, without stopping at the precedents obtained by the said journeymen gardeners, nor at the rulings of opposition set out in the said request, the statutes and rulings of verification, sentence and registration of the said rulings, executed according to their form and content, and following the said rulings, iterative prohibitions made to the said plaintiffs, and to all other private individuals to contravene them and to bring, sell, or debit any vegetables, grass, greenery, plants, trees, shrubs and flowers at the halles, markets and other public places in Paris, on Wednesday and Saturday market days, subject to daily inspection by the said jurors of the said merchandise of the said defendants, and other persons, on pain of confiscation, fine, costs, damages and interest, excepting the bourgeois owners who had their marshes and gardens in their hands, and other owners and gardeners in the surrounding areas, paying taille to the king, in respect of whom the said plaintiffs did not intend to prejudice, or form any impediment. on condition that the said jurors be visited daily in the markets and other public places, and four times a year in the said gardens and marshes of the said defendants in this city, suburbs and suburbs of Paris, and to pay them the ordinary and customary duties for the contravention, disturbance and impediment caused by the said 4006 defendants, who would be fined as much as was reasonable, and ordered to pay the costs. Ruling of April 14 last, given during the pleading, by which it is said to have been ordered that the parties should place their requests and documents in the hands of Maître Nicolas Ferrand, Court Counselor, to be granted their rights without foreclosure or service of request. Production of the parties, conclusions of the King's Attorney General, and yes, the report of the aforementioned advisor. All considered. The aforementioned Court has received and receives the aforementioned journeymen gardeners, opponents to the execution of the aforementioned rulings of March 20 and April 14; in so doing, orders that the contradictory rulings of April 13, 1641, January 16, June 21 and October 14, 1644, be executed; repeatedly forbids the said jurors and community of master gardeners to contravene them and to prevent garden owners, journeymen gardeners and other persons from bringing grass, vegetables and other plants to the markets and public squares, under penalty of a thousand pounds fine; and consequently, at the request and demand of the said jurors and community of master gardeners, has put the parties out of court and out of trial, without costs. Pronounced in Parliament, on June 22nd, one thousand six hundred and fifty-eight. Signed: GuYoT. May 14, 1661 Les jurés jardiniers maintenus dans le droit de visiter quatre fois l'année les marais et jardins, tant des maîtres que des compagnons. Entre les jurés et communauté des maîtres jardiniers de la ville, faubourgs et banlieue de cette ville de Paris, demandeurs en requête de 29 juillet 1658, 17 juin 1659, d'une part; et Pierre Tardu, Mathieu Martin, Thomas Habel et d'autres compagnons jardiniers de cette ville de Paris, demandeurs, d'autre part.  herbages, greens, plants, trees, shrubs at the halles, markets and 108 other public places in Paris, than on market days of Wednesdays and Saturdays, subject to daily inspection by said jurors and on said merchandise of said companions, under penalty of confiscation, fine ct costs, damages and interest, except for and excepting the bourgeois and landowners, who keep their gardens and marshes by their hands, and other gardeners and landowners of surrounding places, and paying taille to the king; in respect of which the said jurors do not intend to prejudice, nor form any impediment to the charge of visiting the said jurors, daily in the markets, and other places and public squares, four times a year, in the said marshes and gardens of the said companions of the city and suburbs of Paris, and to pay them the ordinary and customary duties, for the contradictious, disturbances and impediments made by the said companions, whom they will have fined and ordered to pay costs, on the one hand, and the said Tardu, Martin, Habel and other companions of the city and suburbs of Paris, on the other. Plaintiffs and defenders in request dated July 3, 1655, that they be accepted as opponents to the execution of the rulings of March 24 and April 4, obtained by the said jurors and community of master gardeners. Encounter of Nicolas Louisel and several other journeymen of the said city and suburbs; this doing that the contradictory rulings of the Council of April 13, 1612, January 16, June 21 and October 14, 1644, will be executed; forbid the said jurors and community of master gardeners to prevent in the future, those who would have gardens, owners and companion gardeners, and other persons from bringing, selling herbs, vegetables, and other plants, both at the market halls and in other public places of this city, by which the said companion gardeners would have been received as opponents to the execution of the said rulings of March 20 and April 11, in so doing, order that the contradictory rulings of April 14, 1641, January 16, June 21 and October 14, 1644, be executed, iteratively forbidding the said juries of master gardeners to contravene and prevent garden owners, journeymen gardeners and other persons from bringing their herbs and vegetables and other plants to the markets and public squares, on pain of a thousand pound fine; consequently; on the motion and request of said jurors and community of master gardeners; the parties out of Court and out of trial. The said requests of the said masters and community : the first, of July 29, 1658, to the effect that, by interpreting the judgment of the said day, June 22, in the said year, they be maintained and kept in the right of inspection; in so doing, the journeymen, of the said trade, condemned to suffer it four times 500 a year, in their gardens and marshes, in accordance with the judgments, and to pay the ordinary duties, and to give notice to the said jurés and commnnauté to the effect that they offer, to do two of them free of charge, and that they restrict themselves to ten sols, for each of the said two others; that of June 17, 1659, to the effect that i by interpreting and explaining the said ruling of June 22, the said plaintiffs were given notice that they were to restrict themselves to making two visits per year to the gardens and marshes of both the masters and journeymen of the said trade in the said city and suburbs of Paris, paying ten sols for each, as is customary, so that the masters would retain the mark of mastery of the said trade. Ruling of August 30, 1659, ordering the parties to place their petitions and documents in the hands of Maître Michel Ferrand, Court Counselor, to be heard without foreclosure or service of petition. Production of the parties, contradictions respectfully provided by them. Conclusions of the King's Attorney General. Yes, the report of the aforementioned advisor, and all considered. Dit a été : que ladite Cour faisant droit sur lesdites demandes en interprétation dudit arrêt du 22 juin 1658, a maintenu et gardé, maintient et garde les maîtres jardiniers au droit de visite quatre fois l'année, dans les marais et jardins, tant des maîtres jardiniers, que compagnons de la ville, faubourgs et autres lieux de cette ville, dont ils seront payés de deux à raison de cinq sols chacune visite, ct seront tenus de faire les deux autres gratuitement sans frais, et au surplus sera ledit arrêt du 22 juin exécuté selon la forme et teneur, sans dépens. Pronounced in Parlement, on March 14, one thousand six hundred and sixty-one. Signed, by collation, ROBERT. These various lawsuits provide ample evidence of the community's interest in asserting its privileges: they also demonstrate the no less active interest of the companions in reacting against these privileges. It has been said that the organization of workers' communities was part of the feudal system of the Middle Ages. So, when the great reformer Calvin came to preach his doctrines in Paris in the 16th century, they disrupted the existence of the old communities, which set out to maintain the use of courteous arms between industrial competitors; they were violently opposed by the Paris bourgeoisie, who represented them. After the Edict of Nantes, the king obliged tradesmen to accept several religionists, as they called them, into their ranks. The aim of the authorities, in imposing these men on the various organized guilds, was undoubtedly to force them to obey an order from the king, to ensure the supremacy of the Catholic Church. As these religionists were the most literate, this gave them much greater authority over their fellow members. Despite this, many men in the communities, already enlightened and with a certain independence, preferred to go into exile and take their industries to foreign countries, rather than bow to this arbitrary act (1. This unfortunate act cost our country dearly, says Michelet. The act of revocation was signed by the king on October 16, 1685. On October 19, the Paris police brutally told the tradesmen that they had to convert immediately. They were terrified, but raised no objections. The king thought it was all over, and on the 20th authorized Protestants to assemble for a joint declaration of conversion. Those who resisted were looted and robbed, and some were murdered. Women in particular, whose freedom of conscience is even stronger than that of men, had to endure the most odious outrages. Many of them, to force them to give in, were locked up in the convent of the Nouvelies Catholiques, and subjected to all the horrors that an undisciplined soldiery is capable of inflicting on a woman who is handed over to them bound hand and foot. Surely some of our old grandmothers must have suffered these outrages. Whereas before these ridiculous constraints, which had nothing to do with trades, the groups of citizens who made up the ancient communities, constantly in touch with each other through common interests (1) Michelet, Histoire de France. 10, drew up their own little code, and the state intervened only to approve their decisions, taken among peers, and to reap a certain profit from them. Despite the abuses that these societies perpetuated for their own benefit, and which the Revolution did away with by proclaiming individual freedom, it can be said that they had a raison d'être, which argues in favor of the time when they subsisted. The masters upheld the rights and privileges that the ancient nature of their guild gave them, or that they had arrogated to themselves by forming organized and recognized communities. It's true that, from time immemorial, people have had to band together to defend their interests effectively. Unfortunately, the interests we support become abused with time and new men. Even so, it's hard to let go of them when they've been enshrined for centuries. To be fair to the old community of master gardeners, it must be said that they had almost relinquished all their privileges by the time the revolution broke out. This abnegation by our old masters in favor of their privileges is proof of the independence of their character and the generosity of their ideas. If not these men, at least their sons, will be found later on, and we will trace the services they rendered to the corporation, by taking the initiative, at their peril, to introduce new crops. The old community also had to support various lawsuits against the regrattier fruit growers, who were organized as a community long before the gardeners. An article in the statutes of the community of grain growers governed the right of gardeners to sell seeds. It's almost certain that both of these industries originated in gardening. In the early centuries, growers sold their products directly to consumers, as the city was sparsely populated and not very large, 28 but gradually, as the population grew and the city gradually expanded, new needs arose. This led to the creation of the specialties we have just mentioned, which were careful to set themselves up as communities, with their statutes approved by the public authorities. Another specialty more closely related to gardeners was the community of bouquetières, whose first statutes are included in Etienne Boileau's livre des métiers. The fashion of adorning oneself with natural flowers was very much in vogue in the Middle Ages. At joyous gatherings, flower chapels were woven and offered to friends. The art of making chapels was a favorite pastime of the grandes dames, and our Parisian ladies were already distinguished by their good taste and genius for innovating everything to do with grooming. At first, florists copied these grand dames, but in time, they quickly became artists in their art. The community was free, exempt from watch and taxes, authorized to work at night at certain times "establi pour servir les gentuez hommes". At this time, they made wreaths of flowers and herbs, and above all chapels of roses, diadems, crowns or circles, much used in processions; they reserved the right to sell bouquets, hats, wreaths and garlands of flowers in the streets and at church doors; anyone contravening these regulations was fined five hundred pounds. During the season, bouquets of violets, roses and carnations could be sold, but not upright. Gardeners sold their flowers only at the IIalles and Quai de la Mégisserie, until eight o'clock in the morning. Flowers had to be fresh, and sales were supervised by community jurors. Acacia was banned from Corpus Christi processions. All flower chapels had to be set against a background of greenery. Statutes of the Chapelières de fleurs inscribed in Etienne Boileau's guestbook. 1° - Quiconques veut estre chappellières de fleurs à Paris, estre le puet franchement, pour tant ce qu'il sache fère le mestier et il ait de coi. 2° - Quiconques est chappellières de fleurs à Paris, il puet ouvrer et fère ouvrer de jours et de nuiz, de fleurs et d'herbes. 3° - Quiconques est chappellières à Paris, il ne puet ouvrer, ne fère ouvrer au jour de dimenche de nul chapel, se ce n'est de chapiaus de roses, tant sculement, tout comme la seson des roses durent; et se le faisoit, il seroit à 5 sols de tournois d'amende à poier au roy. 4° - Nus chappellières de fleurs ne doit ne peut cueillir, ne fère cueillir au jour de dimenche en ses courtuiz; nules herbes, nules fleurs à chapiaus fère ne à mangier, en celle jornée, qu'il ne soit à 5 sols de tournois à poier au roi. 5° - Quiconques est chappellières de fleurs à Paris, il puet porter et faire porter, vendre ses chapiaus à Paris, en quelque lieu qu'i voudra, et à toz les jours de la semaine, pourtant qu'il trouve place wide. 6° - Nus chappelliers de Paris, ne doit nul coustume, nul paage, ne nule droiture de chose nule qu'i vendent, n'en achaptent apartenanz à leur mestier, soit qu'i envairet de dehors la ville, ou qu'i envoit l'dehors la ville, soit sur cheval ou à col. 7° - Nus chappelliers de fleurs de Paris ne doit point de guet, parce que leur mestier est frans et que il fu establi pour servir les gentuiz hommes. 8° - Si prend oume du mestier se sont ascenti, un preud'oume de leur mestier soit mestre du mestier, li ce que preud'oume doit jurer devant le Prévost de Paris, que il le mestier gardera bien et loiaument, et que toutes les mesproustures qu'il saura qui fétes seront u mestier devant dit, que il au Prévost de Paris ou à son commandement fera scavoir au plus tost que il pourra par reson. Article 4 of the statutes sufficiently indicates that the bouquetières were gardeners, as it forbids Sunday flower-picking in the courtyards. The husband, father, brother or any other worker was responsible for growing the flowers in the garden, and the wife for selling them, according to the customs and fashions of the time, exactly as they are today, with the difference that each one organized himself as he saw fit. These statutes were renewed on August 21, 1677, and make it clear that the community is independent of any other. We note in these statutes certain articles that concern the sale of flowers in the olden days, and which are still in use today, notably: flowers in crates or pots must be sold at the Quai aux fleurs and not at the Ilalles Centrales. 1677, August 21 Statuts des bouquetières, in 21 articles, and letters patent from Louis XIV confirming them (1). ARTICLE 1 No woman or girl may become a master flower-maker in this city and suburbs of Paris, unless she has been a master of the said trade, and has made a masterpiece by her own hand, in the manner accustomed from time immemorial, which masterpiece will be given to aspirants by the jurors of the said trade, in the presence of four former bachelors only, who will be called in turn and by order of the roll. (1) René de Lespinasse. ARTICLE 2 No girl or woman shall be admitted to the master's degree unless she has served her apprenticeship with one of the master craftswomen for four years, and then served the master craftswomen for two years; the apprenticeship certificates shall be notarized in the presence of two jurées and duly registered in the chamber of one of the king's attorneys. And apprentices will be required to pay three pounds to the brotherhood's (boète) at the time of the said patent, which will be advanced by the mistress, who will be reimbursed by her apprentice. ARTICLE 3 Before granting masterpieces to aspirants who present themselves for acceptance, the jurors will be required to ascertain their good life and morals at the home of the mistresses with whom they have served their apprenticeship and as companions, and according to the report made to them, may grant or refuse them masterpieces. ARTICLE 4 The aspirants will make their masterpiece with their own hands, in the presence of the jurées and four former bachelières, who, after it has been made and perfected, will report on it and take the aspirant before one of the king's procurators at the Châtelet, to administer the oath and be received by him in the customary manner, and all the mistresses will be warned to come and see the masterpiece, if they so wish, and attend the administration of the oath, but without charge. ARTICLE 5 The aspirant will be required, at the time of her reception, to put ten livres into the confraternity box, pay sixty sols to each of the jurées and thirty sols to each bachelière, and the ordinary costs of justice, without it being permitted to make her pay any other costs, even when they are voluntarily offered, under penalty of fine and restitution of quadruple against the jurées, bachelières and others who may have received them. ARTICLE 6 Daughters of mistresses may be admitted to the master's program without having completed any masterpieces or experiments, provided they have served as apprentices to their mothers or other mistresses for four years, pay only thirty sols into the brotherhood box, and pay half dues to the jurécs by way of recognition. ARTICLE 7 Those who wish to be received by virtue of letters, without having served an apprenticeship, will pay thirty livres into the confraternity box and will be received by making light experiments, and will pay the said jurée fees. ARTICLE8 The right to display and sell all kinds of bouquets, hats, wreaths and flower garlands shall belong solely to the maitresses bouquetières. Any person who is not of the aforementioned quality is forbidden to make or sell any bouquets, nor to resell or peddle them in the streets or at church gates, under penalty of confiscation of their merchandise and a fine of five hundred pounds, half of which will be for the benefit of the King, and the other half for the benefit of the community of maitresse bouquetières. ARTICLE 9 All kinds of persons may nevertheless sell bouquets of violets, roses and carnations during the seasons, as in the past, with the difference that they may not be mixed with any other flowers, nor may they use canetille to decorate and tie them ARTICLE 10 Masters of the community of gardeners may not display or sell their flowers; whether they are picked, or in pots, crates or mannequins, at church doors, or elsewhere, in front of the stores and squares of the master flower sellers; they must bring their picked flowers to the market every weekday, and their flowers in pots, crates or mannequins to the Quai de la Mégisserie on Wednesdays and Saturdays in the usual manner. ARTICLE 11 In order to preserve the freshness of the flowers, gardeners and other inhabitants of the surrounding suburbs and villages who bring them to the halles, will be required to bring them there very early in the morning and sell them immediately, either to the bourgeois, or to the flower sellers, and will be required, after having completed their sale, to withdraw in summer at eight o'clock, and in winter at nine o'clock, with a prohibition on selling flowers after the said time has passed, on pain of confiscation and fine. ARTICLE 12 Flower sellers will be required to use fresh and new flowers in their bouquets; they are forbidden to use old, wilted flowers, or those that have been salted during the summer, under penalty of confiscation and a fine of ten pounds, applicable, etc. ARTICLE 13 Bouquet-makers are similarly forbidden to use any accacia flowers in their bouquets, nor to make any wreaths or flower hats for Corpus Christi or other holidays, unless they put some green underneath, subject to the same penalties as above. ARTICLE 14 Each bouquetière merchant may not have two apprentices at the same time, and so will be required to be content with having only one; may, nevertheless, with the said apprentice, have one or more companions to help them do their work, and the daughters of maitresses whom they have working for them, will not take the place of an apprentice. ARTICLE 15 No mistress may give work to a girl unless she is a mistress, apprentice or companion. All mistresses are forbidden to take away companions who are rented to another mistress, or to give them work, unless they have first asked permission from the said mistress and know that she is satisfied with the said companion. ARTICLE 16 All mistresses of the said trade are forbidden, under the same penalty of a ten pound fine, to meet gardeners and other persons when they bring their flowers to the market, so that they may be sold and quoted among themselves. 4 ARTICLE 17 For the preservation of the aforementioned trade, there will be in the future, as in the past, four jurées, two of whom will be elected each year before one of the King's procurators at the Châtelet, one a woman and the other a girl, as is customary, These jurors will take care to prevent companies that could be made on the aforementioned trade and will make visits to the maitresses, at least four times a year, and will be paid twenty sols for each visit, may nevertheless make a greater number, but will only be paid the right for four visits, per each year. ARTICLE 18 We forbid all persons who are not maitresses of the said trade, to sell flowers or bouquets at church doors, on street corners, or to carry them into the houses of the bourgeois; nor regratiers and coureuses, to peddle them in the streets, and maitresses bouquetières, to have them sold by the said unqualified persons: all under penalty of confiscation and fine both against the one and the other ARTICLE 19 If any mistress, apprentice or companion of the said trade were convicted of misconduct in her honor, she would lose her privilege, and if she were an apprentice or companion, she would be unworthy of attaining the master's degree. ARTICLE 20 During their first year as jurors, the last two jurors will take care of all matters concerning the brotherhood, which they will continue to maintain in the church of Saint-Leufroy, as they did previously, and will have the customary service said there. ARTICLE 21 The community will be composed of women and girls only, and no boy will be allowed to become a master, or to enter into the said trade, or to make or sell bouquets. We forbid all mistresses to give work to any man, nor to have their bouquets sold by them. To these causes, Louis, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all present and future; greetings: Nos chères et bien-aimées les jurées et anciennes bachelières de la communauté des maîtresses bouquetières, chapelières en fleurs de notre bonne ville de Paris, nous ont fait remarquer qu'il y a très longtemps que leur art est établi dans ladite ville de Paris, en communauté et corps de métier, qu'elles ont eu des statuts très anciens qui leuront été accordés par les rois nos prédécesseurs, qui contiennent plusieurs beaux droits et privilèges, pour la perfection et la conservation de leur métier; but that through the passage of time, and the negligence of those who preceded them in the office of juror, the originals of the said statutes have been lost, and whatever diligence the aspirants have been able to make, they have been unable to recover them, in such a way that, although the substitutes preserve among themselves the rules of discipline. that they know have always been observed in their community; that they have continued to maintain their confraternity and the divine service that is customary there, that they still have their juries, their apprenticeships, their visits, as they have had from time immemorial, like other communities, they cannot, nevertheless, retain the rights of their trade, nor prevent the undertakings that are daily made by gardeners and other persons, without quality, on their community, if they are not given a name. To this end, they have collected the old memoirs of their statutes and, in accordance with the custom and tradition of their community, have had new ones drawn up, which they have most humbly begged Us to grant them and order them to execute. And having been informed that this community has been established in our good city of Paris for a very long time, that they have their confraternity established in the church of Saint- Leufroy, where they are accustomed to have services said every Sunday for our prosperity; that they have continued to elect jurors every year, to receive maitresses and to take on apprentices, that it would be unjust for the loss of their statutes, which is more excusable, to cause the ruin of the community and state of those who compose it, the just and innocent means of earning their living and supporting their families. Having also considered that the art of flower girls provides a very pleasant and innocent ornament for people of status, and often even serves pious uses of religion, being used to adorn altars and churches, and that it is in the public interest and of our grace, to preserve all the trades formerly established, and give them a means to support themselves in the true rules of justice and their establishment. 909 To these causes. Donné à Versailles le vingt-et-unième jour d'août, l'an de grâce mil-six-cent-solxante-dix-sept, et de notre règne, le trente-cinquième. These new statutes show that the community of bouquetières is completely outside the gardener's guild, since article ten prohibits gardeners from selling their flowers anywhere other than at the Halles and Quai de la Mégisserie. There is no longer any mention, as in the first statutes, of a ban on Sunday flower-picking in the courtyards. Under Louis XIV, this community consisted solely of flower merchants, not gardeners. The communities of master gardeners, bouquetières and regratiers des fruits esgruns (I) were classified as small trades. In the letters patent of Louis XI. containing the distribution of bourgeois, merchants and artisans, under certain banners, for the guard and safety of the city of Paris, tradesmen are divided into fifty-nine banners, according to the Reverend Father Le Masson, in his calendar of the brotherhoods of Paris. The gardeners occupied the fifty-fifth rank and the other two came after. Each banner had a principal and a sub-principal elected every year on the day after Saint John's Day. They were eligible for re-election and were required to swear an oath of loyalty to the king, and to lead the community in arms in defense of the state and the king. The banner was only to be taken out on the king's orders. It was kept by the principal, or failing him, by the sub-principal. To be eligible for these functions, one had to have been a master for at least six years. The communities of the various trades, part of the feudal organization of the Middle Ages, had their own mottos and arms, like the lords and princes of the church. (1) Sour fruits and vegetables. The coat of arms (1) of the community of master gardeners was Sable, with three garden lilies Argent, stems and leaves Vert, two in chief and one in base, and a chief Azure charged with a sun Or. Its motto, inscribed on a token dated 1556 and belonging to the Monnaie collection, depicts an axe-wielding hand amidst a garland of flowers and fruit, with the legend: Manus, fortis, divitias parat (THE STRONG HAND PREPARES RICHES) The axe, in those days, was as much a gardener's tool as the spade. We have seen in their statutes that the masterpiece required to be admitted to the master's program would today represent the work of a trellis-maker rather than a gardener. On another token, which appears to have been made when the community renewed and completed its statutes in 1599, and which became the actual legislation governing the gardener's trade until the Revolution, is written in exergue. Egestatemo, perata est manus remissa (NOVEMBER 1599) In a short work by Mr. Georges Gibault on the former community of master gardeners, published in the Journal de la Société d'Horticulture de France, February 1896, we note the festivals attended by the community in common with the communities of other trades. The pompous procession that preceded the King of France on his solemn entry into Paris was always a great feast for Parisians, and a magnificent sight to behold. The king usually spent the night at the priory of Saint-Ladre (1) Depping, Livre des Métiers. at the top of the faubourg Saint-Denis. At eight o'clock in the morning, placed on a platform, he saw the delegates of his good city parade before him: at the head the mendicant monks, then the clergy of the parishes, then the university followed by its rector, finally the bodies of the city i.e. richly costumed men, chosen from the various trades; some carried with them, either the tools or the insignia of their profession; the others organized militarily in the company of pikemen and harquebusiers, marching seven by seven with fifes and tambourines, all clad in engraved and gilded helmets and cuirasses. The procession then accompanied the king to Notre-Dame (1), through streets adorned with triumphal arches, decorated by the hands of the greatest artists. On June 16, 1549, there were fifty (2) gardeners at the entrance of King Henri II, where the contingent of each of the most powerful guilds reached eighty, while others had only five members in their ranks. The Provost of Paris set the contingent for each trade in the absolutely binding summons he sent to its leaders, and equipping the men was a heavy burden; (3) "and to provide for the fraiz, will be able to compel all those of the said mestier, both in the city and in the suburbs, the strong carrying the weak, etc.". In 1610, when Queen Marie de Médicis was due to enter the town, the gardeners were to provide twenty-six men. Together with the millers, turners, basket makers, etc., they formed a company of one hundred and sixty-four men, commanded by a captain, Sieur Mailly, a lieutenant and an ensign, both shoemakers. The company was therefore made up entirely of small tradesmen, occupying the lowest rank in the classification of trade categories. (1) Entrée de Charles IX dans Paris. (2) Histoire générale de Paris. t. 1. (3) Registre de la Ville, folio 102. 006 La Communauté des maîtres jardiniers had its office on rue des Rosiers, now part of the third arrondissement of Paris. This was more or less where they lived in the 16th century, and where their numbers were greatest. After this social and corporate account of our ancestors, it remains for us to talk about the brotherhoods. Detixed ? GOC DES ANCIENS JARDINIERS A foreigner who took a mercenary into his service, under Charlemagne, paid him three gold sous per year, 270 francs, or 0 fr. 74 per day. Needless to say, this man and his family could only eat oat bread, and not every time they were hungry(t). The polyptych of Saint-Remy de Reims (information on our ancestors' way of life in this remote era can only be found in these precious documents) sets the price of nine days' work at four deniers: 9 fr. 40, or around 1 fr. 05 per day, after the year 800. This is already a small increase on the previous example. On this subject, I'd like to borrow from my excellent friend, Mr. Georges Gibault, a little pamphlet he published in the Journal de la Société d'Horticulture de France, entitled: La condition et les salaires des anciens jardiniers. This little work is very conscientiously done, and required a great deal of research on the part of its author. It deserves to be quoted in full. If we reserve the name of horticulturist for the cultivator of plants destined for the trade, as correctness demands, all that remains to designate the horticultural professional in general is the vague term gardener; an unfortunate word if ever there was one, since it has created a regrettable confusion between the man of art truly worthy of the name and the laborer who calls himself a gardener. Indeed, the general public, always superficial, is all too unaware of the difference between the various categories of people uniformly referred to as "gardeners". However, some are eminent scholars, artists and authors; others are often distinguished specialists in a most difficult profession; as for the science of simple gardeners' helpers, it's limited to handling the spade and watering can. There can be no doubt that the ill-defined name of gardener, and the resulting disadvantageous comparison for the able practitioner, may have contributed to fixing the latter in a condition inferior to his real merit. Gardening already had against it the old prejudices that discredited work on the land; moreover, the majority of gardeners personally attached to the service of a master, found themselves placed on the fringes of domesticity, less favored than craftsmen and other tradesmen whose nature of their work made them more independent. Are these not the main causes of the current inferiority of the gardening profession? Indeed, while most tradesmen have always followed an upward trend towards a higher social status and better material conditions, gardeners have not been so happy. We must hope that the future will remedy this injustice. A great step will be taken in this direction when the gardener's merit is better known; when we can better appreciate the amount of intelligence and the variety of knowledge required by a profession for which too many people profess only the very relative esteem accorded to purely manual trades. p09 It is probable that the most ancient civilized peoples, such as the Egyptians and Assyrians, already distinguished gardeners from farmers. Tomb paintings prove that Egypt, two or three thousand years before our era, had pushed the luxury of gardens very far, whose cultivation certainly required special workers (1). The Romans used only slave labor to cultivate their gardens. Wealthy Romans owned and employed slaves of all professions, from teachers to shoemakers and gardeners, for their personal service. As a result of advances in gardening, the latter were already specialized: hortulanus seems to indicate, in the texts, the gardener in general, often also the flower gardener; olitor, which took its name from olus, vegetable, took care of the vegetable garden, and topiarius or artist gardener, took care of the decoration of pleasure gardens. In a familiar letter, Cicero wrote: "I have paid a compliment to your gardener decorator (topiarius), who has covered the entire main building with ivy, from the base to the terrace (2)". Topiarii and viridarii were particularly skilled at pruning green trees into the extravagant shapes that were so popular. Under their skilful hands, Yew and Boxwood were transformed into figures of beasts and various objects, while Rosemary and Alexandria Laurel (Ruscus hypoglos- sum) drew in huge letters the name of the gardener or that of the owner. According to Pliny and other authors, these singularities were among the main attractions of beautiful gardens at the time. Because of their highly appreciated talents, topiaries appear to have been treated with some consideration. "... There are certain slaves," says (1) Perrot et Chipiez. Histoire de l'Art dans l'antiquité, t. I, fig. 256, 257, 259, 260. (2) Cicero. Ad. Q. III, 1. Cicero, like the stewards and gardeners (topiarii), who consider themselves far above the rest... (1) ". During the first period of the Middle Ages, the gardener was found only in abbeys. Monasteries were the main centers of civilized life. They preserved the faint remnants of the arts, sciences and letters that had escaped barbarism. As the monastic rule imposed manual labor almost everywhere, gardening was in the limelight. A monk, who was one of the abbey's principal officers, was responsible for overseeing the cultivation of crops; he took the title of hortulanus or gardinarius (2); at the same time, he oversaw the orchards, vineyards and ponds; it was his duty to ensure the decoration of the church with appropriate flowers (3). To carry out the work, he employed religious courtilliers (curticularii) (4); he also had recourse to the corvées owed by the abbey's serfs (5). It's only in the 14th and 15th centuries that the documents preserved in the archives, especially the expense accounts, which are of such great help in understanding private life in the Middle Ages, begin to shed some light on the living conditions of the ancient gardeners. The first forerunners of our modern gardeners to appear in history were, of course, the gardeners of the great lords. The insecurity of feudal times meant that only kings and princes could establish which(1) Cicero, Paradox. v, 2. (2) Gardener; word derived from the Germanic Gartem or Garden meaning garden. (3) Alicia Amherst. A History of Gardening in England, 2nd ed. p. 10 ff. (4) Jardiniers; from courtil, still used in some provinces to designate the cultivated enclosure next to the dwelling. (5) B. Guérard. Polyptique de l'abbé Irminon, t. 1, p. 631. the outskirts of their manors or in the fortified outbuildings of castles. As a result, the documents we're talking about come mainly from the royal house of France, the powerful and sumptuous house of Burgundy, the archbishops of Rouen, King René of Anjou and other high-ranking personalities. The already great luxury began to extend to the gardens. Appropriate decoration was needed to harmonize them with the sumptuousness of the homes, furniture and clothing. As a result, from the 13th century onwards, courtyards and vineyard trellises were being built around wealthy residences. The préau, which gave rise to the modern parterre, was a lawn with geometric lines, adorned with shrubs and flowers and surrounded by grass seats. In the following century, this primitive parterre was embellished with carpentry arbors and luxurious pavilions built on artificial mounds. Then came labyrinths, trees pruned in the ancient tradition, grottoes, parquet floors and compartments. The gardening profession thus seems to have originated in the need for special men capable of adorning pleasure gardens with certain accessories which today are more the domain of landscape architects and the horticultural industry. Depending on the taste of the day, the gardener raised the clod (1) to make the courtyards, carpentry work was carried out to build rustic pavilions, trellises and arbors, green trees were sculpted and compartments were designed. Until the 17th century, the gardener seems to have been more a "trellis-maker", a garden decorator than a plant grower. In 1599, the masterpiece required by the old guild of Parisian gardeners for admission to the master's degree program still consisted of simple char(1) Sod removed with a spade. 08 penterie work. The axe was then considered the main emblem of the gardener's trade, quite distinct, it seems, from the vegetable-grower's trade in the Maîtres-Jardiniers-Préoliers-Maraïchers guild (1). If we consider that almost all of our ornamental plants were introduced recently or not very long ago, and that horticulture was in its infancy in those distant days, with neither the pruning of fruit trees nor the art of early produce, we will be less surprised to see the cultivation of many large gardens requiring only the temporary labor of simple field workers. In 1302, in Picardy, Countess Mahaut d'Artois kept "three valleys busy weeding roses" for three days (2). In 1311, she hired laborers to plant "mesliers (Néfliers) pumiers, peskiers, francs-mouriers...". (3). A large hospital, that of Hesdin (Pas-de-Calais), employed only day laborers: Year 1326 "Pour I ouvrier qui fouy les aires (qui laboure les planches" udit gardin par (pendant) v jours..." Year 1333, "pour fouyr les aires et espandre le fiens (manure), II povres vallets, cascun (chacun) XXVI journées et demi..." (4). The head gardener's auxiliaries, hired on a yearly basis, were not employed on a permanent basis either, and were also paid a daily wage. Alicia Amherst notes the same situation in England in A History of Gardening in England (2nd ed., pp. 104-105). Garden decoration was, as we have seen, reserved for the gardener himself, and was most often carried out by the gardener¡1) "L'ancienne corporation des Maitres-Jardiniers", in Jour. Soc, nat. d'Hort. de France, 1896, p. 163. (2) Archives du Pas-de-Calais, A. 177. (3) Idl. A. 281. (4) J. M. Richard. Cartulaire de l'hôpital Saint-Jean en l'Estrée d'Arras. 19 vent par marché, i.e. by the company, or by the task. The expense accounts tell us, in some detail, what the former gardeners' trays consisted of. To give an idea, we'll reproduce a few items from the accounts of the intendants or receivers: Expenses incurred by Countess Mahaut d'Artois, for the upkeep of the gardens of her manors, from 1305 to 1320: To Jehan de la Vingne, to reloier (work) the car carré). des groseilliers du praiel préau de la salle Madame et rehauchier ledit car et pour toutes les hayes drechier et loier et pour les Vingnes (Vines) tailler et pour refaire et wasonner (gazonner) les sièges du praiel..." (!). (!). Expenses incurred for the gardens of the Louvre, during the years 1362-1371 (2): "A Jean Baril, pour avoir faict une motte de terre et de poulce (3) et dessus un paveillon à treilles, lozengié et armorié des armes du roy, de la Royne et de Nosseigneurs de France et faictun pont-levis; pour merrien (bois de charpente) osier et peines de tout ce : XXXVI I. p." "To Jean Dudoy, for having made and delivered ez jardins du Louvre, ce qui ensuit: To wit: VIII hottées de fiens fumier) et fouy (labouré) une grande place de terrc... osté et porté hors les mauvaises herbes avec les pierres et les gravois, et esdits jardins faict plusieurs carreaux de sauge, exope (hysope), lavende, coq (Balsamita suaceoleins), fraisiers violiers (Giroflées), et plantés oignons de liz et rosiers vermeux (vermeil) doubles et plusieurs autres bonnes herbes que il a quis; par marchié faict : XXIIII I. p. " (1) Archives du Pas-de-Calais, A. 330. (2) Bibl. de l'Arsenal, Manuscrit n° 6362, fe 43yo et fe Glyo. (3) Poussière, i.e. added earth. This artificial mound offers a certain analogy with the mound on mount, erected in the old English gardens to serve as a viewpoint. (Expenses incurred during the years 1389-1509, in the gardens of Château de Déville, belonging to the archbishops of Rouen: "Pour faire et planter de Lavende le gardin des galleries devers la chambre de Monseigneur, à Jean Courtin, 5 journées à 2 sous par jour; pour loisanges (treillage) et oisier (osier), pour faire une haie de vergues, de paux (pieux) et d'espines..."). (1). "Pour avoir coupé, latté, plié, lié et tourbé (2) la tonnelle dedans et dehors, 4 livres tournois (3)". The very frequent employment of women in garden cultivation is noteworthy. This is nothing out of the ordinary; in fact, many women still take part in the hard work in the fields today. In those days, women took on the menial tasks of gardening. Weeding and picking flowers and aromatic herbs, whose importance in the domestic economy was singularly great in the past, were mainly reserved for them. In the 14th century, in the gardens of the Château de Rouvres, belonging to the Dukes of Burgundy, women carried manure, earth and sand in baskets and on their heads. In March, the accounts show that two quarters of strawberry plants are being planted in the "jardin Madame"; young girls are busy with this work, as well as with the "esboicher" of lavender. A quarter of land is "reffouit" to plant Aulx; the men make the rays and the women plant; and the girls are busy weeding "toulz les fraisiers du jardin Madame, hoster l'erbe et ordure, nettoyer et sarcler le lis et l'osilctte"; they then pick the seeds of "pourros, blettes, parsley": they rastellent (rake) the sown beds (4). (1) Archives de la Seine-Inférieure, G. 438. (2) Sod or clod, patch of turf removed with a spade. (3) Archives de la Seine-Intérieure, G. 490. (4) E. Picard. Les Jardins du Chateau de Rouvres au XIVe siècle. weeding was done by women in the old gardens. What's more unusual is to see real women gardeners employed as heads of cultivation in royal houses. Under Louis XIV, the practice was commonplace at Versailles, the Tuileries and the Château de Saint-Germain. An earlier example can be found at Charles V's usual residence, the Hôtel Saint-Paul in Paris, as witnessed by a payment order dated 1362: "A Jehanne la Bouchière, concierge et jardinière de noz jardins de Saint-Mor (1) et de nos hostel d'emprès SainctPaul-lès-Paris, vous bailliez.... the sum of thirty-six livres on what li is or could be due because of the works she has done and is doing from day to day in our said garden (2)". We can assume that, despite her gender, Jeanne la Bouchière possessed the qualities that make an excellent gardener: hard work, order and good taste, since her services were so highly appreciated. Later, when Charles V extended his Hôtel Saint-Paul, a gardener was needed. In 1377, we find the first mention of a gardener named Jehannin for this royal residence, who received a salary of 140 francs that year (3). Another of Charles V's gardeners earned 60 écus a year. This brings us to the difficult question of valuing, in modern money, the salaries of these gardeners of past centuries; a valuation that can only be approximate, for while on the one hand we can know the intrinsic value of ancient coins, which is determined by weight and title, on the other hand we can only guess at their value in terms of money. (1) Hôtel enclavé dans la propriété royale, whose buildings and gardens entirely covered the present-day Saint-Paul district. (2) Bibl. nationale, Mss. fonds fr. 25,701, n° 195. (3) L. Delisle. Mandements de Charles V. 6C 3 The same cannot be said for the power of money, in other words, the purchasing power of money (1). However, despite the varying assessments of historians and economists on the relative value of ancient currencies, it is generally agreed that free labor was well paid in the Middle Ages. The gardener's situation must not have been bad, any more than that of other workers. The scarcity of labor, due to the small size of the population, kept wages high - a reaper, for example, earned around 5 francs a day in our currency in 1200. - But the reign of Louis XII saw the peak of high wages. With the growth of the population and the discovery of America, wages began to fall steadily, while the price of basic necessities rose. As a result, due to the low price of food and basic necessities, the worker of the Middle Ages was happier than the worker of the Ancien Régime, and even than the worker of the first half of this century. A gardener who was paid 3.50 francs a day in the 14th century received only 2.10 francs in the 16th. Employed on a year-round basis, such servants were paid 330 francs in 1490, and 227 francs a century later (2). Today, leaving aside those of the privileged, gardeners' salaries range from 1,100 to 2,400 francs a year, with accommodation but without food. They must always have varied according to eircumstances; perhaps the differences were even more appreciable in the past, but it is impossible to account for them exactly because of the difficulty we have mentioned of knowing the relative value of money. In 1314, a "gardigner" of Countess Mahaut d'Artois (1) To assess the value of old coins, we follow the tables drawn up by Mr. G. d'Avenel in his Histoire économique de la propriété. (2) G. d'Avenel "Paysans et ouvriers depuis sept siècles", in Revue des Deux-Mondes; 1896, p. 601, 611, 844. O8 received 18 livres a year and a "robe", i.e. a garment (2). As the livre tournois was then worth (3 fr. 40 and the purchasing power of money four times greater than today, these seemingly modest wages represented a sum of 1,000 francs of our currency. According to accounts compiled by M. E. Picard, the wages of Maître Jehan, one of the Duke of Burgundy's gardeners, amounted to 60 francs in 1372; he also received 30 francs from the Duchess for the upkeep of the "jardin Madame". In this garden, gallantly reserved for the mistress of the house, roses, flowers and aromatic plants were cultivated for many domestic uses: flower hats, jonchées, the manufacture of perfumes and eau de toilette. Sweets, of course, were not forgotten, as strawberry plants played an important role. Payments in kind were customary at the time. In 1338, gardeners at the aforementioned Château de Rouvres took on the upkeep of the gardens for the company. The contract stipulated that they would receive certain products in kind: "XII aunes de drap et III émines de froment." Under a contract signed with Gillet Desportes on August 18, 1453, this gardener-eoncierge undertook to guard the manor of Chanzé, belonging to René d'Anjou, and to maintain the gardens for 10 livres a year (about 180 francs today), plus 2 pipes of wine, 1 pig, and 6 setiers of rye (1). In 1375, Amiot Arnaut, receiver of Philippe-le-Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, noted in his accounts: "To the gardener of the Seigneur de la Rivière, for the gift that Monseigneur li made when he came to enjoy the gardens of the said Seigneur: I franc". In 1384, the new petits Pois appeared on May 17, and "Jean du Jardin" re(1) Archives du Pas-de-Calais, A. 315. (2) A. Lecoy de la Marche. Extraits des comptes et mémoriaux du roi René, p. 103. On this occasion, Q received 16 sous as a gift from the Duke of Burgundy (1). Considering the obscure workers whose memory we are recalling, it seems that they must have occupied a very modest place in the society of their time. From the 16th century onwards, however, we see a number of people who have risen far above their predecessors, despite being called gardeners themselves. The great movement produced by the Renaissance brought about a renewal in architecture and, consequently, in the art of gardening. The gardener-artist appeared at this time, intent on creating a setting around the chateau or bourgeois residence that highlighted the architectural lines of the edifice, while delighting the eye with decoration executed according to the fashion of the day. Among those garden designers who were the predecessors of Le Nôtre and La Quintinie, and whose names are virtually unknown, is Pierre de Mercolienne. He was Louis XII's principal gardener, taking the title of Doyen du Plessis, gardener to the king. He received 116 livres 5sols (approx. 1600 francs) for his fees from January to July 1506, when he laid out and planted the gardens of the Château de Gaillon, owned by the cardinal minister, Georges d'Amboise (2). In the 16th century, gardeners and hydraulic engineers from Italy were highly regarded. In 1570, Bernard de Caruesse, "intendant des plants du jardin des Thuilleries", was in charge of the garden's planting and upkeep, receiving a salary of 400 livres a year (around 3,800 francs) (3). Another Italian family, the Francini, was called to France by Henri IV; for almost two centuries, its members directed the construction of the (1) Mémoires de l'Académie des sciences, arts et belles-lettres de Dijon, 1858-59, p. 112. (2) A. Deville. Comptes de dépenses de la construction du château de Gaillon, p. 86. (3) Léon de Laborde. Les comptes des bâtiments du roi (1528-1571), t. II, p. 348. D0 caves, water distribution and elevation in the royal parks. According to the information provided by the Comptes des bâtiments du roi, the organization of work in the royal gardens was based on the entrepreneurial principle. A plant and garden steward appears to have exercised general supervision. Most often, he was a designer of embroidered and compartmentalized flowerbeds. Next in line were the regular gardeners. Each was assigned to a specific department, and was responsible for the upkeep or, to use the official term, "maintenance" of part of the garden, in return for an annual allowance. A commitment (1) determined the obligations of the person entrusted with the upkeep of the flowerbeds, orangeries, fruit trees, paths and palisades. Palisades were the name given to the straight hedges or walls of greenery made up of pruned trees or shrubs: hornbeam, yew, boxwood, etc., which lined the paths in the old French gardens. In 1541, "Quentin l'African, dit le More", whose name fairly indicates a foreign origin, was responsible for maintaining the garden of the Enclos de l'Etanq, at the Fontainebleau palace. The payment order concerning him (2) grants him 240 livres per year, both for his wages and for the cultivation costs and salary of his assistants. The royal scribe also reminded him that he must not sell or give away any of the garden's produce; he could only take what he needed. The administration of the kings of France was singularly paternal to the servants of the royal estates. Under these conditions, the gardener's job became a kind of function or office that was passed on in survivorship (1) J. Guiffrey. Comptes des bâtiments du roi sous Louis XI)', t. I, p. 806. (2) Léon de Laborde. Les comptes des bâtiments du roi (1528-1571), t. I, p. 175. 208 from father to son. Dynasties of gardeners thus succeeded one another right up to the end of the monarchy, at the Louvre, Fontainebleau, Château de Saint-Germain and other locations. Let's just mention the Saguières and Nivelon families, whose names already appear in the Comptes des bâtiments du roi in the 16th century. The Mollets succeeded one another from father to son at the Louvre and the Tuileries. The Bouticourt family were caretaker-gardeners at the Palais-Royal. The La Lande family was so numerous in Saint-Germain that it's hard to distinguish the different members of the family (t). The principle of survivorship in the position of royal gardener was so well established that it extended to the widow, sons-in-law and even unmarried daughters of the deceased gardener. As a result of this singular practice, many women were entrusted with the direction of a crop or maintenance, in the gardens of Louis XIV's châteaux. According to the Comptes des bâtiments, Françoise Lenostre, from the family of the famous garden designer and widow of Simon Bouchard, was in charge of the Orangerie des Tuileries around 1665, after her husband's death: her daughters succeeded her in this role in 1672. In the same garden, in 1667, the widow Carbonnel was entrusted with the upkeep of various paths and palisades. At Fontainebleau, the widow Debray was responsible for half of the large parterre known as the Tybre; the widow Le Fèvre was responsible for the fruit trees (2). At the Château de Saint-Germain, in 1681, three gardeners' widows were employed in the same capacity. In 1749, Sieur Boisvinet "and his mother" were in charge of the Chancellerie and Chenil gardens at Versailles, while the widow Pimpare tended the garden at Plessis-les-Tours, an old (1) J. Guiffrey. Comptes des bâtiments du roi sous Louis XIV, t. I, p. XL. (2) J. Guiffrey. Comptes des bâtiments du roi sous Louis XIV, t. I, p. 74, 147, 214, 654, 750. C château inhabited by Louis XI. and probably quite neglected at the time (1). The traditional love of the job was a characteristic trait of the old gardeners. Usually, in provincial châteaux, the care of the garden did not leave the same family, as long as the lineage of these devoted servants lasted (2). They were no longer privileged; they fell into the category of gardeners known as "bourgeois house gardeners", a category that became numerous with the development of wealth in the middle class. Records of these modest gardeners became commonplace from the 17th century onwards. But it's mainly in notaries' minute books, so rich and so little explored, that researchers can find traces of their existence (3). In those days, gardeners were employed by private individuals for a period of varying length, and their employment was enshrined in a notarial deed. Today, lack of job stability, the independent spirit of employers and employees, and other factors have led to the abandonment of old customs and practices. However, some provinces have retained the use of year-round rental contracts for domestic servants and farm workers. Among so many acts of this kind, a contract from 1583 seems typical enough for us to dispense with citing others: "On April 10, 1583, according to a contract signed in Paris, with Bergeon, notary: Bernardin Prévost, knight, king's advisor, etc., and his wife Madeleine Potier, made the following agreements with Nicolas Yon, master gardener of Paris: Yon undertakes to cultivate and maintain the adjoining garden (1) L'Etat de la France, par les Bénédictins de Saint-Maur, t. I, p. 402 et 468. (2) A. Rabeau, Les Artisans et les domestiques d'autrefois, p. 307. (3) Louis Morin. Notes sur les jardiniers troyens, in Annales de la Soc. hort. de l'Aube, t. IX, n° 8. 08 to Sieur Prévost's Charenton country house; he undertakes to maintain the borders, supply flower and vegetable seeds, mow, fill and trim the beds and compartments, plow the vegetable gardens in due season, prune and prune the fruit and other trees, clean and rake the paths, maintain the palisades, in a word, keep the garden in good and sufficient condition. The owners are careful to specify which plants are grown on their estate and which must be returned when the contract is terminated or ends. These are, for the borders: Rosemary, Thyme, Lavender, Aspic, Marjoram, Sage, Rue, and IIysope. Roses come in two varieties: white and red. Ornamental and greenhouse shrubs include orange, lemon and pomegranate trees. There's a big difference between "anthés" or grafted orange and lemon trees, and wild ones. Sieur Yon may not touch the products of the former; as for the sauvageons and "pouceuses" (the name given to the cuttings in the deed), he is free to sell them and make use of them, provided he returns the same number when the contract comes to an end. The number of grafted orange trees is not specified in the deed; the wild ones are quite numerous; there are 18 very large ones, 76 in pots and an almost equal number in tubs where they are several together. As an interesting detail, let's note Madame Prévost's reserve of fragrant plant clippings and rose blossoms; she probably used them to make eau de toilette and those ointments and unguents with which all bourgeois homes were abundantly furnished. Mr. Yon would have no right to the fruits either, which were all reserved for the owners, especially the Grapes. The fruit trees formed avenues; Sieur and Madame Prévost reserve the right to increase the number and extent of these avenues as they see fit, without Sieur Yon, who receives no income from them but must nevertheless maintain them, having the right to complain. Finally, the owners reserve the right to take any vegetables and salads they please. The remainder will belong to Sieur Yon, whose share, as we can see, is not very large, since it consists only of the sale of orange and lemon trees (I) that he can produce by cuttings or seedlings, and in what the owners do not want in the way of vegetables. The sieur and dame Prévost sign in fine handwriting, and poor Yontrace struggles underneath with a spade, an instrument of his trade which he undoubtedly knows better than a pen" (2). The conditions, as well as the often multiple and meticulous obligations imposed on gardeners, were bound to vary according to circumstances. Certain deeds illustrate the long duration of commitments to domestic service, and the persistent custom of payment in naturc. In 1638, Louis de Proisy, baron de la Bove, signed an agreement with his gardener, Louis Normand, notary in Bouconville, for the cultivation of his gardens for six years. The gardener will have "6 cartels" of rye per year, a two-month-old pig, the surplus of vegetables not needed for the Lord's kitchen, and half of the apples and pears (3). Other contracts obviously included wages in money; but, as we have already said, the worker's pecuniary situation during the last two centuries was not advantageous, whereas in the past, wages of 2 or 3 sous a day represented, in reality, a daily pay perhaps higher than that of today. (1) It's true that they were very expensive in those days. (2) Magasin pittoresque, 1888, p. 182. (3) Archives de l'Aisne, E. 412. For gardeners employed on a daily basis, we find in Orleans (1), in 1602, salaries of 8 sous (O fr. 95); 12 sous in 1660, or O fr. 97 only, following the gradual lowering of the rate of the monetary unit, the livre tournois, which became the current franc at the time of the Revolution. In Normandy, in 1731, gardener's days cost 20 sous or a livre (O fr. 95) (2) and in 1734, a salary of 6 sous (barely 0 fr. 30) (3). By way of comparison, at the same time and in the same region, a carpenter earned 16 sous, a bricklayer 12 and a washerwoman toiled all day to collect 3 sous. From 1600 to the beginning of this century, the purchasing power of money was, depending on the year, two or three times greater than today. Multiplying the above figures by two or three would give the equivalent in today's money. These were meagre salaries. If we move on to gardeners paid by the year, we see a further extreme diversity in wage rates. In Rouen, in 1669-1685, a gardener at the Jesuit College received 40 livres (60 francs) (4). In the same city, at the Nouvelles-Catholiques convent, wages were 120 livres (177 francs) in 1684 (5). According to a register of wages paid to employees of the Abbey of Saint-Martin-au-Bois, in 1685, Antoine Montigny served as gardener at a wage of 100 livres (118 francs) and food; in 1699, he was reduced to 75 livres a year "if he is given wine, and 105 livres if he is not". In 1721, his successor received (1) Mantellier. Evaluation du prix des denrées à Orléans aux XIVe, XVe et XVIe siècles. (2) Archives de la Seine-Inférieure, D. 440. (3) II. de La Ferrière-Percy. Journal de la comtesse de Sancay, p 98. (4) Archives de la Seine-Inférieure, D. 53. Double or triple these figures, which only indicate the intransigent value, to get roughly the equivalent in today's money. 5) Id. at D. 497. 99 still only 75 livres, and the gardener's assistant is entitled only to food and "something a year to help him maintain himself (1)". In one château, around 1738, the gardener received 100 livres (around 100 francs), while the cook and valet were paid 150 livres and the coachman 120 (2). During the course of the 18th century, other gardeners were paid varying wages of 200, 250, 400 livres, and even 850 livres with food, by a Marquis de la Ferté in 1767. This generous landowner, who paid his gardener so well, granted only 350 livres to the cook, 300 to the valet and 80 to the coachman (3). More favored in terms of wages were the royal gardeners, to whom we referred earlier. According to the Comptes des bâtiments du roi Louis XIV, merit and talent were also rewarded with generous bonuses. La Quintinie's fees amounted to 2,000 livres a year, usually doubled by a bonus of the same amount - 12 to 13,000 francs of our currency. But the elimination of part of the salary was just punishment for negligence and carelessness in service. In these registers, so interesting for the history of gardening under Louis XIV, we read during the year 1679: "To François Francine, for the upkeep of the fountains and grottoes of the Château de Saint-Germain: 1,200 livres; given the decline of most of the grottoes, he will only be paid 800". The widow Bellier, in charge of maintaining the château's vegetable garden, also saw her wages reduced from 600 to 450 livres (4). André Le Nôtre, the great garden architect, received 1,200 livres per year. Charles Mollet, another draughtsman (1) Archives de l'Oise, Il. 382, 406, 407. (2) H. de La Ferrière-Percy, Journal de la comtesse de Sanzay, p. 94. (3) Archives de l'Eure-et-Loir, E. 1668. (4) J. Guiffrey. Comptes des bâtiments du roi sous Louis XIV, t. 1, p. 1221. O8 de parterres, had 1,000 livres. Fleurant, gardener at Château de Clagny, had a salary of 1,200 livres, as did Trumel, gardener at the Pépinière Royale du Roule, an establishment that seems to have been the beginning of a kind of horticultural school. Louis XIV's concern for everything to do with gardening led to the appointment of a 300-lb. teacher, Sieur de Beaulieu, who taught writing and arithmetic to the boy gardeners (1). If the elementary education of gardeners in the good old days left much to be desired, their professional ability was also much weaker than in other professions. Nothing was rarer than a gardener skilled in his art. And nowhere were the conditions for learning the trade more defective, until quite recently. With the exception of a certain amount of practice in manual work, which is easy to acquire, what kind of students could be provided by routine teachers who, like all ignoramuses, were full of presumption and stubbornness! Under the old monarchy, the only enlightened teachers came from the royal gardens. The more we study the history of gardening in France, the more we will recognize that the pronounced taste of most of the kings of France for beautiful gardens was, in this country, the main driving force behind the progress of horticulture. Do we not owe the admirable creations of Le Nôtre and La Quintinie to the generous initiative of one of them? (1) J. Guiffrey. Comptes des bâtiments du roi sous Louis XIV, t. 1, p. 294, 1089, 1350. ANCIENS TRAITÉS DE COURTILLAGE The oldest treatise on courtillage written in French, that we have found, was published in 1393, and is signed: un bourgeois de Paris. At that time, it's almost certain that none of our ancestors could read or write. Looking closely at his work, this bourgeois de Paris must have been a judge at the Châtelet, probably living next door to some intelligent marager who dictated the cultivation he did. When those in the trade read this treatise, which we will reproduce verbatim, they will easily recognize the hand of a fairly skilled practitioner for his time. TRAITÉ DE COURTILLAGE Primo. - It should be noted that whatever is sown, planted or buried, must be sown, planted or buried in damp weather, in the evening or in the morning, before the heat of the sun and during the waning of the moon, and must be watered on the pié and the soil and not on the leaf. Item - When the sun is shining, it must not be watered, but in the evening and in the morning, nor must cabbage, percil or other greens be watered, as the heat of the sun would bake the cut and the soil, and so it would never be watered in this area of the cut. Note: In rainy weather, it's a good idea to plant, but not to sow, as the seed is retained by the ratel. From All Saints' Day onwards, there are bog beans, but to prevent them from freezing, we plant them around Christmas and in January and February, and at the beginning of March; and we plant them at different times, so that if some are frozen, others are not, and when they rise from the ground, as soon as they begin to grow, we must harrow them and break the first germ, and as soon as they have six leaves, we must sourfouir them (put earth on top). And of all these, the first to come are the most expensive, and must be eaten the day they are harvested, or else they will turn black and sour. Nota - Que marjolaines et violettes que l'on veult garder en hyver contre la froidure, l'en ne doit mie mettre soudainement de froit à chault; ne de moite à froit, car qui longment les garde l'hyver en un célier moite et soudainement les mises au sec, il les perd et (sic de contrarüs semilibus). In winter, he must remove dead sage branches. Again in January and February, sage, lavender, rooster, mint, toutebonne be planted until juing. Panoit is sown wide to wide. Sorrel to be sown during and up to March and beyond. Nota - December and January winters cause pores to die, i.e. what is above ground, but in February the roots regrow new and tender pores. This is as soon as the frost stops, and a fortnight later the espinards come. February. - Sarriette and marjoram are very tasty to eat, and are sown or early and are only in the ground for eight days. Sarriette does not last long until St. John's Day. Item. in decours must plant trees or vines, and sow white cabbage and head cabbage. Nota - That hairy markers bear from the year they are planted hairy. Espinards are in February and have long leaves, crenellated like oak leaves, and grow in clumps like porées, and are suitable for esverder (blanching) and good afterwards. Note: Raspberry bushes and raspberries are good to plant. March. - At the end of the year, it must be planted: jombarde planter de mars jusqu'à la Saint-Jchan. Violets, wallflowers, sow in March or plant at Saint-Rémy. O8 Item - Either one or the other, when frosts are approaching, the en must in no time replant in pos, to put under cover and keep in cellar or in célier, for the froit, and during the day put in the air or in the sun and water such hour that the water is beue and the ground dry, before the en puts it under cover, because by no means the en must in the vespre estuièr (tighten) wet. Fêves planter et rompre le premier tuiau au harrow comme dit est dessus. Note: Percil sown on the eve of Notre-Dame in March is out of the ground in nine days. Fennel and marjoram, planted in March or April; and note that marjoram needs fatter soil than violets, and if it has too much shade, it turns yellow. Item. when it has recovered well, it must be uprooted and replanted in a wide position. Item. Branches that have been cut, put in the ground, and trimmed, take root and grow. Item. land fertilized with cow and sheep manure is better than horse manure. Violette de karesme and violette d'Arménie (probably Parma), ne veulent ne couvrir ne mucier, et nota que violette d'Arménie ne porte fleurs qu'au deuxième an, mais les jardiniers qui l'ont eu eu un an en terre, la vendent et replantent a illeurs, et lors elle porte. Oseille, boseille coq (bonlie) be sown in January and February or decours and until March, and if you want to replant oseille surannée (sorrel sown the previous year), it is not appropriate to replant it in all its soil surrounding the racinc. Item. To pick it with care (i.e. with a certain art), because it is always advisable to pick the large stalks and leave the small stalks, which are on top of the large stalks, to grow, and if everything is picked by chance. It is advisable to cut the tuiau ground to ground and it will regetera new sorrel. Percil sows, weeds, bones the stones, and the one sown in August is the best, because it doesn't grow, and stays in virtue all year long. Lettuces must be sown, and note that they do not stop in the ground and become very thick; and for this reason, pull them out here and there at the root to give space to the others and remove thickness. Et nota, que la semence des laitues de France est noire, et la semence des laitues d'Avignon est plus blanche, et en fait apporter monseigneur Bureau de la Rivière, et sont les laitues trop meilleures et plus tendres que celles de France, et ne se guerde la semence, fais bouton après autre, ainsi comme chaque bouton, s'avance de getter sa bourre. 900 Nota - Que laitues ne replantent pas, et mesmement quant l'en veult les maugier si arrache l'en racine et tout Courges. - The pips are the seed and should be soaked for two days, then sown, and left to grow without wetting them, until they are even outside, and then wet the pee, and in April water them courteously, and plant them from one place to another in dour, or half a foot in the ground, and half a foot apart, one gourd from the other, and wet the pee continually, and hang a pos percié, a festu and water, etc., on a stile., or a lesche de drap (piece of cloth) orpot. Chard, sown in March, and when good to eat, be cut close to the root, as it always regrows and regrows and becomes porous. Borages, arraches (bonne Dame) or belle Dame as above. Choulx blancs and choulx cabus are one and the same; they are sown in the month of March, and when they have five leaves, the grower plucks them courteously and plants them half a foot apart, and puts them in the ground up to the eye and arrousé le pié, and grinds them in July. Cabbage apples are sown in March and replanted in May. Choulx romains are of the same nature as pommés and auques (also) of the same seed, for both seeds grow on their trunks, and from the seed that comes through the middle tuïau and which is at the end from above grows the pomme, and from the seed that comes from below comes the choulx romains. Thin in karesme is the regaing of the cabbage and last until March, and then are icelles thin in March of stronger flavor to mengier, and for this, suit them more (parboulir), and in iceluy time, l'en tear the trunks out of ground. Nota, que en en doit planter les choulxes en juillet quand il pleut. Nota: - If these wheat plants abound in a garden, and they are planted with sawdust of oak, they will die or die with the first rain that falls, as the sawdust retains the moisture. Nota - In April and May, sow the whole month in the porches that will be eaten in July and July. The summer porches must be silked, and the roots left in the ground, and after the roots have been left, they must be overgrown 90 and the ground lifted around them, and the new ones sown and the old ones harvested. Nota, que depuis avril à la Magdelaine fait bon smer porées, et les porées de Karesme. sont semées en juillet et jusqu'à la Magdelaine et non plus, l'en bettes. Item - Espinards. Item, chard when lifted from the ground, is replanted by order. Item - In April and May, white choulx and cabbage apples sown in February and March are planted. In May, new beans, turnips and turnips are planted. Nota que en juing, la vegille Saint-Jehan, l'en doit semer percil, et aussi la veille de la my-août. August and my-august. Ysope smez, choux pasquerez, (from Easter time, eat at Easter) soient smez au décours, percil aussy; car celui-ci n'espie point. Nota - Que la porée qui est en terre, regette nouvelle porée cinq ou six fois comme percil, et la peut l'en couper au-dessus du troignon, jusqu'à la my-septembre et d'illec, en avant non mie couper, car le troignon pourrirait, mais eshancher à la main les feuilles d'entour et non le milieu. En iceluy temps convient eshancher (couper les porées montées à graines), semences de porées, car les semences ne peuvent meurir pour la froidure du temps, mais la semence eshanchée et gettée, le troignon regette nouvelle porée. Item, at this time, it is not advisable to cut the percil, but to remove the leaves. After septembresse (Our Lady of September) peony, serpentine, lily onions, rosebushes, gooseberries be planted. October. - Peas, broad beans, must be planted in the ground and along each other a dou, and that they be big broad beans of the biggest, because when they are new, they show themselves bigger than the small ones are, and must be planted only a small one and at each time after, a small one so that the one part gels that the other one does not. If you want to sow or plant peas, sow them when the weather is dry and fine, not when it's raining, because if rainwater gets into the parts of the pea, it will split in two and not germinate. Until All Saints' Day, cabbages can always be planted: and when they are so eaten by caterpillars that there are no leaves, except for the arrestses, if they are replanted, they come back thin C and it is advisable to remove the lower leaves and replant them up to the upper eye. Trunks that are completely stripped of leaves should no longer be replanted, but

in the ground, as they will getter. thin. Nota: - If you replant in summer, in dry weather, you must get water in the pit, in wet weather, no. Nota - If the caterpillars are eating your pulleys, when it rains, sow ash over the pulleys, and the caterpillars will die. Item - You can look under the leaves of the choulx and there you'll find a large gathering of white mittens in a heap, and know that this is where the caterpillars come from, and for this reason, cut off the place where this seed is and getter loing. Leeks should be sown in season, then replanted in October and November. If you want to have seedless grapes, take in crescent (of the moon), in the time that the vine is planted. That is to say, in February, plant a vine with the root, and bone the shovel on one side and the other. Then gnaw the stock and bind all along with black thread, then plant the stock and smoke with good manure and stuff with earth the hole above the joint of the stock. If you want to enter a cherry or plum tree on and inside a vine stock, then in March split it at four canes near the end and bone the mould on both sides, and there make the place of the kernel of a cherry stone and put and enclave it in this slot and bind with thread the jointed stock as before. If you want to insert a vine into a cherry tree, prune the vine, which will be planted and rooted for a long time next to the cherry tree, and in March around Notre-Dame (the Annunciation, March 25), pierce the cherry tree with an auger of the size of the vine stock, and in the hole of the cherry tree, bend the vine stock so that it is at least one foot long, then cut it on both sides of the cherry tree ; i.e. clay, moss and drapeaults, so that no rain can reach the hole. Item - The vine stock must be escorched and its bark peeled and ossified down to the green, in all only as far as the inside of the cherry tree is concerned, for if this is done and the bark is peeled and ossified, the sharp end of the stock joining the sharp end of the cherry tree will consolidate one to the other, which would be prevented by the bark of the stock if it remained there. Once this is done, leave them together for two years and then cut the vine behind and below the cherry tree joint. Item. - On a trunk or stump of oak, bury ten or twelve trees; that is to say, in the month of March, around Notre-Dame, garnish with as many grafts of various fruits as you wish to bury, and saw through the oak or tree you wish to bury; and have your grafts trimmed on one side, as much only as a blind quince, if as it is cy, and so much that the bark of iceluy graft is whole of the one of the sides and without being escorchée, or started, then ficherez your grafts between the bark and the flesh, or the sharp of the graft towards wood, or the sharp of the oak. Then trim and cover with loam, moss and drappeaults, so that rain, snow or frost can't interfere. Si vous voulez garderroses en yver prenez sur le rosier petits boutons qui ne soient pas espanis et les laissiez les queues longues, et entassez en un petit tonnelet de bois, comme un tonnelet à composte et sans cau. Make sure the barrel is well sunk and tightly bound so that nothing can get in or out, and bind two large, heavy stones to the two ends of the barrel, and place the barrel in a running river. Rosemary - Gardeners say that the seed of rosemary does not come from the soil of France, but whoever plucks and desmensbreroit from a rosemary tree, old small sprigs and stretched them by the end and planted them, they would come back, and whoever wants to send them far away, J'ai oüi dire à monseigneur de Berry que en Auxergne à trop grosses cerises que en France pour ce qu'ils provignent leurs cerisiers. This document is the oldest we have been able to find specifically concerning market gardening. Some of the accounts and expenses of large houses or congregations also contain chapters on gardening, indicating the crop grown at the time, but in a more indirect way. One of the first practicing writers to deal with D00 vegetable growing, and even more generally, is Olivier de Serres (1). Although he was more of a farmer than a gardener, he nevertheless deals with the cultivation of all the vegetables known in his day. The time of sowing, the various care to be given to them, is more or less what we saw in the previous treatise. But where Olivier de Serres becomes useful to history is in indicating the introduction of new vegetables and plants. He mentions a new cabbage grown in his country. The Caulifion of the Italians, which is indeed our cauliflower, he predicts a bright future for it, given that its beauty alone, and its delicacy to boot, will see it accepted on every table. The famous agronomist with his cartouffle, which is indeed our potato, probably so small at the time and of low yield, did not have the same eye as for his caulifiori, and yet the former spread millions of times more than the latter. It was certainly impossible at the time to judge the bright future of the illustrious solanée. He also discusses Nicotiana, named after Jean Nicot, King Henri's ambassador to Portugal. This plant," he says, "is native to hot countries, so it must be sown in the shelter of the north. The smoke of patum mêlo, also known as tobacco, taken through the mouth with an appropriate cone, is good for the brain, eyesight, hearing and teeth, and relieves the stomach of phlegm when taken in the morning on an empty stomach. Nor could he have foreseen the source of wealth for his country that this plant would be a few centuries after him. He was one of the first to deal with the cultivation of melons, even though this plant had already been known for some time. We'll talk about this crop in another chapter. (1) Théâtre de l'Agriculture The reader has already seen, and will see again in the remainder of this work, that the ancients attached great importance to the different phases of the moon when sowing and planting. Olivier de Serres does not combat these influences, but he is right to say that "we must not put off until the new moon what we can do at the end of the previous one". One of the principles of mastery, he says, is to know how to sow your seeds in good time to obtain good plants, according to the climate in which they are grown. As for the gardeners working in the gardens of the great, Audiger's Maison Régée, published in 1527, will teach us the knowledge required of them to hold these jobs. At the time, this knowledge was such that anyone wishing to engage in this art had to study in depth with different masters, to learn all that was required of him. You had to know a great deal about agriculture; these ancients weren't yet talking about horticulture, despite the fact that the Romans had had a fairly advanced horticulture several centuries earlier. Knowing how to graft in slits and escutcheons, knowing about graincs, onions, cayeux, flowers and so on. In France, when it was fashionable to have trellises and cradles, the gardener had to know how to manage and care for them. He was also required to have a good kitchen garden, growing all the vegetables known at the time. He was also responsible for purchasing the merry-go-rounds and osiers he might need for his trellises and cradles. The gardener, says d'Audiger, "is often a servant of the house. His duty is to take care of the garden when he is in charge. He must know agriculture, both for trees and flowers, and know how to decorate the garden, according to the times and seasons; he must know all kinds of plants and fruits; he must know how to graft well and enter into splits and escutcheons on trees and wild plants, such as pear trees, cognac trees, etc.; he must keep the garden tidy and tidy. He must always keep 908 flowerbeds clean, mow boxwoods at the right time, know about seeds, onions, cayeux and rare and foreign flowers, and know how to sow and plant them well, so that they come up again in spring. He must not be lazy, to water his garden during the great droughts. He must also know how to prepare potting soil, both for orange trees and for late bloomers. He must know his way around orange trees, how to clean them of bugs and prevent ants from spoiling them. Don't get them too wet, lest they die, and put them in the greenhouse in winter and outside in summer. He must take care to clean the alleys properly, prune the trees and trellises when they need it, as well as the trellises and cradles. Plow the paths and resoil them from time to time. He must take care to smoke the base of fruit trees from three years to three years, removing the wood that embarrasses them too much, which prevents the fruit from growing. Weed the flowerbeds, remove the weeds that choke the flowers, and keep the ponds and fountains in good condition, if any. The gardener must also know how to make a good vegetable garden, sow, plant and bring in all kinds of vegetables, make good beds to bring in melons, not let his garden run out of anything, have artichokes, celery and cardoons, and always lettuces according to the weather, keep everything very clean, get rid of all sorts of nasty weeds, and remove caterpillars, snails and other vilenesses which often do great damage to gardens and destroy the most important things in them". You couldn't ask much more of a gardener these days, for to know all these different branches of horticulture in depth, it's scarcely necessary to have a man to learn them. And yet, after d'Audiger, it was a servant who was asked for this amount of horticultural instruction, when it should have been said that this man was an artist in his art, worthy of standing alongside the greatest artists in the various other arts. 28 Until the end of the 17th century, no specialist writer, apart from Olivier de Serres who wrote on agriculture in general, dealt specifically with horticulture. The most complete treatise on this art under the ancien régime was written by Claude Mollet, gardener to Louis XIII, and published by André Mollet, probably his son and gardener to Queen Christine of Sweden, around 1700. Here is the extract from the prévilège: Nous, Christine, par la grâce de Dieu, reine de Suède, etc., à tous ceux qui ces présentes lettres verront, salut : Honorable et industrieuse personne André Mollet, maistre de nos jardins; s'étant proposé de faire imprimer un traité qu'il a fait en trois langues, se scavoir: suédoise, allemande et française de la culture, utilité, plaisir et ornement des jardins, intitulé: le Jardin de plaisir, et désirant sur ce, nos lettres nécessaires. We have authorized and do authorize by these presents signed by our hand, that he may print, sell and distribute the said book called: le Jardin de plaisir, however and during the term of ten years, starting from the day and date that the said book will be completed to print, making for this purpose very express inhiliations and deffenses to all booksellers and printers or others of what quality and condition they are of our kingdom, country and land of our obeyssance, to print or make print the said book, or to bring some or make bring from outside, under the name interposez to sell and distribute them in our kingdoms, without the permission of the said Mollet or his heirs, on pain of a fine of 400 dol of silver, half of which will be payable to our Chamber of Accounts, and half to the said suppliant without any reduction and costs, damages and interest and confiscation of all copies which may be put up for sale, or otherwise against the content of these presents. For such is our pleasure. Given at Stokholm, March 12, 1651. TRAITÉ D'HORTICULTURE DE CLAUDE MOLLET CHAPTER PREMIER To fertilize the land, use preferably ox and sheep manure: for bedding, horse manure; to improve the land, let the manure season and rot in a low place in winter; it will have less vermin and be fuller of humours for our use. Pigeon droppings mixed with fallow deer, deer or sheep droppings are very good for orange trees. As for pig manure and fecal matter, they would be rather harmful to gardening. The best season for fertilizing is autumn. CHAPTER II OF THE PINEGARDEN Prepare the soil and its amendments for all species of trees in a place close enough to water, make boards four to five feet wide, sow the seeds in rays made neatly a foot apart. Other beds for pits, such as cherries and plums. Large pits, such as apricots, peaches and almonds, should be planted and soaked in water beforehand, or in fresh sand to soften them. If you have rare plants, put them in pots or crates. All these operations should be carried out during the new moon. The following year, the young trees should be transported in a straight line, in small rows about four feet wide and one foot apart, and the second year they can be grafted. Regetons can also be used, but it should be noted that they will not make such good plantos. CHAPTER III GRAFTING FRUIT TREES CHAPTER IV VARIOUS TYPES OF GRAFTS CHAPTER V VINES. - How to plant, prune and propagate grapevines Grapevines can also be grafted in a slit or approach, as long as it is as low as possible. The way to get black and white grapes on the same vine. Plant two vines right next to each other, weld them together with wax, so that they form a single stock, producing different grapes. CHAPTER VI ROOTS AND WEEDS Choose a damp spot, put in a lot of manure, plough and level the ground to sow and plant according to the weather. Let's consider when to sow and replant the most useful vegetables in the kitchen garden. First. - Onions are sown around the August moon and replanted around the March moon. All kinds of onions can also be sown around the February moon in temperate areas; but in cold countries, they can only be sown in March, when the ground has thawed, and as soon as possible so that they can be replanted and grow. Leeks should be sown on the new moon in March, as early as possible in these quarters, so that they have time to strengthen and be replanted on the new moon in June. It should be put in the ground early enough to turn white, as it is best eaten in soup during the winter, when no other herbs are available. It keeps well in sand in the greenhouse, and lasts until spring. Garlic is more suitable for planting than for sowing, because it multiplies strongly in its bulb, as do the small ones (cieüe); this is why it is more expedient to pluck and replant them. It should be noted that all these roots so infect the soil where they have been, that it must be purified and amended before sowing or planting anything else. Beet is a very good and healthy root, and is sown in the full moon, as early as possible in the spring. Turnips can also be sown when the moon is full, but to get them early, they need to be sown on layers of manure; similarly, to get them in any season, they need to be sown every month on earth, and require sandy soil. Parsnips and carrots should be sown during the febrier moon in temperate countries. But in these areas, it's best to sow them before winter, otherwise they won't have time to grow. Chereus, which we call sweet roots here, are very good and multiply greatly, which is why they cannot be escharpir and replanted rather than sown, and this in the new moon of March. Wild chicory is sown in the full moon of August. Selciferia is sown in the full moon of March, or earlier, as are the roots of coarse parsley. After the roots come the herbs of the kitchen garden. These include cauliflower, white cabbage, Savoy cabbage, green cabbage, red cabbage and others, but cauliflower is the most delicate to eat, and is also the most susceptible to the ravages of time, and for this reason it should be sown on layers of horse manure at the end of the March moon, and replanted in the full month of May, in well-smoked and prepared soil, and to preserve it in (hyver), it should be replanted in sandy soil. Apple cabbages, both red and white, can be sown at the end of summer, when the moon is full, and replanted with new ones in spring. Milan or Savoy cabbages, and all others generally, can be sown in spring on the full moon of March, for replanting on the full moon of May. Lettuce is a very good herb, both as a salad and cooked in a pot. There are several species, and to get them soon, they are sown on layers of manure, in the new moon, as soon as possible. It is replanted in the course of the same or following moon. But to have them all summer long, you have to sow them every new moon of the month and replant them at the end of the month. There is another kind of lettuce called romaine or spanish, which is an excellent salad, it is sown in the month of march, and replanted in the new moon of may. Bind with straw to blanch. Endive is also very good, both in salads and cooked. We have two kinds, one curly and the other not; the first is the better. It is sown at the time of the moon, and replanted at the time of the moon when the cold has passed. It can be tied with straw to whiten it, and the one you wish to keep for (hyvuer), should be sown around August. Then, when the frosts start to come, transplant it in sand into the soil, taking care that it doesn't get wet when tightened. The best for this purpose is frisée. Borage and bugloss are sown on the new moon in March, and are good and refreshing in soup. They have small blue flowers, which are very suitable for salads and tables. 908 Spinach, parsley, chervil and sorrel are sown at the new moon in August and March; what is sown in March goes to seed in August, so can only be used until July and August; but what is sown in August does not go to seed and can be used in autumn and even in winter. Poirée à large cosse, or white chard, is sown during the March moon, and is also replanted during the following moon. Pimprenelle is sown on the new moon in March or April, as are round sorrel, stag's horn, watercress and savory. Purslane is excellent both in salads and pickled in vinegar for (hyvuer). It is sown on the new moon of March, or April in these quarters on layers of manure, to have some early, and consecutively every new moon, you can sow some to have some at all times. As for tripe-madame, tarragon, mente, baulme, coq and petites cieüses, they can be sown sooner (escharpir) than planted, multiplying greatly in their roots, they are transplanted in the full moon of March or April. It should be noted that to sow early in these cold countries, it is a good idea to place two or three feet of newly made horse manure on the site to be sown during the winter, so that the warmth of the manure prevents frost from penetrating the soil; then, when the soil is lifted in spring, it will be ready to sow whatever you wish. CHAPTER VII The fruits of the kitchen garden are : melons, cucumbers, pumpkins, artichokes, peas, broad beans and other vegetables, of which the melon is quite difficult to get in some places in temperate countries, and consequently much more so in these northern climates; therefore great care must be taken to grow good ones; and this will be done by means of layers of long horse manure, about three feet high and four wide, on the surface of which we'll put four to five inches of compost, or small used manure, taking good care that the layers are sheltered from the north, as much as possible, and well exposed to the midday, then when they have passed their great burning heat (which can be seen three or four days later by sticking your finger in them), we'll sow melons in them; we'll sow melons in them shortly beforehand, in small holes in order, and two seeds at D8 each hole, and this during the March moon, fitting glass or panes of glass over the said layers to prevent the winds from harming them, and to receive the sun's rays more forcefully; then cover them at night with straw mats to protect them from frost; and when they have three or four leaves, replant them on other layers lower than the first ones and without small manure, ploughing the underside of them, so that the roots of the melons can take nourishment from the earth. They are to be watered often, but first the water must be seasoned by the sun's rays, and by arrousing them without wetting either the leaf or the fruit. Then, when it's time to warm them up, put new manure all around them, about a foot wide and a little higher than them. Then it will be necessary to prune them, leaving them only three or four arms, i.e. branches, always removing the false flowers, and most of the fruit from the end of the branches, so that the fruit close to the foot can benefit more, which is usually the best. Another strong layer is used to transplant melons, which in France we call couche sourde; This is because, having dug two or three feet of earth of suitable width, a trench is made, which is filled with new horse manure and then with earth above, so that the said layers are a little flattened and taller towards the midday, and after having made holes at equal distances, the said melons are transplanted into them, taking good care, when lifting them from the first layer, to remove their roots; ains leave them a small clod, which can keep it in its first place, otherwise our labor would be vain and of no effect. Cucumbers can be seeded and replanted in the same way as melons; they are not so delicate, nor are they tender in bad weather; so they can be transplanted into the ground, with just a little manure at the base and in the hole. Pumpkins can be cultivated in the same way, but as their fruits are very heavy, it is a good idea to support them with poles, as they would take up a lot of land. They also need to be trimmed often. Artichokes are one of the best fruits in the kitchen garden. The best species is the least pungent. They can be sown in the new moon in March, and replanted when they have three or four leaves. They require 900g of rich, well-smoked, fresh, moist soil, and a good deal of watering. They can be kept on their own land by (hyvuer) surrounding them with manure and earth on top. But they will be safer in these quarters in the greenhouse, for in spring to disjoint and separate them, then transplant them as said is. Their pods are excellent to eat when blanched, thanks to the manure with which they are surrounded for twelve or fifteen days. They can also be blanched in the soil to hyvour them. Asparagus is also excellent, it is sown in the full moon of March, and replanted two years later in the same lunc ct in beds or beds well prepared and a little low, so that they can have freshness and moisture, and in these beds, it must be planted in rows and (esgalle) distance of a foot from each other. It is not required that they have more than a foot and a half of good bottom, so that they can heel more, and produce more fruit, not finding suflisant food at the bottom. Peas come in different varieties. The early ones are sown at full moon, as early as possible to have early ones. There is a type of pea that is called "sans gosse" (without kid), as it is eaten with the pea in it, and is very good. It is necessary that all beans be branched. Broad beans are planted during the April-May moon. Fennel is sown during the full moons of March and April. We'll now move on to plants and shrubs, both fruiting and sweet-smelling. Those with fruit are: the groseliers, of which there are three species, namely: the one that comes in bunches, which is white and red and very good for preserving; the third yields fruit that is quite the opposite, namely: separated from each other, it is very thorny, so its fruit is not as good as that of the other two species. The vinette thorn, or barbaris, is very good and suitable for candying, as well as for eating (crude) with meats and sauces. It is similarly thorny, but the leaf is very beautiful, so it can be planted in pallissades in some places in the pleasure garden, which it is advisable to do in the same way for (groseliers), but only in the kitchen garden. All the aforementioned shrubs provinate easily and take cuttings very well. The best-smelling shrubs are lavender, sage, rüc and rosemary, hyosope, thyme and marjoram, which are sown in the new moon of March on layers of manure, if you like, so that 200 of them come earlier, and they are replanted in the full moon. They also easily take cuttings and marcotes. CHAPTER VIII OF THE FLOWER GARDEN The main flowers grown were: roses, marigolds, peonies, wallflowers, tulips, anemones, ranunculus, irises, etc. How to sow them, how to grow them and how to plant them. How to sow, grow and reproduce them. CHAPTER IX WILD TREES Oak, chestnut, lime, elm, sycamore, beech, hornbeam, privet, white thorn. Fir, juniper, holly, boxwood, cypress, which must be protected from the cold, etc. CHAPTER X: ORANGE, LEMON AND MYRTLE TREES. SPANISH JASMINS AND OTHER RARE TREES There are two species of large and dwarf orange trees; the latter are put in pots or vases, so that they can be transported to rooms, tables, etc.; they bear many flowers and their fruit is very small. There are several species of large orange, but they are very heat-loving, and in our countries you need an orangery to hybridize them. Orange trees are easy to graft in escutcheon, approach and cleft. Pomegranates should be kept in the same way, although they are less delicate. There are two varieties, one with fruit and the other with double flowers. It can be grafted in slit or approach form. There are several species of jasmine, of which the Spanish jasmine is the most highly esteemed for its fragrant flowers. The common jasmine is the most robust, but its flowers are smaller and less fragrant. The evergreen myrthes give a good scent. Both males and females bear a small white flower, almost like a white thorn. They are easy to provine and marcott, and can also be grafted. The fig tree can be preserved in the same way and can bear fruit when ripe; it can be pickled and takes cuttings well. There are several types of laurel: common laurel, tin laurel, oleander, white laurel, red laurel and cherry laurel. The latter takes cuttings again, while the others marcott. As all these trees are in boxes, the soil must be renewed every three or four years; mix pigeon, fallow deer and sheep droppings with strong, clayey soil, and even add city sludge. CHAPTER XI DES ORNEMENTS DU JARDIN DE PLAISIR This beautiful and complete horticultural treatise is a striking proof of what we have said in placing Claude Mollet among the great gardeners of past centuries. Although this treatise was not published until 1700, it was certainly written in the first half of the 17th century, since the extract from the privilege authorizing it is dated 1651. In this work, one senses more the skilled practitioner, the man who knows by long practice of his craft, than the theorist who has less hands-on experience. We have reproduced, in extenso, what relates to market gardening, to give the reader a better idea of the progress made in this field over the two centuries between the time the treatise was written, and the time when the treatise on courtillage was published by a Parisian bourgeois in the Menagier de Paris. In the latter, there is no mention of layers; all cultivated plants came in their natural state, and the number was very limited, just a few in addition to those found in Charlemagne's capitularies. Mollet, on the other hand, shows us how to grow plants in layers, and even how to grow plants in layers in the open air. He tells us about the cultivation of melons, already done with a certain art. What's surprising about this cultivation is that Olivier de Serres, who wrote before him, mentions the glass bell and Mollet says nothing about it. It was certainly well known in the south of France, where Olivier de Serres lived, long before it was in Paris. Mollet was growing cauliflower, which was a new plant for him, when Olivier de Serres had been growing it half a century earlier. As for the unfortunate cartouffle, he didn't say a word about it; it was so hated, so feared as a violent poison, that its cultivation was banned everywhere. That's how damaging the errors of scientists and great men can be to people. Finally, Claude Mollet's work was to pave the way for the success and glory of La Quintine, France's most famous, and perhaps the world's most famous, market gardener. As far as this author is concerned, we will only talk about his new, i.e. forced, cultivation; for the others, it would be repeating what Mollet said. But before going into these details, let's examine what our illustrious colleague thought and said about gardeners, and market gardeners in particular. In his supplication to the King, he flattered himself that the treaty he had the honor of presenting to him would contribute to making good gardeners. This part of gardening, which combines pleasure with utility, provides the means to make pleasant vegetable gardens, and to raise good fruit for every season of the year. Some of the first gardeners," he says, "who settled in the vicinity of the big city, had the idea of growing a special crop of grass, anticipating that they would be able to sell it in the public markets. For these gardens, they chose low-lying areas where the soil was greasy and damp, such as dried-out marshes, or marshes that they dried out, so much so that in common parlance, they were called mareschais, or marsh gardeners. As the city's population grew, the marshes became too small to supply it with produce. Human industry has multiplied these kinds of gardens to the point of making 908 of them in very arid and sandy places, ensuring that frequent watering and ample manure fertilization make up for the lack of a good soil. So there are several categories of gardener: the mareschais, who cultivate vegetables and herbs; the florists, who are especially concerned with the cultivation of various flowers; and those who devote themselves to making nurseries, who didn't yet have a name, but who could be called, as La Quintinie put it, pépiniéristes. As for me, he says, "my particular inclination is to apply myself to the cultivation of vegetable and fruit gardens". In addition to the beauties he found in them, he also discovered considerable shortcomings, especially in the gardens of large landowners who had gardeners at their service, and his treatise, he admits himself, was aimed more at them than at specialists. I don't claim," he says, "that this type of cultivation exists today, and I confess in good faith that the knowledge I have of vegetable gardens comes particularly from having had frequent discussions with what are vulgarly called 'skilled mareschais'. Cultivation, in general, includes a large number of plants, and it is not possible for any gardener to apply himself to cultivating them all with art. Some gardeners devote themselves to a certain crop, which is well done, and neglect the rest, which is cultivated with the same art by other specialists. But the gardener who has to run a master garden in a large house must know everything he needs to produce every month of the year. The great master confesses in good faith that what he knew about vegetable gardens, he had learned from skilled mareschais. Let us hasten, for the respect we owe to his memory, to have the same good faith towards him, by declaring that his experiments in forced cultivation have become the basis for the cultivation of market gardens in our century; and have enabled several 908 thousand families, not to make a fortune (one does not make a fortune in cultivation, when that is all there is to it); but at least to raise their families honorably. This is more than enough for market gardeners to honor his memory with a title of gratitude. FORCED CULTIVATION OF QUINTINIA In January. - Lay early cucumbers, melons and lettuces. Warm up asparagus. To do this, dig the path two feet deep and a foot and a half wide, fill it with large, warm, well-burned manure, and after a fortnight, mix it with new manure. Repeat this operation as often as necessary, about every ten or twelve days. So far, modern market gardeners have not changed this method of heating asparagus. They used to cover the asparagus claws with dry manure, and when they appeared, they put a glass bell on top, which they covered with manure at night; those who had glass frames put them on top of the bells. Today, bells are no longer used for this type of cultivation; the author says that many were broken, and we have no trouble believing him. Only glass frames are used, covered with mats sufficient to withstand the most severe frosts. He claimed that a lot of new manure was coming in, and it's exactly the same now. La Quintinie is the innovator of this type of cultivation. He reheated sorrel, patience and borage beds using the same procedures. Raising strawberries on beds, to have them in April and May. He probably raised them in pots and placed them on warm beds, which he omits to mention in his treatise. Take horse or mule manure, two-thirds new (i.e. fresh), and one-third dry. Spread the manure, roll it up so that all the ends are in the middle, and the edge forms a sort of back; let it stand to even out the layer; its height should be two or three feet when you make it, and loaded with potting soil. 08 By this means, when you establish a square, the paths are empty; you fill them in as the heat drops, and if necessary you turn them over as for the paths that heat asparagus, in order to warm up the layer. This explanation was given to me by former market gardeners when I was young, as some of them established this kind of layer right up to the middle of our century. In the same way, for bell beds, the compost was placed on top of the manure, and heated using the same procedures. Market gardeners called these layers "layers à ployants". Today, labor is too expensive to use our ancestors' methods. It took two men a whole day to make a layer. With overheads rising all the time, and forced vegetables cheaper than in those days, young people have to look for ways to make a living. This is one of the main reasons why forced cultivation is no longer carried out with as much correctness as it was by the market gardeners of the first half of the century. Needless to say, La Quintinie, like his predecessor Claude Mollet, cultivated cucumbers and melons. He also grew several types of lettuce. His superiority over his predecessors lies in the fact that, in his royal kitchen garden at Versailles, he brought together all the new utensils for forced cultivation, such as cloches and glass frames. In a word, it was he who carried out the first in-depth studies for these various cultivations; he succeeded more or less well, as happens with everything that is done by trial and error. Nevertheless, the impetus was there, and his successors took advantage of his experiments to perfect his type of cultivation, and it's already been a century since market gardeners have tackled it. 14 UNTIL PHILIPPE-AUGUSTE'S CLOSURE From the time of Roman domination, the town that became the capital of France grew from strength to strength. At first, it overflowed its island, especially on the left bank. When Julian built his palace there, he brought with him a population center, particularly for the literati. It was to remain forever the school district. A little later, at an uncertain date, the city expanded a little on the right bank. Walls were built at the same time as the grand Chatelet tower to defend the city on this side. Petit Chatelet was on the left bank, at about the same point as Place du Petit Pont. Whereas under Roman rule, the city had expanded more on the left bank, the opposite occurred under the Frankish kings. It was under Childebert I that the town of Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois came into being. The Louvre, built in 1201 under Philippe-Auguste, was constructed on land belonging to the abbey of Saint-Denis. It is almost certain that a large part of the right bank belonged to this abbey, just as the left bank belonged to that of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. Later, other, less important abbeys were founded near Paris, giving rise to the following towns: Bourg-l'Abbé, which was dependent on Saint-Martin; Beau-Bourg on the 10 Temple lands; Thiboust, which took its name from an ancient family that included Guillaume Thiboust, Provost of Paris around 1300; and Saint-Eloi, where Saint-Paul church now stands. On the left bank: the town of Saint-Germain-des-Prés; the town of Sainte-Geneviève. Between these towns and Paris, there was arable land, courtils and marshes (1). We have also seen that the kings of the first dynasty had donated land to establish the Paris cemetery and cattle market. For a long time, the term "culture" was used in the names of Paris neighborhoods and streets, as a reminder of the ancient market gardens of the time. On the north side, there was the Saint-Eloi cultivation, and near Saint-Paul church, the house of the farmer who ran it. Then there was Sainte-Catherine, Saint-Gervais, Temple, Saint-Martin and Saint-Lazare. The left bank between the towns of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, Sainte-Geneviève, and perhaps Saint-Marcel, had once again become the fertile land seen in Gaulish times. Above all, there were immense vineyards planted by the Gauls (2). It was these vines that produced the wine known as vin de Lutèce, which became the delight of several Roman emperors. Philippe-Auguste, fearing invasions from the Normans, who had plundered Paris several times, decided to annex a large part of these villages to Paris. He had the enlarged city surrounded by strong walls, nine meters high and three meters thick, flanked by towers from place to place to keep an eye on the enemy. From far and wide, monumental gates gave access to the city. The work, begun in 1191, took twenty years to complete. (1) Delamare, Traité de Police. (2) Delamare, Traité de Police. C north side, opposite the Louvre. At this point, there was a gate called the Porte du Louvre. From there, the cloture passed between the rue du Louvre and the rue du Coq, crossed the rue Saint-Honoré, where there was another gate; it continued between the rues d'Orléans and de Grenelle, crossed the Hôtel de Soissons and the rue Coquillère, where a gate was opened, later called the porte Coquillère, after a notable bourgeois living there. The cloture then crossed rue du Jour, derived from "séjour", because the kings had a pleasure house there; it crossed rue Montmartre with porte Montmartre and Saint-Eustache; continued between rue Tiquetonne and pointe Saint-Eustache, crossed rue Montorgueil, where another gate was later opened. The fence then passed between rue Pavée, rue du Petit-Lyon and rue Mauconseil, crossing ruc Saint-Denis, above Saint-Jacques-de-l'Ilôpital. At this point, there was a gateway known as the Porte aux Peintres. These walls passed between rue du Heuleu and rue aux Oües, crossed rue Bourg-l'Abbé, where there was a false door, then crossed rue Saint-Martin, opposite rue du Grenier-Saint-Lazare, continuing this ruc, crossed rue Beaubourg with a false door of the same name. Rue du Chaume, at this point, the walls turned as they crossed Rue de Paradis, in the middle of the Convent des Blancs-Manteaux, where there was a door named : Porte Barbette, in honor of the bourgeois of that name, who lived there and was provost of the merchants. They turned between the Rue des Francs-Bourgeois and the Rue des Rosiers. They crossed rue Saint-Antoine, where there was a gate that took the name of the former porte des Baudets, then rue de la Mortellerie, crossing various monasteries, where there was a gate called porte des Béguines, and ended at the river with a gate called porte Barbette. On the left bank, the fence began opposite the place where it ended on the other side of the Seine, in the place called la Tournelle, by the rue du Cardinal-Lemoine, crossed the rue Saint-Victor, went up behind Sainte-Geneviève, rue des Fossés-Sainte-Geneviève, rue Soufflot, Monsieur le Prince, passage du Commerce, and ended at the Institut where stood a strong tower called Philippe Hamelin, name of the provost of Paris at that time. On the left bank, the gates were: Porte de la Tournelle, Saint-Victor, Saint-Marcel, Saint-Jacques, Porte Gibard, since renamed Porte d'Enfer. The Buci and Saint-Germain gates led to the abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. In these parts, there used to be a saulsaie on the banks of the river, where the inhabitants went to cool off in summer. Until 1550, the path that followed these extramural walls was lined with meadows; in 1609, these were converted into houses. At the time of Philippe-Auguste's death, there were still vast marshes, arable land, meadows, vineyards and vacant lots within the walls of Paris, which were built on under subsequent reigns. Philippe-Auguste's enclosure, built between 1190 and 1211, had raised the population of Paris to around 100,000, a fairly respectable agglomeration for a time when no produce came from afar; it required a certain number of market gardeners to supply the city with fruit, vegetables and grass. On both the left and right banks of the Seine, these walls encompassed a number of hamlets dependent on the surrounding abbeys. We won't deal with the left bank here, as there were very few market gardeners at the time. However, there must have been a few on the Place Maubert side, a fairly marshy area. We can see that there was a confraternity in Saint-Sulpice, but the gardeners on this side were probably more interested in growing trees and flowers, and we'll find them later on the Saint-Marcel side. This is probably what prompted special men to create the King's Garden, D8 now known as the Jardin des Plantes, in these parts. Even today, most of the major horticultural establishments are still on the left bank. The right bank, on the other hand, was much more marshy at the time, and the majority of its inhabitants were market gardeners. All the towns between the Seine and the heights of Charonne, Ménilmontant and Montmartre, contained a large proportion of these specialists. As a result of this expansion, a number of them found their way into Paris, and the same thing happened several times later. As these lands became more valuable, they were built on, and the maragers retreated outside the surrounding walls. DERECdO GO FROM CHARLES V TO LOUIS XIV Outside the walls established by Philippe-Auguste (!) there were abbeys with coultures that were rented out to the maragers, notably the Saint-Eloi cultures near Saint-Paul, the Sainte-Catherine culture, du Temple, SaintLazare, Saint-Honoré, etc. It's clear that there were abbeys with coultures that were rented out to the maragers. But as the city grew in population, more market gardeners were needed, and those who were displaced were forced to relocate further afield. In 1383, Charles V resolved to expand his "good city" of Paris, but this time only on the right bank. He tore down Philippe-Auguste's walls and built new ones, starting at the Arsenal on the Seine. It was then that he had the Bastille built as a state prison. The new walls roughly followed boulevard Beaumarchais, passing through the gates of Saint-Martin and Saint-Denis. From there, the walls turned to cross the Place des Victoires, the Palais-Royal and enclosed the Louvre within Paris. As a result, the districts of Saint-Paul, Sainte-Catherine, le Temple, Saint-Martin, les Filles-Dieu, Saint-Sauveur, etc., which had been mere suburbs, found themselves enclosed within Paris. By this new (1) Delamare, Traité de Police. expansion, the city, twenty years later, was increased by half and had one hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants. This new enclosure enclosed almost all market gardeners in Paris. As commerce and industry developed, their land was taken over. But it was mainly in the 16th century, from the time of François I onwards, that these districts began to be populated. In 1544, the nuns of Sainte-Catherine sold what was left of their land and gardens, with the buyer required to build and lay out streets. The lands of the Saint-Eloi culture near Saint-Paul were sold and built on around the same time. Around 1600, during the reign of Henri IV, the town was still surrounded by the meadows of Ile Notre-Dame and Ile du Palais, and to the north of the town by marshes and farmland. The king decided to have all these areas built up. The nuns of Saint-Anasthase sold the land they had in the Temple, Saint-Antoine and Saint-Gervais districts to private individuals. Place Royale was built, as were Rue de Cléry, Rue du Mail, Rue Neuve-Saint-Eustache, Rue des Fossés-Saint-Augustin, Rue des Victoires, Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, Rue Richelieu, Rue Sainte-Anne and Rue Neuve-Saint-Honoré. The abbey sold a garden where the Rue Saint-Benoit was built. This enormous expansion of Paris took place under Henri IV and Louis XIII, bringing the population of Paris to 300,000 by 1600. From then on, the capital's population grew rapidly. It was also around this time, in 1600, that the gardening guild expanded. Cultivation took on a new lease of life, as sailors began to bring in plants from foreign lands, and the powerful encouraged horticulture by employing foreign scientists in their gardens. It was also at this time that the gardeners had their statutes officially recognized, entitling them to cerO tain privileges and definitively classifying their guild as a Parisian profession. In 1603, the gardeners rented a large part of the Temple grounds from the Prior, which they converted into vegetable gardens (1). At first, they built lodges for shelter. Later, the Grand Priory authorized them to build small cottages to house themselves, on condition that they be demolished and the materials taken away at the end of their leases, if he did not prefer to retain them and reimburse half their value, according to estimate. These leases were granted at a rate of four pounds per acre. In 1608, when the king conceived the plan to transform this district, all this land was acquired by Pijon, a bourgeois from Paris, for forty-four thousand livres, obliging himself to build there according to the plans given by the Duc de Sully, and to pay, to the order, six hundred livres of rent, of which he would charge by portion the houses he had built. In this treaty, we can see that the Order first received the purchase price of the land, and, in addition, a perpetual annuity to be deferred in parts on the sub-purchasers. As for the unfortunate "loçataires maraichers", there is no mention of them in Delamarre's Traité de Police, written at the beginning of the 18th century. As the author makes no mention of compensation for tenants, it's likely that they received little or nothing. The Saint-Honoré district between this faubourg and Montmartre was still swampy in 163l. These various documents show that market gardeners occupied all these districts until the beginning of the 17th century. Under Louis XIII and Louis XIV, the city expanded even further. From a population of 300,000 in 600, it reached 500,000 in 1700. Louis XIV, on the strength of his greatness, renown and comp(1) Delamare, Traité de Police. 90 sion on the fortified borders that Vauban had established, made Paris an open city. He demolished the remaining walls of Philippe-Auguste on the left bank, and those of Charles V on the right. On this side in particular, he created the beautiful boulevards that have become the center of Parisian activity. After this demolition, the suburbs grew as fast as the city, giving the capital a huge extension. It was in these faubourgs that we find the gardeners of the Revolution, who returned to Paris for a third time. In 1784, the fermiers généraux proposed to Louis XVI that a wall be built around the city, with gates at the main crossroads, in order to more effectively collect duties on goods entering Paris. This plan was carried out under the orders of Ledoux, the king's architect. These were the walls that men of my generation knew, since they were not demolished until 1860. The main landmarks on the left bank are Place Denfert-Rochereau, where the octroi offices built by Ledoux have been preserved as a historic monument. The Pont de Bercy links the left-bank boulevards with those on the right. On the right bank, the Place de la Nation, formerly the Barrière du Trône, and the Place de la Chapelle, with their offices, have also been preserved. Further west, the Arc-de-Triomphe de l'Etoile, above the Avenue des Champs-Elysées. At the time these walls were built, the capital contained 620,000 inhabitants within its walls. AND LES HALLES DE PARIS The first market in Paris was established in the city (1), roughly where Notre-Dame square is today. The main trade was in grain, which was transported by land from the surrounding area. At first, the capital had two small ports on its river: Port Saint-Landry and Port aux Eufs, near the Grand Pont. It was only under Louis the Younger, in the 12th century, that Port de la Grève and Port Pépin were added. These ports were not designed to receive grain, but only saltworks, timber and a few wine boats. The abbey of Saint-Denis levied duties on all goods traveling on the Seine (2). It also levied a tax on fruit and vegetables grown on its lands; this tax was costly, paid on a retail basis, and less so if the sellers of these products, the so-called "small trades", took letters from the abbot, which were also taxed. Generally speaking, however, the abbey leased out this collection in order to obtain a fixed annual manse. This farmer did not fail to exploit as much as he could the farmers who brought their produce to Paris. The city's first market has long since disappeared. The oldest surviving market is the Grand Pont, now known as the Quai aux Fleurs. This market has always (1) Paris through the ages. (2) Félicie d'Ayzac. COOg C has retained its customs in terms of selling days, which have always been and still are Wednesday and Saturday of each week. There are many police ordinances concerning the exchange of money on the Grand Pont de Paris; we will cite those of Philippe-le-Bel, issued in 1304, which read as follows (1). February 1304. - 1°: The exchange of Paris will be on the GrandPont, on the Grève side, between the great arch and the church of Saint-Leufroy. 2°: The exchange will not be carried out elsewhere, on pain of confiscation of the goods exchanged. 3°: If any of those involved in the exchange, by giving notice, give rise to confiscation, they will receive the fifth part. March 1304. - 1° : It will be solemnly shouted in all the baillages, the vicomtés, the prévotés and other places, that nobody, under penalty of confiscation of the goods, sells the sextier of the best wheat, measure of Paris, more than forty sols parisis and the sextier of other lesser wheat in proportion. 2°: The sextier of the best beans and barley, measured in Paris, will be sold for thirty sols; the sextier of the best oats for twenty sols, the sextier of the best bran for ten sols, the least in proportion and so on for the other grains. 3° : Whoever has of the above-marked grains, what is necessary for feeding his house and sowing, will be obliged to send the surplus to market, not all at once but little by little, to be sold at the price fixed above. 4°: If, after the public proclamation that will be made, any grain is found in excess of the quantity granted to them, the grain will be confiscated for the benefit of the King. 5°: The aforementioned ordinance will be published by the bailiffs, at the places they will mark. They will enforce it and severely punish those who contravene it. 6°: And so that the aforementioned ordinance is put into effect, Nicolas de Laigny and Guillaume de Tournay, appointed by other letters, will search for grain, and compensating the measure of one place with that of another, they will reduce them all to those of Paris. (1) Ordinances of the kings of France. of the place where the exchanges were to take place, but also fixed the price of the main commodities. Transporting goods from one place to another wasn't easy; there were only rivers, and many of them were hardly navigable. Paris owes its prosperity, in large part, to its geographical location: placed between the Brie and Beauce regions, it was able to be fed by land, in the early centuries, from these fertile regions; crossed by the Seine, just below the confluence of the Marne, a little above the confluence of the Oise, this network of major rivers contributed in no small measure to its rapid growth. It was under Philippe-Auguste that wheat began to be transported by water, as the area around the capital was no longer sufficiently productive to supply it (1). This gave rise to new ordinances to prevent hoarding. Under the aforementioned ordinance, farmers were required to bring their produce to market, not all at once, but in instalments and at different times. Likewise, bakers were not allowed to stock up on goods; community jurors strictly enforced these regulations. Almost all merchandise was subject to a fee upon arrival at the market, and we will now list the fees charged for gardening in general (2). DROIT DE PAYAGE DE PETIT PONT Cis titres parole del paage de petitpont ARTICLE XX Semenche de porée et d'oignonete doit un denier à col, et à dos deux deniers et seur un asne un denier et en charete un denier. Chancuvis en charete deux deniers, à cheval un denier. seur asne, obole ; à col obole, se à églyse n'est (i.e. if (1) René de Lespinasse. (2) René de Lespinasse. these products do not belong to the religious, who were exempt from duty). ARTICLE XXXII De tous fruis à col pardon ali rois Loys pour amour de Dieu à touz jors et en charete doit deux deniers, à cheval un denier, seur asne obole. ARTICLE LXXIX Semenche de choux ne doit noiant. ARTICLE LXXXIII Pea arrow must obole, how soi, fors à col, et se home en porte à col si ne doit rien de demi douzaine ne de moins, et se il i a plus de demie douzaine, si doit obole. Pois que l'en apèle poioz qui ne sont flèche, doivent en charete deux deniers, à cheval un denier, seur asne obole. TITLE XXII Cis titres parole del tonlieu et del halage des fruis crus el royaume de Franche ARTICLE ler Tous fruiz qui viennent à Paris à cheval, au semedy ou aus autres jours ès hales, ou el marchié de Paris, li sonners (doit) portevine de halage et deux deniers de tonlieu, si li marchans en vend, et si il n'en venden riens, il ne paiera rien de tonlieu devant qu'il vende, et quand il vendra, il paiera un denier de la some por le tonlieu. ARTICLE II If the fruit is sold at the Paris market, or at the hales during the week or on other days, and it belongs to a homeowner, he will pay an obole de halage and two deniers de tonlieu, as soon as the merchant sells, in whole or in part. ARTICLE III Se ils sont deux compaignons ou plusieurs en une charete de fruiz, et li en marchande de la voiture pour tous, cel qui en marchande doit obole de halage et deux deniers de tonlieu de son fruit, ja tout ne si poi n'i aura sus la charete, soit poi, soit auques; et chacun des autres, come compaignons, devra obole de tonlicu, jas tout de sas, de coste et de magne ni aura et del sac un denier de tonlieu. ARTICLE IV Se li un les compaignons ne marchande au charetier pour tousz les compaignons, cel qui pour li seul marchande premier de sa voiture au charetier est quitcs de son tonlieu pour deux deniers, ja tout de sas, ne de costes, ne de magnes n'i aura seur la charete, et si doit obole de halage. Et nus des autres compaignons de cel sur la charete ne doit point de halage, car cel qui premièr marchand de la voiture au charetier, pour lui ou pour ses compaignons, doit payer le halage. ARTICLE V Fruits which come by water, in attic, countermont or counterval, the icuel which is at home de dehors, li muiz, c'est assavoir XXII costes, ou III tonnel par le mai doivent VIII deniers de tonlieu. And cel tonlieu doit cel qui veut, et cil qui achate ne doit point de tonlieu, se il est demeurans à Paris ; et cil est demeurans de hors Paris et il achate, il doit paier de chascun sac un denier de tonlieu, de chacune magne un denier, de chacune coste obole de tonlieu, se il maine par eau ou à charete. The horse owes a denier de tonlieu and its rider an obolus and a black collar. ARTICLE VI Tous cel qui sont estagiers de Paris sont quites des coutumes devant dittes. ARTICLE VII Le home de dehors Paris, amaine fruiz à Paris par eauc, en coste, en magnes, en sacs ou en corbillons, il doit de chacune magne un denier de tonlieu, de chacune coste obole de tonlieu. de chacun sac un denier de tonlieu, soit qu'il vende à un home ou plusieurs. ARTICLE VIII Teut cel qui sont regrattiers à Paris et marchandent d'aigrun, doivent un denier au jour de la Saint-Denis. ARTICLE IX All regrattiers in Paris who sell aigrun and remain within the limits of Saint-Denis Day owe each two deniers de coustume on Saint-Denis Day, along with the four preceding deniers. ARTICLEX Poulaillers sont tenus por regrattiers et doivent la droiture devant dite. ARTTICCE X bis Tout cel qui achatent le mestier de regrattiers et poulaillers doivent chascun au voüer de Paris, un denier. TITLE XXIII Cis titres parole del tonlieu et del halage de aus, de oingnons et des semences de toute manière d'aigrun. ARTICLE I Oingnons qui viennent de Marne, chascun sac doit un denier de tonlieu, comment qu'i viegne. ARTICLE II Oingnons, poireaux, naviaus, civos qui viennent par eau et par terre, doivent de chascun charretée deux deniers de tonlieu et un denier de halage, soit qu'ils soient tous ensemble, ou chascun chose por soi, ou qu'elles soient toutes à un home, ou à plusieurs. ARTICLE III I a somme des choses devant dittes, doit un denier de tonlieu et obole de halage, à asne autant, et à col noiant, fors que obole de halage. ARTICLE IV Ilom de dehors qui achate aigrun et le resvente au marchié, ou ès hales de Paris, el doit pour le revendre un denier de tonlieu et obole de halage, s'il met à terre, s'il n'a pas le mestier de Paris, et s'il a le mestier de Paris, il ne doit que le halage. ARTICLE V Nus aigrun sans teste ne doit rien de tonlieu, ne de halage. ARTICLEVI Leek and onion seed must comply with the above-mentioned custom. DEEEO (HOO6 8 Nule semence des autres oingnons ne doivent rien de coustume. ARTICLE VIII Tuet cel qui sont de hors Paris et vendent à Paris auz, oingnons, porreaux, civos, naveaus ou eschaloingnes doivent chascun un denier, l'en por la porée le roi, avec les coustumes dessus dittes à paier pour la Saint-Jean-Batiste, à la volonté, celui qui garde cel métier. ARTICLE IX Tuet cel de Hauberviler, de Boneuil et tout cel d'entour Paris, ne doivent halage ne tonlieu de toutes les choses dessus dittes qu'ils vendent, fors que au jour del semedy; et à cel jour ils doivent le tonlieu et se halage devant dit. From these documents, concerning the exchange, or trade in supplies for Paris, it can be established that, since the time of the Frankish kings, there has been a market around the Chatelet on Wednesdays and Saturdays. This market was subject to the various ordinances of the kings, for the foodstuffs sold there. In our century, it has become very important and exclusively dedicated to horticulture: trees, shrubs, flowers in cuttings, pots, crates and so on. Only cut flowers can be sold at the halles, and the former at the quai aux fleurs, which stretches along both banks of the river from Hôtel-de-Ville to Pont-Neuf, using the bridges nearby. Le Chatelet and its surroundings were known to the ancients by the Latin expression Porta parisiensis. For some authors, this meant Porte de Paris; for others, l'apport Paris (market); in the end, Chatclet was both. "Estour Chatelet" wrote around 1430 (1), Guilbert de Metz, "vendoit ou sel, fruits et herbes, et aussi y faisoit on tout l'an chappeaux, couronnes de diverses fleurs et verdeurs". (1) Paris through the ages. Old-time drawings show vegetable and flower merchants sheltered under awnings around the Chatelet. The Letters Patent of Charles VI, May 13, 1416 (1): "Desirons que devant notre Chastelet, ait une notable place belle et spacieuse, ordons que la boucherie soit du tout, démolie, jusqu'au rez de terre, sans y réserver rien, et ordonnons que l'écorcherie qui était derrière le grand pont de Paris n'y soit plus" (2). This later became the poultry market. LES HALLES CENTRALES It has been said that the Frankish kings owned a large territory on the right bank of the Seine called (campella), and that they donated land to establish the Paris cemetery outside the city. Not far from there, the cattle market was established; the wheat market we saw in the Cité was transferred there, and later, when Philip-Augustus annexed these districts to Paris, he had two large enclosed and covered market halls built (3), and brought a fair there, which he bought from the monks of Saint-Lazare, in 1183. Letters patent in the form of a transaction were signed between Philippe-Auguste and the Chapter of Paris in 1222, to regulate this purchase. These letters patent were called Charta Pacis, and stipulated that the bishop would have full justice in the old town of Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois, in the Culture l'Evêque and in the Clos Brunel; in other words, the annexation of these towns to Paris by the new enclosure. (1) Ordinances of the kings of France. (2) Paris through the ages. (3) Delamare, Traité de Police. were located on the bishop's land, the king agreed that for three weeks at a time, i.e. one-third of the time, the provost of Paris would deliver wheat measures to the bishop's officers, and that they would exercise the emoluments; in addition, said officers and servants would enjoy the franchises. The "Halles des Champeaux" were to become the "Halles centrales", and would continue to expand as the population of Paris grew. The old regulations show that the halle aux poirées (pear market) was located between the rue Saint-Honoré and the halle aux blés (wheat market), in the side streets of this crossroads, as this trade has always been conducted in the street. In the past, only master gardeners were allowed to display their wares at this market every day of the week, and until around 1860, they didn't pay the City of Paris any market fees. I remember being told by elders, when I was young, that this was a gift that had been made to the master gardener community in past centuries. I haven't been able to find this document anywhere, nor is it cited by any author who has written on the subject. However, Delamarre's Traité de Police is very comprehensive in this respect. It must simply have been an old, time-honored custom, and one that resisted even more than half a century after the Revolution. ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF VEGETABLES Vegetable herbs are indispensable to human nutrition. The Latins called them olera (1) (vegetables). That's why gardeners were called Olitores, and the herb market, Olitorium forum. The successive introduction of vegetables into the crops of the Middle Ages marked, as it were, the stages of progress achieved by gardening. Improvements to vegetable crops were to run parallel to the development of the gardening guild. Without wishing to research the exact origins of vegetable plants, which would be beyond the scope of this book, we will instead focus on the place they occupied in the cultivation of our ancestors. We will therefore cite them below, in order of importance, wherever possible. 1 - Cabbage and cauliflower Among these plants, the most famous was cabbage; the Latins called it Brassica. From a therapeutic point of view, it was placed above all other medicines: (1) Olivier de Serres. llized Oy GO0 it was a universal remedy. Chrysyppe de Gnyde, a famous Greek physician, wrote an entire volume on the properties of cabbage, both as a food and as a remedy. Pliny felt the same way about this plant, and said: "It's no wonder that the Romans kept all the doctors away from their city for many years, and that they used cabbage to cure all illnesses. . The ancients claimed that of all the virtues of cabbage, none was more certain than that of guaranteeing and curing drunkenness. They derived this fact from the antipathy between Cabbage and Vine, and from the fact that wine also retains the same aversion. This is what the poet Alexis expresses in Athenaeus, with these lines, speaking of the Sybarites, great drunkards: Yesterday, my friend, you drank only too much, By such a great excess your head is heavy. Would you like to cure it? Instead of such a syrup: You must only fast and take under the tent, A dish of boiled cabbage from the hands of a servant. In Henri Estienne's Maison Rustique, published in 1597, we find a whole treatise on medicine, with vegetable plants. He says: Le premier bouillon de chou rouge, avec beurre ou huile et sans sel, lâche le ventre, mûrit la toux et rend la voix plus agréable. Creamed with sugar, it's ideal for asthmatics and lung sufferers. Cabbage seed in broth or powder is excellent against children's worms; used in another way it gives milk to wet nurses, the juice or juice fights venom taken from eating mushrooms, otherwise it cures burns, good remedy for curing gout, etc. In a word, it was a panacea. Cabbage has been around since time immemorial, and is native to all temperate countries. The flora of Asia mentions it along with turnips and rabe, which were grown as a single crop. The Hebrews had no names to distinguish these varieties from one another; on the contrary, the Arabs had a name for each of them. The ancients were already aware of how easily this plant degenerates. If you sow old cabbage seed," they said, "you'll get Raves, and if you sow old Raves seed, you'll get Cabbages. That's where the proverb comes from: "Sow cabbages and you'll get Raves". This proverb implies that an undertaking had a completely different event and purpose than the one proposed. In the 16th century, only a dozen varieties of cabbage were known. Olivier de Serres, writing around 1600, said: "We believe we recognize in the caulifiori of the Italians, our flowering cabbages, which are still quite rare in France, but will hold an honorable place in the gardens thanks to their delicacy, and which will be mentioned as something proper and useful". So, around 1600, cauliflowers were little known in France, and it's worth adding that Olivier de Serres lived in the South of France, in Montpellier, and that cauliflowers were not yet grown in Paris. They were known as brassica cauliflora, or brassica cypria, because they originate from Cyprus. Around 1700, gardeners were still saying that the best seeds came from Italy. The famous agronomist Olivier de Serres was right when he said that cauliflowers would take an honorable place in gardens. Today, they are even grown outside gardens, in open fields covering hundreds of hectares. In Paris, they're available all year round, with the first plants coming from Algeria, followed by those from Provence. Then Paris market gardeners supply the halles from May until the big frosts, i.e. the beginning of December: growers around St-Germain bring them at the end of summer and throughout autumn. PenO08 dant l'hiver, les Bretons qui en font une culture spéciale sur le littoral de l'Océan, protégés de la gelée par le gulf-stram, approvisi onnent la capitale et les autres grandes villes. 1l. - SALADS Chicory and lettuce were sometimes confused by the ancients. Wild chicory, now cultivated with great improvement, grows spontaneously throughout Europe, except for the north. In the past, it was also widely used medicinally as a depurative. Chicory has been cultivated for a very long time, and now has a very large number of varieties. When blanched, it makes one of our best salads. Chicory has more or less the same properties, and there are also several varieties, but they are less distinct from one another than curly endive. Endive, a large-rooted chicory similar to coffee chicory, belongs to the Mediterranean region, and has been cultivated since Greek-Roman times. There are two species of watercress: 1° Cresson Alénois A olere (to feed), because when mixed with meat, it gives it a good taste; it was once sought-after for certain properties of its seeds. Its cultivation dates back to ancient times and is now widespread. The Persians held it in such high esteem that they fed it to their children, to give them strength and courage. 2° Watercress was held in the same esteem, and has also been known for a very long time. It is picked along streams or near fountains. Today, some growers have devoted themselves specifically to this crop, which they cultivate with a certain art in specially established "cressonnières". Lettuce was called lactuea by the Latins, because of the milky juice it was filled with. The ancients spoke of them28 with the same praise as cabbages. It has been said that one of the branches of the Valerian family, which gave masters to the Roman Empire, had taken the name of Lactucians, for having bred a singular species in their gardens, which we suppose to be our Romaine(l). The latter is said to have been brought to Paris, during the reign of Charles V, by Bureau. de la Rivière, the king's favorite. This great figure must have visited Avignon several times, but in May 1389 he was there with Jeanne, Countess of Boulogne and Auvergne, whom he had proposed in marriage to Gaston Phébus, Count of Foire, his guardian, on behalf of the Duc de Berry. It was this princely marriage that brought Romaine to Paris. Wild Lettuce grows spontaneously in all temperate countries, and has been cultivated for over two thousand years. From a medicinal point of view, Doctors Estienne and Liébault considered it a very good remedy: "it refreshes the heart, softens the stomach and makes the good blood abound. Its juice, mixed with rosé oil, soothes headaches; it is used in gargles, mixed with pomegranate juice, for inflammation of the gullet. The seed, crushed with white poppy seed, tempers the ardors of Venus. Lamb's lettuce grows wild in all temperate countries. It seems to have originated in Sardinia. It is grown nowadays only around large cities. Dandelion, like Lamb's lettuce, grows wild in all temperate countries. For the last ten years or so, Parisian market gardeners have been cultivating the improved Dandelion; it is already much larger than the wild Dandelion, and has certainly not yet reached all the perfection it is capable of. It makes an excellent winter salad. Now grown by market gardeners, it (1) Le Ménagier de Paris. 4 there is no doubt that it will reach a degree of perfection that will place it on a par with the other plants cultivated by these specialists. Purslane was once one of the most widely grown lettuces. It has been cultivated since ancient times. It was used medicinally to combat many illnesses. 111 - MELON The melon is thought to have come to Europe from several different countries, including India and Africa (1), where it may have been cultivated at the same time. The natives of the countries where it grew wild were perhaps not long without recognizing its pleasant smell and delicious taste. Hence the honors of cultivation, just like the cucumber whose cultivation dates back thousands of years. But despite their antiquity, these plants have not been as useful to people as cabbages and onions; moreover, their cultivation is only easy in warm climates, where it is quite elementary, requiring no great preparation of the soil, nor much fertilizer. In Algeria today, the Maltese who grow this crop plant the seeds in situ, just as they do in France for beans, only they water them when the need arises. The Romans also cultivated melons, which they confused with cucumbers, proving that they were not very sweet. In their vast empire, they cultivated these plants in warm climates, but did not introduce them to the Gauls, whose climate was resistant to this crop. There is no mention of them in Charlemagne's capitularies, nor in the Ménagier de Paris, which seems to define Parisian market gardening at the end of the 14th century. Its importation into Paris may date back to the early 16th century, under François I. It is likely that in the (1) De Candolle, Origine des plantes culticées. 06 south of France it was cultivated before this time. The first Cantaloupe melons were brought from Armenia to Italy around the 15th century (1), and the first green-fleshed melon grown in France, near Rouen, was brought from Africa by a monk from Grammont in the 16th century. The "maraîchère" variety is less delicate, and until the beginning of this century, when market gardeners began to have frames, it was cultivated by them much more than the cantaloupe. The latter were probably only cultivated in the gardens of great people, where there was everything needed to establish this crop. When I arrived in Paris around 1860, I still remember seeing market melons being grown by a few market gardeners, albeit in the late season and on top of the soil; they planted two rows per layer and pruned very short, although they produced fine fruit when sufficiently watered, but left much to be desired in terms of quality, compared with today's varieties. At that time, the south of France still didn't send any; they were sold at almost the same price as today's good ones. It's worth adding that these vine-ripened fruits were still preferable to Cavaillon melons, which ripen by force in the straw, and of which many fruit stores are overcrowded. The ancients took great care in planting and re-growing their melons. Let's listen to Olivier de Serres on this subject: "The hottest part of the garden is chosen for the melon patch. In temperate countries, a layer two or three feet high should be planted, sheltered from the wind, along a wall. The maistrise for this plant consists in uprooting it to replant it, as these plants fear being disturbed in their roots. (1) Louis Noisette, Manuel du Jardinier. 98 To produce melons within twenty-four hours, enclose the seed in baskets or earthen pots, among the febrile and well fertilized earth, before having soaked the seed in wine or other liquors, one or two days. And then bake the baskets or earthen pots in the oven as soon as you have baked the bread, where for the remaining heat of the batch, in one day and one night the seeds will grow and rise from the earth. In cold weather, place them in large crates on wheels, to shelter them on bad days and especially nights. To protect these plants from the cold, place glass covers over them. These covers are large hats shaped like bells, wide at the bottom, or like still hats, with no rim at the end. Their size is a foot in diameter to wrap around the melon pit. The bottom of the pit should be heated with recent horse manure (1)". This treatise on the cultivation of melons, published by the greatest agronomist of the 16th century, shows that this crop was not within the reach of many people. It's also the first time we hear of these large glass caps, fashioned as bells, whose description gives us a good idea of our first garden bells. In a more recent work published by M. Delamarre around 1700, entitled Traité de Police, the Melon is also mentioned. It is, he says, one of the most difficult plants to cultivate. "To choose the best ones: those with a good smell, the heaviest, the thickest tails; they can also be recognized by the number of small marks imprinted on their bark, like so many nail strokes, which means, according to gardeners, that they have been grown by an overabundance of sap which they have been better nourished than the others". (1) Olivier de Serres, Théâtre de l'Agriculture. 208 These signs mentioned by the author, for recognizing the quality of a good melon, are absolutely correct. We might add that when the fruit has been well nourished by sap, and has reached maturity, the tail detaches from it, which gardeners call "decerner". This is a sign to be added to those cited by Delamarre. Sometimes, when the fruit has reached full size, in stormy weather, the sap causes it to split. To avoid this accident, which takes away much of their flavor, the gardener is obliged to twist or make an incision in the branch carrying them, to stop the excess vegetation. We'll come back to this cultivation in a moment. Ancient authors tell us nothing about the pruning they underwent; in all likelihood, none at all. 1 Doctors Charles Estienne and Jean Liébault, in their Maison Rustique, published in 1597, treat melon cultivation as a perfume. They claimed that horse manure was detrimental to its quality. "To guarantee them from veroniss and pussons, sow origene around them, or iquez branches between the plants. To make a fragrant, good-smelling pompon, as soon as you have removed the seed from the melon and wiped it dry, place it among seiche roses or musk seeds, and keep it that way until you need to sow it, and if you like, sow them together, or soak their seeds four days before sowing in damask water or perfume; by the same means, give them such odor and flavor as you please; if you soak their seeds, in such liquor before sowing. as in mead, or rose water, powdered with sugar or musk; however, watering takes away much of the said odor, and even flavor. To make pompons or sweet cucumbers, soak the seed in very sweet water, or honey; and to make them sweet, in ewe's milk or mead and sow them, then when they are sown, powder them with very dry earth and water them a little. The woman being in her months, by pourmenant by the boards of pompons, squashes and cucumbers, makes them seicher and die: the fruit which escapes will be bitter. Pompons, which smell like roses, are very useful for quenching thirst during a burning fever. Our ancestors made great use of perfumes and sought every means at their disposal to create them. Lavender, balsam, civet, etc. were among the perfumes most often used by princes. These men, in constant fear of being poisoned, had numerous manuscripts on how to make their own perfumes. This was an excellent reason to propagate these selected plants. The melon seed was one of the four cold seeds used in medical emulsions. Ancient doctors, and even many modern ones, claim that melons can cause fevers in autumn. That's why, under the ancien régime, the police magistrate would issue an ordinance prohibiting the sale of melons at this time of year. Today, everyone is free to sell melons for as much as they're worth. IV. - OTHER CUCURBITACES CUCUMNS, VEGETABLES AND CUCUMBERS Squash, gourds and calabashes. These fruit-vegetables are also native to warmer climates. They are mentioned in treatises on plants (1) a century before our era. The ancient authors included them under the single genus of serminous plants crawling on the earth. Charlemagne cites them in his Capitularies, proof that they have been cultivated in our countries since antiquity, probably imported by the Gauls. As far as medicine is concerned, the ancients claimed that nothing (1) De Candolle, Origine des plantes cultivées. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS more sovereign for soothing the ardor of burning fevers, tempering thirst, loosening the belly, than the frequent use of pumpkin juice cooked without water, in a new earthen pot, placed in the oven; nothing is better "for dryness of the tongue, for thin, feverish people, than the use of pumpkin pulp, or syrup made from their juice". The cultivation of these plants is widespread; there are hardly any villages where they are not grown. As the Pumpkin is in the same family as the previous ones, its cultivation is not much more delicate. However, to obtain beautiful fruit, when they are specially cultivated, they need certain care. These plants require a lot of water once the fruit has set and begun to swell, leaving only one or two fruits per plant. In our countries, if you want to be sure of success, you must raise the plant under chassis, and when spring is cold and rainy, it is not harmful to plant them under cloches to facilitate recovery. But I'm talking here from a market-gardener's point of view, and this plant is now only exceptionally cultivated by them. The capital is supplied with these fruit-vegetables by growers in the outer suburbs. The cucumber is thought to have originated in Tartary and India. It has been cultivated in these countries for at least three thousand years, and was introduced to Europe by the Arians. Its cultivation is hardly more delicate than the previous one, when done in its season. Also cultivated under Charlemagne, and continuously since. In the Ménagier de Paris treatise on courtillage, published in 1393, only squash is mentioned, but the author, not being a professional, and writing under the dictation of a practitioner, probably included this plant and others of the same family, such as cucumbers and gherkins, under the word courge. All authors since that time who have dealt with this subject, speak of the cultivation of the Cucumber. It's one of the easiest market garden plants to force, and doesn't need as much sun and daylight as the melon. Provided it has the necessary heat, it grows easily. In Belgium, and even in England, this crop is grown on a large scale with the help of thermosiphon heat. Since coal is cheaper than in France, it is difficult for Parisian market gardeners to compete. Twenty to twenty-five years ago, this crop was quite lucrative, but it's tending to disappear, and soon it will only be grown in middle-class homes as early vegetables. There are two types of cucumber: green and white, and today there are a number of varieties of each. The gherkin is a small cucumber that is picked before it reaches maturity. The gherkin cucumber has long since become a well-established variety, grown in open fields like the pumpkin. It is grown by farmers around Paris, within a radius of forty to fifty kilometers. V. - THE TOMATO AND THE AUBERGINE The tomato is relatively new to our countries; like its congeners, the potato, it comes to us from America, and was brought to Portugal at the beginning of the 18th century. In these countries, it can be cultivated without art, whereas in ours, to have a profitable crop, it must always be sown (hot) and transplanted in the same way; it is hardly before May 15 that we can risk putting it (in place), and even then sometimes there are little frosts which do it considerable harm. It's a fact that, before it entered the market, it was first cultivated in the gardens of the great and good, and it's only in this century that its cultivation has made great progress in Paris. Market gardeners first cultivated it extensively, until the middle of the century, when a few grew it as early crops, but with the rapid means of p08 communication, the Midi sent some, and today Algeria supplies a considerable amount, making it difficult for Parisian market gardeners to compete, given that this plant is very easy to grow in warm climates. Growers on the left bank of the Seine, near Lonjumeau, Monthléry and Arpajon, who have very hot soils, have begun to cultivate it in open fields, and it now covers tens of hectares. As a result, whatever the season, market gardeners find it hard to compete with the competition from either the Midi or the outer suburbs, and its cultivation is increasingly abandoned by the latter. We will, however, come back to its cultivation, the new varieties that have been obtained through selection, etc. Eggplants originated in India, where they have been cultivated for a very long time. Its cultivation spread to Africa before the Middle Ages. Europeans only discovered it in the 17th century. Like the tomato, in our climate it has to be grown in (hot) frames. Market gardeners have also grown it, but not as extensively as the tomato. Moreover, this plant has not entered the popular diet to the same extent as its sister, the tomato. By its very nature, it is not capable of rendering the same services. Its taste is very bland, and it needs special preparation to be good to eat. We grew it ourselves for some fifteen years, at a time when the Midi shipped very little of it, and even then it was worth the effort. Today, however, it has been completely abandoned, so to speak, and perhaps something could be done. Instead of trying to grow it early, in July and August, we could plant it later, for example after the Carrot of the cloche layers, prune it to keep it bushy, as low as possible, and as soon as the cool nights arrive, place two boxes one on top of the other O0Q and put frames over them. This wouldn't be expensive, since that's when the frames are stored. In this way, Aubergines could be sold from mid-August to mid-November. It's an idea that I'm putting forward, but it's up to any practitioner to try it out. Cultivation is becoming so difficult for market gardeners, that it may not always be a question of trying to obtain plants early, but also of delaying them as much as possible, as our ancestors did for certain plants. VI. - BULB POTATOES AiL, ONION, PEAR. CIBOULE, CIVET. Garlic originated in Sicily. It is a widespread plant that spreads easily. Its cultivation dates back to ancient times (1). In Egypt, the plant was so highly esteemed that it was long included among the gods. The Greeks, on the other hand, hated it, and even condemned certain offences to eating nothing but garlic for a certain number of days. The Latins had neither the veneration for garlic of the Egyptians, nor the contempt of the Greeks; they considered it a useful food for country folk and sailors. Eaten on an empty stomach, garlic was the theriac of rustic people in times of plague; it was also used against certain illnesses. The onion is one of the oldest known vegetables, its origins lost in the mists of time. The Americans knew it before Columbus discovered their country. The Egyptians paid it divine homage; it is, along with cabbage and turnips, one of the oldest known vegetables. Before people began to grow cereals, these two vegetables were the staple of their diet. It was mentioned by Charlemagne in his capitularies. In fact, we (1) De Candolle, Origine des plantes cultivées. 98 have published this list, which is undoubtedly the sum total of the vegetables and flowers our ancestors were growing at the time. Like cabbage, it was used medicinally in a large number of cases. Tobacco being unknown, it was used as a substitute for it, to be inhaled through the nose to "purge the brain". Leeks, which the ancients called "porreau" or "porrée", are native to the Mediterranean region. The Latins called it porrum, because its root is not round like that of other bulbs. It was not known under Charlemagne, and is not mentioned in his capitularies. In the past, its seeds were used to throw into barrels to prevent the wine from becoming sour, or if it was sour, to bring it back to good quality. It was also claimed that leeks cooked under ashes had great virtue for dissolving drunkenness. Ciboule comes from Siberia, and was unknown to the ancients. It arrived in Europe via Russia in the 16th century. Civet is widespread throughout Europe, growing wild in Italy and Greece. VII. - ROOT VEGETABLES BETTERAVE, CARROT, PANAIS, RADIS, SALSIFIS, etc. Beet, cultivated for its roots, originates from the Mediterranean islands to the Caspian Sea. Beet juice "sucked through the nose purges the brain". Carrots, parsnips or pastenades, and Chervis, are old plants cultivated since the time of Charlemagne, and played a major role in people's diets before the popularization of the potato. Carrots in particular are an excellent vegetable for all kinds of stews. Some varieties are used as animal feed, and belong more to the field of agriculture than horticulture. C Ancient physicians claimed that these plants had the virtue of inducing urination. The leaves "crushed and put on wounds are very beneficial", says Henri-Estienne. Turnips belong to what the ancients called the "Raves" family, but are milder and only eaten cooked. They were called Napus by the Latins. Before Jenner's discovery of the vaccine, doctors recommended them to "push out" smallpox and measles; mixed with a decoction of lentils (1). The Egyptians made good oil from them. Radish originated in the temperate regions of the ancient world, but has been grown in our gardens since historic times. Horseradish comes from Russia, its name derives from the strong root, and it is commonly known as "German mustard" or "Capuchin mustard". Ancient doctors believed that horseradish root, when chopped and mixed with white wine, caused profuse urination. "Drunk with mead, it cures jaundice. The leaves, cooked in soup, relieve inflammation of the liver and spleen. Horseradish was generally used against all urinary tract diseases. Salsify grew wild in Greece in the 16th century, and Olivier de Serres described it as a new crop for his country. Scorsonera, or Spanish salsify, was not yet cultivated in the 16th century; it was known only in the wild, being spontaneous throughout southern Europe. It was called the "viperine" plant, because the ancients claimed that it was an antidote against the bite of vipers. VIII. - VEGETABLES GROWN FOR THEIR LEAVES SPINACH, GARLIC Spinach was unknown to the Greeks and Romans; it was new in the 14th century; the Ménagier de Paris mentions it in (1) Henri Estienne. 008 his treatise. Spinach is thought to have come to us from the Orient.

It is good for those whose voice or breathing is impeded, or who cough a lot" (1). Sorrel, or Acetasa in Latin, meaning sour or acidic, is a widely-used vegetable herb. It has been cultivated for a very long time. It has some medicinal properties, but is less widely used today than in the past. Patience has more or less the same properties. Poirée or Bette is a very old plant, highly esteemed by the Greeks, while the Latins, on the contrary, despised it as a dirty, tasteless food. Bonne-Dame or Belle-Dame is a bland, tasteless and tasteless species of arrowroot. Cultivation of this plant has now been abandoned. IX. - VEGETABLES GROWN FOR THEIR SEEDS Beans are an old vegetable of obscure origin, due to the antiquity of their cultivation. Ancient peoples all cultivated it, as do modern ones. In the ancient pagan cult of the Romans, fava beans were included in sacrifices made in honor of the goddess Carna. She played an important role in ancient Italy. As religions succeeded one another and left indelible traces in human mores, the custom of putting a broad bean in cakes on the Feast of the Three Kings undoubtedly originated. There are several varieties, including the marsh bean, once cultivated by the market gardeners of Paris, but nowadays, in general, the bean belongs to the domain of agriculturc. The Hlaricot (Phaseolus vulgaris) was already cultivated by the ancient Greeks in remote times, under the name of fasiolos. The bean was probably known in Asia and Africa for a very long time. Charlemagne (1) Henri Estienne. 08 had it grown on his farms. But it was mainly after the discovery of America that it spread to Europe. In the 16th century, gardeners called it "Turkish bean". At the beginning of this century, until around 1855, market gardeners grew it as an early crop. This crop was extremely labor-intensive, and the increasing cost of cultivation, combined with competition from products from the south of France, forced them to abandon it. In Algeria, the crop is grown on a large scale, and in January we saw beans being picked for shipment to France, as the colonists say. After Algeria, the South of France sends us some, and then the suburban growers supply the halles. We can these vegetables all winter long, even when there are new ones, so that everyone can eat green beans all year round. Shelled beans are also supplied by growers in the suburbs. As for dried beans, they belong to agriculture and are imported in large quantities from Hungary. Peas are also very old, cultivated by the Greeks before our era, they were imported into our country by the invading Gauls. Their cultivation went through much the same phases as that of beans. Lentils have also been cultivated since prehistoric times. X. - STRAWBERRIES A number of strawberry species are native to most of Europe. The Greeks and Romans did not cultivate them. We have seen that in the 14th century, Charles V had them planted in the garden of the Louvre, more as a decorative plant than for production. Olivier de Serres says of this plant that "it is so easy to pick up that only small tokens with a few Q subtle filaments are needed to grow. Suffering equally well from cold and shade, they come naturally, without cultivation, through agrarian forests, among the clump of trees. However, they become engrossed as they are treated. So to grow large strawberries, transplant them to a sunny spot in the garden, weed them well and water them in dry spells, cut off any running shoots and force them to stay in their lodges. But to produce larger strawberries in greater abundance than the common variety, scront strawberry plants require special treatment. This is by not allowing them to climb to the ground, but forcing them to rise to the top, shaping themselves like a small shrub. This is done by cutting them off with the fingernail, as they naturally want to climb to the ground. For this reason, the plants are planted a foot apart, in rows. The soil of which, after cultivation, will yield strawberries exceeding in size, goodness and abundance, the common ones, and in such qualities will render themselves almost admirable, if the breed of itself is good. Given that by such treatment the most savage are freed". This quote shows that the famous 16th-century agronomist already knew how to improve the wild strawberry. This crop, so defined at the time, has been continued. It has been greatly improved by the introduction of Chilean and Carolina strawberry plants, whose hybridization with our own varieties has produced large-fruited strawberry plants. It's not surprising, then, that we now have several hundred varieties of strawberry, each more beautiful and better than the last. As a result, strawberry cultivation has expanded considerably. For half a century, strawberries have been grown on hundreds, if not thousands, of hectares of land around the capital. The strawberry is not only consumed immediately, and is already needed by the four million inhabitants of the Scine department, when its price is affordable for 906 everyone; but, in addition, confectioners make excellent jams from it, and distillers a liqueur they call: la fraisette. The strawberry is a very healthy food, although picked in the woods, in the wild, where it can be soiled, or even tainted by the venom of certain beasts, we know of no example where it has never harmed anyone: "Among other conveniences that they would bring", says Doctor Charles Estiennc in the 16th century, "the juice or wine that is expressed from strawberries, is sovereign to remove the redness and small scratches that come to the face, from heat of liver, even to soothe the redness of the eyes, and erase the spots and pimples of ladrerie". XI. - ASPARAGUS Asparagus was highly esteemed by the ancients, and is no less so by moderns. The Latins called it Asparaqus. Old authors mention it as a wild plant in the earliest times. We ate it in Algeria in 1892, and it is much more bitter than the cultivated variety. Very good for the stomach and considered a tonic, it has the disadvantage that, almost as soon as eaten, it imparts a bad odor to the urine. Our ancestors under Charlemagne knew nothing about growing asparagus, since it is not mentioned in his capitularies. If the scholars of the time had known about the works of the ancients, who spoke of it, they would not have failed to draw the monarch's attention to the virtues of Asparagus, which was then growing without use. In the 16th century, Olivier de Serres was cultivating it, and does not mention it as a new plant, although he does say the same about cauliflower. It's true that Asparagus hadn't had the honors of divinity like Cabbage, or even Lettuce. Asparagus must therefore have been first cultivated in France, between the 9th and 16th centuries; it was imported in 908 by some obscure and modest man, at an unspecified date. La Quintinie is the first gardener known to have forced its cultivation. XII. - THE ARTICHAUT AND THE CARDON Cardoon is thought to have originated near the Mediterranean, indicating a very ancient culture. The Romans ate the receptacle bearing the flowers, while we eat the fleshy leaves. Cardoon has always been considered an excellent food. According to some authors, Artichoke is a derivative of Cardoon. For others, it's a very old plant known to the Romans. It was also known to the Egyptians, but had not yet become a food. Its root was once recommended as a cure for dropsy. Celery is widespread in all climates; it is an old cultivated plant with a number of varieties, of which celeriac is the most distinctive. XIII. - THE CONDIMENTS CHERFEUIL, PERSIL, ESTRAGON, etc. Chervil has been cultivated since the Christian era. It is an excellent condiment that "stimulates the appetite and purifies the blood". Parsley is an old local plant, which ranks first among the herbs used to season stews. Charlemagne had his gardeners cultivate it in all his domains. Its flowers are much sought-after by bees. The ancients also used it extensively in medicine, notably to make women lose their milk when giving birth. Tarragon, called "stragon" by ancient gardeners, has the same virtues as arugula, but these herbs should not be eaten alone, because of the "excessive heat they bring to those who use them". As a result, they are rarely used as a condiment in salads and sauces, along with many other herbs such as salad burnet, savory, perce-pierre, etc. XIV. - PINEAPPLE The pineapple originated in America, but was introduced early by Europeans to Asia and Africa. It was not until the reign of Louis XV that it was brought to France. Having received two carnations of the fruit from America, the King entrusted them to his head gardener at the Versailles kitchen garden, one of the Lenormand family, who from father to son governed the garden for almost a century. But cultivation requires so much care in our countries that it will never be commonplace, and even today it is only done by a few specialists, who find it hard to keep up with the competition from hot countries. Whatever happens, pineapple cultivation will not be completely abandoned in our countries; if the specialists who grow it for the trade are forced to abandon it, for lack of sufficient income, it will still be grown in the gardens of the great. The majestic bearing of its fruit, its size, goodness and finesse will always make it a first-rate ornamental plant. XV. - THE POTATO The potato, like the tomato, is a relatively new vegetable, imported into Europe by various routes in the 16th century. It was only towards the end of the 18th century that it was vulgarized and became an established part of the European diet. Certain vegetables, such as cabbage and onions, played a major role in the diets of ancient peoples; when wheat and other cereals were O8 cultivated, they eclipsed vegetables. The importation of the potato into Europe has certainly not eclipsed the precious grasses, but after wheat, it is the potato that plays the greatest role in the diet of modern peoples. Today, we even wonder how workers of all professions, in all countries, lived when the precious tuber was unknown: "It is the most beautiful conquest that Europe has made over the new world" (1). Originating in America, it comes from the land of gold, and has rendered more services to peoples than the vile metal (2) used to incite men to exploit one another. When Christopher Columbus landed in America, the potato was already being cultivated by the natives, at least in temperate countries. Cultivation began in Chile, then spread to Peru and Bolivia. The Chileans first harvested it in the wild; it bore little resemblance to today's potatoes, they called it "papas" and the Indians called it "batata", a word that has since been adopted by the Arabs to designate it. The first imports did not excite the enthusiasm of the farmers to whom they were entrusted, due to the smallness of the tubers; they were rather gnarled roots than anything else. It's obvious that if they'd only had the shape of today's tubers, they would have attracted attention more quickly. Olivier de Serres, in his Traité de l'Agriculture, mentions them vaguely, a century after the discovery of America. Some authors even claim that he confused it with the Jerusalem artichoke; only, this tuber was so small that he could not foresee the glorious future of his "Cartouffle". (word taken from the German Kartoffel: Potato). (1) Ernest Rose, Histoire de la pomme de terre (2) Victor Hugo. D00 In 1620, Gaspard Bauhin mentions the potato in Franche-Comté; as coming from Italy and Switzerland, under the name of (Cartouffli), which can only be the same plant mentioned by Olivier de Serres, under the name of (Cartouffle) and which became the (Tartouche) of the Francs-Comtois and Burgundians. In our youth, the ancients still used this term to designate the potato. At that time and in those countries, the potato's detractors spread the rumor, which had become legend, that the plant should not be eaten, as it could cause leprosy, being a member of the Belladonna family, and all the plants of this family are a very violent poison. To bolster their legend, they claimed that a ruling by the Besançon parliament forbade this crop, on pain of fine. Treated in this way by the powers-that-be, the potato was unable to make any serious progress and remained a plant rather despised than tasted. However, in 1655, it was given the honor of entering the King's garden (Muséum or Jardin des Plantes), and being cultivated there. Various farmers in their respective countries tried to cultivate it, but it was so feared by the people that nobody wanted to eat it; it was barely fit, it was said, for animal feed. It's so true that legends take root in the minds of men, that it took the perseverance and tenacity of the illustrious Parmentier over the last two centuries to popularize it and give it the place it occupies in people's sustenance. Parmentier used a number of stratagems to achieve his goal. At a court celebration, when potatoes were in bloom, he attached one of these flowers to the king's buttonhole, and the potato made its entry into the court. Charming and innocent flowers, wherever you come from, your presence is always welcomed by men, and in all their gatherings, gay 906 or sad, you are always welcome. And you, modest flower of the Potato, if your presence has contributed to the popularization of the tuber that gives birth to you, by the services it renders to mankind: be the first and most blessed of all flowers. Parmentier obtained permission to plant a few acres of the much-discussed plant, choosing between the Grenelle plain and the Gravelle plateau. He chose the latter to demonstrate to his opponents that the plant he so insistently advocated could grow in any terrain, as the Gravelle plateau is almost arid. Twenty years ago, another distinguished agronomist, Georges Ville, chose the same site to demonstrate the use of chemical fertilizers. But back to Parmentier, these potatoes were to be shared among the unfortunate people of Paris. Some of them began to steal them, so he had them guarded; the great agronomist said that his trial did not fail its purpose, for certainly the thieves were not rich people. Afterwards, he offered a dinner especially for the plant's detractors. This dinner, from soup to desserts, was composed of dishes, of which the Potato held the most arge place. Everyone dined well and no one was inconvenienced; Parmentier had won his case. From that moment on, the potato took its rightful place in people's diets. Its cultivation has continued to increase ever since (1). In 1789, an estimated 4,500 hectares of potatoes were planted in France, and a century later, in 1889, more than 1,500,000 hectares. In France, the area planted to potatoes already exceeds that of barley, reaches that of rye, half that of oats and a quarter of that of wheat. These figures illustrate the importance of (1) Elisée Reclus, Géographie universelle. 009 cultivating this precious tuber at the end of our century. It's true that this plant alone would be enough to feed entire peoples. When bread is too expensive, it replaces it in many cases, so there is no famine wherever the potato is grown. This marvellous Solanée has revolutionized agriculture, because it belongs more to this science than to horticulture. It's a source of new wealth, unknown to ancient farmers. It is estimated that the 1,500,000 hectares planted in 1889 produced a harvest of 135,000,000 quintals, worth approximately 600,000,000 francs. These figures speak for themselves (1). The number of varieties is prodigious (2), says M. de Vilmoin in his book on vegetable plants. We could count several thousand if we wanted to record all those that have been obtained and recommended over the last century; varieties suitable for all soils, all zones, all climates and easy to grow in all circumstances. At the beginning of the century, the market gardeners of Paris cultivated it as an early crop, but for the same reasons given for other vegetables, they had to abandon it. Settlers in the vicinity of Algeria's major ports grow this crop on a large scale, shipping it all winter and spring to France. Their planting begins as soon as the first rains arrive in September, and continues throughout the winter, so that they supply French markets with new vegetables long before we can plant them in our climate. (1) Elisée Reclus, Géographie universelle. (2) Vilmorin, Les Plantes potagères. 908 That's how far this vegetable has come in a century, a relatively short time in the history of mankind, and the services it has already rendered to people. Yet the man who has devoted all his strength, all his faculties, his whole life to popularizing it is barely known to rural populations, when the names of the great destroyers of men are on everyone's lips. This benefactor of humanity should have a statue in every major rural center, so that no one is unaware that he is the greatest man of modern times, because he knew how to provide food for people. But, alas, the agronomist, the farmer, the winegrower or the gardener are never appreciated for their true worth by the people they feed. Some plants that once enjoyed the honors of cultivation are now neglected. Laceron, for example, was cultivated and its roots eaten as a salad in Italy during the winter. The Italians found them sweet and pleasant-tasting. Ancient doctors used the stalk, which is full of yellowish milk, to cure certain illnesses, notably earache, etc. Today, except when fed to rabbits, Laceron is considered a noxious weed. In the past, market gardeners grew not only vegetables, but also medicinal and aromatic plants. These included Mallow, Marshmallow, Gentian, Passerage, Valerian and Angelica. The latter was still cultivated by some people as late as 1860. Among the aromatic plants: Rhue, Mint, Thyme, Savory, Rosemary, Anise, Fennel, Lavender, Pepper, are still grown by some, but in small quantities. LES JARDINIERS DE PARIS O08 FLOWERS, FRUITS, TREES CONSIDERED FROM A MORAL POINT OF VIEW In the previous chapter, we spoke of the role played by vegetables in the history of peoples. In ancient religions, certain vegetables were honored by divinity for the services they rendered. Today's more civilized people may no longer worship plants, but they still seek in them an allegorical image for their passions, afflictions, games and mourning. Vegetables offer analogies with our feelings, no less fertile than flowers and trees. By choosing the rudest, as it were, the most misunderstood of all: the Raves, they will illuminate the issue with a torrent of light, and prove themselves worthy of the rank assigned to them by morality. It is a nursery of beautiful analogies, says a great philosopher, that the bourgeois families of Raves, Beets, Carrots, Salsify. Celery, etc. Their collection represents the cooperators of the agricultural tram: each of these vegetables allies itself with the class of which it is the portrait. The large turnip remains at the table of large farmers; the turnip, less rustic, can appear on more distinguished tables. The carrot represents the experienced gardener whose usefulness is everywhere in evidence. Celery, with its acerbic flavor, gives the idea of those chamO pterous loves, where peasant men and women court each other with their fists. The fava bean, as we have said, played a role in ancient pagan religions, and to this day, the custom persists in Catholicism of putting one in the cake eaten with the family on the Feast of the Kings. The Athenians ate chickpeas (Pois lizes, Pois pointus, Garbanzos) on certain feast days. Some southern countries, in the minds of the people, have retained fidelity to old customs; for example, eating chickpeas on certain holidays of the year. Such is the case in Italy, Spain and even the south of France. In Montpellier, for example, people used to say that when Jesus Christ entered Jerusalem, he passed through a "sesierai" (from Cicer, the Latin name for this pea), a field of chickpeas, and that it was in memory of this day that the custom of eating these peas was perpetuated. In ancient times, the Roman nobility used to throw vegetables at the people to demonstrate their superiority. Flowers have always provided garlands on feast days, depending on the climate, the season, the customs of the country and the status of those using them. Laurel adorns the foreheads of warriors and studious schoolchildren, ivy that of poets, myrtle crowns the heads of happy lovers. The flower is part of every ceremony, happy or sad, and takes its place everywhere. Even the most modest of celebrations is accompanied by flowers, which means that the rich flock to them in heaps. When it's a funeral procession, the most modest man has a wreath of flowers, and when it's a man of note, like our two Presidents of the Republic, who died within the space of a few years, you'd have to count by the cubic meters the flowers of every kind and provenance that are brought there. In even the most modest of homes, everyone tries to raise and care for a few flowers. In Paris, our squares rival the finest princely parks of yesteryear. Water features, cascades and fountains, with numerous swans and ducks from all over the world frolicking in their midst. Ornamental trees, shrubs of all kinds, flowers and lawns forming wonderfully tasteful copses, beds and lawns. Some gardens are planted in the style of Le Nôtre, in the French style, in the large parks; others are planted in the English style, according to the layout of the gardens. But all planted with an art that does credit to the gardeners of our time. Not even our cemeteries are true parks. The alleys are planted with ornamental trees of various species, each bearing the name of the tree it is planted with. The death squares are surrounded by flowerbeds planted with shrubs of all kinds. Citizens keep as many flowers as possible on the graves of their loved ones. Seen from afar, it looks more like a magnificent park than a necropolis. Those unable to erect a monument of any kind on the grave of a departed family member plant flowers which they tend religiously until the body is raised, which is done every five years, and the bones join those of our ancestors in the catacombs. Trees, regardless of their usefulness, their products or their pleasures, are more or less bound up with our ideas and affections; they are, for us, old acquaintances. It is in this respect that certain trees, which live for many years, present themselves to our imagination, when their presence strikes our sight; it is no longer just a tree adorned with all its attributes that comes to our mind, but a sort of old friend, who brings back to us the beautiful days of our childhood and our most tender adolescence. When you've been away from home for thirty-five or forty years, and you're about to return, sometimes your father's house has disappeared; all you know are a few roughnecks whose hair, like ours, has turned white and who bend their backs under the weight of the harness. So, when you come across one of these giants of the flora, a walnut tree, for example, you recognize it immediately and imagine that it recognizes you too. You stop under the shade of this old tree, which is still green despite having seen several generations of men born and die beside it. We're tempted to ask his forgiveness for the lacerations we've made with picks and sticks to steal some of his fruit. This little war exercised our skill and developed our strength. The nuts obtained by right of conquest were again the instruments of new games, which often provoked battles between comrades; and in the end they remained with the victor. But this didn't happen without being reported to the teacher, who in turn punished both winners and losers. Some of these old trees were also witness to the first kiss we shared with a little girl our own age, in our tenderest adolescence. A very chaste kiss, it has to be said, but one whose memory remains forever etched in our minds. Already bordering on old age, it seems to us that if this tree were to speak, it would reproach us for the ill-treatment we have inflicted on it; it would take its revenge by saying: once you didn't respect me, now you're old, your skull is bare and I've stayed green. Instead, he still shades you with his superb, haughty head. When we see these trees, which were old when we were young, in a short space of time, our whole existence is retraced in our minds. For haven't they also seen the funeral convoys of our dearest loved ones pass by at their feet? How many have disappeared since the time we left the country? So it gives us a certain satisfaction to see these old trees again, witnesses to all our joys and sorrows. Doesn't the weeping willow announce regret and sorrow in a very touching way? Doesn't it inspire sentimental melancholy, and its overall bearing invite you to reverie? His head, bowed over a grave, offers the image of a being overwhelmed by grief. The gentle, sentimental poet Alfred de Musset expressed his dying wish that one of these trees be planted on his grave in Père-Lachaise. This wish was fulfilled by his friends. The tree has grown since the time of his death, and today it completely covers the grave of one of the greatest poets of our century, and at least the most sentimental. DEuEed (OOS C We have seen that, under Henri IV, Louis XIII and Louis XIV, the capital had expanded considerably, and the gardeners who occupied the Saint-Eloi (where Saint-Paul Church is), Sainte-Catherine, Saint-Martin, Filles-Dieu, etc. estates retreated, all of these districts having been sold to middle-class citizens who built there. At the end of the last century, and even at the beginning of this one, the gardeners moved to the suburbs, outside the walls of Charles V, near the Bastille, rue de Lappe, which was cut through the middle of a marsh, and named after the owner; rue de la Roquette, in the grounds belonging to the Hospitalières of that name, rue Popincourt, on the site of the canal, faubourg du Temple, Saint-Martin, rue des Récollets, near the hopital Saint-Louis, rue des Marais du Temple, and further on, rue de Paradis, rue Bleue, then the passage Saulnier, which was opened in 1787, by the owner of that name, in the middle of his marshland. There was also the ruc des Porcherons, now rue Saint-Lazare. An honorable dean of Paris gardeners, M. Le Bouteux, by virtue of his family's seniority in the trade, tells us that his father-in-law was a gardener on the site of the Passage Tivoli, his grandfather started out on rue Saint-Lazare, and later moved to rue des Récollets. It's also likely that some of them set up shop on the Champs-Elysées side of the Seine, where they were to be found until the beginning of our century; allée des Veuves, which is now avenue de l'Alma. Crossing the Seine at the Pont de la Concorde, there were no other bridges downstream, but at Gros-Caillou, when the Ecole Militaire was built in 1767, some of them were relocated, and we've known them in these parts since 1870, and a little further up, in the Necker district. To find other market gardeners on the left bank at this time, we need to return almost to the banks of the Bièvre, near the Jardin des Plantes, rue de Buffon, rue de Poliveau. This street ran all the way to the Seine, at the site of the Orléans railroad station. It began near the church of Saint-Médard, but there were many more horticulturists on this side. The market gardeners, who had moved back to this point, were probably descendants of those who had inhabited the Plaee Maubert for several centuries. PARISIAN MARAICH GROWERS The cultivation of Parisian market gardeners has followed in small steps the progress made by La Quintinie and his successors in this art. Most of them had neither horse nor carriage, and drew water by hand, which was moreover not deep, inhabiting all the marshy areas. In addition to the ordinary crops grown by their ancestors, they used air beds to force lettuces, turnips and radishes. A few had bells, at first in small quantities, and then a few bells were used to cultivate lettuce until the end of the last century and the beginning of this one, when frames were added to the equipment used by the ancients, and from then on market gardening made rapid progress. Some had horses and carriages, and delivered manure to their colleagues. They were as much valets as gardeners. However, M. Le Bouteux, who quotes this fact to me, says that his grandfather, who did 50Q of this trade, had several thousand bells, raised seedlings in winter for other growers, and heated asparagus with bells using the system defined by La Quintinie. Already in the last century, the pleasure of eating asparagus before the season was given only to the king, as his famous gardener had said a century earlier. It's certain that all the greats who owned gardens wanted to imitate the king. Their gardeners followed in La Quintinie's footsteps, and when you don't have to count the cost price, the difficulty is not insurmountable when you know the culture to be established. This was not the case for market gardeners, who are everyone's gardeners. The question was whether this costly crop would be profitable enough to grow. Of course, it was only started on a small scale, so that we could judge what it could produce. Nevertheless, it's true that the first to try to imitate the great gardeners in this forced cultivation, were bold pioneers who paved the way for their sons and prepared the ground for the introduction of all the forced cultivation that the latter were to do, and which has become, today, the basis of Parisian market gardening. These great market gardeners, who had horses, also had cranks. The crank is very old," says Malpeyre in his Maison Rustique (1), "and its installation could cost three or four hundred francs. But most market gardeners didn't have the means to do so; nor were their establishments large enough to require such a tool. When they lived in marshy areas, it's quite possible that they had gutters where water ran continuously; later, they watered with bailers like the hortillons of Amiens and certain other towns. (1) Malpeyre, Bixio et Bailly, La Maison Rustique. 7 In hot countries, such as Algiers, watering consists of running water through gutters dug between each bed. In all these large marshes along the Agha Bay coastline, the water is shallow. A Noria pump set up in the highest part of the marsh and operated by a mule-drawn merry-go-round, throws a considerable quantity of water into a large cement basin, surrounded by mandarin trees, in which the gardener washes his vegetables, and only has to worry about getting it to flow where he wants to water. This is how the Arabs water their date palms in the oases. Their main occupation is to make the water flow, and steal it when they can. This is also the method used by the city of Paris to use its sewage pipes on the vast estates it irrigates. Water is pumped into the main sewer in Clichy, pumped back up and distributed to the irrigated land. Here, in addition to the watering effect, the water deposits all the fertilizers it contains in the soil it flows through, and returns to the Seine clear and limpid enough to be drunk. We've tasted it at Gennevillers and Achères, and all that's left is a faint taste of its primitive state. Let's return to the Parisian gardeners of the last century. Those who drew water by hand had wells in place in their marshes. Digging them was not very difficult: a hole a metre or two deep, with a barrel knocked down into it to support the soil, often sufficed. With the introduction of hand-cranks, as soon as you could afford to install them, there was only one well in the highest part of the marsh, and water had to be distributed everywhere. Wood was cheap in those days, so two planks joined together to form a gutter and sunk to ground level were used to lead the water into barrels; then came sandstone pipes laid with fountain putty or bitumen, sunk deeper into 98 the ground, passing through all the barrels, filling them one by one or all together if the ground was flat. I remember seeing this system again in old establishments when I first arrived in Paris. For watering, market gardeners used watering cans known as "turn-over" watering cans. They were carried with the knob backwards; when they reached their destination, a flick of the wrist on the handle was enough to turn them, and the other handle, placed behind them, was grasped to empty them. You can still see a few of these in the homes of old gardeners, but they're becoming increasingly rare. I still used them a year or two after arriving in Paris: like all apprentices, I sometimes dropped one on my bare feet, of course, I was told, to get the job into my head. The main crops for the majority of market gardeners were, in addition to the old-fashioned crops, a few layers in the air to advance radishes, turnips, parsley, sorrel and lettuce. In autumn, the gardener's science was to keep the plants that came in that season, such as cauliflower, scarole, celery, etc., as late as possible in the winter. During winter and early spring, parsley, sorrel, wild chicory, etc. were sold in "calais" (a kind of small, elongated, round, slightly pointed basket), in which fish arrived. Melons, cauliflowers, Romaine and other vegetables were mounted on hoods and sold in batches. All this was carried to the market halls on the backs of hottriaux, and when there was a lot of merchandise in the spring, it was necessary to make several trips and walk most of the night. In other words, market gardening has always been one of the most fulfilling jobs that men can do. LEASE PRICES The reader will have seen that under Henri IV, the Grand Priory had 09 leased to market gardeners the lands dependent on the abbey of the Temple, at the rate of four livres per acre, certainly swampland and without a house, First, he allowed them to set up lodges or huts for shelter, then he authorized them to build small houses on the land, which they either took with them or left to him, paying them half their appraised value. In a lawsuit brought by a certain Le Bouteux against Le Coq, lord of the Château des Porcherons for a question of mitoyenncté in 1762, it can be seen that this lord had ceded to a man named Louvet, by an authentic deed, lease with annuity, dated April 24, 1725, half an acre of marshland, located in rue des Porcherons, now rue Saint-Lazare, in return for fifty pounds of ground rent. This land was subject to an additional five sols de cens. In our century, the reader will find rent prices in the chapter: Historique sommaire de la corporation maraîchère pendant le siècle, written by the author to serve as a retrospective exhibition at the 1900 Universal Exhibition. MECOS GO AT THE END OF THE LAST CENTURY & THE BEGINNING OF THIS ONE Under the reigns of the last kings of the ancienrégime, particularly Louis XIV, the capital expanded greatly. The suburbs were rapidly populated, especially those on the right bank, after the demolition of Charles V's walls. We have seen where market gardeners used to live, and as these areas were built up, they retreated into the suburbs. At the end of the last century, when Louis XVI had the city walls built, this time not for the defense of the city, but to facilitate the collection of goods entering Paris, they still found themselves almost entirely enclosed within the city. The population of Paris grew even faster than in the previous two centuries. With the sale of the Lationaux estates, many farmers of all kinds became owners of the land they were cultivating; and so began a well-being unknown to their ancestors. This," says Michelet, "was the beginning of a large number of agricultural and horticultural families: a respectable beginning, since it was founded on the faith that the farmer placed in the revolution, in the solidarity of the pledge that it delivered to him". This is how our institutions have become solid and durable; slowed down at times, their development continues unabated. This is because they are not simply based on the mobile ground of cities, which rises and falls, where people build and demolish. Rather, they have entrusted themselves to the land and to the people of the land: this is the durable France, less brilliant, less turbulent than the city, but much more solid. It would seem that their ideas have been the same for many centuries, but what is truer is that they advance by an insensible and latent work, as is the case with any modification in the great forces of nature. In a century's time, this population of farmers will still be whole and strong, going about its business as it does today, thinking as it ploughs, and cultivating its land; it will continue to preserve the benefits that the revolution has brought it, while the ephemeral population of the cities will long ago have buried in oblivion, along with its bones, all its political systems. Around Paris, the revolution found these men of the soil eager, like all their counterparts in the countryside, to own the soil they cultivated. For the supreme goal of the peasant, like that of the market gardener, the Parisian peasant, is to own the soil he moves so often. It's as if, by turning it over and over again, he's settled in and would like to stay there forever. The sale of national property was the beginning of the fortunes of our vicious market-gardening families, like a large number of farming families. The acquisition of their land, much of which belonged to the nobility and religious communities, made them Jacobins, and thus attached to the work of the revolution. Those who were not revolutionaries became so out of self-interest; their families' future depended on the success of the insurrectionary movement. As the aim of the movement was to liberate mankind, the men of the earth hoped for an immense benefit. 98 The nation, through the sale of national property, had in one fell swoop created a million property owners in France, that is, as many patriots attached to its fate, and by this very fact, had become invincible. Nor should we look for the success of the doctrines of the men of 1789; the interest of the greatest number. This is not a new, unprecedented or spontaneous act. It is the legitimate repetition of the great insurrectionary movements; we have already seen it happen when Christianity took root in our country. In the Middle Ages, great movements also took place for this persevering love of the purchase of land by those who cultivate it. Hymen sacré, legitime de la terre et du laboureur. In saying legitimate, this expression has a profound propriety. The man who cultivates the land has never asked for it to be given to him for free. This object of all his wishes, of his faithful passion, he seeks to acquire from his savings, through constant and superhuman efforts. The revolution is therefore the good mother of the farmer in general; it broke down the barrier that prevented all citizens from becoming real property owners. It made it easy for anyone who owned a garden, a piece of land or a vineyard to acquire it. It is in this way, by making the greatest possible number of owners, that she is at once the benefactor, the friend and the savior of the greatest number, temporarily agitating the world only to give it peace. By inviting the farmer to acquire, by marrying him to the land, the revolution made him even more thrifty, more industrious, if that's possible. The farmer felt that, while he had new rights, he also had new duties: to prosper, to expand his plot of land and to raise his family honourably. And so it is that we still find today, in our old market-gardening families, the taste for work, order and thrift that was bequeathed to them by their fathers. This is the moment to recall that they have remained faithful to the old 900 motto of the guild of master gardeners of past centuries: Manus fortis, divitias parat LA MAIN FORTE PREPARE LA RICHES When the ancients recount how their fathers lived, we are astonished by the effort made by this generation: a Spartan lifestyle, abstinence to excess, which no worker would accept today. Although gardeners, then as now, had peaceful and austere morals, there were nonetheless violent types among them, as in all societies and corporations. History relates that during the troubles of the 1789 Revolution, a troop of prisoners, made up of nobles, most of whom were men who had marked their opposition to the movement in a most odious manner, was brought in carts to Versailles. Escorted from the front and the back, it was assaulted from the flanks by a confused troop who surrounded the carts and jumped in. A gardener who had worked on Mr. de Brissac's land, and had been expelled by him for a trivial reason, said to her: "Do you recognize me? At the same time, he grabbed him by the ruffle and broke a stoneware milk jug he was holding over his head. This was the signal for the general massacre of the troop. In another era, such acts would have been unforgivable, but in these troubled times of our history, we must excuse them. Indeed, this generation carried in its heart the hatred that the suffering of twenty generations had accumulated there. These men, most of whom came from families of serfs, had heard their fathers and grandfathers tell of all the misery the old society had made them endure, and some had suffered it themselves. It's hardly surprising, then, that among them there were exalted, violent individuals capable of committing the most cowardly murders, of the kind we've just mentioned. If we relate these facts, it is as a faithful and impartial historian, to demonstrate that in the most peaceful and peaceful guilds, there are beings ready to satisfy their vengeance when the occasion arises. Men of the revolution, whatever your virtues, whatever your vices and faults, you have undergone the final clash of the old world against the new; a clash that has no equal in the history of peoples. You have endured it more or less stoically, but you have transformed the world no less, giving it freedom, emancipation and hope. Whoever you are, we, your great-grandnephews, salute you as heroic men. LES JARDINIERS DE PARIS DIntiXedE GOO MARAICHÈRES In the previous chapter, it was said, according to our great historian Michelet, that at the time of the Revolution, many agricultural and horticultural families had been formed, but there were also very old families in the market-gardening guild, dating back several centuries, notably the Dulac family, which is very numerous today in the horticulture of the Paris region, and which has provided eminent practitioners. Under the reign of Charles V, market gardeners of this name dried out the marshes of the "Coulture Sainte-Catherine", and are surely ancestors of those of today. The first signatory to the statutes of the community of master gardeners, in 1599, was a Le Bouteux, of whom one member still remains, one of the deans of the guild, having been born around 1615, but having no male heirs, this name is tending to disappear from the guild of gardeners. Other families also date back several centuries: the Debilles, the Stainvilles, the Hébrards, etc., all names that we'll find among the first market gardeners who began growing early vegetables. Another no less ancient family, which to my knowledge no longer exists in the gardening trade, is the Debergue family. This family may not have left as lasting a corporate mark as others, but one of its members was immortalized in 1870, during the Franco-Prussian war. Paris was overrun by the German army, isolated from the rest of France, and consequently without news of troop movements outside. The capital sent news to the provinces by balloon, but received none. Several prominent men, including Gambetta, left Paris in this way to organize national defense in the provinces. A few brave men, risking their lives, crossed enemy lines to bring news to Paris. One of these was a descendant of the Debergue family, who was captured by the Prussians and mercilessly shot, along with one of his colleagues. A monument has been erected in their honor in Bougival, on the very spot where these brave men, victims of their patriotism, fell victim to the bullets of the victors. Such men honor their families, their corporations and France itself, the family of us all. Debergue, may your name remain forever engraved in history, as a martyr to patriotism; may your memory be hailed by future generations as a hero. We, your contemporaries, modest workers like you, place a laurel branch on the monument raised in your honor to consecrate your heroism. Indeed, as I write these lines, it is almost thirty years since the terrible year passed, and yet the event held every year at the monument to these heroes, on the anniversary of the battle of Buzenval, grows in importance from year to year. Speaking of the character of market gardeners, which consists above all in becoming owners of the land they cultivate, taking into account the spirit of conservation of patrimonial property in children; of the location that gardeners occupied at the beginning of the century; of the rapid expansion of the capital since that time; of the prodi909 243 gious increase in land in all these districts; the reader will not be surprised at the great fortunes owned by the grandsons of our old market-gardening families at the end of this century. These fortunes have a tendency to increase, as the grandsons continue the tradition of their ancestors, buying the land they occupy themselves, and the same progression exists for land further from the center, as for that occupied by their grandfathers. 9gues9 COO 2 Google ====-- PEVOLUTION DE LA CULTURE MARAICHERE depuis La Quintinie Douxed . (OOQ 6 DoueedS GOOglo The cultivation of early vegetables, inaugurated by La Quintinie in the last century, could only exist to satisfy the whims of kings and the powerful. As already mentioned, the gardeners of the big houses who engaged in this type of cultivation didn't have to worry about the cost price or the selling price of the plants they grew. Of course, it was to their credit that they produced plants out of season, and thus gave satisfaction to the masters who employed them; but it was a big step from there to seeing this cultivation done by gardeners from all over the world. The former grow crops with money, while the latter have to make money with crops, and the difference between the two is enormous. Those first market gardeners who practiced forced cultivation drew their ideas from the Versailles kitchen garden, but once again, it's certain that this royal kitchen garden, where money was spent without counting the cost, did our profession a great service by experimenting with new crops, which the artists who took over the management of the establishment could do without running the risk of losing a penny if they didn't succeed. Nevertheless, I'm certain that not a single Parisian market gardener graduated from the Versailles school as a pupil, and that many went on to become teachers. Which school did these teachers attend? Surely it was the practice and routine of past generations that had trained them in their art. Indeed, La Quintinie himself acknowledged that he had learned a great deal from the "Parisian Mareschais". Even during the Renaissance, when cultivation had its masters, didn't we see the potato, that precious tuber, take two centuries to become popular? This is a valuable example of how many centuries it took for other, much less useful plants to gain the honor of cultivation in earlier times. Our masters from the beginning of the century, who had lived under the ancien régime, sensed that, with the revolutionary turmoil behind them, a new era was opening up for them and their descendants. Many had become landowners, that is, in a state of stability that enabled them to break out of the old routine, and establish new cultures, where some probably committed more than they possessed, having for themselves only the hope of success, without having the certainty of it. There's no doubt that there was a lot of trial and error, and harsh criticism, even from colleagues who aren't looking for anything and wait until the initiator has found something useful to take advantage of it without a moment's hesitation. Some probably became discouraged, while others took up what the first had abandoned, to try and do better. These early masters of the gardeners of our time perhaps already foresaw the extension that their trade would take with the century that was beginning. They did not create these new crops simply out of egoism, which is a human trait. But inspired by a new spirit, after the great social movement that had just taken place, they understood that if man has strict moral duties and obligations towards himself, he also has them towards posterity, and that on pain of lying to his natural destiny, he must cultivate his intelligence in such a way as to bring it up to the level of the general knowledge of his time, for all that he must bequeath to his children. And once this first duty has been accomplished, he must not limit the scope of his action to material and personal interests alone. No one can blame him if he gives a large share to egoistic feelings. But he must link all his aspirations to the ideal that, alongside our ephemeral selves, there is something permanent and superior: posterity. This ideal is the desire not to be completely useless here on earth, and to contribute even the smallest stone to the social edifice to which countless generations before us have contributed. It's the formal and unshakeable will to help posterity, in every circumstance and according to its means, to rise higher and higher to a more general well-being than that of our ancestors. It's up to us, in our turn, to pass on to future generations, not only intact but enlarged, the precious heritage of which we are merely the custodians. The first market gardeners of this century were therefore initiators, and are those to whom it is given to introduce their fellow human beings to a higher realm, to open up a path and walk straight ahead, without worrying whether they will be followed. The initiator is the man of genius, recognized by the fact that, being ahead of the others, he is not at first understood by them, but astonishes, worries and scandalizes them. So, to cite just one example of the new cultivation methods introduced into market gardening at the beginning of the century, we'll take the bell bed to cultivate Romaine. Those who devised the counterpO0 planting method were not the first to do so; their experiments had to be criticized; today, however, this method is quite simple - it's just a question of knowing how to use it. The old-timers used to make ployant layers, i.e. they built them up to just the width of the frame or the three rows of bells, and rolled up the manure to form the edges, leaving the paths empty to warm up as and when needed. This work was very labor-intensive, and I remember hearing a former gardener tell me that two men shouldn't have all the fun of making an eighteen-panel long belfry bed in one day. This is the kind of layer that La Quintinie made, and that our ancestors copied when they started growing early vegetables. It has to be said that labor was cheaper than it is today, and early vegetables were rarer and generally sold at a higher price. Here are just a few of the main market gardeners who began forced cultivation. Around 1776, Legrand, on rue de la Santé, at La Glacière, was heating rose bushes in situ, using layers of sludge; carelessly, he placed a chest and three glass frames on the end of a bed of Alpine strawberries; The first dozen he harvested were sold for twenty-four francs, and although the author reporting this fact neglected to indicate the time, it was probably in the course of May; since then, prices have fallen significantly. In 1788, Decouflé was growing peas and beans in frames and carrots on beds. The cultivation of peas and beans must have been abandoned by market gardeners, because of the competition for these products from Algeria and the South of France. Around 1791, Stainville, allée des Veuves (Avenue de l'Alma), on the Champs-Elysées, was forcing fine Chicory. When we say "forcing", we must assume that he first had the idea 009 of sowing it on a bed and transplanting it in the same way, to obtain a late spring crop, given that until then this salad had only been grown in autumn. Autin followed in his footsteps. The secret of how to grow the plant early and prevent it from bolting was revealed; other market gardeners did better. The market gardeners of Vaugirard and Grenelle, in particular, cultivate it early on beds. They made it a special crop for most of the century. The first white asparagus to be heated under a frame, using the system that still exists, was produced by Quantin around 1792. This system consists in digging paths about Om65 wide; throwing the soil into the boxes to butter the asparagus, so that they are white when they grow; filling the paths with hot manure, which is reworked every ten or fifteen days, depending on the weather; bringing in new manure each time to mix with the previous one; and finally, keeping the paths continuously full up to the top of the boxes. This type of cultivation is very costly, and asparagus must be sold for at least ten to twelve francs a bunch to cover it. The troubles of the Revolution halted the progress of this crop for some time. Afterwards, it was quite lucrative for those who cultivated it, especially in sandy soils, which are more suitable for asparagus than clay soils. Today, as the Midi sends out more and more of them, it is to be feared that the younger generations will not always be able to keep up with the competition, especially in the late season, and that this crop will largely disappear at the end of winter and the beginning of spring from market gardening, as we have seen with other vegetables. At the beginning of the century, Marie was forcing green asparagus. It consists in: pulling up asparagus claws at least two years old, in the fields, as a large quantity is needed, and planting them touch by touch on a strong C layer, to develop the eyelets; when they reach a length of twenty-five to thirty centimeters, they are picked and bundled for sale. The claw is then removed and burned. This type of cultivation is now done only by a few specialists, using the thermosiphon, because to do it profitably, you have to raise the plant yourself, and this requires the cultivation of many hectares of land. One house in particular does it in a big way: Compoint, in Saint-Ouen. The company's latest exhibit at the agricultural show delighted all visitors. The head of the company recently won first prize at the International Horticultural Exhibition in St Petersburg. The first market gardeners to use frames were Stainville, Marie, Debille, Hébrard, Marcès, Quentin, Valet, etc., followed by François, Fournier, Heude and Jaulin. By 1820, they were in general use, and the number of frames has continued to rise ever since. By this time, France had regained its tranquillity, and trade had taken off in a way that would only be temporarily interrupted by a few temporary disturbances. A few began growing lettuce in combination with carrots, followed by cucumbers and cantaloupes. Until the introduction of frames to their crops, market gardeners grew little more than "maraicher" melons. Some continued to grow them in cloches on soil until around 1865. I've still seen this extremely robust variety of melon being grown. The beds were not turned over, but simply ploughed into the compost, and two rows of melons were planted in each bed under cloches. They were pruned very short, and once they had stopped (in trade terms), i.e. once we had chosen the most beautiful one to be the fruit that was to remain, we removed all those that had formed so as not to harm the growth of the favorite. They were watered copiously every day. Eventually, however, this variety disappeared 906 from market gardening, as the quality of the produce was generally inferior to that of the Cantaloups grown today. They were replaced on Paris markets by imported Cavaillon melons. The working-class population eats these Cavaillon melons, which ripen in the straw or in the fruit tree stores, and are certainly no match for our old market-garden melons, which ripened on the plants that bore them. This is a consequence of free trade. It's quite certain that in the days of the "maitres", juries would not have allowed the sale of a large proportion of these fruits, which are liable to cause disease, and which, for consumers who are not connoisseurs, contribute to depreciating the value of those grown by Parisian market gardeners. Around the same time, other market gardeners were experimenting with different crops. Besnard was planting cauliflowers under frames around 1812. Those already named with new names, such as Dulac. Chemin, began to make bell beds to grow Romaine. In 1815, the Société d'agriculture awarded a gold medal to Mr. Pierre-Simon Marcès. This market gardener grew cucumbers, peas, beans and strawberries. He was also one of the first to grow Romaine on bell beds. Mr. Debille also won an honorable mention for his forced cultivation. From then on, market gardeners were more likely to give lessons to the Versailles kitchen garden than to receive them. However, the garden was not left behind. M. Edy, head of the establishment, experimented with all types of forced cultivation. Messrs Grison and Gontier followed in his footsteps, the latter receiving a gold medal from the Horticultural Society in 1834, for the application of the thermosiphon in forced cultivation. In 1827, almost at the time of its foundation, this same Society had awarded a prize to Mr. Découflé for all his forced cultivation. In spite of all this encouragement, market gardeners contributed almost nothing to the Society; they have continued to err in the same way ever since; this is because they have no clientele; they take their produce to Les Halles and sell it at the market. This is the real reason why they are not interested in making presentations to this Scientific Society. However, it must be recognized that the Horticultural Society has rendered great service to the market-gardening guild, and to horticulture as a whole, in the popularization of new plants, and in that of improvements obtained on older cultivated plants. Thus, in vegetables in general, there are today a large number of varieties that date back only to this century, and which have taken on great importance in cultivation and trade. Deuixed G0 MARAICHERS IN THIS CENTURY During the course of this century, the population of Paris quadrupled or nearly quadrupled, causing frequent displacement of market gardeners living in the suburbs. Towards the beginning of the century, we find the biggest nuclei in the vicinity of the Bastille, the Temple and Saint-Martin suburbs, the Saint-Lazare district and the Champs-Elysées. On the left bank, at Gros-Caillou, near the Ecole Militaire and a little higher up. And on the banks of the Bièvre, from its mouth and up the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. After the Revolution, as the value of land increased in all these areas, tenants, with their leases terminated, had to go further afield to establish their crops. Those who owned their land, finding it more profitable to rent it out to industry, also placed their children on other, less expensive land near Louis XVI's walls, either inside or outside the city. On the Bastille side, the Canal Saint-Martin displaced a number of them around 1820, and neighbors who were not in the way were displaced by the industry this outlet brought to these neighborhoods. At the Champs-Elysées, too, as land became more valuable, market gardeners had to cross the Seine and settle in the plains of Grenelle and lower Vaugirard. On this side, the Ecole Militaire and the Champ-de-Mars had displaced some of them, while those living on the Gros Caillou also had to retreat further into the plain where they were settled. Contrary to what had happened in previous centuries, it was in this area, the 15th arrondissement of Paris, that the largest group of market gardeners was established during the last two-thirds of this century. It's true that they found all the elements they needed to grow their crops here: strong, clayey soil on a sandy base on the banks of the river; sandier and lighter soil as you move up towards Vaugirard. Water, always the essential element sought by market gardeners, is shallow and plentiful. A word of history about these neighborhoods (1). Valboitron was later called Vaugirard, because Abbé Gérard, superior of the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, had a farm built there that bore his name. On the basis of old plans, this farm would have included the whole of the 15th arrondissement, as well as parts of the 14th and 7th arrondissements, extending over the territory of Issy and belonging to that parish (2). Issy took its name from Isis, because the Gallo-Romans had built a temple dedicated to this goddess. The land of Issy was donated to the abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés; it included all the territory of the farm already described, Issy, Vanves, Malakoff, Chatillon, Fontenay, Clamart and Meudon. Around 1342, Vaugirard was established as a parish, and a hamlet was built around the church, which later became the commune of Vaugirard. The lower part of this territory, which later formed the commune of Grenelle, remained under arable cultivation and was given over to other farms, notably the Grenelle farm, which some old-timers still know. Up until a third of this century, part of the 15th arrondissement was still farmed. (1) Dom Bouillard. Histoire de l'Abbaye de Saint-Germaindes-Prés. (2) Abbé Irminon. 109 marshy, a small branch of the Seine separated from the river at Champ-de-Mars, cutting the plain in two and joining the river at Ile Séguin. It's probably because of this island, which has long since disappeared, that Parisians refer to this district as l'ile des Singes. The street that today bears the name of Lourmel was called chemin des vaches at the beginning of the century, and the local elders say that it was these animals that cleared it to go grazing. It later took the name rue des Marais, probably also because it was later inhabited by many market gardeners. We insist on this district, because it's where we practiced our trade as market gardeners for almost a quarter of a century, and I remember that at the beginning, this land still felt its marshy state, even though it had already been cultivated for twenty-five years. Today, the land is crossed by two major thoroughfares, Rue de la Convention and Rue Herr, and a factory is already operating on the site. The 15th arrondissement is the largest of the twenty that make up the capital, bordered on one side by the Seine and on the opposite side by the Chemin de fer de l'Ouest railway line, Having rid itself of the Champ-de-Mars, which served as an army parade ground, and of the barracks which will inevitably be relocated near the new parade ground, and which constituted a sort of zone between it and Paris, this arrondissement will be one of the most densely populated in the capital in the course of the century that is about to begin. Cultivated land is beginning to thin out: in ten years' time, it will be counted. All that will remain are a few lost corners, like the ones we've seen left in the various precincts of Paris. Those in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau have retreated up the Seine towards Ivry, still close to Louis XVI's walls, or Glacière, up the Bièvre. Between 1840 and 1850, a great advance was made with the creation of railroad lines, all ending in the capital; passenger stations were set up inside the city, not far from the walls of Louis XVI, and freight stations in the suburbs outside the city, also at a short distance from these same walls. In other words, all these new facilities had to be built on the large areas of land occupied by market gardeners. As a result, many were expropriated and had to move their establishments further afield. These shopping centers also obliged the city to create large access roads through all this land, resulting in further expropriations. As commerce expanded, industries, factories, construction sites and even neighborhoods were built around the new stations. The market gardeners gradually disappeared from Vieux l'aris. Dg184S GOC For the first time, we have used a term that was previously unknown to us: Expropriation. In fact, the great industrial revolution that the creation of railroad lines was to accomplish obliged towns and major railroad companies to acquire large tracts of land; the legislators of the time, in order to facilitate and develop industry and commerce, passed a special law called : Expropriation Act, dated May 3, 1841. This law sets out the procedure to be followed to force landlords to sell their property, and tenants to give up their leased premises, either to the state, to cities or to large corporations, when it is in the public interest to do so. Firstly, a decree declaring the expropriation of the designated premises to be in the public interest, followed by various formalities, including unc, the constitution of a jury responsible for setting the allowances due to the expropriated for the purchase of their properties, and to the tenants for the termination of their leases or the damage caused to their industries in whole or in part. It is quite clear that the legislators of the time were of the opinion that the expropriated should always be compensated with a certain mark-up, for the properties sold, or the industries that had to be moved elsewhere, or abandoned, at the expropriated parties' peril. This law, like many others, gave rise to many abuses. We have seen expropriations that were amply paid for, and others where the interested parties were wronged; this is often due to the way the jury was constituted. These kinds of cases, which are really no more than expert appraisals, are usually handled too legally by the lawyers on both sides. Having had the honor of sitting as a juror on several occasions in different cases, I can say that I have often heard the lawyers on both sides of the case argue beside the point, thereby confusing the jury. The expropriating party makes derisory offers to the expropriated parties, who in turn make exorbitant demands. On both sides, there is no reliance on justice, but simply on the jury's greater or lesser competence. The jury, always made up of very honest people, is never guilty of anything other than incompetence. Thus, in various expropriations of the same trade, such as that of gardener, we see people receiving twice as much as others placed in exactly the same conditions. To give just one example, let's look at the most recent expropriations of gardeners for the opening of the rue llerr, in the 15th arrondt of Paris: almost all of them were heinously wronged. These facts are absolutely regrettable in the times in which we live: to seize the property of others, in the name of the law, and not to pay for it what it is really worth. The legislators who made this law had not foreseen this case. We estimate that the displacement of a market gardener, who almost at the end of his lease has five or six hundred frames, three to four thousand bells, irrigation, etc., is today worth twenty-five thousand francs, at the very least, after which the jury must take into account the years of lease remaining, established crops and a host of other cases that can raise the allocation to twice this sum. For partial expropriations, there are also many cases to be examined, and D08 must be competent to deal with them. We are particularly insistent on rental expropriations, as it is on this point that the most misunderstandings occur. This sixty-year-old law is already too old to remain fair, given the progress made in our century. The jury should be recruited by other means, so that it is composed of more competent men. At present, all guilds are unionized and elect experts; these men, chosen by their peers, are ideally suited to sit on expropriation juries. These experts would be chosen according to the industries to be expropriated. One of these men, who would bring out the real value of the case in question, before his colleagues from other trades, accustomed as he was to settling such disputes, would give fairer justice to both parties, than the randomness of an honest jury, there is no doubt about it, but more or less competent and capable of being led one way or the other, by the pleadings of this or that lawyer. JUSQU'EN 1860 With the help of the law of expropriation, it became easy to undertake major works, either for the state, for towns or for large companies that could obtain the decree of public utility. Since then, these companies have continued to expand their domains, and the capital has made numerous street openings and widened other thoroughfares, as the streets of old Paris became insufficient to meet the needs of the transactions that commerce imposed. Almost entire districts were demolished, and the industries that had been established there were forced to retreat to the outskirts of the city. Louis-Philippe's government also built fortifications around Paris, on average about two kilometers from Louis XVI's walls, thus encompassing part of the surrounding villages. It's quite certain that the engineering officers who built these fortifications hoped that in the near future, they would form the limits of the capital, which they did less than twenty years later. While we're on the subject of this project, let's also mention that the same government had forts built two kilometers away from these fortifications, to cover the capital, with a road running past each of them and linking them all, called the strategic road. After these major commercial moves, the main market-gardening centers were located between Louis XVI's and Louis-Philippe's enclosures. On the right bank: Bercy, Reuilly, Charonne, La Chapelle and Plaine Monceau; on the left bank: Grenelle, Vaugirard, Montrouge, a few at La Glacière, but as always, more and more horticulturists on this side, and in the Gare d'Ivry district. Although not an integral part of the big city, all these neighborhoods encompassed by the fortifications were gaining considerably in population and trade, and this in turn drove up land prices enormously. In this incessant game of backwardation, the last became the first. Thus, at the beginning of the century, those near the Louis XVI fence were the furthest away, and became the first half a century later. Towards the middle of the century, some of them crossed the fortifications to settle in neighboring villages, such as Charenton, Saint-Mandé, Vincennes, Montreuil, Pantin, Aubervilliers, Saint-Denis and Clichy on the right bank. On the left bank: Issy, Vanves, Montrouge, Gentilly and Ivry. Those remaining in these countries today are closest to Les Halles in Paris, where they all trade. If this game goes on for a few more centuries, one wonders where the market gardeners will be in this day and age. However, with the hindsight they have gained in the last forty years of the century, it is safe to assume that they will remain where they are now for a long time to come. Despite the fact that the demands and needs of all kinds imposed by this enormous agglomeration of citizens, the entrenched camp that is the capital today, the immense network of railroads, canals and consequently stations, warehouses, workshops, docks, ports, etc., that commerce requires, and even cemeteries, will still force some market-gardening centers to move backwards, this time into the Seine-et-Oise département. Q AT THE END OF THE CENTURY In 1860, all the communes enclosed within the fortifications were annexed to Paris; the walls built by Louis XVI were demolished, and the octroi was transferred to the fortifications: this is our present-day Paris. The gardeners, or at least most of them, were once again enclosed within the city. Some of the villages annexed to the city became as commercial as the center, thanks to the large-scale commercial installations that had been built there since the creation of the railroads. The right bank, in particular, quickly became denser than the left. Passenger and freight stations, canals and harbors, the wine warehouse at Bercy, markets and abattoirs, all contributed to the creation of large industrial and commercial districts. Much of the industrial activity took place on land vacated by market gardeners. Landowners benefited greatly, while other market gardeners were expropriated as a result of the opening of new roads. Finally, those who owned their land and already had a certain fortune, opened up streets and other lots on long leases, to enable tenants to build on mutually-agreed terms. As a result, the right bank of Paris now boasts only a few 2,000 market gardeners lost behind buildings or land belonging to religious communities, which industry has not yet been able to take possession of. On the left bank, in the XIIIth and XIVth arrondissements, there are also almost none left; the XVth arrondissement alone still has a number, but with the construction of major thoroughfares over the last ten years, they will rapidly disappear. Many of those that had retreated outside the fortifications have also been relocated. Firstly, on the Charenton and Saint-Mandé sides, by the extension of the Bois de Vincennes. A large proportion of these went to start building the new districts of Maisons¬- Alfort, Alfortville and Créteil. Others headed for Bobigny, a village on the other side of Pantin that is still the largest grouping of market gardeners. In Pantin, Aubervilliers and La Plaine-Saint-Denis, many were displaced by the numerous railroad lines criss-crossing the area, the stations they required and the trade they brought with them. These retreated to Sains, Pierrefite, la Courneuve, Bobigny, Draney, le Bourget and Bondy. Similarly, in Clichy, they were driven out by the railways, docks, warehouses, etc., to settle in Asnières and Gennevilliers. On the left bank, those of the XIIIth went to Ivry and Vitry, the first of these towns taking on such considerable importance that soon the last market gardeners would disappear. The XIVth has rejected its own in Bagneux and Arcueil. Thirty years ago and more, in the XVth arrondissement, as the establishments located near Louis XVI's old walls disappeared, they moved further out onto the same plain, to Issy-les-Moulineaux. However, since the 1889 Exhibition, the Champ-de-Mars could no longer be used as a cavalry maneuvering ground, and another large area of land was needed for this purpose. The military engineers chose the Plaine d'Issy to set up this maneuvering ground, and the gardeners had to abandon the site once again. This time, cornered at the end of the immense plain, where we first saw them set up at Gros-Caillou, they had to retreat to all sides, as they could no longer find suitable land for their crops in this region. DgttixedO GO AND MODERNES In chapter XIII of this book, we listed the main tools used by gardeners in Charlemagne's time. They were few in number, and some of them would still belong today to other trades rather than to gardening. However, the spade is certainly the first tool used by men to cultivate the land, having preceded the plough by a number of centuries that is difficult to determine; the hoe or pickaxe is also very old, as are the sickle, the scythe and other tools, such as the cognée, the auger and the saw, which are more woodworking tools. Some wooden utensils, such as the van and the basket or banne, were also used for a variety of purposes. Later, the "rastel" or rake was added to the gardener's tools, followed by the watering can, the two- and three-pronged fork, and the wooden and iron shovel. It's clear that, until market gardeners started using forced cultivation methods, this equipment hardly increased at all. Wooden tools and utensils were joined by the hood, so widely used in the last century and at the beginning of this one for preparing and transporting produce to Les Halles. WATERING It is in watering systems that progress has been most noticeable, especially in our century. The first gardeners established in swampy areas were content to let water run off in gutters, and this was sufficient with the freshness of the soil they were cultivating. Later, on drier soils, they had to water with a scoop, then as the soil became healthier, they were obliged to dig holes from place to place to obtain sufficient water and draw it with a bucket, using a pole, Then came the pulley suspended from the top of the well with a rope and a bucket at each end, the water was poured into a barrel and then drawn off with watering cans, which have also undergone many transformations. The first watering cans, known as "turn-over" watering cans, were carried with the apple or "bouffe" at the back. They had a handle connecting the "bouffe" to the body of the watering can, and another behind, almost at the bottom. To fill them, all you had to do was press down on the "bouffes", and they would fill up very quickly, immediately being grabbed by the first handle indicated to carry them, and when they reached their destination, a little flick of the wrist would make them turn and the handle on the other side would come to the hand, so that they emptied just as quickly, and as soon as they were empty, they were returned by the same means. All the old-timers who were used to this system preferred it to the new ones. Admittedly, it had its merits, but what's certain is that it was less affordable than today's "pouring" system, which simply consists of carrying the full watering can by the top of the handle and pouring the hand down to the other end to empty it, then bringing the hand back up to refill. But the elders of the last century, and those of the beginning of this one, still had the watering can to turn over, in accordance with their principles of mastery and companionship, from which it was not necessary to depart. Then came the hand crank, which is very old, but not used by our ancestors, as the gardening establishments were not large enough to use this DO8 tool, which requires the use of a horse. So it was only towards the end of the last century that a few gardeners began to use them; little by little, they came into general use, but until the first quarter of this century, many continued to pull water by hand. Around 1835, piston and merry-go-round pumps made their appearance. This new tool solved the problem of great depths and enabled market gardeners to tackle the plateaus around P'aris head-on. Before the crank, there were several wells in each marsh, so that there were no fixed pipes. As we've seen in some provincial towns, there were probably portable pipes to carry water in barrels to a certain distance from each well. With the use of cranks, a system of fixed pipes came into use, initially in sandstone welded with fountain putty, later with bitumen. The barrels were filled one by one, the well being located on the highest point of the marsh; later, they were filled one by one by means of a discharge at each of them, the pressure not being strong, many market gardeners closed these discharges with a simple plug of rags, others, afterwards, put in taps. so that the expense was more considerable than today to install an irrigation system. (1). Fully laid sandstone pipes cost seventy-five centimes a metre. Barrels that had contained oil were the only ones suitable for this purpose, and were worth twelve to fifteen francs a piece, and the taps adapted to the rejects eight to ten francs. The installation of the crank cost four to five hundred francs, the first were supervised by a person, usually a bastard, to empty the buckets, and others were emptied by means of a hook. One of the first market gardeners (1) Moreau, Histoire des Maraichers de Paris. cited for this installation was a man named Bourgeois, at Petit-Grenelle. The merry-go-round pumps that replaced the cranks did nothing to change the watering system; the first to use them were Séguier, Autin and others. Around 1860, Ponce Isidore, in Clichy, and Niolet, in Vaugirard, came up with the idea of raising the water in a reservoir to water by pressure. Like everything else that started out, this system had many detractors; the old-timers were adamant that it would never be worth anything, for various reasons: 1° they didn't know how much water they were giving the plants; 2° watering would not be done equally everywhere, and so on. Despite all these criticisms, the system was generally adopted, and not a single Parisian market gardener watered in any other way. The first irrigation systems installed were far from the perfection of those used today. Some were made with sandstone pipes that were not strong enough to withstand the water pressure. For the distribution of water in the marsh, until the copper taps with screw thread, which we use today, there were many trials. I remember seeing a simple rubber hose fitted to the end of the T, onto which the watering hose was fitted; to stop the water flow, this end of the rubber hose had a ring with a small chain that was used to bend it, by means of an accessory existing after the T; the chain was hooked to hold it in this state, and the water was stopped. Other market gardeners used flaps that were kept closed by water pressure alone. Nowadays, everyone has come to rely on copper taps of various types; there have also been cast-iron taps, abandoned long ago as they could not be repaired. When market gardeners settled on the high plateaus around Paris, they could only find water at very great depths. Some D08 establishments needed several horses in summer to accomplish this task, so the idea came to some of them to operate the pump mechanically. One of the first to install a steam engine was M. Trousselard, in Bagneux. This method required a lot of inconvenience, the fire had to be maintained continuously, and as the machine was not large enough to require the presence of a special driver, the system was not followed, and has even been completely abandoned in the face of new modern advances. Later, Mr. Narcisse Laurent in Grenelle installed a pulsometer. This device raises the water by steam pressure alone, but the system can only be usefully employed at shallow depths, and consequently could not provide all the services that market gardeners expected of it. At the 1889 Exhibition, mechanical engineers presented gas and oil engines. These devices are designed to produce the power needed; they take up very little space and are very easy to operate. Once in motion, there's no need to worry about gas engines; as for oil engines, you just have to make sure they don't run out of fuel. Young market gardeners quickly get used to operating and maintaining them properly. For the last ten years, a large number of these devices have been in operation in the marshes around Paris, and, just as with ireigations, in twenty years' time we'll be counting those who don't have one. As we enter the twentieth century, mechanical power has taken its place in the work of market gardeners. There's every reason to believe that it won't stop now. Our great-grandnephews will cultivate larger tracts of land than we do, and equipment will increase proportionately. From this will also come new, more economical means of cultivation than ours. 00 LES CLOCHES The first time this type of equipment was mentioned in this book was when Olivier de Serres wrote about it in his Théâtre del'Agriculture, published in 1600 (1). The great agronomist depicts our cloche clearly enough for us not to be mistaken, for before this all-glass cloche, there was the verrine, a kind of tiny greenhouse with an iron or cast-iron frame and glass panes, used only in princely gardens (2). The smallest verrine cost five or six francs, a price that prevented our ancestors from being able to afford a certain number. Claude Mollet, in his fine Traité d'Horticulture, makes no more mention of the glass cloche in the chapter on melon cultivation than in the other chapters. He did, however, write after Olivier de Serres, and was more of a specialist than he was. But Oliver de Serres lived in the South of France, while Claude Mallet lived in Paris. It would seem from these facts that the bell comes from Italy, where the glass industry had made great strides. So it's hardly surprising that, at a time when communications and means of transport were so difficult, the glass bell was known in the South of France more than half a century before it was in Paris. It was not until the reign of Louis XIV, when La Quintinie travelled to Italy to study his art, that this object came into great use in the Versailles kitchen garden, as the great gardener used it to force asparagus. From that time onwards, they were used more frequently, and it's likely that some master gardeners began to own a few. According to Malpeyre, they were about the same price as they are today, despite all the progress that has been made in their manufacture. (1) Chapter XXII. (2) Malpeyre, Maison Rustique. 96 Olivier de Serres tells us that the bell has a diameter of one foot at its base and a similar height; the glass was leaded. Nowadays, it has been enlarged in width and height, and great improvements have been made in the manufacture of glass. An average bell for growing vegetables in Paris should be 0m35 to 0m36 high and Om4l in diameter at the base. The glass is slightly blued to prevent sunburn. In the first half of the century, white glass was produced, but practitioners have recognized its defectiveness, and today there are almost none left. The number of bells used by Parisian market gardeners at the end of this century is estimated at five or six million. Towards the middle of the century, Messrs Moreau and Daverne estimated the number at two million two hundred thousand, a figure that has almost tripled in the last half-century. The use of this equipment, which is certainly the most important for today's market gardeners, seems to date back to the mid-seventeenth century. Olivier de Serres didn't know about them in 1600, although he did know about the cloche, while Claude Mollet, half a century later, spoke of glazed frames, although he didn't know about the cloche. It was not until the reign of Louis XIV, therefore, that all the equipment used by marachiers for forcing vegetables was brought together and used in the Versailles kitchen garden. In his royal kitchen garden, La Quintinie brought together all the equipment that the progress of the time had made in this new art of forcing plants, and of commanding nature, as it were, even when snow covers the earth. The illustrious monarch, so proud of his kitchen garden and so satisfied with the produce his illustrious gardener served him out of season, could not have foreseen that this royal fantasy would, two centuries later, become an important branch of our national industry, with business worth hundreds of millions of francs in our beautiful country of France. Today, the forcing of trees, vines, vegetables and flowers represents a surface area of many square kilometers; I estimate that Parisian market gardeners alone heat four to five million square meters of land. So, like the bell, the glazed frame was at first only a luxury item for gardens.

of the greats. This is more or less the role it played until the end of the last century. At that time, a few gardeners began to use them. From what little has been written on the subject, and from what the ancients have told us, bells were used more for breeding spring plants. At the beginning of this century, the bold pioneers of the market-growing guild, who were trying to make money from a crop hitherto considered a luxury, were not afraid to increase their installations, at their peril, with this important equipment. At mid-century, Messrs Moreau and Daverne estimated that the number of glazed frames used by Parisian market gardeners stood at three hundred and sixty thousand; by the end of the century, this figure had risen to one million. The same authors counted eighteen hundred market gardeners in Paris and its suburbs. This number has decreased over the years, as crops have become more specialized. A certain number who were counted as market gardeners at the time, because they grew vegetables and flowers, have become florists for us; those who continued to grow vegetables have given up growing flowers. Half a century ago, market gardeners specialized by district. Those in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine had more frames and bells than those in Vaugirard and Grenelle. The latter were especially busy forcing curly, fine or Parisian chicory, while the former were forcing asparagus, melons and cucumbers in their prime; carrots, lettuces and Romaine on bell beds, etc. This would have been to deviate from the norm. It would have been a breach of common sense to move a crop from one district to another. In Vaugirard, the old culture of open-air beds, especially for Radishes (the Raves had been abandoned), still lasted a long time. I remember seeing former market gardeners growing Radishes all year round on their open-air beds; this culture, well done, was worth another. Finally, this district also specialized in growing summer cauliflowers. The market gardeners of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and other districts, after their early crops, grew all the vegetables that their ancestors had cultivated. From 1860 onwards, with the rapid communications brought about by the railroads, market gardening underwent a revolution. The Midi began to ship its produce, and northern countries, notably England, began to demand produce from the Paris market. These commercial outlets proved the Faubourg Saint-Antoine greengrocers right, and all market gardeners, in every district, increased their equipment in frames and cloches; after 1870, Vaugirard was home to establishments as large as those on the other side of the Seine. It was around this time that a new crop of early vegetables was added to those already in existence. We're talking about the forced cultivation of turnips. The ancients, even in the last century, were already cultivating Radishes and Rays on open-air beds. It is therefore astonishing that this forced cultivation of turnips has taken so long to spread among modern market gardeners, as this plant is in the same family as those we have just mentioned. The care it requires is hardly more difficult than for its congeners, except that it needs a little more heating, and the roots must be kept tender. Some market gardeners first sow it in other crops, without any particular care, which always gives 008 a bad result. However, some young growers, seeing the potential of this crop, took it up in a big way, with Messrs Narcisse Laurent, Durchon, Beaufils and others leading the way. This time, this innovation of forced cultivation began on the left bank, contrary to everything that had happened until then. Forced cultivation of turnips was very profitable for a number of years; today it belongs to the public domain, if I may put it that way. However, it has not done little to increase the number of trays used by market gardeners; I estimate that half of these trays are used in spring, after they have produced one or two harvests of lettuces in autumn and winter. It can therefore be said that the market gardeners who innovated this crop have done a great service to their corporation and to the various industries that depend on it, especially the chassis manufacturers. Finally, it is worth adding that the cultivation of other early vegetables has followed the same progress, which explains the rapid increase in this equipment since 1850. PROGRESS ACHIEVED IN CHASSIS MANUFACTURING The first chassis were made entirely of wood. They consisted of a frame and three timbers placed at equal distances to support the glazing, giving four rows of panes. There were also some with four small timbers, giving five rows of panes. This was probably the oldest system. I haven't found anything written on the subject. Market gardeners, or rather the manufacturers who worked for them, adopted a uniform measurement, which is 1'30 wide by 1u35 high, but horticulturists have larger ones, which are most often used at the same time to cover their 00 greenhouses. As "market gardener" frames are uniform, when one of these practitioners sells his equipment, he can easily get rid of it, since his colleagues can use it. Glazing is done by overlapping the panes by about a centimeter from the top, to facilitate water drainage from the bottom of the frame. The last tile, improperly called the "base" by tradesmen, rests on the bottom rail, which is the real base of the sash, covering it by two centimeters. A groove exists in the wood on each side and in the top rail to fit this glazing and to putty over it. Until the middle of the century, frames were made from driftwood. The wood was cheaper than today, and the sapwood was removed, so the frames were able to withstand humidity long enough without suffering too much, especially if they were well maintained with coats of paint. Until then, early fruit and vegetables were not grown until the end of December or the first days of January, whereas now many market gardeners take out their frames in October and don't bring them in until the end of June or the beginning of July, depending on the temperature. The only progress we've made on this tooling has been to replace wood with iron. Firstly, the three small timbers have been replaced by three equally grooved iron rods; consequently, there is no change in the glazing, except that the panes are a little wider, and the iron takes up less space than the wood, resulting in a welcome reduction in shade for the plants grown under these frames. Some builders made all-iron frames, but this system has its drawbacks: firstly, they are heavier if you don't want them to whip, hotter in summer, colder in winter, and don't stack well when they need to be retracted. This system has not been adopted by market gardeners, and there are very few of them in their equipment. Another system of double frames forming a two-slope greenhouse is also available on the market. Gardeners in some provincial towns use them, but there are very few of them in the equipment of Parisian market gardeners. The most popular frame in the last thirty years is the one designed by M. Vélars père, known as the "Vélars frame". A number of imitations have been made without any advantage over the first. This chassis consists of a frame whose top and two sides are made of oak and whose bottom is made of wrought iron, with brackets rising up to a third of the way up the frame and fixed to the wood with screws. This iron advances under the uprights in all their thickness with a screw and four others in the bracket which goes up inside along the leaves. THE COFFERS As the word suggests, this part of the equipment is designed to support the frames and surround the cultivated plants. Although market gardeners have abandoned the old method of folding layers, they have retained the idea of maintaining the warmth of the layers, by filling the paths with dry manure as much as possible, according to time and need. This part of the equipment is certainly the most costly to maintain, as it is constantly exposed to warm humidity. No economical means of preserving wood have yet been found. At the Versailles kitchen garden, we saw a trial of a tarred trunk, and the melons inside were burnt; the heat of the layer and the sun made the tar run, and the gas released burnt the plants; the head gardener told us that sulfating produced the same effect. Many different types of trunk have been tried, and all have varying degrees of disadvantage, which we shall now examine. The tarpaulin or fixed trunk is rarely used by market gardeners, and mobile, portable trunks are needed, given that crops are constantly changing place, and that 908 it must be easy to place plants at varying distances from the glass. The crutch chests: at the end of each board, there was a very narrow head with a foot on which two iron rods were adopted, where the end of the board was passed, there was at four or five centimeters from the top, a small notch to pass the rod, so that the board was fixed just at the height of the head, and as in all the other chests; the frames were supported by bars, these with dovetails. The good thing about these chests was that no holes were made in the layers with the heads, but the bad thing was that it was difficult to raise them when necessary, as the whole row was held together, and had to be able to be raised all at once. The nailed trunk has a head at each end and is therefore independent. The old market gardeners didn't have many others, with dovetail bars When there weren't many frames, this was the simplest, and when they were no longer needed, they were stacked; But nowadays, with so many frames, they take up so much space that hurricanes sometimes break them, and the sun and rain cause the boards to warp and wear, making them difficult to stack. Next came the sliding trunk, exactly the same as the nailed trunk, except that instead of being nailed, it has two pegs at each end of the head, with a notch in the board to pass the peg through and hold it at the required height. At the end of the pitons there's a hole to pass a rod that secures the board to the head across its entire width. At the end of the rows, the heads are Om35 wide and the others Om18. The first trunks in this system had hooked bars; the wooden bar was just as wide as the trunk, and an iron hook was fitted by means of three screws. The disadvantage of these bars was that as soon as one screw was missing, the bar could no longer be used. O0 Another bar system consisted in the hook being fixed from below, to avoid fatigue, and raised at right angles to the end of the bar, to hook in like the previous system. In this day and age, wood is generally replaced by iron; bars are made from one-piece T-iron, bent at each end to form the hook, with the edge of the T underneath bent just to leave the thickness of the board and form a stopping point. This system is undoubtedly the best and least expensive, although it requires a greater advance of funds at the outset, but lasts a very long time. In all trunks, there are two cleats attached to the bottom board, to prevent the frame from sinking when it is given air or raised for one reason or another. At first, these cleats were simply two small pieces of wood nailed to the outside of the bottom board, extending beyond it by the thickness of the frame. Mr. Velars, who designed a frame system, came up with the idea of making iron cleats. This cleat is hooked onto the board; the iron is bent under the frame in a small notch in its thickness to grip the board internally. This system is very practical, and indestructible, given that they can be removed when the trunks are picked up, or fixed with a nail through a hole cut in the iron and passing through the board. So, from my point of view, this is the best trunk you can build: Om35 oak headers at the ends of the rows, Om18 inside with pitons and rods to secure the fir boards, the bottom one a little narrower than the top one, iron bars and cleats. PAILLASSONS Gardeners have been using this accessory for a very long time, even before they had bells and frames, and its manufacture has remained unchanged and familiar to all practitioners (1). Since not everyone needed a large quantity, and there was always time to make them in winter, this issue was considered negligible. With the increase in labor and the quantity needed by market gardeners, the time is ripe to reduce the cost price. The Syndicat alone, with its cooperatives, will be able to make major savings in this area. These companies have already dealt with the purchase of twine, which is the smallest part of the business, and yet they have achieved a result, the first step in this direction. Later on, we'll be buying straw in bulk for all the members, so it's no surprise that our little nephews will have their own factory, mechanically of course, where associates will find the number of straw mats they need every year, at a much lower price than they currently pay. I'm trespassing on the future here, but by examining the past and studying the issues seriously, we can well foresee the future. It is up to the younger generations to study these questions and to try, by every means in their power, to bring down the cost price of their products, if they want to compete advantageously against the competition which will not cease to grow. Old-timers can only enlighten them with their experience, and that's what I'm aiming for in writing this story. SMALL TOOLS Great improvements have been made in this area over the course of the century. All tools are much lighter, and therefore less tiring. When we had a heavy spade or pitchfork in our hands from morning to night, it took more effort to use it, or we produced less work with the same amount of fatigue. This (1) This description is given in our treatise on vegetable growing. 508 It's only in the last quarter of a century that we've had the American fork. In our time, this tool has overtaken the spade, which was almost the only tool used by gardeners in past centuries. The manufacture of the latter has also improved considerably over the olden days; much less heavy as we say, these tools penetrate the earth better by the effect of their shape alone. The same applies to all other tools. There's nothing more to be said about the watering can, since it's been done away with almost everywhere, except for a few light sprinklings. NEW EQUIPMENT In recent years, new equipment has been added to the existing range. The Decauville narrow-gauge railroad has been introduced into the marshes. I've seen tracks with turntables, and probably other tracks with points, but it's already a small network. Small wagons, pushed by men, run on the rails, transporting manure, soil, goods, etc. These plants were the precursors of the new railways. These plants were the forerunners of the large plants of the twentieth century, when these wagons would be powered by automobiles. As we saw in the previous chapter, at the end of this century, mechanical power replaced animal power to pump the water needed for irrigation. In fact, the horse does enough to bring in the manure needed for farming, and to transport the produce to the Halles Centrales, which is becoming increasingly remote as market gardens move further and further away from Paris. As market gardeners moved farther and farther away, they cultivated larger tracts of land, and ploughing was done mechanically. Inventors of agricultural implements are keeping a close eye on the transformations that progress is bringing to this type of farming, and as soon as they see the usefulness of a 908 special plough for market gardeners, the latter will not be long without an embarrassment of riches to choose from. Here again, I'm foreshadowing the future, but when eighty-year-old men tell us that they've still seen market gardeners pulling water by hand, and when we consider the successive progress made since that time in Parisian market gardening, we can well foresee the progress that the twentieth century will see. Dnied9 GOO AMONG THE OLD AND THE MODERN At the time when the statutes of 1599 officially established the market-gardening guild (1), new crops such as melons began to enrich the market-gardening scene. There is no doubt that the drafting and application of these statutes enabled the corporation to make progress in regulating all aspects of its trade. However, despite the fairly slow progress made in the trade, such as the first air beds, where lettuces, turnips and radishes were grown, and the first trials of forced cultivation, based on La Quintinie's method, trade was very limited. Nevertheless, it's fair to say that market gardeners were never idle, and when they didn't have early crops to grow, their art consisted in preserving vegetables that had arrived in autumn for most of the winter. As these plants became rarer, they sold all the more expensively: cauliflowers in particular fetched prices that would be considered fabulous today: some old-timers told me that they sold for as much as two or three francs apiece. Greens such as parsley and sorrel were also very expensive, as were scarole and celery, whose late sale remained quite lucrative for two-thirds of this century. (1) See the statutes of the ancient community of gardeners, chap. 19 of this work. The first market gardeners to cultivate early vegetables sold them at a very high price, but as we have said, this cultivation was done on a small scale, after much trial and error, and often false maneuvers that took away part of the profit. It's rare for the inventor to benefit from his invention; the profit is more often than not for those who come after him; they benefit from the experience of the first, and make improvements to the innovation that enable them to earn a higher return. It was not until after the Revolution, therefore, that trade grew significantly. The social state having been transformed, many more average fortunes having been built up at the expense of the great fortunes of past centuries, and the city growing rapidly, the introduction of forced cultivation among gardeners everywhere enabled well-to-do people to indulge in fantasies that only kings and the powerful had been able to enjoy in previous centuries. A little later, when these forced cultivations became general, they lost their value, the trade always being local, so that the market gardeners increased their costs, the profits were hardly greater. On this subject, I remember hearing a great agronomist of our century, M. Georges Ville, say in one of his lectures that "agriculture did not make a profit"; when, he said, "the farmer has withdrawn the interest on the money committed to his enterprise, the emoluments due to the manager and the director who take the lion's share for the work carried out on the farm, there is nothing left. If he has a little money, it's a saving on his personal well-being". This reasoning by a competent man can be applied to the market-growing corporation in general. However, there was a period in this century when the profession of market gardener was significantly better than it was before, and than it is today; for we have arrived at a time of transition; as we have said: the advent of the great NC industrial establishments, if I may use this expression, where the large workforce will be mechanized. This period of prosperity began with the creation of the railroads, and the city's population doubled in thirty years. In fact, according to the various censuses taken in this century, the capital had 910,000 inhabitants in 1836, and 1,825,000 in 1866. Market gardeners already had a certain amount of equipment for growing early vegetables, and these products were in demand on foreign markets, especially in England and Belgium, while the Midi region did not yet have a suitable crop to compete actively with market garden produce. As a result of these circumstances, in autumn, following the old system of preserving plants, they were sold for part of the winter, as well as or better than in the old days. When summer was dry, and production in the Paris suburbs was lacking, the market gardeners' trade also increased. I estimate that this period began around 1855, and began to decline around 1880. For the past twenty years or so, production has been steadily increasing, while revenue has been declining in the same proportions. This too-short period of prosperity for the market-growing corporation has doubled labor costs, rents and general expenses. The conclusion to be drawn is that today, market gardening is scarcely more lucrative than it was sixty years ago, but there is still a higher level of well-being, and people still live better than they did then. It's up to the younger generations to react, by looking for new ways of growing crops, by replacing manual labor with mechanical means, and in short, by using everything possible to reduce the cost price of their crops, to enable them to sell their produce cheaply 1008 and thereby compete advantageously with the Midi, thanks to its climate and the ease of transporting its produce to Paris. The market-growing corporation is made up of independent, active and hard-working men, and there is no reason to doubt that the intellectual level of the younger generations will enable them to make the progress necessary to make their industry more flourishing than ever. This is the most ardent and sincere wish I can express as I write the history of their ancestors and foretell their own. D8t-e45 GOO Few trades require such basic and inexpensive working clothes as market gardening. Bosses and workers, being occupied with the same tasks, wear the same effects. Comparing the clothes our ancestors wore with those worn today, I feel that on this side, there has been little progress. If, on the one hand, work clothes have hardly been improved, market gardeners, on the other hand, suffer as much as before, if not more, from the ravages of time. In fact, and quite to the contrary, because of the large-scale cultivation of early fruit and vegetables in our time, and also because of the remoteness of the establishments from the capital, market gardeners are even more exposed to bad weather than in the past. In the past, our elders and we ourselves still wore a limousine to drive the car; this garment completely enveloped the man and, with its double pelerine, guaranteed against the heaviest rains. The paletots I see worn by today's market-garden workers are a poor substitute for this garment, which is still very much a rarity in the trade. Another garment that has also disappeared is the "coltin". Made of coarse twill ticking, it was used in the marshes, especially to carry the "hotriau", and to protect against the rain and cold, it was a kind of overcoat for all kinds of work, and very long to get through in the rain. This garment has not been replaced, not even advantageously. Often, the same paletot used for the car is also used in the garden. When it gets wet, it dries on the back, which can lead to illness. So much for current clothing defects. As for progress, we see only the following: The blouse, which the ancients used to wear, has been abolished and replaced by the bourgeron, which modern industry supplies cheaply. Similarly, the canvas or coutil cotte is tending to disappear, to be advantageously replaced by coarse velvet pants, also supplied cheaply. The shoes used by market gardeners have not changed: clogs, made entirely of wood, are the best. Galoshes don't provide the same service, especially in winter, when feet are constantly numb. In this respect, the fashion of the ancients was still preferable: clogs made entirely of wood, with bare feet inside, with fresh straw artfully woven under and over the foot, and renewed every day. This trim, however rustic and primitive, defies the best stuffed shoes. Clogs are also useful for ploughing with a spade. The practitioner who knows how to handle this tool uses the clog as a support to turn the "bêchetée" of terrc. For a long time to come, this shoe will continue to be used by market gardeners during the winter months. In winter, our ancestors wore black woollen caps, which they called "black radishes". These bonnets have been replaced by caps of all kinds; it's all a question of fashion. For summer, everything is simplified; a pair of pants, a canvas or cotton shirt, a wide-brimmed straw hat, bare feet - that's the market gardener dressed. For those going to Les Halles, a burgundy coat and selvedge shoes or slippers complete the outfit. Women have kept pace with the progress that modern industry has made in clothing. I've been told by former market gardeners that at the beginning of the century, some women still walked barefoot in the marshes, but this fashion has long since been abandoned. Some still wear it, but others have replaced it with more modern, less expensive garments. What is disappearing completely among young women is the old hairstyle worn by our mothers and even our wives: the marmot, which we describe for the lay reader as nothing more than a handkerchief or scarf artfully tied around the head. The marmot has been worn with some coquetry by some women. Today, it has been replaced by woollen kerchiefs, bonnets and other more modern headgear. In all things, you have to keep up with the times, provided your health doesn't suffer. For the market-gardener, there's no improvement in her work; the establishments are bigger, farther from the capitalc and these two conditions mean more trouble for her, since she has to go to the Ilalles almost every day, whatever the weather. Despite this, our daughters are as healthy as their mothers and grandmothers. of contemporary times DOuXed D (OOC OEUEed S GOOgIC - * -- - - -.- -. - The revolution of 1789 came at the right time to proclaim and effectively defend individual freedom. Few today would deny the immense progress it has brought to society in general. But, as with all things, no matter how good they may be, there is another side to the coin. The esprit de corps was very strong in the old workers' communities, where everyone's rights and duties were well established. This was partly broken by the proclamation of the principle of workers' freedom. By creating individualism, the power of the money man was exaggerated, and the old edifice disintegrated, little by little, under the dissolving action of self-interest. Workers are no longer bound by any contract with their bosses, and sometimes display a certain rebellious independence towards them. The latter, for their part, are free to dismiss them whenever they see fit. The two become indifferent, if not downright hostile. If relations between employers and employees have cooled to such an extent in the world of work, isn't it because the former appear to the latter to be nothing more than labor contractors, who employ them and pay them more or less well, according to their needs, leaving them free to seek better conditions with other bosses? The modern system has thus created individualism, with its initiatives and responsibilities, its chances of success and opportunities for fortune for the few, but also its isolation, weaknesses and inconveniences for the many. The old guild is no longer there to protect all concerned by its statutes. Was this state of affairs immediately felt by our ancestors? The answer has already been given in the course of this book. The ancient community of master gardeners did not wait for the revolution to abandon its privileges. They had given them up of their own accord, so that when lightning struck, it changed almost nothing in the social state of the men in our guild. Family spirit and family life continued to exist between bosses and workers, as before, but weakened the further one moved away from the Revolution, so today this family life is tending to disappear. In all the specialties that modern progress has created in Parisian horticulture, the only ones left to feed their workers are market gardeners. We're still looking forward to the time when everyone on both sides will be free to have lunch as they please, which will happen faster on large farms than anywhere else. In other specialties, workers start their day at such and such an hour and finish it at the same time; some are paid by the day and others by the hour, exactly as in industry. In this century of progress, freedom and competition, it's true that citizens should have the greatest possible amount of individual freedom. But alongside the strong, the intelligent or simply those to whom fortune smiles, aren't there the weak, the disinherited, etc., who need to be protected? Employers and workers settle their disputes before the Justice of the Peace: that's common law. A large number of guilds settle their disputes before industrial tribunals. Isn't this a throwback to the Middle Ages and the statutes written in Etienne Boileau's Golden Book? The 009 regime set out in the statutes of ancient workers' communities has left many traces in our modern institutions, because it contains a shred of economic truth, and represents the patriarchal and protective side of the weak against the strong. While recognizing that the regime of individual freedom is more favorable to great initiative; that the commerce of this century would be hampered by the economic system of the Middle Ages; we must agree that for far less gifted natures, the opposite occurs. In the great working-class family, there have always been and always will be, alongside the strong, weak, sickly, unintelligent, short-sighted or poor managers of their own interests, as well as old, weakened or infirm workers. That's a whole world to protect. Should all these men be allowed to deteriorate, through the free-for-all, often into dullness and sometimes even into dishonor? Should we also force these old veterans to beg for bread? Once the great revolutionary turmoil had passed, the men of this century realized that it was necessary to reconstitute the associations of the Middle Ages on a different basis. The statutes of the old communities, destroyed by the Revolution, placed work under the hand of the Eglisc, whereas our modern societies are secular and liberal, freed from all religious suggestion. Our mutual aid societies and old-age pension funds have replaced the box of the old workers' communities. Professional unions are the image of the statutes of the workers' communities of the Middle Ages, linked with the ideas and economic and social needs of the modern world. Other associations, such as mutual insurance companies against hail, storms, etc., aim to protect each other, as far as possible, when one of these scourges brings ruin and desolation to one or more members of the association. Cooperative societies form a collective capital, enabling the most disadvantaged to buy their produce as cheaply as the rich. Like the societies of the Middle Ages, there is no doubt that these various groupings are the prelude to great social and economic transformations in the centuries to come. OOREed9 GOC During the Revolution, as the people of the countryside began to feel freer, they came to Paris from all surrounding countries. As trade expanded, the Normans, the majority of whom had been the source of Paris's first market gardeners, preferred to trade rather than farm; many became fruit growers, even buying squares of standing produce from the market gardeners, particularly Romaine. In our century, the majority of workers are descended from the Yonne and Nièvre departments. A number of large market-growing families are already from these departments. Half a century or more ago, a certain number of workers saved on their wages, got married and took up establishments that were then within everyone's reach. Some became owners, and like their colleagues from older families, benefited from the added value that the expansion of Paris gave to these properties. After the wars of the Revolution and the Empire, which cost Europe a million men, a few workers made beautiful marriages, either with their boss's daughter, or that of a friend; soon, there was no longer any distinction between provincials and Parisians. The worker who became boss would bring in a brother, cousin or friend who followed the same path, if he was hard-working and thrifty. It's interesting to add that all these hard-working, industrious and thrifty men who made up the market-gardening guild in the first half of this century were animated by a spirit of solidarity, which is tending to disappear from the mores of market-gardeners. These men fought to see who could establish the most workers and advance the highest sum. Let us take this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the memory of my family's benefactor, the Honourable Charles Debille, whom we have already mentioned on another occasion, and whose parents, along with others, were the first to try forced cultivation. This good man advanced my eldest brother, like so many others, a sum of money to establish himself, and he later did the same to his entire family. I cite this fact because it's particular to me, but almost all the old market-gardener families are in the same situation, and there are hardly any provincial workers established in Paris who are not indebted for a similar kindness, to one of those old families we've mentioned several times. Isn't this the purest socialism imaginable? These modest, hard-working and thrifty men, who could have enjoyed greater well-being than they did, sometimes went to great lengths to raise their workers to their level, and were honored when the latter succeeded. In today's world, however, factories are becoming less and less accessible to workers, as their purchase price rises day by day. On the other hand, many workers are prone to the vice of the century: alcoholism. Many of them, even those who had no intention of settling, have lost the thriftiness that characterized their ancestors. The latter amassed a small nest egg and returned to their homeland, cultivating the plot of land they inherited from their parents and expanding it with the proceeds of their savings. O08 "Today, some have taken on that rebellious independence of which we spoke earlier; others, who might have had good dispositions, have found themselves sometimes put off by unjust bosses; from this comes misunderstanding between the two parties, instead of the reciprocal esteem of patriarchal life that once existed. So it's almost an exception for a worker to stay with the same boss for several years, which used to be the rule. But we should also mention the role of women in market gardening. The market gardener's job requires technical knowledge for the woman at least as much, if not more, than for the man. In fact, in addition to the work she's responsible for on the farm, a woman has to learn how to trade, as she's in charge of selling the produce at the Halles. Anyone who is familiar with the Halles trade, with the variation in prices, sometimes from one day to the next, knows just how important it is to keep an eye on the arrival and demand for a given product, when another is neglected; given that everything is generally sold on the same day, what remains loses its freshness for the Lendémain, and selling is often made all the more difficult. As mentioned in the chapter on Halles et Marchés, market gardeners have always sold their produce in the streets around the Halles, at fixed locations; sales end at 7am in summer and 8am in winter. As soon as the bell was rung to announce the end of the sale, any remaining goods had to be transported to the storerooms, otherwise they were left to be pillaged. From this brief description of the market gardeners' trade, it's easy to see what skills the market-gardener must have to ensure that she doesn't miss her sale, under the best possible conditions. according to the course. Given the special skills that market gardeners must possess, market gardeners generally 299,008 marry market gardeners; the latter accompany either their mothers or their bosses to the Halles, where they learn the trade, and are thus up to the task when they are called upon to work on their own account. When it comes to marrying off their children, market gardeners have preserved a custom handed down from their ancestors, one that no longer exists anywhere that I know of. They hold "picnic" weddings; friends and relatives are invited, and there are many of them, with all families allied to one another. Everyone pays their own way at the banquet held on the wedding day, and it's not uncommon to see two hundred people attend such banquets, where harmony never ceases to exist. It's yet another trait of customs bequeathed to the guild by the ancient community of master gardeners of centuries gone by, who themselves had inherited it from the "ghilds" of the Franks. These primitive men were already organizing "picnic" or communal banquets. So true is it that there's nothing new under the sky, and that men always retain the same temperament; but for the subject at hand, it's also proof of the good harmony that reigns within the corporation. WORK In all times, and still today, the job of market gardener is one of the hardest that men can do. In the past, when they were not far from the Halles, they carried their produce there on their backs, i.e. on hoods. In spring and summer, when the produce was more plentiful, they made several trips, so they had to be on their feet part of the night. Then the water was hauled by hand and the watering cans carried. This type of work lasted for the most part until the first quarter of this century. Workers earned twenty-five francs a month in summer, and twelve to fifteen francs in winter. They were also provided with food and lodging. Female workers, if any, earned between twelve and fifteen francs a month (t). The women, for whom the trade was perhaps even more arduous, did the same; they stayed at Les Halles to sell and deliver goods. The maid, commonly known as the "fille", was usually a child of the household at the time, and would bring back from the Halles, on a hood, the various utensils, such as mannes, manettes, clayettes, manivaux, etc., that had been used to package the products. When she returned home, she and the (1) These details were provided to me by former market gardeners. manager would prepare the vegetables for the next day's sale. In this respect, nothing has changed. It's worth saying here that, since time immemorial, market gardeners have taken a siesta during the day, in the four hottest months of the year. This siesta, which lasts an hour and a half on average, cuts the day in half, and anyone who has been in the trade knows the well-being it brings. The only complaint young people have about what all market gardeners call "the sleeping hour" is that it's too short... Later, the introduction of the horse and carriage brought relative well-being for everyone, but especially for the bosses, who hardly ever left the house. The women and the "boy" in charge of driving the carriage continued to go to the Halles to sell vegetables. It was at this time that the cultivation of early vegetables took on a certain importance, necessitating the use of much more manure to build up the beds. Once the produce had been deposited at Les Halles, the man in charge of driving it would bring back a wagonload of manure, which he would load at the ad ministrations or at the homes of private individuals with stables in Paris. Afterwards, he continued to work in the marsh with the boss and other workers, if any. Until around 1860, the "girls" continued to bring back from Les Halles the various accessories used to transport vegetables. As the Halles began to move further away, some of them brought only the clothes they needed to make the morning sale. When the first bateaux-mouches were installed, it became customary for many market-gardeners living either upstream or downstream from the river not to return from Les Halles on foot, and this practice quickly spread to other districts, whatever the means of transport (omnibuses and streetcars). It also did away with the custom of carrying a hood. From then on, the girl would pack the above-mentioned garments and return home 508 by the easiest and cheapest means of transport. In the work by Messrs Moreau and Daverne, we find that women earned an average of two hundred and forty francs a year around mid-century. In addition, they made profits in the marsh, such as cauliflower leaves, which were removed when this vegetable was prepared for sale, baby carrots, chickweed when it wasn't weeded in time, etc. They also made profits in the "Illes d'Or", where they worked the marshes. They also made a profit at Les Ilalles, carrying goods when they were sold, either to the merchants in the pavilions, or to the city fruit growers who left their cars with the guards around Les Halles. Today, they earn an average of one franc a day; they are housed, fed and laundered, and they also enjoy the profits we listed above, which have increased with the growth of the establishments. It's one of the hardest jobs a woman can do, but it's also one of the ones where she earns the most; we're talking, of course, only about purely manual jobs. The same authors we quoted above also tell us that, at the time they were writing (in 1845), men earned eighteen to twenty francs in winter, plus two francs a Sunday (this was called the "loan"). In summer, they earned thirty to two francs a month, plus a loan of two or two francs fifty. In my day, from 1860 to 1870, the average was forty francs a month in winter and sixty francs in summer. Today, prices have risen from fifty to sixty francs in winter, and eighty in summer. Food and lodging are always extra. With bosses and workers all working and living together, the way of life has improved a great deal, and market gardeners today live much better than most workers. 008 After 1870, as the spirit of independence grew among workers, some bosses agreed with their workers to abolish the Sunday evening meal, which was initially paid for by those who agreed to this deal. The practice then became widespread, and everything was included in the monthly wage. The remoteness of the establishments from the capital, forcing the man driving the car to eat outside in the morning, and the suppression of the Sunday evening meal are the prelude to the moment when the workers will no longer be fed by the boss. It's quite possible that this will lead to a new sense of well-being on both sides. LES JARDINIERS DE PARIS From this point of view, the old well-off families can be blamed for not giving their children enough education. It was legendary among them to believe that it was useless to be educated in order to do their job. I've noticed that, among men of a certain age, a large number don't even have the education of a common peasant. Even more so, they lagged far behind the well-to-do peasants who were already giving their children a secondary education. Our old market gardeners, however intelligent but uneducated, didn't at first understand this new benefit of the Revolution: education for the people. With compulsory education enshrined in our laws under the Third Republic, the children of market gardeners are no longer below those of other corporations. But the time is not far off when this will no longer be sufficient. With the trade tending more and more to become an industry, and establishments growing steadily away from the capital, there will be new means of cultivation, new fertilizers, etc., all of which will entail bookkeeping in good order, and knowledge of agricultural chemistry, in order to analyze one's own soil and fertilizers, in a word, to break out of routine and enter the realm of science. Some crops will disappear. New ones will probably emerge, and we'll have to study them before applying them. The GOOs 6 trade will make it increasingly possible to specialize crops. The manures used on the farm will no longer be sufficient to fertilize the soil; chemical fertilizers will have to be used, and to use them economically, it will be necessary to know the dominant element of each plant, i.e. the element it absorbs in the greatest quantity; it will also be necessary to know which elements the soil we are cultivating contains. In short, it will require a wealth of technical knowledge that already belongs to the domain of modern horticultural science. Today's market gardeners are already suffering the consequences of their lack of education. The forcing of plants brings with it new diseases, in the face of which they are forced to sit idly by, not one of them having the education necessary to carry out reasoned experiments to combat these diseases. Some of these diseases, such as lettuce and romaine sucker (peronospora gangliiformis), melon nail, grey mould and rust, which attack other plants, have already caused enormous losses to the corporation. Lastly, crop specialization destroys the rotation system so much advocated by the old-timers in all types of cultivation, and which still has its raison d'être, despite all the fertilizers. After a certain period of time, when the same crop is grown on the same land, the land becomes exhausted and the harvest is hardly remunerative. So, by analyzing this land, we could give it back what the crop has taken away from it; or we could change the crop in time to avoid losses. It is only with this special knowledge that future market gardeners, with large farms, will be able to make a profit. 4 PLAYED BY CERTAIN MARAICHERS From a political and communal point of view, some market gardeners played a certain role in the 19th century. During the terrible year of 1870-71, Becquerelle, from Ivry-sur-Seine, was appointed mayor of the town during this troubled period. This almost uneducated man imposed himself through his dignified, energetic attitude and his life of integrity. Threatened several times with being shot, either by the Communards or by the Versaillais, as the belligerents were then called, he never flinched or lost his cool. This heroic attitude saved Ivry from the horrors of civil war. This brave old man belonged to the generation of 1848; he had retained all its principles. He never acquiesced to the imperial regime that France had given itself, or rather allowed to be imposed. On every occasion, he held high the flag of the Republic. So, to consecrate his long life as a sincere republican, he expressed the wish that the Marseillaise should be played at his funeral, the moment his body was lowered into the grave. I attended the funeral, as did a large crowd, and the whole town of Ivry had come to salute the memory of this energetic man of integrity. When the Société musicale d'Ivry, who had made it their duty to accompany this brave old man, played the first stanzas of our national anthem, a shiver ran through the audience, unaccustomed to hearing it on such occasions. One sensed that this man of principle had possessed broad and generous ideas. Another example I'd rather not mention is that of my elder brother. A resident of the 15th arrondissement of Paris for some fifteen years, he was recommended by his friends to be appointed deputy mayor of his arrondissement in 1878, when Jules Grévy became President of the Republic. He held this post for three years. The voters of the Javel district then appointed him to the posts of town councillor and general councillor of the Seine, which he held until 1889. For one year, he was even vice-president of the latter assembly. Around this time, he was struck down by a serious illness, which took its toll on him two years later. Since 1870, a number of market gardeners have been elected municipal councillors, most of them living in the Paris suburbs. Today, there are a number of them. Some are mayors of their own communes. Among them is Mr. Duvillard, who has been mayor of Arcueil for many years. Among those who live in Paris, several are members of charitable organizations, such as welfare offices, school caisses, municipal crèches, and so on. With this presentation, we wanted to prove that, with their freedom and independence, the market gardeners of the end of the century can and already do play an important role in society. A number of them have received or are receiving honorary distinctions. M. Laizier, founding president of the Société de Secours Mutuels, was a Chevalier de la Légion d'Ilonneur. Ponce Isidore, expert arbitrator with the Tribunal. Civil for many years, was chevalier du Mérite Agricole. My eldest brother also held this distinction, thanks to the services he rendered, as a general councillor, for 08 the creation of horticultural schools, especially for morally abandoned children. The same goes for Mr. Georges Chemin, thanks to the selections he made from various plants, including the tomato which bears his name, and the Golden Celery which he succeeded in fixing. We should also mention Mr. Duvillard, as professor of vegetable cultivation for the Seine department and the Chambre Syndicale des ouvriers jardiniers. Several others, such as Messrs Stainville, Hébrard Alexandre, Ilébrard Laurent, for services rendered, either to the Horticultural Society, or to the Société de Secours Mutuels-des jardiniers et horticulteurs du département de la Seine. A few others have been awarded this decoration for a variety of other reasons. Shortly before the publication of this book, Mr. Narcisse Laurent was awarded the Cross of Chevalier du Mérite Agricole for his participation in the International Horticultural Exhibition in St. Petersburg. Mr. Narcisse Laurent had long been known in the horticultural world for the impetus he gave, long ago, to his cultivation of early vegetables, by installing steam circulation in his beds, and as one of the main innovators of new forced cultivation methods. The market gardeners who have written and left their mark on the history of their corporation are extremely rare. Messrs Moreau and Daverne, however, wrote a Manuel de la Culture Maraîchère and an Exposé Historique de leur corporation around mid-century, from which I was able to draw some information. Later, Mr. Isidore Ponce also wrote a small work on the same subject. That's about all the literary works I could find, written by market gardeners themselves. 1 May posterity salute the memory of these kind-hearted men who honored the guild in the history of our country. 8 MARAICHERS Here are the main localities occupied by market gardeners at the end of the century. Starting as we always have, on the banks of the Seine, upstream from Paris and on the right bank, we find Alfortville, Maisons-Alfort and Créteil, these three countries situated between the Seine and the Marne, in a beautiful plain that awaits the market gardeners of the centuries to come. A small group exists in Champigny on the right bank of the Marne; closer to Paris, there are still a few market gardeners, in Saint-Mandé and Vincennes, but they will disappear in a short space of time. Then it's on to Bobigny, home to the largest group on the right bank, and La Courneuve, Drancy and a few other nearby villages also have market gardeners. Next, Stains, which already contains a small group. Then, scattered among the factories and railway lines, the remaining ones in Aubervilliers and Saint-Denis, which will also soon disappear. Finally, there's a large group in Gennevilliers and Asnières, on the peninsula that bears that locality's name. A number on this side irrigate with sewage from the city of Paris. As for the few that remain in Clichy and Saint-Ouen, they are so lost among factories and built-up areas that, for a hundred different reasons, not a single one will be left before long. Then you have to go all the way back to Billancourt to find a few; but on this side, space is so tight that they can't increase, hemmed in as they are by the Seine, which bypasses this locality, and by the population, which is also increasing rapidly in these parts, close to the Bois de Boulogne. On the left bank, the marshes of Issy-les-Moulineaux are severely eroded by the maneuvering area. In Malakoff, those who live in the upper part of the country will be able to stay there for a long time to come, barring unforeseen events. Châtillon could take in a few, but the land is already too valuable for market gardeners to settle there, given that land cannot currently be paid for at more than three to four francs a meter to establish a marsh. On this side, moreover, the terrain is too hilly for further development. Montrouge still has a number of market gardeners, but these will disappear as the land is taken over by industry. However, those near the Bagneux cemetery will be around for a long time to come. The largest group on the left bank is at Bagneux, while Gentilly, Arcueil and Larue, on the banks of the Bièvre, have a few. Ivry will shortly be sending the few remaining to Vitry and Choisy-le-Roi, which already have a small group. On this side, as on the right bank of the Seine, a beautiful plain awaits the market gardeners of the centuries to come. They will undoubtedly build up settlements of the kind we anticipate, and of which we will give an overview in a subsequent chapter I CURRENT VALUE OF MARAIS AND THEIR RENTAL AREAS With trade and industry having made more progress in our century alone, than in the previous twenty centuries, the land in and around Paris has considerably increased in value 1). The land occupied by our ancestors at the beginning of the century (near Charles V's enclosure) was then worth twelve to fifteen thousand francs per hectare; today it sells for five to eight hundred francs per meter. The rental of this land, for market gardening, was worth five to six hundred francs per hectare, including the dwelling house. By 1815, this same land was already worth between eighty and one hundred thousand francs per hectare. It was therefore in the second half of the century, i.e. since the creation of the railroads, that they acquired such a considerable value. The land occupied around mid-century by the children of the former (in the vicinity of Louis XVI's surrounding walls) was worth between twenty-eight and thirty thousand francs per hectare, and now sells for between one hundred and three hundred francs per metre. At that time, rent was already doubled, with prices ranging from thirteen to fourteen hundred francs per hectare, including the dwelling house and outbuildings. Throughout the 11) Moreau et Daverne ; Hlistoire des Maraichers de Paris. 145COOS C century, these conditions have not changed. When we speak of "renting a marsh", we always mean including the dwelling house and outbuildings. At the end of the century, land near Louis-Philippe's fortified enclosure, where there are still a few market gardeners disappearing as leases come to an end, was worth twelve to fifteen thousand francs per hectare at mid-century. They are now selling for between twenty-five and fifty francs a metre, depending on the district in which they are located. It's understandable that with this prodigious increase in the price of land, market gardeners, whether owners or tenants, can't cultivate it for long. The former, who have crossed the fortified zone to settle in the neighboring communes, are also benefiting from a fabulous increase in land prices. The capital suffocates within its walls, and land is exorbitantly expensive. The major industries that need a lot of space are moving out of Paris to set up in these communes: the result is this enormous increase in land, especially on the banks of the river, a canal or a railway line; in other words, the whole of the outskirts of Paris is in these conditions, albeit more or less advantageously. The largest groups of market gardeners are currently to be found in the last communes of the Seine department. Suitable land can be bought for between three and four francs a metre, of course, unless there are exceptional circumstances that cannot be used as a basis for general assessments. The cost of buildings, fences, wells, etc. amounts to around twenty thousand francs, bringing the price per hectare of market garden land to between fifty and sixty thousand francs. The rental of these establishments is currently worth between two thousand and two thousand four hundred francs per hectare. The century that is about to begin will not pass without further expansion of the capital. There is already a 98 project to dismantle the fortifications in the north-western region of Paris. The population centers of Boulogne, Neuilly-Levallois and Clichy will thus be incorporated into the capital, which will only be limited in this direction by one of the bends in the Seine. These communes have become real cities. Progress will perhaps be slower in the rugged, quarry-strewn region stretching from Châtillon to Bicêtre, south of Paris. Nevertheless, as the capital continues to expand, we can expect a steady rise in the price of all the land around it. DEIESS Q OF THE ESTABLISHMENTS TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THEY GIVE RISE At the end of the last century, when market gardeners owned very little equipment - most of them had neither horse nor carriage, no chassis, only a few bells - establishments were not yet sold en bloc. I had before me the minutes of a sale of the equipment of a market gardener, which was not the least important for the time; the total of this sale amounted to fourteen or fifteen hundred francs, including the furniture. It was only with the introduction of cranks in market gardening establishments, which began to constitute an establishment in its own right, that market gardeners adopted the mutually beneficial system of selling their establishments in their current state, a custom that has continued to this day. In fact, the seller always makes a profit by selling everything that makes up his establishment as a whole, while at the same time transferring his right to the lease, or, if he is the owner, granting a lease to the buyer. The latter then takes over the business, having bought everything: seeds, plants and merchandise of all ages, and from the day after his acquisition, he continues to sell the products likely to be sold. In this way, an establishment is more valuable in spring than in autumn. Both parties are aware of the advantages and disadvantages of the seasons, and this facilitates transactions. We also take into account the remoteness of the Ilalles, the quality of the land, and the length of time it has been used for market gardening, although less so today than in the past, when it was felt, for example, that summer cauliflowers could not have been grown in areas other than Vaugirard and Grenelle. Depth and abundance of water were also taken into account. It's true that now, with the use of motors, depth is becoming a secondary issue; but abundance is still, as it always has been, the primary question. At the same time, the quantity and quality of all the equipment are examined. Furniture alone is not included in these transactions, and the buyer must follow the commitments made by the seller with regard to the establishment. More often than not, the latter gives the former staggered deadlines for liquidation. This approach makes it much easier for young people to establish themselves. This is especially true for those from the provinces, who are generally not wealthy. A few small savings from the young man or woman, together with a certain sum advanced by a friend, or as we said in another chapter, more often than not by a boss, form a payment to the conptant, giving a certain guarantee to the seller. The remainder is paid with interest at the set times. In most cases, the two parties know each other, or the buyer is recommended and supported by a serious person. It may be added that this is one of the trades in which there are the fewest cases where commitments are not kept. The first establishments sold in this way were worth between two and five thousand francs, depending on the size of the equipment; their price has risen with the progress of the industry. By mid-century, they were already worth between eight and twelve thousand francs. With the introduction of irrigation, prices rose even further, and all equipment increased considerably, with average prices rising from fifteen to twenty thousand francs. Today, with new advances such as engines, Decauville railroads, etc., the average is between twenty-two and twenty-five thousand francs. To set up an establishment at the beginning of the twentieth century, taking into account all the advances mentioned above, we'd need to operate on a plot of land of at least fifteen thousand meters, on which we'd put a thousand frames, five to six thousand bells, horse and carriage, motor to operate the pump, irrigation, Decauville railway, etc., i.e. we'd need to spend thirty thousand francs to organize such an establishment. These figures show that the market-gardening industry in Paris, like all other industries, is set to become capitalist; the number of establishments is declining day by day, as those that remain grow in size, and it is already becoming difficult for workers to set up on their own. Such is the force of things, a force against which nothing can be done. The day when products can all be sold by auction, making it easier for growers to specialize their crops, capitalists will set up ćtablissements on hectares of land, with equipment whose scale we cannot predict: farms that will have a manager and a director, exactly as is already the case in large-scale farming. DURING THE XIXC CENTURY ----------------- As far as market gardening is concerned, we can say that, as in all industries, if trade has increased considerably, it is in the interests of consumers in general. We have seen that, at the beginning of the century, the produce of early crops became more accessible to a certain category of citizens, but they were not yet within the reach of all pockets, whereas today almost everyone can afford the fantasy of eating, for example, a Laituc in the middle of winter. In other words, production has risen sharply and prices have fallen accordingly. But with costs rising in general, how does the producer manage to make a profit? Well, where our ancestors struggled to sell a thousand lettuces, for example, we sell fifty thousand today. Produce a lot and sell it cheaply - that's the motto of modern trade. Market gardeners, who have always done their business on a cash basis, generally don't keep books; however, some young people, without having one as such, are beginning to keep track of the business they are doing. As the farm expands, it will be necessary to keep proper books, just as in all industries and businesses. It is therefore only possible to estimate their sales over the course of the century. To guide us in this evaluation, we shall base ourselves on a work done in 1845 by two intelligent practitioners, Messrs More au and Daverne, who wrote the history of their corporation in a manner judicious enough to fix the historian. These authors tell us how much equipment was used in their guild at the time, and how much business was done annually. They estimated it at thirteen or fourteen million francs, including the product of certain crops, such as mushrooms and many flowers, crops which have been transferred to other specialties. Taking all these facts into account, the practitioner can, by deduction, roughly establish the vegetable trade that the ancients did at the beginning of the century. Having established the value of forced cultivation at the time when the authors we have just quoted were writing; having deducted the product of mushroom and flower cultivation, we estimate that Parisian market gardeners, at the beginning of the century, sold three to four thousand francs worth of vegetables. Until around the middle of the century, trade was only local, but with the city rapidly increasing in population, and containing many more average fortunes than under the old regime, trade in general was affected by this well-being. So did the corporation's particular trade, which had grown from three to four million francs at the beginning of the century to thirteen or fourteen million francs in 1845. It was not until the trade became international, therefore, that it took on a very large dimension. This expansion will only increase in all countries as new commercial outlets open up. Today's market gardeners have become completely O08 specialists, growing only early vegetables and salads, then in full season. We estimate that they cultivate a thousand hectares of land, with a thousand frames and five to six thousand bells per hectare. This land, covered with the equipment we have indicated, yields an average of thirty thousand francs per hectare. The Paris market-gardening industry therefore delivers thirty million francs worth of production to the trade every year. This represents a tenfold increase in sales over the course of the century, but taking into account the fall in food prices, we can estimate that it is fifteen times higher today than it was at the beginning of the century. We have already mentioned that market garden crops will be forced to become even more specialized. Competition from products from the south of France will force market gardeners to abandon certain crops, such as the forced cultivation of asparagus in the off-season, just as they have abandoned others such as Ilaricots, Peas and Potatoes. But other forced crops, such as Lettuce, Romaine, Turnip, Melon etc., will continue to expand and will withstand all kinds of competition for a long time to come. Later on, we'll see market-gardening establishments that will be veritable factories for the production of one or other of these plants. MUSHROOM GROWING We saw in a previous chapter that mushroom growing became specialized during the 19th century. Let's try to retrace the phases this cultivation went through. The ancients knew about edible mushrooms; they considered them very good, but very dangerous to health and even to life. "Being of a very cold and damp nature, they must be used sparingly, but they are especially dangerous by accident" (1). The Latins called them fungi, a name which, according to some authors, comes from funerals, and others from the number of murderers. Oh, what gluttony! said Pliny, what a shameful attachment to the pleasure of the mouth, to expose oneself to death in order to satisfy it. Mathiole said: you'd have to be a fool to want to satisfy your taste at such a price. Alongside the excellent edible mushroom, cultivated in such abundance in the ancient quarries around Paris, other varieties of the most poisonous species grow in the wild. This family, so numerous (mushrooms are the masters of the earth), presents (1) Delamare, Traité de Police. a few pleasant-looking genera, such as the false oronge, whose bright red globe stands out against the carpet of greenery; but when you think of the deadly venom this mushroom contains, beauty disappears, what does the envelope matter, when the heart reveals only gall and poison. We'll deal here only with cultivated mushrooms, the others being outside our scope. Parisian market gardeners have been cultivating them for over two centuries; unfortunately, these modest men have neglected to write down or have written down their cultivation methods. La Quintinie, who admits to having learned a great deal from the Parisian mareschais, must have learned this culture from them. He's the first author I've come across who talks about it, albeit very vaguely. I believe that the famous grower must have considered this crop a negligible quantity, or he made some very serious omissions on this subject in his treatise on cultivation. For the edification of the practical reader, we will quote verbatim what he wrote: CHAMPIGON LAYERS "The difference between those which are to produce plants by their heat, and those which are to produce mushrooms, consists, firstly, in the fact that the latter do not need to be sunk into the ground, like the others which are sunk in by half a foot, unless it is to be what we call deaf layers. Secondly, this difference consists in the fact that the first ones must be regularly placed and joined on top, instead of the others being in the shape of a humpback". Certainly, if the layer is laid out in this way at the end of winter, mushroom spawn, or mycelium, may form in the autumn; this happens quite frequently, even in layers built for forcing vegetables. But this is only a random occurrence, and does not constitute cultivation as such, since it is only due to the state of decomposition of the manure, the weather it has been in to achieve this result, etc. The cultivation of mushrooms, as mentioned above, carried out by market gardeners over two centuries ago, either in the cellar or outdoors, only became more widespread in this century, when it began to be used in the quarries from which the ashlar, masonry and plaster used to build the great city were extracted. The first quarries used for this purpose were in Passy (probably even under the Palais du Trocadéro), Montrouge, the XIVth arrondissement and parts of the XVth and XIIIth arrondisements of Paris. The first specialists to do so were Legrain in Passy, others of the same family in Montrouge, Daniel in Vaugirard, Marchand near La Glacière in the XIIIth arrondissement, Arbot in Châtillon, followed by Brique, Burvin, Moulin, Sanguin, Tarenne and others. It's hardly possible to compare these early mushroom growers with the large farms run by their grandchildren today. Some of them had neither horse nor carriage, and like the market gardeners, they carried their produce to Les Halles on hoods. The mushrooms were put into "maniveaux", a type of small, round, slightly splayed basket; these maniveaux were stored in another basket called a "clayette", which held between twenty and thirty, and so the sale was made. In the Maison Rustique by Malpeyre, Bixio and Bailly, written at the beginning of this century, we find a treatise on mushroom cultivation. What's certain is that, according to the testimony of the ancients, market gardeners were already cultivating them at that time, but as this treatise was not written by practitioners, they missed out on many small details. Nevertheless, it's already a much more complete treatise on cultivation than La Quintinie's. C Here's an extract from that treatise: COUCHES A CHAMPIGNONS "The construction of mushroom beds differs completely from other beds. Donkey manure is the easiest to turn white, followed by mule and horse manure. Market gardeners obtain horse manure, arrange it in regular heaps, Om60 high, tread it and water it according to the weather, leaving it like this for a fortnight; at the end of this time, they reshuffle it, taking care to change the one on the surface with the one in the middle. When the manure has reached the desired point, i.e. unctuous, fatty, it is laid out in roof-shaped millstones, Om80 wide by Om55 high at their base. These millstones are best built in a cellar, rather than in the open air, and are lined from distance to distance with small pieces of a special substance known as mushroom spawn. It's already a culture: there's the preparation of the manure, the assembly of the millstone, the dimensions of which seem enormous, as we'll see from the following treatise written by a true practitioner, the planting of the millstone, if I may use that term, or the grafting; what market gardeners and mushroom growers call "lardage". This is the beginning of the art of mushroom cultivation, but I repeat, our ancestors cultivated them long before this time with a certain art. In Delamare's book, written at the beginning of the last century, the author says that gardeners have found the secret of producing mushrooms all year round. Here again, I declare that it is regrettable that these practitioners have not written down, in a work of some kind, the names of the initiators of this new crop which has taken on such great development at the end of our century. It is however 909 easy to prejudge how gardeners started it. Seeing. mushrooms growing around their manure heaps, or as I said on old layers, where the manure had just decomposed to achieve this result; the mycelium gaining the neighboring parts from where it had formed; Intelligent men, taking these observations into account, have had to prepare manure to bring it to the state in which the mushrooms grew; place small pieces of spawn, or mycelium, in the manure thus prepared, cover the whole with earth and, after a certain time, harvest mushrooms, of which there is nothing to fear. As for wild mushrooms, I don't deny that there are some excellent ones out there, but according to competent people, there are some that are excessively poisonous and bear a strong resemblance to the former; it's not uncommon to see almost entire families poisoned by these terrible cryptogams. Finally, let's mention the Traité de culture des champignons, by Mr. Duvillard, professor of market gardening in the Seine department and member of the Chambre syndicale des ouvriers jardiniers. This treatise expresses itself in these terms: A USEFUL AND PRACTICAL WAY TO PRODUCE MUSHROOMS (1) "Take fresh horse manure, as much as possible, and make a square of it one to one-and-a-half meters thick; the size will be in proportion to the quantity you wish to establish. It is always preferable to "cut down" more manure than less, as the surplus is never lost in cultivation. This operation (1) In another work, entitled Culture forcée et ordinaire des plantes potagères ainsi que des champiquons, we publish a treatise on mushroom cultivation and on the choice of the best whites to use, etc. 509 is called "abattre" (cutting down) the manure into planks. Care must be taken to place the manure always in the same direction, so as not to have to pull on it to "turn it over", an operation that is performed twice, every eight days. This operation will be carried out twice, every eight days. It consists in taking the manure, the last to be placed, and mixing it, taking care that the edges are put back in the middle of the heap, and the middle on the edges. Once these two operations have been completed, the manure must be left for a few more days before it is put to work, i.e., put into millstones. If, during the preceding operations, the manure should sometimes be too dry, care should be taken to water it by gauge, as the beds are established, and especially on the strawier bed. "The manure, thus prepared, is made into millstones with a thickness of 0m40 at the base, ending at zero, over a height of Om40 to Om50. This operation is called "mounting the wheels" by the specialists. The millstones must be well made, the manure must not be put into tampons, and must be well trodden with the hands and knees. A few days after this operation, when the grindstone is no longer too hot internally, the mushroom spawn can be added. This is called "larder"; you need to prepare pieces of spawn, called "mises", Om10 square by OmOl thick, and place them 0m40 apart, in two rows, the first row as low as possible and the second in the middle of the wheel. Leave in this state for twenty to twenty-five days, then pat the sides of the wheel with your hand, putting a knee on the top to support it throughout its thickness, and knocking off any bits of manure that may be sticking out, so as to make its surface as even as possible. "At this point, we check the work the spawn has done in the wheel, and proceed with the "gobetage", which consists in covering the wheel with uncultivated soil, preferably subsoil, and not more than a centimetre thick. "The fungus will form in this soil and appear two or three weeks later, if all the work has been well done, if the quarry has always had the same temperature and a regular draught. If the soil becomes too dry, it should be watered lightly with a fine-headed watering can. "When we set up millstones outside, we have to wrap them in large dry manure, which is renewed as often as it gets too wet. This is called putting on a "shirt", and on top of this a thickness of manure, varying according to the weather, to maintain normal heat". This treatise is undoubtedly the clearest, most precise and practical guide to mushroom growing, and the ultimate in mushroom cultivation. However, despite all this hard work, sometimes you just can't get it right, from a financial point of view of course, because you still have to reckon with the weather. When the weather is soft and rainy, and the temperature heavy, the quarries lack air and "sulk", as the mushroom growers say. In such cases, they set up long wooden chimneys over air intake holes, and light a strong stove at the bottom of the quarry to draw in the stale air it contains and renew it. Despite all their efforts, they still don't achieve the same results as when the weather is dry and cold. When the millstones sulk, "molles" are formed, the mycelium penetrates the earth, and the fungus doesn't form, representing a leprosy on the surface. In this case, remove all the diseased parts with the soil, and gobble again. If the weather changes, and the air in the quarry is renewed, the disease sometimes disappears, but always with some benefit to the grower. The purity of the spawn used for larding also needs to be taken into account, as this spawn can be diseased and eaten by another, more voracious cryptogam, which mushroom growers call 908 "verdigris". Care must be taken to peel the spawn before introducing it into the grinder, so that it does not contain this parasite, which devours everything and produces nothing. This description of mushroom cultivation will enable the layman to judge the care, technical knowledge and inconvenience involved in making a living from this crop. The Pasteur Institute, which has rendered eminent services to science and humanity, is already working on sterilizing mushroom spawn. There can be no doubt that the study of this question, placed in the hands of scientists, will yield practical and satisfactory results. So there's a long way to go from the mushroom production of yesteryear to the millions of kilograms that mushroom growers bring to the IIalles today. Today, it's a veritable industry. There are around one hundred and fifty mushroom growers in the départements of Seinc, Seine-et-Oise and Seine-et-Marne, who produce around two million running meters of mushroom wheels. Their union estimates that the average input is twenty thousand kilograms per day, but with great variation; there is much more in winter and spring than in summer. Given these figures, it's easy to establish the annual production of this new industry. It would produce around seven million kilograms of mushrooms a year, with an average sale of 1 fr. 20 per kilogram, giving an approximate income of 8,500,000 francs. This industry employs around eighteen hundred workers, some of them year-round; these are true mushroom workers; the others are sort of laborers, finding work in the worst season of the year, i.e. winter. Almost all market gardeners are able to do this work. They are paid from O fr. 45 to 0 fr. 60 an hour, depending on their abilities. Mushroom growers also employ eight to nine hundred horses to transport their manure, gobet soil, 909 produce to Les Halles, and the body of millstones to the stations, which is bought by large-scale cultivation, because when the millstone no longer produces mushrooms, the manure is very good as fertilizer, and sought after by growers in the greater suburbs for certain crops. Those farthest from Paris have their manure taken by rail to the nearest station to where they slaughter their floors. They pay an average rent of O fr. 15 per meter of gallery they occupy. One meter of millstone requires around 1.50 francs worth of manure, which represents 3,000,000 francs worth of raw material from the capital. The sale of millstones is estimated, on average, at O fr. 50 per metre, giving a profit of 1,000,000 francs. In addition to this, they spend a great deal of money to obtain virgin blanks, and they also prefer the blanks from millstones built outside for larding in quarries. Some market gardeners set up millstones to be lifted in white, i.e. at the moment when the fungus begins to appear and form on the surface; at this moment, the whole millstone is invaded by the mycelium, it is sliced with a long knife like a lump of butter, and removed in wedges from Om15 to 0m20 thick. It is in these wedges that the bets are prepared, as described in Mr. Duvillard's treatise. In short, these abandoned quarries, once used for the construction industry, are a source of income for the owners of the land, sustaining a large number of working-class families and increasing the wealth of our national production. It's worth adding that mushrooms are never wasted; when they grow in greater abundance, they are preserved, as are vegetables such as peas, beans, tomatoes, etc. Many of these preserves are shipped to our customers. Many of these preserves are shipped abroad, which also increases our export figures. This is another important branch of vegetable produc006 tion, if I can use that term, that our ancestors created. Let's add that at the International Horticultural Exhibition just held in Saint Petersburg, a member of the mushroom growers' union, Mr. Lécaillon, exhibited fresh mushrooms. They arrived in very good condition, but two days later they were spoiling, so it's only a question of shipment, a question that will soon be resolved by trade, to supply these distant markets with our fresh products and thereby create a major commercial outlet for this industry. This small exhibition, which was only an ess ai, was rewarded with an average silver medal. The mushroom growers, being absolute specialists, set up a trade association to defend their interests in every respect. Dgiised 9 GO AGAINST INSECT PESTS AND PLANT DISEASES In a previous chapter, we said that market gardeners had remained helpless against the ravages of insect pests and parasitic diseases, either due to a lack of education or to a lack of awareness of the need to combat them. As we shall see, the means employed to combat these scourges have remained rudimentary. Among the insects harmful to market gardening, one of the most dreaded is the courtillière or cricket mole. This dreadful insect grows as big as a man's thumb, working its way through the soil in exactly the same way as a mole, cutting and gnawing at everything it comes across. It is especially formidable in the layers. Establishing its lair at the bottom, beneath the manure, it can only be tracked down when the topsoil is removed to reconstitute new layers. The most practical way for gardeners to destroy it is to pour oil or kerosene into the holes where it settles, by pouring water over them. A drop of oil or kerosene that reaches a courtillière is sure to kill it. But these insects have nests with hundreds of eggs, so that enough eggs always escape to spread, and it's almost impossible to get rid of them completely in the soils they like. During spring and summer, at night, the courtillières come up for air. Cats, which are very fond of them, also destroy a certain number. White grubs, called horseflies by gardeners, are only to be feared in areas that have recently been converted to marshland, where they wreak considerable havoc. In old marshes, where the soil is oily and often disturbed, there are very few of them. Various aphid species also attack market garden crops. One of the most fearsome is the black aphid, which attacks melons. Some years it comes in such abundance and so quickly that it's hard to get rid of. To obtain this result, gardeners use nicotine cut with water to water the affected plants; but this operation must be carried out as soon as the fly that indicates its arrival is seen. This is because if the operation is carried out when there is a large number of flies, the plant would have to be destroyed at the same time as the insect. It's fair to say that the cure is worse than the disease. Caterpillars and larvae of all shapes and colors attack plants in different ways; some through the roots, others, in greater numbers, through the leaves. The only way to get rid of them is to look for them and crush them. However, for those that eat cauliflower leaves, you can get far fewer by watering often; the leaf, which is continually wet, keeps away the moth that produces them. The flea beetle, which destroys sorrel and young cabbage plants, can be controlled by frequent watering, and young cauliflower plants sometimes have to be shaded in late spring to get rid of it. The guillotine, or white worm, attaches itself especially to the 900 roots and collar of cabbages of all varieties. This forms a kind of bulge at the root, and the plant perishes. Slugs are very common in certain areas, especially in autumn. To destroy them, powdered lime is spread on the soil. Affected slugs are burned, but often take refuge under the leaves; where they cannot be reached, care must be taken to find them and collect them. In certain crops, we also make small piles of leaves on the ground, where they take refuge. If left unchecked, these insects can wreak havoc. Grey mould is caused by a tiny acarus, a small insect that attacks the parenchyma of plants, especially as they age. Cucurbits, beans and celery are particularly susceptible. A radical cure for this disease is not yet known. Romaine blight, in spring, is due to the action of a microscopic fungus that spreads through sudden changes in temperature, cold sleet, etc. Melon blight, which affects early and late-season melons in particular, also appears following cold dews. There is as yet little agreement on how to treat this disease. How many studies have yet to be carried out on these various diseases, whose effects often compromise market garden crops? Eggplant cultivation has been abandoned, tomato cultivation severely compromised, not only because of the competition it has established elsewhere, but also because of the diseases to which these plants are prone when the cool nights of September arrive. But one disease that was hardly known, or at least did not cause serious losses, before the introduction of early crops, is (miller) (Peronospora gangliiformis, berh), which attacks Lettuces and 008 Romaines grown under glass. Plants grown outside are easily cured when the weather turns dry and warm. As for early plants grown under frames and cloches, when they are affected they do not recover. The disease progresses more or less rapidly, depending on the weather, but it is extremely rare for it to disappear entirely. This parasite feeds at the plant's expense, drying out the affected leaves and causing it considerable damage. During wet winters, this disease is the source of losses that can already be quantified in millions of francs. This forced cultivation begins in early autumn and lasts until late spring. Some twenty years ago, a small group of market gardeners got together to look for ways to combat the miller. No appreciable results were achieved. One day, this idea will be taken up again, and let's hope and wish for the younger generations that they will be more successful than their elders and that they will know a practical way of avoiding losses which will become considerable in their crops, due to the very extension of these crops. Despite

While the success of this small association may have been limited, we must bear in mind the generous goal it set itself, a goal we do not despair of seeing achieved one day or another. So, for the edification of those who may later wish to take up this idea, we publish below the association's articles of association. They are followed by the important report to the Acacémie des sciences, made on this subject by Mr. Max Cornu, the learned botanist who now holds the chair of cultivation at the Muséum d'histoire naturelle in Paris. STATUTES OF THE ASSOCIATION "The committee set up to combat plant diseases is offering a bonus of ten thousand francs to the person who can provide the means of radically curing the malady it calls le (meunier). This bonus will be given under the following conditions, which aspirants must comply with in order to compete. ARTICLE FIRST Aspirants will carry out their own experiments, or have them carried out by members of the committee, if they deem it appropriate. These experiments must be carried out before a committee, as stipulated in article 4, which will judge beforehand where they should be carried out; however, they must be carried out in the homes of committee members. Aspirants will be required to carry out several experiments in different districts with the same product, in the course of the same year. ARTICLE 2: The products used to carry out the experiments, as well as the time spent using them, will be at the expense of the aspirants; in no case will they be able to claim compensation from the committee. ARTICLE 3: The length of time required by the committee to perform the experiments, in order to be entitled to the bonus, is three consecutive years of experiments performed with the same product, and having each given a radical cure of the disease. ARTICLE 4: A report on each experiment will be made by an experimental commission, taken from the committee, which will have judged the effects produced by the experiments, as well as the time spent using the products, and their cost price. A duplicate will be in the hands of the committee, and the other in those of the aspirant, who will sign them, as will the commission who attended the experiments. ARTICLE 5. Aspirants will have to comply with the arbitration of the committee, which will have to rule on all the reports made during the three years required for the experience of each product. ARTICLE 6: The time spent using the products and the products themselves may not exceed in expense more than one tenth of the price of the plants they cure. If only one preservative is found, it must not exceed one-twentieth; otherwise there would be no result satisfactory enough to award the prize, and the competition would remain open until such time as the committee deems necessary. ARTICLE 7. The committee reserves the right, in the event of several candidates achieving the same result, to award the prize only to the one offering the most practical and economical means. ARTICLE 8. For each experiment carried out by the aspirants, a sample must be taken and placed in such a way as to ensure its safe keeping and that it cannot be distracted by anyone. These samples will be deposited in a place chosen by the committee and the aspirant, so that the responsibility of both is well covered. At the end of the three-year experiment, the committee and the aspirant will take back the samples. The committee will have the right to have them analyzed, if it deems this necessary, in order to ascertain whether the same product has been used for the three years in front of the com missions. In the event that these samples do not conform exactly, the premium will be refused and the experiments continued, if the committee deems it appropriate. 08 When an aspirant, after having fulfilled the aforementioned commitments, has supplied a product recognized as good, he will be acknowledged by the committee, and the premium will be paid to him by the said committee, three months after the signature of this acknowledgement. ARTICLE 10: In acknowledging the discovery, the Committee reserves the privilege of the discoverer. The latter, in exchange for the deed, must give the Committee the manner in which his product is to be composed and used. If he has a patent, he must relinquish it to the Committee, and if he has none, he will not be entitled to take one. ARTICLE 11. It is understood that once the act has been received, the aspirant who has won it may neither sell the product, nor give instructions on how to make it to anyone other than the Committee, under prejudice in damages to the Committee, ARTICLE 12. Any person wishing to compete must contact the Committee Chairman to find out the conditions to which he must commit himself by signature, failing which he will not be able to compete for the prize. Committee Chairman, CURÉ Rue Lecourbe, 315, Paris. Secretary. DUVILLARD. Here is the important report presented to the Académie des Sciences on November 18, 1878, by M. Max Cornu on this subject: MALADIE DES LAITUES "Market garden crops have been invaded for several years by a special disease, which has received the popular name of Meunier. Meunier attacks varieties of Lactuca sativa (Lettuce and Romaine); it impedes the development of these plants, stains, dries out or corrodes the leaves. "The damage is so considerable that a small group of market gardeners, about twelve in number (1), have decided to offer a prize of ten thousand francs to anyone who can put a stop to it. "The disease is produced by a parasitic fungus, Peronospora gangliiformis Berck, which frequently attacks other plants (groundsel, lettuce, etc.), and in particular artichokes, where the same disease is masked by the down of the leaves, without anyone seeming to care. "This species, like all its congeners, attacks living plants, which it more or less exhausts, and on which it produces dark patches of browned, dried-out tissue; it is the direct cause of the disease: there can be no doubt about that. In this respect, consult M. de Bary's (2) remarkable work on the fungi of this group, and read his account of the experiments he carried out. "We know that the dreaded disease of potatoes and tomatoes is due to a Peronospora (P. infestans Mont.), and that our vineyards are threatened by a similar parasite; I have repeatedly insisted on this danger (3). Dr. Wittmack recently reported a species (P. sparsa Berk), which is devastating rose crops near Berlin, as well as in several parts of England. A study of Lettuce disease may be of some interest, by (1) M. Curé (de Grenelle), president of the Committee; M. Duvillard, (de la Glacière), secretary. (2) Ann. des Sc, nat, Bot, 4e série, t. XX, p. 5, 1863; 13 plates (see especially page 59). (3) Sav. étr. t. XXII, n° 6, p. 35; 1873, - Comptes rendus, sóance du 23 juillet 1877; c'est le P. viticola Berk, et Curt. 1008 attirant l'attention sur les moyens à employer dans la lutte et sur les altérations déterminées par les parasites. On lettuces, these alterations are of two kinds and very different: they can be insignificant or disastrous, depending on the case. "When we tear off a flap of epidermis from a Lettuce plant attacked by P. gangliiformis, we observe conidiophorous filaments, emerging through the opening of the stomata, as in other Peronospora. They are grouped in twos or threes, or solitary; their upper part is variously branched; the whole simulates a small tree. The ramuscles are dilated at the tip and bear three to six sterigmata, which give rise to the spores or conidia. The conidia are broadly oval, with an incomplete papilla; germination gives rise to a filament that is sometimes remarkably twisted. "Vegetable growers attribute the disease to westerly winds and mild, rainy weather; by this we mean that these conditions favor the dissemination and germination of spores on nurse plants, as there can be no question of spontaneous generation. "When a lettuce seedling is suddenly invaded by Peronospora, where should we look for the cause? The cause must be attributed to weeds in the vicinity, to Seneçons, Laiterons or others, to Artichokes, to Chicories already carrying the parasite. Sometimes, however, none of these plants are to be found in the vicinity; in this case, the spots are produced by the germination of dormant spores or oospores, the parasite's second mode of reproduction. These oospores germinate after a long period of rest and can be preserved in the soil or on its surface, requiring only a little moisture and warmth to germinate. "These oospores develop in the tissue occupied by mycelium filaments and dried out by its action. They are common on melon, but very rare on lettuce, although their existence is highly probable. O09 "If we make a transverse section of the attacked leaf, we observe the mycelium crawling between the cells and emitting ovoid-oblong suckers; when the exhausted tissue dies, the mycelium disappears and is itself the cause of its death. This is the alteration that occurs in summer. "If the plant is more completely invaded, the conidiophore filaments are sparser on the leaf surface, which becomes paler; the leaf dies as a whole without drying out; it softens and turns brown. This change generally takes place away from the outer leaves, and is what occurs during winter. "In winter and spring, large quantities of lettuces are shipped abroad. Those affected by Meunier disease arrive at their destination altered as we have seen above, and this alteration is attributed to imperfect packaging or poor quality of the plant at the outset. The merchandise is rejected as a whole, causing considerable losses, and we don't know how to distinguish between lettuces that will spoil and those that will keep. "The parasite is formidable only for this reason; it is in order to remedy it that the market gardeners have proposed such a considerable price. "It is possible to find in the cultivation of plants and in the history of the parasite a means of protecting oneself from its attacks: I ask the Academy's permission to present to it at a later date some considerations on the general question of Peronospora. The study of this question has made little progress over the last twenty years, the committee that dealt with it having disbanded, some of its members having disappeared, and others no longer in business. However, Mr. Cornu's interesting report shows that scientists are well acquainted with the terrible parasite and its means of reproduction. O08 M. Max Cornu is: the neighborhood of weeds; market gardeners avoid it. Science must therefore focus all its efforts on the second, i.e. preventing the germination of oospores that can be stored for a long time in the soil or on its surface, and which germinate with a little heat and humidity. Science has long since shown that spontaneous generation is out of the question. Since it is only a question of destroying dormant spores, science, which has already rendered so many services to agriculture and viticulture, would render an eminent one to horticulture in general, and to Parisian market gardeners in particular, if it could find a way of combating the dreaded parasite. The scientist who wishes to attach his name to this discovery, Mr. Max Cornu (1) or any other, will always find an excellent auxiliary in the Board of Directors of the Union of Market Gardeners of the Paris region, whose headquarters are at the Hôtel de la Société d'Horticulture de France, rue de Grenelle-Saint-Germain, 84, Paris. Educated by experience, we believe that it is above all through a preventive remedy, in this disease as in all others, that we should try to operate. Indeed, once the miller's disease has set in, you have to work on plants that are so soft and tender that the slightest toxicity alters and tires them. Nevertheless, old market gardeners who have already dealt with this question could help the operator who takes this matter in hand from a scientific point of view. (1) Since the time we wrote this chapter, we have resumed experiments on this disease under the direction of M. Max Cornu. Max Cornu, and we publish the results in our more recent work entitled Traité de culture forcée et ordinaire des plantes potagères ainsi que des champignons. 908 D'HORTICULTURE DE FRANCE The revolution of 1789, in order to eliminate all the abuses that the organization of the old society had created, was forced to dissolve all existing associations, and thereby create individual freedom, the basis of our current legislation. But men soon recognized the need to associate again, basing their associations on more modern principles. The first horticultural association to be founded was the Horticultural Society, a scientific association bringing together horticultural practitioners, teachers, amateurs and artists alike. This important society was founded in 1826, with the aim of perfecting the art of gardening, improving cultivation methods, facilitating the study of new introductions, etc., etc., etc. As soon as it was founded, the society decided to publish a monthly compendium to publicize its work. The cost of this publication is covered by an annual membership fee of twenty francs. It also decided to create temporary exhibitions of horticultural products, as one of the best ways of publicizing and encouraging progress in this science. Since then, unless there have been very serious circumstances, hardly a year has gone by without one or two exhibitions. The society holds two meetings a month, on the second and fourth Thursdays, at its hotel, rue de Grenelle-Saint-Germain, 84, Paris. It is very rare that at each session, there are not a certain number of contributions made by horticulturists or amateurs, judged by competent committees on their novelty, beautiful cultivation, etc., and whose vote is ratified by the general assembly; and premiums varying from three to nine francs are awarded to the presenters, sometimes accompanied by a certificate of merit. This large association, which is active throughout France and has numerous corresponding members in all parts of the globe, encourages small local societies, professional associations, mutual aid societies, etc., by all the means at its disposal. It even lends the rooms of its hotel free of charge to the various societies, made up of horticulturists pursuing a goal tending to improve their trade or their well-being. Founded under the reign of Charles X, in 1826, it has been encouraged by every successive government since that time. When it was founded, it immediately won the king's good graces. He authorized it to inscribe his name as protector and founder; a precious support for a fledgling society to be so highly patronized. Under Louis-Philippe, it was also encouraged by the leading men of the day, notably the Comte de Rambuteau, the Duc Decazes, M. Héricourt de Thury, etc., through the association of patroness ladies; in addition to its scientific purpose, it became a relief and charity society. The Republic of 1848 also showered it with favors. Under the Empire, placed under the protectorate of the Emperor and headed by the most prominent men of that regime, such as the Duc de Morny and Marshal Vaillant, it could only make rapid progress, having been recognized as a public utility since the beginning of the Empire. During the terrible year, forced to suspend some of its work and publications, the Society did not remain 008 inactive. Horticulturalists in the Paris region, most of whom live on the outskirts of Paris, were particularly hard hit by the two sieges of the capital. How many establishments did we see ruined, first by the foreign war and then by the civil war? Houses often demolished or ransacked, equipment broken or burnt, plants devastated or wasted. I can still remember the efforts made by all of us, the more fortunate ones, who lived within the walls of Paris, to save the equipment and goods of either a relative or a friend. The Horticultural Society then stepped in, acting as a nucleus to concentrate the help offered by English and French horticulturists, who were fortunate enough not to suffer the horrors of the German invasion and the sadness of the civil war. With these sad days behind them, the horticulturists generally returned home to repair all the ruins; many, alas, had great difficulty in doing so, and some even succumbed. It's when you've been through these sad times that you feel, more than anyone else, the need to unite and join forces. The Third Republic, which devoted much of its efforts to encouraging agriculture, could not abandon horticulture, the elder sister of the first. Trade has flourished in all branches of horticulture. I remember that, immediately after these sad events, horticulturists started growing vegetables, saying that flowers could no longer be sold. Yet flowers have never been as expensive as they are today. So, little by little, everyone went back to their own speciality. In the nearly thirty years since these events took place, horticulture has taken on extraordinary importance in every respect. The exhibitions that the Society organizes in spring and autumn each year have become major O00 Parisian festivals; each one is visited by the President of the Republic, accompanied by a large entourage, and generally some outstanding horticulturists receive various decorations, even from the hands of the Republic's chief magistrate. And it couldn't be any other way, since horticulture at the end of this century has become one of the most active sources of our national production, and the powerful tools it brings with it have led other industries to develop and, by the same token, to increase their business. In recent years, exhibitions of horticultural products of all kinds and related tools have been joined by the fine arts. Artists come to exhibit paintings of landscapes, trees, flowers, fruit and vegetables. If you go down this road, there's hardly a painting you won't find at a horticultural exhibition. These are the products of artists of many different kinds, yet they live in perfect harmony under the aegis of these exhibitions. The number of visitors also increases from year to year, and certainly the space reserved for it in the Tuileries Gardens for the last few years will become too much by 1900. At each exhibition, the President of the Republic donates an objet d'art, which is awarded to the first prizewinner. Other major prizes are also donated, notably by the Minister of Agriculture, the General Council of the Seine, the City of Paris, the Society itself and various prominent personalities who are members of the Society. These donations are known as honorary prizes, and are in addition to the numerous gold, vermeil and silver medals awarded by the Society to exhibitors recognized as worthy by competent juries. 208 DES JARDINIERS HORTICULTEURS Du départernent de la Seine The great social movement of the 1848 generation was association on new bases, in keeping with the spirit of the times. A handful of intelligent, dedicated market gardeners and horticulturists set about creating a relief society, Société de secours-mutuels des jardiniers-horticulteurs du département de la Seine. It was founded on July 10, 1856. Its main aim was to build up capital to pay pensions to its members. Initially, a small contribution of twelve francs a year ensured a pension of three hundred francs at the age of sixty, or placement in an old people's home, putting an end to poverty. Here appears the highest, noblest idea that the human brain can conceive. Among the men who have contributed most to the organization of this society, we find the sons of those who began forced cultivation at the beginning of the century, notably the Laiziers, the Stainvilles, the Le Bouteuxs, a descendant of the president of the first society that the former gardeners set up; Marchand, Lefilleul, Garlin, Niolet, Dulac, and so on. Posterity owes a religious tribute to these courageous citizens, who guarantee and will continue to guarantee a large number of elderly people from destitution. These men have been succeeded by their sons and a number of newcomers, who bring the same dedication to the work. First as president, Stainville, son of the previous president; then, in various positions, Laurent, Hébrard, Hémard, Piver, Lecaplain and others. In order to inform our great-grandnephews about this work, we are publishing its articles of association in extenso, just as we did for the companies of the past: TITLE PREMIER Corporate purpose ARTICLE PREMIER - All horticulturists, gardeners, market gardeners and florists living in the Seine department may join the Society as participating or honorary members; however, the Society is limited to seven hundred and fifty participating members. Ministerial decree, October 26 1878, and the number may only be increased by virtue of an authorization from the Ministry of the Interior... . ART. 2 - The purpose of the Society is to provide mutual assistance in the event of old age. A special fund will be set up to assist members who have become unfortunate as a result of illness, injury or disability, leading to an inability to work; this fund will also be used to provide assistance to widows and orphans of members whose needy situation is known to the majority of the Society. This fund will be fed: 1° by a contribution of twenty-five centimes payable every three months, by each participating member, into the hands of the collector; 2° by a tenth of the annual subscriptions of honorary members. ART. 3 - The head office of the Society is provisionally established at Clichy-la-Garenne, rue des Bateliers, n° 12. 08 TITRE II Conditions d'admission et composition ART. 4 - Any person wishing to be accepted as a participating member must be introduced by two other members who vouch for the recipient's morality, that he or she is French and has been domiciled in the Seine department for at least six months, and that he or she enjoys his or her civil and civic rights. Ladies will be admitted to the Society under the same conditions as men; they may attend meetings, but will not be liable for any meeting fines; however, they will not be exempt from fines for failure to pay; in addition, they will be subject to the same charges and will consequently have the same rights as other members, but in no case may they take part in the administration or deliberations. ART. 5 - The Society is composed of participating members and honorary members, or free associates. ART. 6 - Participating members are those who have undertaken to comply with the present statutes and regulations, and are entitled to all the benefits of the Society in return for regular payment of their membership dues. ART. 7 - Honorary members are those who, through their care, advice and subscriptions, contribute to the prosperity of the association without sharing in the benefits. ART. 8 - Their names will be inscribed at the head of each directory, together with the amount of their subscription and the nature of their benefits. ART. 9 - To be admitted as a participating member, a person must be at least twenty-one years old, and less than fifty-five years old, and live in the Seine department. In future, participating members will not be admitted after the age of 40, or up to the age of 45, if they pay, in addition to the ordinary entrance fee, as many times 9 fr. as they have more than 40 years, and, then, they will have the right to retire at the age of 65, without this giving them any additional benefit to the right of the convoy fund. It was voted on October 10, 1880, that from January 1, 1882, no more participating members would be admitted after the age of 35. ART. 10 - Honorary members will be received by the President and the Executive Committee without distinction of age, residence or profession, and their number is unlimited. ART. 11 - Any judicial conviction tainting the honor or probity of a member shall entail forfeiture of membership and the impossibility of admission. Disqualification is pronounced by the General Meeting, on the proposal of the Executive Committee and without discussion: 1° for conviction of an offence; 2° for wilful prejudice to the interests of the company; 3° for any act contrary to honor; 4° for disorderly and notoriously scandalous conduct. Except in the case of an infamous conviction, the member whose exclusion is proposed is invited to appear before the Board to be heard on the facts imputed to him/her; if he/she fails to appear, his/her exclusion is pronounced at the General Meeting. ART. 12 - Resignation, striking off and expulsion do not entitle members to any reimbursement. However, life annuities constituted in accordance with the decree of April 26, 1856, in favor of resigning, struck-off or excluded members, remain their property. The admission 908 LES JARDINIERS DE PARIS of a member will be put to the vote and adopted or rejected by an absolute majority at the General Meeting. Exclusions will be decided in the same way. TITLE III Initial subscription payments and membership fees ART. 13 - All new members must pay a deposit of five francs, and four francs for the first quarter. ART. 14 - These sums will be returned to the recipient if he/she is not accepted by the General Meeting. ART. 15 - In the event of exclusion, striking off or resignation, any sum paid into the fund will never be returned to the depositor. ART. 16 - Each participating member, as from April 1, 1881, must pay three francs in dues, on the first of each of the quarters of April, July, October and January, from 10 a.m. to noon, at the home of a Society collector, appointed in each section of the suburbs and in each arrondissement of Paris, where this is deemed necessary. ART. 17 - Members who fail to pay their quarterly dues will be fined twenty-five centimes for each late payment. ART. 18 - Any member who is four quarters in arrears will be considered to have resigned and will be struck off the Society's rolls, if he fails to respond to the first appeal made to him by the Receiver General. ART. 19 - A member who resigns, or is declared to have resigned, and who wishes to be reinstated, can only be reinstated if he is not three years in arrears with his membership dues, and if he immediately pays double the amount he would have paid on joining the Society; and if he is represented by two participating members who certify that none of the cases mentioned in art. 1t have occurred to him since he left the Society. ART. 20 - Members may be represented by third parties to make their quarterly payments. TITLE IV Members' pensions ART. 21 - A retirement fund is created in accordance with the decree of April 26, 1856, and placed with the Caisse des dépôts et consignations. This fund is made up of: 1° deductions made by the Company from surplus revenues; 2° special subsidies granted by the State. 3° Gifts and bequests whose acceptance has been authorized by the competent authority. To be eligible for the pension, the participating member must have paid contributions for twenty-five years and must have reached the age of sixty, or sixty-five if he joined the Company after forty years of age, by paying nine francs as many times as he would have had more years than forty when he joined the Company; he is given until January 1, 1875 to pay this fee, after which time he will no longer be able to benefit from these advantages. Entitlement to a pension never cancels payment of membership dues, which remain payable until the member's death. ART. 22. - The pension rate is set at three hundred francs; however, if a member becomes infirm or reaches an age that does not allow him to live at home on this O sum, the Society, after recognizing the member's state of hardship and, consequently, the inadequacy of the pension, will, at its own expense, place the member in a government home most convenient to the Society: The President will send to the Minister of the Interior : 1° an extract of the deliberation concerning the vote and the amount of the pension, as well as the date of admission of the member, and an indication of the department in which the arrears are to be paid; the birth certificate, issued on plain paper and certified by the mayor: 2° After the death of the pensioner, the Chairman will forward to the Préfet an extract, on plain paper, of the death certificate, for reinstatement to the Society's retirement fund, in accordance with article 4 of the decree of April 26, 1856, of the funds used to set up the pension. ART. 23 - If a participating member becomes disabled before reaching sixty years of age, or twenty-five years of membership, and is recognized as needy by the majority of the. Society, each participating member must, each year, pay an extraordinary contribution to help him or her. However, in no case may this extraordinary assistance exceed two hundred francs. ART. 24 - The following are not covered by the provisions of the preceding article: 1° Members who are ill as a result of intemperance or syphilitic diseases; 2° Members who are ill as a result of voluntary brawls in which they have been aggressors or provocateurs, or who have received injuries in a riot in which they have voluntarily taken part, or in the event of unemployment. TITLE V ART. 25 - A special fund will be set up to pay for the funeral convoys of participating members who die; the convoys are set at one hundred francs, with a deduction made for municipal taxes, so that the Society pays only ninety francs to the families who pay the funeral expenses, but if this sum is not spent on the convoys, the Society will pay only on presentation of the funeral receipts, which will be the same for all participating members, regardless of the number of years they have been members of the Society. ART. 26 - A sum proportionate to years of membership in the Society will be deducted from this fund, to be used to pay a penny to widows and direct heirs. ART. 27 - From entry into the Society up to and including the fifth year of membership, the convoy only will be paid as explained above. ART. 28 - From the sixth to and including the tenth year of membership in the Society, the convoy will be paid and a denarius of fifty francs to the beneficiaries. ART. 29 - From the eleventh to and including the fifteenth year of membership in the Society, the convoy will be paid and one denarius of one hundred francs to the beneficiaries. ART. 30. - From the sixteenth year up to and including the twentieth year of membership in the Society, the convoy will be paid. and a denarius of one hundred and fifty francs to the beneficiaries. ART. 31 - From the twenty-first year and above, the convoy will be paid, and a denarius of two hundred francs to the beneficiaries. ART. 32 - All sums used for the deniers will be paid in the following order: !° to the widow or widower; 2° to the children, if the youngest is under fifteen years of age; 3° to the father and mother, if the youngest is over sixty years of age; it is understood that these sums will only be passed on to the children if there are no widows, and to the father and mother, if there are no children under fifteen years of age. O ART. 33 - If none of the aforementioned heirs remain in the order explained, the denier will remain by right in the convoy fund. ART. 34 - As all these sums are not the property of the members, no one may dispose of them by will, and no creditor shall have any right to them. ART. 35. - To form this "convoy" fund, participating members who are members of the Society shall pay, immediately upon approval, a sum of three francs into this fund, and shall continue to pay seventy-five centimes into it on the first of April, July, October and January of each year, and those joining in the future shall pay three francs into this fund on joining the Society, and shall continue to pay seventy-five centimes every quarter, as explained above; in the event of late payment of these sums, late payers will be fined as for all other payments due to the Society. TITLE VI Organization and Board ART. 36 - The Society is administered by a Board which meets every three months and whenever convened by the President. All Society meetings convened by the Chairman or by his order in the interests of the Society are compulsory. It is composed of. A Chairman. The President is elected by secret ballot by the Society for a five-year term, and no one is elected or proclaimed President unless he or she obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast. In the second ballot, election is by relative majority; in the event of candidates obtaining an equal number of votes, the eldest is proclaimed Chairman. The 99 "minutes of the election are immediately forwarded to the Minister of the Interior. No one may be elected as a member of the Board unless he or she is French and enjoys full civil and civic rights; all members of the Board, including the Chairman, are taken from among the participating or honorary members. The Chairman is the head of the Association, and in this capacity supervises all operations of the Executive Committee; he is the custodian of and responsible for the register of members and other printed documents belonging to the Association, and signs all such documents and acts relating thereto. He supervises and ensures the execution of the articles of association, and submits the annual report required by art. 20 of the decree on associations to the competent authority; 2° Two vice-presidents appointed for one year, and eligible for re-election by an absolute majority. They replace the Chairman in case of absence, or when required by him. They have the same powers and duties as the Chairman; 3° A Treasurer, appointed for one year, and eligible for re-election by an absolute majority. He is civilly responsible for all sums paid into his fund, as well as the books relating thereto. He may never, under any circumstances, have more than fifteen hundred francs on hand, the excess of which will be remitted by him, on behalf of the Company, to the Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations. He remains custodian and responsible for his cash books; 4° A secretary, appointed by an absolute majority, for one year, and eligible for re-election. He is specially entrusted with the Company's records; he calls the roll and notes absentees. He draws up the minutes of meetings and receipts, and signs them with the Chairman; 5° A Receiver General appointed by an absolute majority for one year, and eligible for re-election; he supervises the receivers of each section, receives from them the funds they have received from the members of their section, and remits them immediately to the Treasurer; 5° Three Auditors appointed by an absolute majority, p09 for one year, and eligible for re-election. They are specifically responsible for auditing the accounts, and must meet for this purpose, along with the Board of Directors, at all ordinary and extraordinary meetings. ART. 37. - Members absent from a meeting convened either by the Board or the General Meeting, or from any other meeting convened by order of the Chairman, shall pay a fine of one franc fifty centimes. ART. 38 - Only illness or national service will entitle the member to an exemption. ART. 39 - A delegated collector will be appointed in each suburban commune and in each arrondissement of Paris where this is deemed necessary. He will be specially charged with receiving, at his home, the dues and fines of the members of his district or commune, on the days and at the times indicated in art. 16. He will hand over the amount of his takings, at the latest on the day of the rendering of accounts, to the Receiver General, who will sign his register, or have it signed by the auditors; in the event of non-performance on the part of a collector, he will pay the fines of all those who have paid him. Should a section not agree to appoint one of its members as Receiver, all section members will be required to pay their dues to the Receiver General, under the same conditions as in art. 16. Should the workload of the officers become too great, the Society will appoint one or more deputies to assist them in their duties and replace them if necessary. TITLE VII General Meetings and their holding ART. 40 - General Meetings are held for the purpose of rendering accounts and receiving proposals, in the interests of the Company. 1C They may not deliberate unless they are composed of half plus one of the participating members who are members of the Company, and their deliberations, to be enforceable, must be voted by an absolute majority of the members present. All honorary members have the same rights as participants. ART. 41 - There will be two meetings a year, on the second Sunday in May and the second Sunday in October. The election of officers will take place at the second meeting, and members appointed to replace others will not take office until the second Thursday in January following, or those replaced will cease to hold office. No member of the executive committee may convene a section without the order of the president, except for a convoy of a member of his section, and of which he shall immediately give notice to the president, so that he may prevent it if the case so requires. ART. 42. - The May session will open at two o'clock sharp, and the October session at one o'clock sharp. Any member failing to respond to the roll call, which will take place a quarter of an hour after the opening, will pay a fine of one franc fifty centimes; and members present not wearing their badges will be fined twenty-five centimes. ART. 43 - When a member, honorary member or participant dies, all the members of his section must attend his funeral, on pain of a fine of one franc five centimes, and those present twenty-five centimes, if they are not wearing their badges. ART. 44 - No member will be admitted to assemblies unless in decent dress. ART. 45. - Any member who is present on behalf of an absent member will be fined three francs. 99 TITLE VIII Discussions ART. 46. - No member may speak unless he has obtained the right to do so from the Chairman; if he fails to comply with this article, he shall pay a fine of twenty-five centimes. Any member granted the floor must express himself with decency and moderation, failing which he will be deprived of the floor for the entire session. ART. 47 - Any political or religious discussion is strictly forbidden; any member who raises such a question will be immediately expelled from the meeting. ART. 48. - Any discussiòn or disgression foreign to the philanthropic aims of the association is prohibited. Any member who deviates from the discussion will be immediately called to order, and expelled from the meeting if he persists. ART. 49 - To prevent a member's expulsion from taking on the character of a brawl at a meeting, it will be put to the vote and decided by an absolute majority. If the member refuses to obey this decision, the meeting will be adjourned and he will be expelled from the Society. TITLE IX Police of the Society ART. 50. - Entry to the Society hall on the day of meetings is forbidden to any person not belonging to the Society, except to members of the authorities, when they can prove their status, or on presentation of their distinctive marks. ART. 51 - On the day of the general meeting, two heads of order will be appointed, charged with keeping out all persons not belonging to the association, and with supervising the internal police of the meeting. ART. 52 - Any member in a state of intoxication will be refused entry to the meeting room; when his name is called, he will be considered absent, and punished as such. The fine will be paid by the Heads of Order if they neglect their duties. ART. 53 - If a member takes the liberty of insulting one of the members, during a meeting, or one of the officers, in connection with their duties, he will pay a fine of fifty centimes and may, notwithstanding the fine, be expelled from the meeting. ART. 54. - Any member who assaults another member during a meeting will be struck off the Society's rolls by right, without ever being able to be reinstated, all without prejudice to legal proceedings. TITLEX Administrative provisions ART. 55. - All members of the Society have the right to check and compile their own accounts; accountants may not, under any pretext, refuse to carry out such checks. ART. 56 - Any member who, while enjoying his rights as a member, does not receive the assistance set out in the present regulations, has the right to bring a civil action against the Society to compel it to comply with the regulations, but before doing so, he may request an arbitration decision. ART. 57. - On entering the Society, each member shall be issued with a printed copy of the present regulations, which he shall sign in the minute of the register provided for this purpose; he shall pay fifty centimes for this printed copy. ART. 58. - Fines pronounced in execution of the regulations will be collected and appended to the general accounts. They will be deducted from any payment made by way of dues. ART. 59. - Receipts for amounts paid by members will be issued in a booklet issued for this purpose. If lost, it will be replaced at the member's expense. ART. 60 - The present regulations will be submitted for approval to the higher authority, in accordance with the decree of March 26, 1852. ART. 61. - The substance of these regulations may never be departed from; should it subsequently become necessary to add articles, they may only be adopted by a three-quarters majority, plus one member. ART. 62 - Any additions or modifications recognized as necessary, and voted by an absolute majority, will only be enforceable after having been submitted to the authorities for approval, and having received their sanction, in accordance with the decree of March 26, 1852. ART. 63. - The Company may only dissolve itself in the event of insufficient resources. Dissolution may only be pronounced at a general meeting specially convened for this purpose, and by a number of votes equal to two-thirds of the registered members. Such dissolution will be valid only after approval by the competent authority. In the event of dissolution, liquidation will be carried out in accordance with articles 6 and 17 of the decree of June 14, 1851, article 15 of the decree of March 26, 1852 and article 3 of the decree of April 26, 1856. - 1 = =- - TITLE XI General provisions ART. 64. - When a member changes his place of residence, he is required to notify the President as soon as he changes. Failure by the member to comply with this formality will result in a fine of one franc. ART. 65. - The costs of correspondence relating to the Society, printing, stamps, locality, office supplies and other outlays of this kind, shall be borne by the said Society. ART. 66. - The duties of office employees are free of charge. They may not, therefore, demand any remuneration for their employment. ART. 67. - The members of the Society are mutually and reciprocally bound to maintain, cause to be maintained and execute verbatim the present regulations. ART. 68 - The Society, having heard the reading of its by-laws and discussed them article by article, unanimously adopts their wording in all their form and content. These bylaws were approved by a decree dated August 25, 1856, and the officers appointed by the Society were approved by another decree dated September 8 of the same year. This society has been in existence for almost half a century, and we are a participating member. It remains for us to present its results, and then to critique them. Let us begin by praising the memory of its founding philanthropists, for at the end of this century, only a few of them remain. These men have rendered exceptional service to their guilds and, above all, to their contemporaries. Men who take the initiative to set up a charity of some kind are not always aware of the difficulties, even setbacks, they encounter from the outset. However, it should be borne in mind that the creation of the Society we are dealing with here came at a time when business had increased considerably, for the reasons we set out in an earlier chapter. Many families were already, if not wealthy, then very well off, and with the good spirit of confraternity that existed among gardeners, generous donors were immediately found, and the number of honorary members almost always exceeded that of full members. Donations of all kinds made to the Society up to December 31, 1898, amounted to two hundred and thirty-three thousand eight hundred and thirty-two francs (233,832 fr.). State subsidies amounted to seventy-seven thousand eight hundred and twenty-eight francs (77,828 fr.). Regular members' contributions: subscriptions, admission fees, fines of all kinds, badge purchases, etc., amounted to four hundred and forty thousand, four hundred and fifteen francs (440,415 fr.). Interest on invested funds amounted to one hundred and ninety-four thousand, three hundred and sixty-two francs (194,362 fr.). Grand total: nine hundred and forty-six thousand, four hundred and thirty-seven francs (946,437 fr.). In addition to this sum, a donation of eleven thousand, one hundred and twelve francs (11,112 fr.) was made by Mr. Moynet; this donation is not included in these figures and we will come back to it later. Up to the same period, the Society paid its pensioners a total of two hundred and twenty-three thousand eight hundred and twenty-two francs (223,822 fr.), divided between two hundred and twenty-four pensioners, of whom one hundred and eleven are still in existence. Many of the first members, as the reader can see from the articles of association, were not retired until they were sixty-five years old, which further reduces the proportional retirement figure for each member to date. In a few years' time, all members who reach the age of sixty OO0 will be entitled to a pension, since from 1881 onwards, no one joined the Company after thirty-five years. From its foundation to the end of 1899, the Society had one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five participating members, of whom two hundred and twenty-four were entitled to a pension. The average pension paid per retiree is six years, and 677 years of pension have been paid to !13 deceased retirees. These figures speak for themselves, without needing to comment on the services that this company has rendered, is rendering and will continue to render to the gardeners' guild of the Paris suburbs, without distinction of category, since all are entitled to membership. In addition to this fund, there is another known as the "convoy" fund, which is used to give the heirs or assigns of a deceased member a sum of one hundred francs, equal for all, to be spent on the funeral of the deceased, i.e., the Society makes it a point of honor that its members are not taken to their final resting place in a pauper's cart. In addition, depending on the number of years of membership, the Society allocates a sum ranging from fifty to two hundred francs, known as the "widow's or widower's denier". This donation is also a great help to families whose resources are too often depleted by long illnesses. For infirm members who cannot provide for all their needs, the company places them in a retirement home. Even those who become infirm before the age of sixty, if they are recognized as needy, are also helped. The Society's aim is therefore the extinction of pauperism in the corporation. It is regrettable that the Society does not include all those who may need it. Let us now examine the faults we can accuse it of. The first can be called a weakness. It consisted in allowing the religious spirit to enter a civil society by accepting a donation of 11,112 francs, the interest on which is used each year to issue savings books to the children of full members making their First Communion. This donation, accepted by the Society, removes the equality of rights that must always exist in a mutual society; all the more so as the recipient cannot be asked, on admission, to which denomination he or she belongs. It is quite certain that, in order to circumvent the law, we have given it another name, as otherwise the higher authority could not have authorized it. Let us hope that in the near future, this donation will go to the orphans' fund, where it should always have been. It will make an important contribution. It will make up for the mistake made. This donation, with the spirit of independence that animates men in these times, has given rise to bitter discussions within the Society, which has done much to exclude one of its most devoted and intelligent members, who is in a position to render useful services, precisely because of the spirit of independence that characterizes him. For it is always preferable to have a loyal adversary, who points out the faults committed, or those that could be committed, rather than a flattering friend who approves of everything, even when he knows perfectly well that you are in error. This member is Mr. Narcisse Laurent. It's quite certain that if he had wanted to, he would have forced the Society to reinstate him, but a sense of dignity prevented him from suing. The Society's biggest fault was that of not increasing its dues sufficiently when it began to pay its retirees. Up to that time, the contribution was twelve francs a year, an insufficient sum to guarantee a pension of three hundred francs. From then on, it had to be increased to twenty or twenty-four francs to have the necessary capital in hand to guarantee the commitments made by the Company. Today, the deficit stands at a minimum of one hundred thousand francs. The Board has been moved by this situation and has just 908 voted to raise the membership fee to twenty-five francs, a figure which will enable the Society to operate without making up much of its deficit. At some point, thirty francs will have to be paid to make up the deficit, unless substantial donations are made. By paying thirty francs a year, the young member will still find advantages in joining the Society. At the age of sixty, he will have three hundred francs assured for his retirement; plus, for his heirs, a sum of three hundred francs, both for his funeral and for the widow's penny. In reality, therefore, he will have paid four hundred and fifty francs to secure a three hundred franc pension. It has to be said that all mutual aid societies make mistakes in this respect: the first members pay less and have the same benefits as those who come after them. Almost all mutualists, seeing their capital increase, do not count the expenses that the commitments made entail. It is also necessary to take into account, to a certain extent, the difficulties the former have had to overcome to build up this capital. Despite these faults, which are not crucial to the Society's existence, young people will understand that it is in their interest to join. At the sine of this century, when establishments are tending to expand considerably, and when it will be necessary to be, so to speak, a small capitalist in order to work on one's own account, it is through mutuality that workers should think about protecting themselves from poverty in their old age. The deficit we are reporting may seem enormous to some timid minds. However, with a few francs more in contributions, it will be made up in fifteen or twenty years' time, and members will benefit from an institution that will continue to have generous donors for a long time to come, and which will give them, if not more, at least as much security as any other mutual aid society. O08 DE L'HORTICULTURE DE LA RÉGION PARISIENNE Against damage caused by hail and storms This association was created with the aim of insuring each other against damage caused by hail and storms, an idea no less generous than the one which presided over the foundation of the previous one, since one of these scourges can ruin this or that grower while sparing this or that other. Mutuality, insofar as possible, can save the victim from ruin. Alongside a few distinguished horticulturists, such as Messrs Boutreux, Landry, Simon, etc., we come across some new names among market gardeners: Duvillard, Poitou, Chemin, Pruniot, etc. This association can only include gardeners who are already members. This association can only include self-employed gardeners. Its aim is to protect them against the all-too-frequent ruin caused by hailstorms and storms to establishments with equipment as fragile as that of horticulturists and market gardeners. Its action is certainly not as broad as that of the previous society, which encompasses all gardeners, managers and workers of all categories. Nevertheless, its aim is also philanthropic; for it often happens that certain workers set up with little money in hand, and when one of these plagues destroys part of their crops and equipment, they find themselves unable to repair the losses incurred. Insurance, by immediately paying them a certain sum based on the estimated damage caused, enables them to continue working and gradually repair the disaster they have suffered. Despite all this, the association has not made rapid progress. It barely has a hundred policyholders, when it should have at least two thousand. When one of these disasters occurs in a given locality, a few people think of taking out insurance; but once the accident has passed, they believe that there will be no more; nevertheless, these events are very frequent, and we cannot insist too much on young people in particular, that they take out insurance. All these associations, like the guilds of the Middle Ages, will bring about new progress from which society in general will benefit. Mutual aid societies and pension funds, for example, will advance the idea of a pension fund for all elderly or infirm workers. Mutual insurance against the scourges of the sky, organized by canton and department, will one day force statesmen to take an ongoing interest in these most important of all issues, since they concern the feeding of the people. Each commune will make an average annual estimate of the production of each of its inhabitants, who will pay a premium in proportion to this estimate, and when a disaster occurs, experts appointed, as in these small associations, by the insured themselves, will allocate sums to the victims, according to the losses recognized and the total of the year's losses. The farmer, thus protected, will be less inclined to leave the countryside, where he will find sufficient guarantees for his existence, rather than move to the city, where he often suffers many setbacks. This crop insurance against hail and storm damage will also facilitate the creation of agricultural banks. Farmers, winegrowers and horticulturists will be able to borrow against their harvests, since they will be able to provide their lender with a serious guarantee. Don't we see Crédit Foncier requiring a fire insurance policy to lend on built-up property? In the same way, a farmer with an insurance policy against the most frequent elements that can destroy his crops, will be able to obtain a loan that will often enable him to produce more abundantly, thereby increasing our national wealth. Even in this century of progress, reforms are slow in coming. The issues, the ideas, have to be fully matured before we decide to take advantage of them. However, this idea is part of practical socialism, where the state only intervenes to form the unity of association between all land producers, and to unite all these small local associations into a single, immense bundle. ASSOCIATION STATUTES TITLE I Constitution and Purpose of the Association ARTICLE 1 - A mutual insurance association against damage caused by storms, hail and tempests is hereby constituted in the Paris region, the purpose of which is to indemnify, in the proportions hereinafter determined, the claimants who have adhered or will adhere to the present statutes. ART. 2 - The title of this association is "L'Horticulture Parisienne". Its head office is in Paris. It covers the Seine and Seine-et-Oise departments. Its duration is unlimited. ART. 3 - The association excludes any solidarity between its members, each of whom in any event only bears the premium to which the value he insures gives rise. ART. 4 - The association is made up of participating members and honorary members; ladies are admitted in both cases. ART. 5 - Premiums are variable, but may in no case exceed eight francs per thousand. The minimum premium is set at two francs per year and per thousand of the value declared by the member. This premium is payable in all cases, even if no claim has been made against the company during the year. It is payable half-yearly in advance, with a reserve of 5 0/0 deducted from the premium for the Provident Fund. It will be collected by post, at the expense of associates, from February 20 to 28, from August 20 to 31, and for additional premiums, in the fortnight following adoption by the General Meeting. ART. 6 - The maximum premium varies according to the number of claims incurred during the year. It is set at the September General Meeting and collected as stated in the above article. The amount of supplementary premiums is established in such a way that, after the settlement of claims, a sum at least equal to one-third of the annual minimum premium remains in hand. ART. 8 - A fixed contribution of fifty centimes is levied every six months for all participating members, and is intended to cover office expenses, printing, premises, etc. The contribution for honorary members is optional. Honorary member dues are optional, with a minimum of five francs per year. This contribution is added to the contingency fund. TITLE III Indemnities ART. 9 - Indemnities are variable, and will be calculated on the basis of maximum membership fees. In no case will compensation exceed fifty percent of the estimated damage. ART. 10 - The annual interest on the reserve fund will constitute an additional indemnity, distributed among all claimants, regardless of the rate of indemnity set. ART. 11 - As the aim of the Association is to come to the aid of disaster victims as quickly as possible, an initial indemnity determined by the Council will be paid within eight days of the adoption of the experts' report, which may not exceed ten percent of the estimated damage. The Council may order a further payment if necessary. ART. 12 - Every six months, the Treasurer will draw up a table of the damage suffered and the provisional indemnities already paid, but it is only at the September General Meeting that the final percentage to be allocated to all the victims of the same year will be determined. The balance of compensation due to each claimant will be paid to him or her during the following month, into the Treasurer's fund. The same meeting will close the financial year, the accounts of which will be approved by the next meeting. ART. 13 - The Association's financial year begins on September 1 and ends on the following August 31. TITLE IV Disasters ART. 14 - The disasters recognized by the Association are hail, cyclones or whirlwinds, waterspouts and storms. ART. 15 - Immediately following a claim, the insured shall notify the President, explaining the nature of the damage. There is no need to make a claim if the damage caused does not amount to 60me of the value of the insured products or equipment. ART. 16 - The insured must draw up a list with the approximate price of the equipment, crops and products damaged or destroyed, and hand it over to the experts, bearing his signature. ART. 17 - In the event of a second loss involving the same products, a new declaration and appraisal may be required. TITLEV Members of the Association ART. 18 - Any owner, horticulturist, market gardener or grower whose products and equipment, as described in article 1, are likely to be damaged or destroyed by the plagues referred to in article 14, may become a member of the Association. They must be presented to the President by two members of the Association; a form will be given to the applicant on which he will declare the value of the equipment, crops and products he wishes to insure; this declaration must be signed by the applicant and the presenters; admission will take place at the General or Council Meeting by a majority of the members present. An admission fee of five francs is payable. He or she will not be entitled to member benefits and new charges until twenty-four hours after presentation of his or her receipt and a duplicate of his or her declaration slip, which will mention the date and time of presentation to the interested party; this duplicate must be signed by the Chairman and the Treasurer. ART. 19 - Any person admitted to the Association during the course of a semester must pay the minimum premium and accept all charges. ART. 20 - Growers, nurserymen or other interested parties in the same type of cultivation must draw up a statement of the crops they insure in each territory or commune, indicating by number from one to the last, the rooms or gardens insured. This declaration must be renewed each year before May 1st. In the absence of the above declaration, the insured cannot claim compensation for crops or products that are not of the same nature as those listed for the previous year. A fee of one franc will be charged for each new declaration. ART. 21 - The minimum duration of membership is three years for all associates. Honorary members will also be presented to the Chairman by two members of the Association. TITLE VI Association funds ART. 22 - A reserve fund is established as follows: State subsidies, gifts and bequests made to the Association will constitute an inalienable reserve fund, the annual interest on which will be used to increase the rate of compensation paid to disaster victims. If these resources are not used during the financial year, they will be capitalized by operation of law, and these funds will be placed in a government fund. ART. 23 - A disposable provident fund is set up with the following resources: 1° The reserve deducted from the minimum premium (art. 5). 2° Annual dues paid by honorary members. 3° The surplus of the minimum premium remaining available after the close of each financial year. This contingency fund will be used to supplement or increase indemnities in the event that the maximum premium is insufficient in the event of a disaster. No more than two-thirds of this fund may be drawn down in any one year. The amount to be withdrawn will be determined at the Annual General Meeting. This fund will be invested in a state-guaranteed annuity. No associate, even one who leaves the Association voluntarily, may claim or exercise any right over the reserve or contingency funds, which may not be used for any purpose other than that indicated in the present statutes. TITLE VII Experts ART. 24 - Experts from each associate member speciality will be appointed annually by the General Meeting. Their duties will include on-site verification of the damage and detailed estimates of the losses suffered by the claimants. Following notification of a claim, the Chairman will appoint one or more commissions of three experts, depending on the extent of the loss. They will draw up a report on their work, which they will submit to the Chairman as soon as possible, and the Board of Directors will immediately decide on its adoption, after examination. TITLEVIII Administration ART. 25 - The Association is governed by a Board of Directors, made up of at least 18 and at most 21 members, elected at the General Meeting by an absolute majority of the members present, and renewable by thirds each year. ART. 26 - The members of the Board of Directors shall be chosen as far as possible to ensure that the localities and specialities making up the association are represented. ART. 27 - No member may be appointed to the Board of Directors who is deprived of his or her civil and civic rights. ART. 28 - The Executive Committee is appointed by the Board of Directors from among its members, and is renewable every year. It comprises a Chairman, two Vice-Chairmen, a Treasurer, two Assistant Treasurers, a Secretary and two Assistant Secretaries. Members of the Board of Directors and the Executive Committee are eligible for re-election to the same positions. In the event of a second ballot, election is by relative majority. Participating members who have become honorary members retain their rights to Association functions. All functions are free of charge. ART. 29 - The Treasurer is solely responsible for the general collection of all sums intended for or belonging to the Association, and for the investment and withdrawal of funds. He draws up the accounts for each insured party. He shall pay compensation to claimants. ART. 30. - An audit committee composed of five members drawn from outside the Board of Directors shall be appointed each year to audit the Treasurer's books and accounts, as well as the Association's financial situation, and shall draw up a detailed report to be submitted to the next General Meeting. TITLE IX General Meetings ART. 31 - The Association holds ordinary general meetings twice a year, on the second Thursday of March and September, and extraordinary general meetings when convened by the Board of Directors. Resolutions are passed by an absolute majority of votes cast, irrespective of the number of members present. Honorary members and ladies are not required to attend. Any discussion alien to the aims of the Association is strictly forbidden. ART. 32 - Meetings of the Board of Directors are compulsory, and take place fifteen days before each ordinary general meeting, or in an emergency, on notice from the Chairman. The Board meets after each claim to examine the experts' reports. The rapporteur is required to attend in order to provide explanations where necessary. TITLEX General Provisions ART. 33 - In the event of disputes or legal proceedings for the collection of premiums, the Treasurer is delegated by the Board of Directors to represent the Association. ART. 34 - Votes duly cast by the Ordinary General Meeting are binding on all members present, absent or dissenting. Postal votes are not permitted. ART. 35 - The present Articles of Association will come into force one month after they have been deposited with the Préfecture de la Seine. They cancel the previous Articles, and may only be modified at the proposal of the Board of Directors, or at the request of one tenth of the members of the Association. ART. 36 - In the event of dissolution of the Association, the available assets will be used in accordance with the Association's purpose. ART. 37. - The Board of Directors shall draw up internal regulations to implement the present Articles of Association, which shall be submitted to the General Meeting for approval. ART. 38 - Any subsequent case not provided for in the present articles of association shall be settled by the Board of Directors at an extraordinary meeting called for that purpose. By a return to the idea of common defense or struggle, a return which we have already explained, syndical associations were founded under the Third Republic, which recognized and regulated their existence by the law of March 21, 1884. Today, all guilds are unionized; so many people, as in every age, feel the need to get together to defend their corporate interests. To say that these new groupings will not cause abuses in future centuries is far from my intention. After the study I have made of human mores at different times, in writing this history, given man's domineering temperament, these institutions, like those of the Middle Ages, may perhaps turn to abuse. In the meantime, at the present time, they provide great services to their members. Each corporation draws up its own statutes to protect its corporate interests; these statutes are deposited with the competent authority, which is called upon to approve them. The Ministry of Commerce even has an Office du Travail, which deals specifically with professional unions, requesting monthly reports on their activities and operations, as well as a statement on the situation of their corporation. Armed with this information, the higher authority keeps a close eye on the world of work, and through this system, with our rapid means of communication, can procure work for workers who lack it in one locality, when another locality is short of manpower, and thus avoid a great deal of misery and conflict. For the 1900 Universal Exhibition, this same ministry is organizing a special exhibition of professional unions: their statutes, reports on their work and institutions of all kinds created by them, from every point of view. Economists, and indeed anyone interested in these matters, will be able to draw on this very useful information, which could later benefit this institution. Thousands of trade unions will be taking part in this exhibition, making it all the more interesting. Vegetable growers in the Paris region were the last to join a union, having already set up their own mutual aid society, the mutual insurance association against hail and storm damage. by the invasion of the "regrattiers", who were taking over their places at the Halles centrales, and seeing the time coming when their children would be obliged to sell their products on the floor, when places are specially allocated to them in the streets around the pavilions, that they were moved and decided to form a union, under the impetus given by a few of them, including Messrs. Duvillard, Laurent Narcisse, Laurent Joseph, Gagneau, Colmon, Cottereau Charles, Dumur Antoine, Becquerelle Eugène, Hérouart and yours truly. Pre-meetings were held to lay the foundations of the new association, statutes were drawn up by a committee appointed for the purpose, and these were voted on and adopted at a plenary general meeting convened by the committee. This meeting took place in a room in the hotel of the Société d'Horticulture de France, on October 908, 1894. The syndicate, now properly constituted, immediately appointed its Board of Directors, who were responsible for having the new syndicate recognized by higher authority. STATUTES OF THE UNION Foundation ARTICLE 1 - A union or professional association is hereby formed between the undersigned and those who will adhere to the present statutes, which will be governed by the law of March 21, 1884, and by the following provisions. Name ART. 2 - This Union shall be known as the "Syndicat des Maraichers de la Région Parisienne". Its duration is unlimited, as is the number of its members. Its existence will begin on the day its Articles of Association are legally registered. Registered office ART 3. - Its registered office is at 84, rue de Grenelle-Saint- Germain, Paris. Purpose of the Union ART. 4 - The general purpose of the Union is to study and defend the economic interests of our profession and to improve its living conditions. In particular, it proposes to: 1° Examine all practical and commercial questions concerning our crop; 2° Facilitate the means of sale and export of its products, by providing all necessary information to French and foreign merchants, in order to facilitate export to all countries; MARAICHERS' UNION 3° Defend the interests of all its members at markets, with land and sea transport companies, and with public authorities. 4° To propagate innovations and improvements of all kinds which may be of interest to its members. Arbitration and Expertise ART. 5 - The Syndicate appoints Expert Arbitrators at a General Meeting, to study and settle matters concerning the corporation. See the by-laws for terms of reference. Means of realization ART. 6 - The funds necessary for the realization of the program of the Syndicate consist of the proceeds of the admission fee, dues, donations and subsidies made to it. Obligations of Members ART. 7 - The admission fee for membership of the Syndicat is two francs per Member, once paid, for the first year of formation, and five francs for Members joining the Syndicat after that year. Each Member also undertakes to pay an annual subscription of one franc, payable in advance. Sundicat administration ART. 8 - The Syndicat is administered by a Council of twelve Members elected by secret ballot at a General Meeting. ART. 9 - The Council shall elect from among its members: a Chairman; a Vice-Chairman; a Secretary; an Assistant Secretary; an Assistant Treasurer. One-third of the Board is renewed each year, and outgoing members are eligible for re-election. ART. 10 - The Board has all necessary powers to manage and administer the affairs and property of the Association, to accept donations and legacies, to collect all funds belonging to the Association in any capacity whatsoever, and to supervise the use of such funds as the Association may direct on its proposal. It is also responsible for all administrative details and makes all internal regulations that may be required for the execution of the present Articles of Association. Revision of the Articles of Association ART. 11 - Amendments may be made to the present Articles of Association; the request for revision must be made and signed by half plus one of the Adhering Members and addressed to the President, who will make the proposal to the General Meeting convened for this purpose. Dissolution ART. 12 - The dissolution of the Association may only be pronounced at the request of three quarters of the Participating Members, who must take part in the vote, failing which the request will be null and void. In the event of dissolution, the Association's funds will be paid into the "Caisse de la Société d'Horticulture de France". RULES Admissions ARTICLE 1 - All persons wishing to become members of the Syndicat must be introduced by two Adherent Members, and will be admitted after a favourable vote by the General Meeting. SUBSCRIPTION ART. 2 - Article 8 of the Articles of Association sets the admission fee and the annual subscription. Any member who is one year in arrears with payment of dues will be informed by the Treasurer that he/she will be asked to leave the association if he/she fails to pay after this warning. General Meeting ART. 3 - The general meeting of the Association will be held once a year, on the first Thursday in September. In addition, when the Board of Directors deems it appropriate, extraordinary meetings may be held, but only by invitation. Board of Directors ART. 4 - The Board of Directors will meet at least twice a year, convened by the Secretary. Attendance is compulsory for all members of the Board. ART. 5 - Any member of the Board who has missed three meetings without a valid excuse shall be deemed to have resigned. ART. 6 - Any decision taken by the Board is valid regardless of the number of members present. Chairmanship ART. 7 - The Chairman is in charge of the Chamber; he directs the debates. He chairs the Board of Directors; he may attend all committees. Secretariat ART. 8 - The duties of the Secretary include: 1° keeping the Social Register, containing the names and addresses of Members and the date of their admission; 2° drafting the minutes; 3° reading the minutes, correspondence, etc. at the meeting. The Assistant Secretary assists him in the performance of his duties. TREASURY ART. 9 - The accounts and cash are kept by a Treasurer. The Treasurer collects, on his signature and by means of receipts drawn from a counterfoil book, the membership fees and collects all sums belonging to the Society; he pays all expenses ordered on the payment order, signed by the President. He may not possess a sum in excess of two hundred francs. Available funds are deposited in a Société Générale Cashier. The Assistant Treasurer shall deputise for him if necessary. Arbitrators and Experts ART. 10 - Expert arbitrators are appointed by the General Meeting, by secret ballot, for one year; they may be re-elected. All functions on the Board of Directors are compatible with those of expert arbitrator. Functions of Arbitrators and Experts ART. 11 - Expert arbitrators are entrusted by the Board of Directors, but under their personal responsibility, with: 1° The study and assessment of disputed cases entrusted to them. 2° To reconcile the parties involved as far as possible. 3° Report to the Board on the results of their operations. 4° to submit to the Board a statement of their fees, drawn up in accordance with article 12 of the Association's regulations. ART. 12 - The fees of expert arbitrators are set at twenty francs per session. ART. 13 - Expert arbitrators who, for any reason whatsoever, do not wish to deal with a dispute must immediately notify the Chairman, who will give immediate notice. ART. 14 - As soon as elected, the members of the Council shall proceed, by secret ballot, to the election of the Members of their Bureau, in the successive order of registration provided for in Article 10 of the Articles of Association. All functions are free of charge. ART. 15 - The present Statutes and Regulations, modiffés et votés par la Commission administrative nommée par la réunion préparatoire du 23 Août 1894, dans les séances des 6 et 20 Septembre 1894, ont été approuvés par le Syndicat en Assemblée générale dans sa séance du 12 Octobre 1894. The Syndicat des Maraichers, which was only five years old at the end of this century, nevertheless had three hundred members, and had already carried out important work. Since its foundation, it has led a campaign against the "regrattiers" who swarm the Ilalles Centrales in all shapes and sizes. Today, a federation of sixty agricultural and horticultural unions in the Seine and Seine-et-Oise departments, whose members are all growers who sell their produce directly at Ilalles Centrales, is continuing this campaign. A number of regrattiers have disappeared, and the time is not far off when those who remain will disappear in their turn, assimilating with the other merchants who sell on the Halles floor. A unanimous protest by interested parties against the regrattiers forced the Chambers to pass a law, dated June 11 1896, whose purpose was to set up a commission supérieure des Halles, charged with regulating the Halles Centrales trade. This commission immediately recognized the validity of the protest, and measures have already been taken against this illicit industry, which is detrimental to producers, pavilion merchants, city coffers and consumers in general. These measures are not yet strong enough to completely eliminate this industry. Indeed, what is regrat? If you open the Académie dictionary, you'll see that it's: a small business that consists of retailing certain commodities second-hand. Our ancient kings sold letters of regrat, which corresponded to today's patente. But at the Halles Centrales de Paris, those who engage in this trade, which has become a veritable industry, do not pay a patent, and find themselves assimilated to producers; and if we did not react against this state of affairs, they would soon be the masters of the Paris food trade. O8 As this state of affairs persisted, the President of the Republic issued a decree on August 5, 1898, which read as follows: "ARTICLE PREMIER - The carreau forain des Halles is reserved for growers who bring produce there to sell themselves, and for suppliers selling foodstuffs they own. Merchants selling products purchased outside Paris and shipped directly to them at Les Halles, or which they bring themselves, are considered to be "approvisionneurs". Merchants who contravene the above provisions will be excluded from the floor by decision of the Préfet de Police. "Farmers and suppliers must justify the origin of their goods by producing, on arrival at the carreau, either a declaration of introduction indicating their name, address, the number of cars brought in and the date stamp of the octroi post which controlled the entry of their goods, or a consignment note or railway receipt at their address. "Farmers established in Paris must provide proof of their status in the form of a certificate issued by the Police Commissioner for their district, stating their name, address and the extent of their cultivation. "ART. 2 - The President of the Council, Minister of the Interior, is responsible for the execution of the present decree, which will be inserted in the Bulletin des Lois. Done at Le Harre, July 27, 1898. FÉLX FAURE. For the President of the Republic, The President of the Council, Minister of the Interior, HIENRI BRISSOX Regrattiers are using every possible means to confuse legislators by trying to prove that they are suppliers. In this age of commercial freedom, the legislator's mind needs to be well enlightened if he is not to unfairly harm useful suppliers by wanting to destroy the parasites that everyone is calling for to be abolished. All the protesters are in absolute agreement, even with the Administration, not to harm traders bringing in food purchased at the place of origin. As far as market-gardeners in particular are concerned, the solution is easy to establish: 1° The Administration must only give fixed places in the streets specially allocated to them to those who can show proof that they really are producers. It may be objected that some may present titles today to obtain a space and tomorrow sell their business while keeping their space. To avoid these inconveniences, the Administration can ask the Syndicat for information from time to time, and the Syndicat is always well placed to provide reliable information. The lay reader may ask: why should this bother the producers? The answer is this: It goes without saying that the regrater buys only good-looking, in-demand produce, and sets up a nice fruit shop without paying a license fee, literally killing the space of the grower next door, who is obliged to sell all his produce, and not all of it is good-looking and in demand. As long as this type of regrater was only made up of former market gardeners, no longer able to do their trade, and doing this little business to help them live, the young people, in a spirit of good fellowship, didn't put up any obstacles, but over the last twenty years or so, real traders have come to set up in large numbers among them, and the number is increasing every day. This illicit competition has led some market gardeners to give up cultivation, in order to take up this trade themselves, which 00 is less risky and, above all, involves less trouble and more profit than the former. The regrattiers also create disastrous competition for the pavilion merchants, who are burdened with fees to pay for the places they occupy, and which they would eventually abandon to become regrattieres. This also results in a considerable loss for the city of Paris, as the pavilions are deserted and a considerable amount of trade is done without paying patents, square taxes, etc. The beautiful products are monopolized by the merchants, who are obliged to pay for the space they occupy. As the best produce is snapped up from the outset by all these merchants, fruit growers are already obliged to buy second-hand, and therefore at a premium, which inevitably leads to a price increase that consumers in general pay. Finally, the Syndicat des maraichers is making its influence felt on the economic conditions of the crop itself. In fact, it has set up cooperative centers in each region, where union members can buy their small tools at wholesale prices. Of course, as we've said elsewhere, this is only the beginning of this economic path. Later on, large tools will go through the same channel. It is absolutely essential that the younger generations seek every possible means of reducing the cost price of their products, if they are to stand up to the competition from products from the south of France, a competition that will grow by the day. These means consist of: 1° low-cost purchase of equipment; 2° increased yield through mechanical processes; 3° creation of new commercial outlets, by having products sold directly by commission agents on foreign markets. One of the Syndicat's most active members, Mr. Narcisse Laurent, has just exhibited his products, at his own expense, risk and peril, at the Saint Petersburg Exhibition. He won two silver medals for this small partial exhibition, which earned him the Cross of Agricultural Merit. The path is clear, it will be followed, and when the Syndicat takes this 1008 business in hand, it will achieve great results. Here, experience shows that no product of this kind can compete with the produce of market gardeners in the Paris regionnc. So, during the most difficult few years of the company's creation, this is what the Syndicat has been working on. When all growers understand the benefits of joining this nucleus, it will be able to undertake major reforms, create new commercial outlets, and make the industry it represents more flourishing than ever by increasing our national exports. The syndicate, currently in agreement with that of the French early fruit growers, is negotiating with the major fruit and early fruit commission houses and the President of the Compagnie Transatlantique, to ship French early fruit to North America. After the Exhibition, we hope to welcome the departure of the first French steamer to set sail for the New World, carrying French horticultural produce in refrigerated equipment. SYNDICAT DES MARAICHERS After the Revolution and the first Empire, as soon as the Bourbons returned, some of the brotherhoods we mentioned in the second part of this book were reconstituted. But very few of them occupied the same parishes, given that gardeners had moved away since the great social movement that had considerably increased the capital's surface area. However, we can cite the parish of Saint-Médard, which had had a brotherhood of gardeners since antiquity, and was one of the first to be reconstituted in this century. Others were formed in new parishes, such as Sainte-Marguerite and Vaugirard. In our century, these associations have lost the primordial motive that drives men: interest. Their existence could only be short-lived. All these brotherhoods were placed under the patronage of Saint-Fiacre, who had long been the only saint recognized as the patron saint of gardeners, whereas in the Middle Ages, some brotherhoods celebrated Saint-Jacques and Saint-Christophe, and others Saint-Fiacre and Sainte-Véronique. The former celebrated on July 25, and the latter, as today, on August 30. It's obvious that the timing of the feast day alone tipped the balance in favor of Saint-Fiacre, as this was roughly the beginning of the year for market gardening. When I was young, I remember seeing these constituted bodies fetch the image of the Saint from a confrere, bring it in procession to the mass said in his honor, and then take it to another confrere, where it remained until the following year. The feast was religious in nature, but it also gave rise to fraternal agape among confreres, which sometimes turned into drunkenness in certain quarters. In the evening, a grand banquet followed by a ball, which lasted until the following morning, brought together the entire brotherhood. Later, the religious festival was abolished, and only the banquet remained for some time. Today, it no longer exists anywhere in the guild, but the time is not far off when new associations will reconstitute it under another title. Already, the Chambre Syndicale des ouvriers jardiniers holds an annual festival, in which Saint-Fiacre plays no part, but which is nonetheless a corporate festival. This Syndicat will be followed by other societies, as men have always changed the titles of their associations without altering their morals or temperament. Our guild's feast day will always be celebrated within a fortnight, at the same time as our ancestors celebrated theirs: around Thermidor, which is generally the end of the gardener's year. Which once again vindicates our great ancestors of the Revolution in their desire to start the year at the time of sowing, i.e. when the harvest is almost complete and the seeds for the next crop are being entrusted to the earth. 1 In the chapter on the great gardens created by kings and the powerful, we said that a chapter would be devoted to the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, so much so has this establishment wiped out everything that had been done up to that time. The author does not pretend to provide a technical demonstration of the usefulness of this institution, nor a scientific picture of its current state. Such a work could only be produced by an authorized scholar. The author will therefore confine himself to outlining the history of its foundation, and quoting some of the most eminent men who have remained attached to it, devoting their science and their existence to the embellishment of this incomparable work. The King's Garden was founded under Louis XIII (1), by Hérouard, the King's first physician, and Gui-de-la-Brosse, his ordinary physician. These two doctors obtained authorization, by letters patent, to buy, in the king's name, a house plus twenty-four acres of land in the Faubourg Saint-Victor, in order to found a royal garden of medicinal herbs. This land was surrounded by marshes and crossed by the Bièvre, whose course was moved to its present location. Until the beginning of this century, rue Buffon, ruc Poliveau, etc. were still home to a number of market gardeners and, above all, horticulturists. In 1645, the following edict was issued and registered; (1) Bernard, etc. Le Jardin des Plantes. "Whereas medical schools are not taught to perform pharmacy operations. Sieur Bernard would have begged us that three doctors chosen by him from the Faculty of Medicine in Paris, be provided by us to demonstrate to schoolchildren the inner workings of plants and all medicines, and to work on the composition of all kinds of drugs, by simple and chemical means. "Voulons que dans un cabinet de ladite maison, il soit gardé un échantillon de toutes les drogues, tant simples que composées, ensemble toutes les choses rares, en la naturc qui s'y rencontreront; duquel cabinet ledit La Brosse, aura la clef et régie, pour en faire l'ouverture aux jours de démonstration". Gui-de-la-Brosse laid out the garden proper over an area of ten arpents, out of the twenty-four that comprised the property acquired by the King. Since then, the Jardin des Plantes has been considerably enlarged, forming a vast parallelogram between Rue Geoffroy- Saint-Hilaire, Rue Buffon, Place Valhubert, where it forms a cutaway, opposite the Pont d'Austerlitz, Quai Saint-Bernard and Rue Cuvicr. There is a monumental gate opposite the Pont d'Austerlitz; another at the corner of Rue Cuvier, facing the small square in front of the Hopital de la Pitié. A third at the corner of rue Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire and rue Buffon, which must be the first entrance to the establishment, and several others giving access to the garden. The establishment is visited from every angle. Scientists who come to study this or that science; foreigners who don't want to cross Paris without visiting

this magnificent establishment. Parisians rich and poor alike bring their children here to visit the Swiss valley or menagerie. In summer, the locals come here to relax in the shade, as they do in the other squares of Paris. . 108 Rue Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire is bordered by the Cabinet d'Histoire Naturelle, which contains specimens of all kinds of naturalized animals and birds; at the top of this street, the highest part of the garden, there is an immense labyrinth, from which you have a beautiful view over part of Paris and its suburbs. The beautiful cedar of Lebanon, planted by de Jussieu, can be found around the bend in this labyrinth. Rue Cuvier is bordered in part by the lecture hall, the anatomy cabinet and the Swiss valley. On the quay side is also the Swiss Valley, with a superb gate serving as a fence. Rue Buffon is bordered by the mineralogy cabinet and the garden; a new pavilion has been built in recent years along this street, almost at the corner of Place Valhubert. As you enter the garden from this square, you see before you the botanical garden surrounded by wide avenues, and next to the avenue on the right, the Swiss valley. Higher up, vast greenhouses where trees and shrubs of all climates can be cultivated. Next door, a garden created by Buffon for seedlings, which became a school, where we learn how to sow and raise plants, and where we follow the series of procedures necessary to raise plants in all climates. In its early days under Louis XIII, the king's garden covered twenty-four acres. Today, it covers thirty-one hectares, eight of which are occupied by the menagerie. It would take several volumes to list all the men who have served as directors and teachers of this establishment, and the services they have rendered to science and humanity. Among the best known is Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, who virtually created botany and enriched the establishment with a large number of plants. De Jussieu, following in the footsteps of Linné, who had taken botany a giant step forward, was the author of the so-called natural method, which still serves as the basis for the classifications that come from time to time, DO0 bringing modifications to the order and importance of plant families that are never more than secondary. Then came the illustrious Buffon, who deployed all his science to enrich the king's garden. Taking advantage of the resources offered by the famous establishment he directed, he set about tracing the picture of the whole of nature, and worked all his life on his Histoire naturelle. The author's style is considered one of the leading classics of the French language. In his acceptance speech to the Académie, he himself demonstrated that style is man himself. Buffon was joined by his compatriot Daubenton, who was also a great scientist. With men like these, the king's garden enjoyed great prestige throughout the world. At the time of the Revolution, Bernardin-de-Saint-Pierre was at the head of the establishment. By decree of June 23, 1793, the Jardin du Roi became the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, commonly known as the Jardin des Plantes. Since that time, every man who has held a chair in the establishment can be considered a great scientist, rendering immense services to his fellow citizens and to posterity. To name just one, let's take the centenarian Chevreul, who, in addition to the great body of work he produced, can serve as an example of sobriety to the men of today. It is said that this man never drank wine or other alcoholic beverages in his long life. In the chapter on the great French gardens, we mentioned this garden and the cultivation carried out by its creator, La Quintinie. But now that this kitchen garden has become our Ecole nationale d'horticulture, we're going to retrace its history, written by M. Nanot, its current director, in a fine book entitled: le Potager de Versailles. It would have been impossible to obtain such precise information anywhere else. Its creation dates back to the reign of Louis XIV. In 1678, Mansard and Le Nôtre had just completed the chateau and park of Versailles, and had destroyed the kitchen garden that had existed under Louis XIII and had been planted by Jacques Boyceau. This kitchen garden was around two hundred and sixty meters long and one hundred and twenty-six wide. In the middle, a long alley separated it in two, with each side divided into three small walled gardens with a circular driveway. This installation provided a very large surface area of walls suitable for espaliers. To the right of the entrance were the farm buildings and greenhouses. The garden having been destroyed by the construction of the château or its outbuildings, the king entrusted La Quintinie with the task of finding suitable land on which to reconstitute the kitchen garden. La Quintinie had already been managing the king's fruit orchards for several years. The new kitchen garden was built on ponds filled first with soil from the newly dug "pièce d'eau des Suisses", then with soil brought in from the Satory mountain, a free-flowing soil that becomes a mortar in wet weather, and petrifies in dry. By means of an aqueduct, La Quintinie diverted the water from the neighboring mountains into the filled-in ponds. To clean up the soil, he buried a lot of large-scale manure, and gave his squares a certain slope, in a word, he drained the garden. By this means, he says it didn't take him long to improve his crops. For watering, water was taken from a reservoir on the Satory hillock. With such means, one can judge what the installation of this garden must have cost. In those days, it was customary to prune trees with a billhook, giving them the shape of men, animals, ships and so on. Armand d'Andilly demonstrated the absurdity of these customs by making the first use of espaliers. He harvested beautiful fruit at Port-Royal, where he had created a model garden. La Quintinie adopted his principles and soon became a master in the art. He divided the twenty-five-acre kitchen garden into a large number of enclosures, separated by walls used for espalier cultivation, with different exposures; in the center, he laid out a vast square of ten acres surrounded by terraces; it's in this square that you can still see four large Catillac pear trees, said to have been planted by La Quintinie. The perimeter was divided into twenty-eight compartments, forming nine sunken gardens. Five sunken squares were dedicated to a few varieties of peach trees, the fig orchard and the melon orchard. To the east of the large square, three enclosures were devoted to the cultivation of asparagus for warming. Other squares were devoted to a variety of fruit and vegetable crops. Some wall exposures were used for espaliered peach trees, while other squares were used to grow strawberries. Before La Quintinie, Montreuil's growers cultivated peach trees with great skill, producing beautiful fruit. It's true that they have a special soil that suits this tree and makes it easier to grow than in other areas. 4009 It's by dint of study and expense, to make his soil his own, that the great gardener has succeeded in harvesting fruit as fine as that from special soils. Here we recognize the man of genius and the lead he had over his contemporaries in the same profession. La Quintinie had already studied the nature of the different soils required for different species of fruit trees, the varieties, the exposure, etc. He had not only studied the soil, but also the soil itself. What's more, he didn't need to count the cost of his studies. For the same reasons, taking advantage of his position as director of the king's vegetable and fruit gardens, he was one of the first to come up with the idea of forced cultivation of fruit and vegetables. Speaking of asparagus, he said that only the king could enjoy eating asparagus in winter. In January 1680, for the wedding of Mademoiselle de Blois, the king's daughter, to Prince Conty, the table was decorated with nineteen silver baskets filled with anemones, hyacinths, jasmine and orange blossom. The kitchen garden cost 1,170,983 livres to build, and its annual upkeep in 1685 cost between eighteen and twenty thousand livres. La Quintinie was so highly esteemed by the king that he ennobled him in 1687, his coat of arms being: "Argent, a chevron azure between two mullets of the same, and in base, a tree of vert, field of the same". After many transformations, the buildings he occupied became today's School of Horticulture. After La Quintinie, Nicolas Bénard took over the management of the gardens, followed by the Le Normand family, from father to son, until 1782. With these gardeners, the production of early vegetables increased considerably. The latter introduced the forced cultivation of grapes and pineapples, and it has been said how this D08 fruit was introduced to France, and the success Le Normand achieved in cultivating it. He also tried his hand at growing coffee trees, and succeeded in raising twelve of them, which grew to a height of four meters and produced up to ten pounds of coffee a year, so ripe and of such good quality that the finest gourmets at the Court mistook it for coffee from the tropical sun, which greatly amused the King. These gardeners also tried their hand at growing truffles, but without success. They were very good gardeners, and the kitchen garden was enlarged in good proportions under their management, which lasted for almost a century. The last Le Normand was succeeded by an Englishman, Alexandre Bronn, who was replaced by Gondouin, who was forced to resign by the Revolution. In a deliberation of February 1793, the district of Versailles declared that the kitchen garden could be rented, either in part or in its entirety. It was rented in part to several tenants, including J.-B. Forgeot and Nicolas Dufresne. On February 25, 1798, the Convention decided that a central school would be created in Versailles, and that the school's garden would be located in the kitchen garden. The management of this botanical garden was entrusted to Antoine Richard, a learned botanist, who was granted the right to establish a fruit tree nursery. This Convention law saved the kitchen garden. In 1801, the clos aux asperges and the eleven gardens were transformed into nurseries. In 1805, the property was returned to the Crown, and the garden returned to its original purpose. Under the First Empire, its management was given to Count Lelieur, who restored it to its former splendor. He was able to enlist the help of skilled garden managers such as Peradon, Moutroi, Delpierre, Massey and Souchet. An arboriculturist, Dumoutier, a pupil of Thouin and professor at the Jardin des Plantes, restored the kitchen garden's fruit trees. At the end of the Empire, the cultivation of early crops was entrusted to Barthélémy Edy, and open-ground cultivation to Modeste Lampérière. Edy made great strides in pineapple cultivation; his successor was Grison in 1824. In addition to the forced cultivation carried out by his predecessors, Grison planted a Chinese banana tree. All means of heating were experimented with by this skilful gardener, whose sous-chef was Gontier, who later settled in Montrouge. Count Lelieur's successor as manager was Montory, who was only an inspector, and was succeeded by Massey. Under Massey, the cultivation of early fruit and vegetables increased considerably, particularly pineapples, which underwent major expansion under Gontier père and fils. Massey introduced the cultivation of crambé cabbage to the garden. He cultivated peach trees, cherry trees, plum trees, fig trees and vines in pots. He remained in charge of the garden until 1819, when he returned to his native Tarbes. The list of sous-chefs includes Ecoffey, who succeeded Gontier. A man named Moreau joined the kitchen garden in 1832 as a laborer, and two years later became workshop head, becoming first boy in 1837, before leaving the garden in 1851. This list also includes Chouvet, a talented horticulturist. Grison père's sous-chef was his son, who replaced him on his death. Then came Gondouin, responsible for transporting the garden's produce to the National Palaces; he was replaced by Doré until 1877. In 1850, the vegetable garden changed its character, becoming a field of application, and was managed by Auguste Hardy, who retired in 1859. Under the Second Empire, the kitchen garden once again became what it had been before the Revolution. The agronomic institute was abolished, leaving the kitchen garden, which was entrusted to Hardy throughout the empire, assisted by skilled gardeners. For early produce, Pilon François succeeded Grison fils. Puteaux was succeeded by Louis Bernard. The Third Republic set out to organize a vast agricultural and horticultural education system in France. It was at the instigation of Picrre Joigneaux, deputy for the Côte-d'Or, that the present horticultural school was founded: Hardy remained its director until his death on November 24, 1891. LES JARDINIERS DE PARIS 009 The heads of cultivation were Pelou for early produce, Bernard and Rouland for fruit trees. Piétrot succeeded Pelou. In 1879, Lemaître Octave replaced Desvaux, whose successor was Lefèvre. Pavard was put in charge of the greenhouses in 1889; Lemaye replaced Dunur in 1892, with Delot as his sous-chef. On Hardy's death, interim management was entrusted to M. Henri Grosjean, inspector of agricultural education until April 12, 1892. On that date, Mr. Nanot took over as head of the school, with Mr. Piétrot as head gardener. THE GARDEN'S CURRENT CULTURE La Quintinie had divided the kitchen garden into twenty-nine enclosures, of which there are now only sixteen. Its surface area, including terraces, is three hectares and twenty-two ares, divided by alleys that cut the garden at right angles. Each of the enclosures is surrounded by flowerbeds, the middle of which is occupied by counter espaliers, planted in palmettes with horizontal branches, and along the alleys by apple trees in horizontal cords. In the past, access to the garden was by staircase, but in 1828, the east and west terraces were partly transformed. Under the terraces are vaults for storing vegetables and tools, one for growing mushrooms, and another for blanching, notably capuchin beard and endive. These different types of cultivation show that the school is keeping pace with all the progress made in vegetable growing in this century. Mushroom cultivation is also part of this specialty. In the north, the retaining walls of the terraces are lined with currant and raspberry bushes. To the south, back-to-back greenhouses are devoted to the forciculture of peach trees and vines. The total glazed surface area of the vegetable garden's tarpaulins, greenhouses and frames is 5,899 meters, almost all of which is heated with ther99 mosiphon, representing an annual expenditure of nine thousand five hundred francs. Following on from the winter garden is the bedded square, with a surface area of twenty-nine ares, divided into eight rows of thermosiphon-heated tarpaulins for growing melons and strawberries. On another section, white asparagus is grown on site. This crop has lost much of its importance due to competition from imported pineapples. From a commercial point of view, it will probably become impossible, but on large estates it will continue for a long time to come, both as an ornamental plant and for the flavor of its fruit. CULTURE OF MELONS One hundred and ninety-two thermosiphon-heated frames, and as many covering layers, with no other means of heating, produce Melons from late April to midsummer; these Melons belong to a variety derived from the Prescott Melon and selected by the School. At this point, we'd like to take the liberty of levelling a reproach at the administration of this school: this cultivation, as well as that of strawberry plants, resembles an industrial operation rather than an experimental garden, which should not be concerned with profit, but simply with teaching the cultivation of different varieties that can be grown in different climates, where students will be called upon to apply their art. What's more, since the School is national, i.e. maintained with taxpayers' money, it must not compete in the marketplace with specialists in these kinds of crops. Various petitions have been sent to the Minister of Agriculture to remedy this state of affairs, and those concerned hope that the competent authorities will recognize the validity of their protests. This criticism does not attack the culture of the school, which is C everywhere well done; it also proves that the teachers at the head of the establishment are more than equal to their mission. We will, however, criticize the poor maintenance of the frames, which are badly painted and glazed. However, these same men are well aware that one of the essential points in horticulture is to have equipment in good condition. There is no excuse for this neglect, when the equipment is clean in other schools, where the pupils are even younger, and therefore the instruction is much more elementary than at Versailles. A few frames are used for growing tomatoes, and a few for Concombi. Seven thousand strawberry plants are forced into pots. Around one hundred frames cover two thousand thermosiphon-heated plants in the open ground. Three hundred frames, without artificial heat, cover strawberry plants: around thirty large-fruit varieties and the main varieties of the four known seasons. Twenty-five frames are used for the forced cultivation of Asparagus. Four to five hundred pots of beans of various varieties are grown to demonstrate this forced cultivation, too often abandoned by practitioners. A layer of cloches for growing Romaine is made to demonstrate to students not only the forced cultivation of this plant, but also the counter-planting, the initiative for which belongs to the old Parisian market gardeners of the early 19th century. Frames and cloches are also used to raise plants such as: Eggplants, Tomatoes, Squash, Pumpkins, etc. Lastly, seedlings are sown to obtain new varieties, notably for remontant strawberries. Near the north terrace, the School has built a basin for sulphating mats, stakes, etc. Next to it, there is a shed for the production of strawberries. Next door, there is a shed used to make straw matting. Whereas, to be a true practicing gardener, one must, to this day, know how to make straw mats, glaze and paint frames, etc., the reader can see from the above that this is not the case. The reader can see from this broad outline (for more information, read M. Nanot's book: le Potager de Versailles), that our horticultural school spares no effort to keep up with modern progress. Lessons are given by knowledgeable and practical heads of cultivation, and the students who leave this school, if they wish to take advantage of all the lessons received, can in turn become artists in their trade. The services rendered to horticulture in general by the King's Garden in the last century can also be seen in the trials of forced cultivation carried out there by the scientists at the head of this establishment. To conclude this chapter, let us say that the men of the third republic were well inspired in creating a school of horticulture in the former kitchen garden of our kings; for the students who graduate from this school will be able to render useful services to horticulture in general. Let us therefore salute the memory of the initiator of the School's transformation, my honourable compatriot Pierre Joigneaux, who devoted his entire life to defending and encouraging agriculture and horticulture. PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS (FLEURY-MEUDON), Alongside horticultural schools founded by the State or the départements, there are others founded and maintained by philanthropic societies, or due to the generosity of wealthy private individuals. I'll list the main ones in the order of the visits I've made to them, starting with the Orphelinat de Saint-Philippe, in Fleury-Meudon. This school was founded by Madame Brignole, duchesse de Galliéra, around 1888. It's an important estate, of which we'll only talk about the part that concerns us: the garden, and especially market gardening. The garden covers an area of around five hectares, divided into three parts: vegetable growing, arboriculture, greenhouses and ornamental cultivation. The school has between fifty and fifty-five pupils aged between fourteen and seventeen, all of whom have lost one or both parents, and whose remaining family members want them to learn the gardening trade. For their education and upkeep, these children cost the organization around eight hundred francs a year. The services are divided into thirds: in the first year, the pupils work on market gardening, in the second on arboriculture, and in the third they move on to greenhouses and ornamental cultivation. The whole program is supervised by a director: currently Mr. Coffiniez, who seems to us to have great aptitude for all aspects of horticulture, judging on the spot, the products he gives in the specialty we treat. The market garden department has two sous-chefs, the arboriculture department has one, another is attached to the greenhouses, and a third is in charge of summer planting and city services. All theoretical courses are given by the director. MARAICH GROWING This is undoubtedly the part of horticulture that occupies the largest surface area. A large square of artichokes, asparagus, seedlings of peas, beans, etc., followed by seasonal salads, lettuces and Romaine, cabbages, onions, leeks, wild chicory, spinach, sorrel, all the condiments that this type of cultivation entails, etc. Strawberry plants are also grown on this square. Strawberry plants are also grown on a large scale and have a luxuriant vegetation in these grounds. I noticed the four-season Belle de Meaux variety, followed by large strawberries: Docteur Morère, Héricart and Général Chanzy, which grow less vigorously than the previous ones. All these crops are well understood and well-managed for a school whose aim is not specifically intensive cultivation, but demonstration to fourteen- and fifteen-year-olds. The school has a cellar where theoretical and practical demonstrations of mushroom cultivation are given, meaning that nothing is forgotten in this beautiful and vast establishment. CULTIVATION OF PRIMROSE CROPS It is here above all that we can judge the competence of modern market gardeners. The practitioner can examine 906 on the square assigned to this crop, a set very well understood to achieve the goal that the work proposes. Carrot beds sown in December, in which Radishes and Lettuce have been harvested. At the end of April, we are starting to harvest Carrots by thinning them out, and Cauliflowers, which are already strong, will replace them. A few panels of turnips are also being thinned for consumption. We also see Beans and Potatoes, also on layers, which are coming in very well. The frames used for the carrot and turnip beds have been transferred to strawberry plants in the ground, which will be harvested after the bedded ones. As and when a crop needs to be depanelled, new beds are prepared to plant Melons and receive the frames. Most of the frames at this time are used to grow melons and strawberries. Despite the school's lack of thermosiphon heating for this important crop (which is surprising, with such a rich installation), there are Prescott melons with grey bottoms, which are at full size and will ripen in the first ten days of May, followed closely by Prescott melons with white bottoms. A row of green cucumbers is also well treated. Several rows of Docteur Morère strawberries, which are nearing the end of their harvest, are a credit to the gardener who grows them. HORTICULTURE SCHOOLS EQUIPMENT The establishment has three hundred chassis for growing early fruit and vegetables. This equipment is in very good condition, with well-maintained paintwork and glazing; a compliment we were unable to pay to our national horticultural school in France. The school is set up for irrigation watering on all 908 points; nevertheless, barrels are placed on part of the garden, to teach students how to water with this system. Doormats are sewn in four rows and sulfated. In a word, everything is set up to train gardeners, and the underprivileged who are fortunate enough to enter this establishment can acquire the beginnings of a horticultural education, which will enable them later to adopt one or other of the specialties most suited to their tastes or aptitudes. The Director says that all this is taken into account when placing them on leaving the school; however, the majority adopt the speciality of managing middle-class gardens. In fact, the instruction they receive at school is highly suited to these kinds of gardeners, who need to know all the branches of horticulture. With practical experience, there's no doubt that many students will make excellent gardeners. As for the other two specialties, which are outside our subject, we won't talk about them here, as we don't have the necessary expertise to deal with them. A slightly smaller area than the one we have just examined is given over to fruit and ornamental arboriculture. Seedlings are planted to teach students the various grafting techniques, including grapevines. There is also a botany square, where students can learn the basics of botany. The garden has seven double and two adjoining greenhouses, each sixteen meters long, plus sixty-six frames of tarpaulin, all heated by thermosiphon. All plant species are grown here, from ferns to orchids. THE PRODUCT OF THE GARDEN Many of the plants grown in the greenhouses are used to plant the beds, which are so numerous in this vast establishment; 200 of the remainder are sold either to florists who trade in this way, or to large plants or cut flowers sold to boutique florists in Paris. Early fruit and vegetables are auctioned at the Ilalles Centrales de Paris. Everything common is consumed at home, where there are three or four hundred mouths to feed, or sold in the surrounding area. Proceeds from sales and food supplied to the house amount to fifteen or sixteen thousand francs a year. Deitised GO This establishment was founded some ten years ago by a philanthropic society of Israelites, in the outbuildings of the immense estates that the Duc du Maine owned in and around Sceaux in the last century (1). A small court that fought for a time against the Regency, during the minority of Louis XV. The aim of the organization is to take in, educate and moralize abandoned male children belonging to the Israelite faith. The pupils taken in are aged between ten and fifteen, all orphans, abandoned or morally abandoned. At the age of eighteen, they leave the shelter and are placed according to the trade they have learned. The school also has a small carpentry and joinery workshop, where frames, chests, etc. are made. But most work in horticulture or on the small farm adjoining the school. On leaving, the young man is not abandoned by the work, his primary education, even secondary for some, and vocational for all, is completed, and he receives as his boss, a member of the Board of Directors, responsible for supervising him. He continues to belong to the great family in which he was raised, and this family protects him against adversity when his conduct leaves nothing to be desired. A noble example of human solidarity! (1) Michelet, Histoire de France. As the school takes in children at the age of ten, their primary education must be perfected before they can be professionally trained. As the school has various workshops, as mentioned above, it is necessary to have an administrative director, who runs the school under the supervision of a Board of Directors appointed by the Society. The director is specifically in charge of teaching all theoretical courses. A schoolteacher is attached to the house to give primary and even secondary instruction to the pupils. Each workshop has a master to teach the trade to students who want to learn it. In the garden, a head gardener is in charge of all cultivation; he is assisted by sous-chefs in charge of greenhouses, fruit trees and vegetables. The work supports fifty-five children, at least two-thirds of whom will become gardeners. In the few unannounced visits I've had the honor of making to the establishment, I've always found the crops in good condition. The espaliered trees, in rows of various species, represent a length of several kilometers. New plantings are made every year, as well as seedlings for grafting. In this area, the school's teaching leaves nothing to be desired. It is the dominant part of the establishment. However, over the last three years, the company has made rapid progress in other branches of horticulture. In fact, in 1896, the director asked the Société nationale d'horticulture for a joint commission of arboriculturists and market gardeners to visit the farm. I was part of this commission and, appointed rapporteur for market gardening, I was in a better position than anyone else to observe, during my last visit, the progress made in general, and especially in market gardening. 908 Horticultural equipment has been substantially increased. A twenty-five-meter long, sixteen-meter wide and five-meter high, lean-to vineyard greenhouse has been installed with every possible comfort. Vines are planted in different varieties. Fruit trees are also foraged here. A second, temperate greenhouse is used to grow plants for the beds and flowerbeds in the ornamental area, while a third, hot greenhouse, the same size as the other two, is used to grow the most delicate ornamental plants. The potting room is five meters above the boiler room. All the plants are well labeled, so that children can remember the names of the different varieties. The same applies to the botanical garden, where new collections are added every year. Market gardening has also made rapid progress, and the equipment has been increased; the school now has one hundred and fifty trays used for this purpose, under which we have seen strawberry plants and melons of good quality, though not as advanced as those at the school we described earlier. The cultivation is well done and this can only contribute to good results from a professional point of view. There are also Carrots, early Potatoes, well cared for, depanelled on time and the frames busy with other crops. We'd like to take this opportunity to point out the weak point of non-specialist gardeners: since forced cultivation is always very costly, it's absolutely essential that the plants and seeds used are selected with the utmost perfection; this is the most important quality, otherwise the costs and care are the same, and the result is mediocre. Consequently, gardeners (of whom there are many in middle-class homes today) who engage in this type of cultivation should only use plants and seeds of which they are certain that the selection is the most perfect. 908 Apart from this criticism of an old practitioner, which is addressed not only to this school, but to almost all gardeners who are not specialists, the cultivation is well established, with order and good taste, and irreproachable cleanliness, an essential quality for a school, given that when children, from an early age, are accustomed to working cleanly, they continue to do so later, and this is the basis of all cultivation at all times and in all places. The weak point of this establishment - you wouldn't believe it on a visit - is the lack of water. The Board of Directors, which is not made up of practitioners, and which takes such pride in beautifying this magnificent estate, will one day get to grips with this idea, and when its resources permit, it will do its utmost to fill this gap. With this result, the Plessis-Piquet horticultural school, already so well established, will rank among the first of its kind in our beautiful country of France. Having the advantages that many others don't: proximity to the big city, for the sale of products it has in excess for its food, the ease of obtaining fertilizers, the exceptional quality of the land it cultivates, etc. All sorts of cases to its advantage over others. All sorts of advantages over other, less well-situated schools. This vast establishment, covering eighteen hectares and so picturesquely located, can establish many types of cultivation and requires a great deal of fertilizer. The men of progress at its head, notably the current director, Mr. Coudry, are not neglecting any modern ideas; they are experimenting with chemical fertilizers, variously constituted, taking into account the dominant characteristics of the plant they are cultivating. Perhaps they will achieve satisfactory results, and thereby render a valuable service to horticulture in general. In this respect, we can only applaud them and encourage them to persevere with their experiments, by enrolling us among their students. 108 Between 1881 and 1883, the General Council of the Seine, ever eager to improve the lot of the underprivileged, founded a number of vocational schools, notably those at Monténain and Villepreux. The aim of the former is to train industrial and construction workers. It is beyond the scope of this article. The second, designed to produce gardeners, is of interest to us alone. The initiative for this institution was taken by the third commission of the General Council, chaired at the time by Mr. Doeteur Bourneville, with Mr. Rousselle as secretary. The members of the commission were: Messrs Cattiaux, Curé, Dubois, Forest, Hamel, Loiseau, Mamès, Aristide Rey, Rayé and Thulié. Mr. Michel Moring, then Director of Public Assistance, began implementing the project voted by the General Council, on the proposal of its third Commission. His successor, Mr. Quentin, who took a keen interest in the project, had the honor of creating it, and gave it the name "Service des enfants moralement abandonnés" (Service for morally abandoned children). Through his activity and his contacts with the press, he was able to involve the public in this act of human solidarity, which received considerable donations, so that the department of the Seine had virtually nothing to spend on the purchase and organization of the Villepreux school. Mr. Quentin had enthusiastic collaborators in Mr. Bruyère, Head of the Division for Assisted Children, and above all Mr. Guillaume, a former pupil of Grignon, to whom the direction of the school was entrusted; Mr. Guillaume kept it until 1898, to take a well-deserved rest, although he remained, in spite of everything, honorary director, so much this man of heart made this work his own. For the competent men who saw the school's beginnings, who have followed its development and progress to date, it is to this democrat, this tireless worker, who was never put off by anything, who devoted his youth, his intelligence and part of his fortune to this institution, that we owe them in large part. Men of this temperament are so rare, even in our century of democracy, that it would be an ingratitude on the part of the historian not to communicate their names to posterity. At the beginning of 1882, the school opened with three pupils; by the end of the year, it had some forty. A bourgeois house in Villepreux and three hectares of adjoining land were acquired by the Département de la Seine; the land was cleared by the pupils and converted first to the cultivation of large vegetables. A donation from M. Joseph Reinach was then used to build a hot-house, the first of the major facilities the school now has. At this time, a member of the French Horticultural Society, Mr. Laisné, well known as a philanthropist in the society, founded an annual prize of one hundred francs, consisting of a savings bank book, to be awarded each year as an incentive to the most deserving pupil. Since this initial donation, the sum has been doubled by the generous benefactor, and three prizes are awarded: one for one hundred francs and two for fifty francs. The school and its equipment continued to grow; a fifty-five-acre plot of land not adjoining the establishment, surrounded by walls, was purchased and devoted specifically to fruit growing; new DO0 greenhouses for different crops were built, including one for forcing vines and another for peaches. Chassis and bells are acquired for market gardening. The estate itself was considerably enlarged, from its original three hectares to five. Various workshops were set up to maintain equipment and even manufacture new items: one for carpentry and locksmithing, and another for basketry, where the students make all the objects used in horticulture in bad weather. They also bake their own bread, an excellent household bread that makes all these young boys look great. All the building alterations required for these various services are carried out by the students, who are thus initiated into masonry work. A very important apiary is established at the top of the estate, where students learn how to care for honey flies. A cow barn, a pigsty and a farmyard containing numerous poultry have also been added to the estate, giving the pupils the opportunity to cultivate crops outside the school. The highest part of the estate was cleared and transformed into an arboretum with flowerbeds and lawns, enabling students to maintain a pleasure garden, and the school to earn its title of "Le Nôtre" school. A large nursery was created, containing all the shrubs that gardeners use to plant beds in squares, promenades, public and private establishments. The School began to supply the hospices and hospitals of the Seine department with the various plants, including annuals, which adorned the gardens that had become so fashionable in these establishments, and for which it would soon become the main supplier. What a wonderful innovation in modern times! For nothing is more comforting for the unfortunate who have suffered, when they begin to take the air, to find themselves 1000 ver in the midst of shrubs and flowers that other destitute people have provided for them, while learning a trade that can later put them out of misery. This account of the school's set-up gives the reader an idea of the various courses it offers the pupils. In addition to general subjects such as farm cultivation, cow farming, pig farming, barnyard work, apiary work, carpentry, locksmithing, masonry, basket-making, baking, etc., the most important teaching is the "art of farming", The main subject is horticulture in general: ornamental plants, annuals and perennials, trees and shrubs for bedding, landscape architecture, fruit growing from sowing, grafting, pruning and all aspects of fruit tree care, including forced cultivation and vines. As the house is located far from a town, we only grow vegetables for our own needs: a few panels of forced strawberry plants, melons, carrots, turnips, lettuces and romaine, etc. All of this is well cultivated, with a great deal of care and attention. Everything is well cultivated, tidy and clean, and the plants fairly well selected. This cultivation is very useful for teaching students who will not become specialists, and a good apprenticeship for those who will engage in this art. The table of placements given to students, which we have before us, shows us the professions they adopt on leaving school. Most remain gardeners, while a few have already made a name for themselves in horticulture. The school's current head gardener is the first winner of the Prix Laisné. A former student of the school is director of the trial garden in Libreville (French Congo), officer of agricultural merit, academy officer. Another is director of the Tunis test garden, reporting to him are four former colleagues, like him wards of the Seine department. A number of them are gardeners in public assistance homes; others manage bourgeois gardens of some importance; many are currently in the military, since the oldest pupils are barely thirty-five years old; some have re-enlisted at the age of 500 to make their military career, and are already supplying some non-commissioned officers to the army. Some of them have also taken up the trades they began at school: locksmith, carpenter, basket-maker, baker and so on. These young people will be of real service in the countryside, giving gardening lessons to their former childhood friends; for this is the weak point of rural dwellers, who could obtain great pleasures that would cost them almost nothing, if they had a few notions of horticulture. ORGANIZATION OF THE SCHOOL It can support and house fifty to fifty-five pupils, who enter at the age of twelve or thirteen and leave at sixteen; in other words, at the age when one can earn a living in horticulture. PRIMARY SCHOOL Classes are held every day from half past four to half past six. One section includes pupils without a primary school certificate. The majority of pupils who do have the certificate are taught in another section, which deals with surveying, levelling, accounting and writing. These courses are taught by the local schoolteacher. PROFESSIONAL INSTRUCTION Theoretical and practical professional instruction is given concurrently by the school director and the heads of the farms or workshops, in lectures by the former, and on the building sites by the latter. Lectures are reserved exclusively for second- and third-year students, and take place three times a week, covering botany, applied chemistry, fertilizers, cultivation methods and so on. At the end of their studies, they are awarded a certificate by a jury appointed by the Société nationale d'horticulture de France. WOODWORKING AND IRONWORKING Two workshops, equipped with sufficient tools to carry out work related to cultivation equipment, operate under the direction of two technical foremen who are also supervisors. Each student learns the essentials of the trade. During the off-season, a gardener's boy, or a former student placed with a basket-maker, gives apprentices lessons, making baskets, baskets, etc., as used by horticulturists. LIBRARY AND MUSEUM The school has a reading room, collections of molded fruit, seeds and herbariums. An annual subsidy of five hundred francs is allocated for upkeep. In this model establishment, no effort is spared to complete the education of the children entrusted to its care. Pleasurable arts are not forgotten and form part of the program. Music, gymnastics and games. Two and a half hours are devoted to music, twice a week. Lessons are given by a musician from the Republican Guard. There is also a brass band, whose players are suitably trained. GYMNASTICS The same time as for music is devoted to this exercise, so useful for young people. Cane and boxing lessons are given by a non-commissioned officer from the Saint-Cyr military academy, located a few kilometers from Villepreux. A covered gymnasium, equipped with all the regulation apparatus, is at the students' disposal. GAMES All kinds of games are set up in the house to entertain students during breaks: bowling, barrel games, ball games, etc., even a billiard table for older students. Each pupil receives a salary, part of which is left at his or her disposal, while the rest is used either to buy small items or to build up a nest-egg. The salary consists of : 1° A weekly cash bonus, to be used at the child's discretion. 2° Quarterly allowance to be spent in kind. 3° Reserves placed in his name at the savings bank by the administration. First-year students receive: 1° A weekly allowance of forty-five francs per year. 2° Twenty-five francs set aside for personal purchases. 3° Payment into the savings bank by the administration, fifty francs. Total: one hundred and twenty francs. Second-year students receive one hundred francs for the weekly bonus, and twenty-five and seventy-five francs for the other two. Third-year students receive one hundred and twenty-five, one hundred and fifty and one hundred and seventy-five francs. Not only does it teach them a trade that will enable them to earn an honorable living, but it also leaves them with a small nest egg that many others would not have, at the age when they leave school, when they leave their parents' home. Each year, we organize professional training trips, either in France or abroad. The principal accompanies students chosen from among the most deserving, and provides them with explanations on site to help them make the most of these trips. In addition, good subjects are authorized to visit their home agency each year, at their own expense. Their ties with their foster parents are not severed, and for one month they help them with the work in the fields. This last fact sufficiently explains why a certain number return to their adoptive families, to become farmers in the country where they were raised. As I said earlier, they will be able to render great service to their adopted brothers. May all these young people, now citizens, never forget to return to society all the kindness and consideration it has shown them, and may the education that their situation has enabled them to acquire become a national benefit by themselves educating the inhabitants of our countryside. PUNISHMENTS Punishments consist of the total or partial withdrawal of gratuities, and additional drudgery. A register of punishments lists the reasons. The student always receives a weekly report. THE ESTATE This beautiful estate of more than five hectares, with its various facilities: accommodation for the director, students, library, museum, schools, various workshops, farm, pigsty, cow barn, playrooms, gymnasium, various services. Horticultural equipment and plants. The establishment has a surface area of twelve hundred meters of glass greenhouses, equipped with thermosiphon heating and containing plants of considerable value. Frames and cloches are used for other crops. Two thousand five hundred meters of trees of various species and espaliered and counter-espaliered vines, all well trained and in full ratio. The nurseries, arboretum, livestock, poultry, tools, etc., represent an enormous capital, largely due to the generosity of numerous donors, the main ones being : Baron Joseph de Reinach, Simon Emden, Kahn, the Iycée Charlemagne, and the Ministry of Agriculture. But one of the most important, the most disinterested, the most modest, whose name appears nowhere, and yet well known to practitioners who have followed the progress of the work, is without doubt the honorable director: M. Guillaume. This good man with a certain fortune, which has always enabled him to remain independent, even from the administration, has devoted most of his income to improving the physical, moral and above all professional well-being of his pupils. C This new Vincent de Paul will have his place in the republican calendar, if ever there was one, as the benefactor of morally abandoned children. In the meantime, let us cite him as one of the men who have rendered the most services to humanity in our century. WATER SUPPLY When creating a horticultural establishment as important as the one we have just described, the first thing to consider is how to obtain abundant water. In this respect, the school is in an exceptional position, thanks to the intelligence and energy of its director. The rû de Gally runs alongside the garden at the bottom of the property; it's worth noting that the terrain in this area is very uneven. Not far from the building, the commune owns a fountain fed by springs from the neighboring hillsides. The water is clear, colorless and odorless, with a slightly pasty taste. Initially, a connection was made to the schoolyard, for drinking water and all domestic needs. This installation has now been removed. Today, the water used in all departments comes from springs tapped at the top of the estate. With the slope of the land, and after studying the various layers of which it was composed, he had the students dig a gallery one hundred and fifty meters long, reaching the level of the spring. By this means, he was able to capture the entire spring, which yields a flow of two hundred and fifty liters of pure, healthy water per minute, used for watering the entire garden and feeding a stream that runs through immense lawns adorned with plant beds; rustic bridges are built over this stream, to give students an insight into landscape architecture; a beautiful aspect of horticulture, which can be of great service to them when they have to design a public or private park; a situation which some students already occupy, as we have seen above. All these trays, made by the students in their own time, were done at an unbelievably low price. Visiting these works with a friend and accompanied by the principal, we suggested to him the idea of supplementing the school's teaching by taking advantage of these galleries to establish a mushroom farm. The school's budget will not be increased; a few cubic meters of good horse manure will be the only expense, and as we shall see in the Traité de la culture du champignon (1), this manure will then be used as fertilizer for the crops. With the main notions of this cultivation, given by a few friends who are interested in the work, to the intelligent head gardener we knew as a pupil, this teaching will soon have reached the level of the others given at the school. In this respect, everyone knows the danger of consuming wild mushrooms. As we said in the chapter devoted to these plants, unless you're a serious connoisseur, you can make a mistake picking them, and risk poisoning an entire family. Student gardeners should therefore be encouraged, when they later take charge of a garden, to cultivate these plants whenever possible. Let us add, to conclude this chapter, that in addition to all these generous men who have taken care of the School, there have been certain general councillors of the Seine, who have taken it under their protection. Among so many others, we can mention Messrs Bourneville, Thulié, Rousselle, Curé, etc. Since Mr. Guillaume's retirement, the school's management has been entrusted to a young man, hard-working and intel(1) Work that the author will be publishing shortly. OQ ligent: M. Potier, like his predecessor, a former student of Grignon. We have every reason to hope that he will follow in Grignon's footsteps, helped by his advice, and that the Villepreux school will flourish even more than before. We also hope that the generous souls who have already done so much for this philanthropic work will not soon forget him. Deused CO D'IGNY Various other schools exist in the department of Seine-et-Oise, which can be considered part of the Paris suburbs. These more or less fee-paying schools are generally run by clerics, and the teaching they provide is more a reflection of the large-scale cultivation carried out in this suburb than of horticulture per se. We visited the Saint-Nicolas Brothers' school in Igny. This establishment specializes in fruit growing. The garden is laid out in very large squares, where we grow large vegetables such as potatoes, peas, beans, artichokes, etc., framed by three rows of fruit trees, apple and pear trees in cordons and pyramids, well trained and in full ratio. There are two small greenhouses, however, where students can learn about ornamental plants and vine forcing. A small bedding area is used for cuttings of annual plants and for forcing a few vegetables. A few panels of strawberry plants, varieties : Docteur Morère and Marquerite that don't look bad, the rest are insignificant for the season (beginning of May). It's only in autumn that this school is at its best, and its products are noticed every year at the exhibition held by the French Horticultural Society at this time of year. We feel that this is not enough for such a well-designed establishment, given that the students who graduate from it are specially destined to manage bourgeois gardens. As we know, owners who take on a student from a school like to have vegetables in all seasons, especially early ones. Osteed CO AND PUBLIC COURSES The statutes of the community of master gardeners under the old regime contained an article on apprenticeship that provided a valuable advantage for young apprentices and a guarantee for the employer. At the beginning of the century, having retained some of the customs of the past, young people were hired as apprentices and paid as such. Once they had spent some time with the same employer, they became skilled workers, capable of doing their trade well. When, for one reason or another, they left their apprentice boss to work for another, we knew where they'd come from and what they knew how to do. These circumstances helped a great deal in securing contracts, whereas nowadays, a worker comes to work for us declaring that he knows how to do the job, when sometimes he has never set foot in a swamp, or knows very little about the work he has to do. The boss, often believing he's dealing with a good worker, has agreed to pay him as such, but seeing himself deceived, he dismisses him immediately and the worker starts again elsewhere. It also happens that, when the work is urgent, we keep him on for a while, employing him on the big jobs, which are the easiest to do. The worker, for his part, knowing that he does not possess the special aptitudes to fulfill the commitment he has entered into, is convinced in advance that he will be dismissed as soon as the heavy work is finished; he becomes more demanding when he does not leave the job of his own accord. This state of affairs gives rise to unease and discontent on both sides, often extending to the good workers themselves, who then become the victims. Labor is becoming so hard to come by these days, that we have to anticipate the moment when almost everything that is possible will be done on the job. Will this way of working reconcile all interests? Only time will tell. From this brief account, we can see that almost all the evil stems from the lack of training of workers. Without going back to the practices of the Middle Ages, couldn't we require a certificate of apprenticeship from the worker, which would justify the degree of professional instruction of the applicant? This certificate would inform the employer, at the time of hiring, about the work that the worker would be capable of performing. This procedure would make it easier to sign up to new contracts, and would often help them to last longer. In the century of freedom in which we live, it applies to many corporations. In Paris especially, where everything is specialized, there is a huge difference between a worker accustomed to working in one specialty, and another working in another. The method we suggest would not be detrimental to anyone's freedom, and would be of great benefit to both employers and workers. Frequent job changes benefit no one, and on the contrary, often cause a significant loss in the industry where they occur, and always to the workers in their wages. Only one free vocational course exists in the Seine department, given by an experienced practitioner: Mr. Duvillard. This course, paternally given in his beautiful 908 marsh in Arcueil-Cachan, is both theoretical and practical, but it can hardly be applied to apprentices, who above all need to learn manual labor, before knowing when to sow seeds, how to care for plants, how to rotate crops; in a word, all the profit that can be made from the land we cultivate. This course is more useful for those who intend to run private gardens, where horticulture in general is practiced. It is the intellectual and practical side of the profession, not the manual. In the latter case, it is essential that the apprentice knows how to use the tools placed in his hand, before learning how to manage the crop, which he learns by practicing. In spite of everything, we would strongly urge workers to follow this course, which can only strengthen them in their art. It would encourage them to take notes on the various crops they are studying; the results obtained, and so on. Make comparisons with what they see being done elsewhere, and draw their own conclusions. In horticulture in general, and in market gardening in particular, where you have to continually help or fight nature, you never know your job inside out; a fact that vindicates your methods one year vindicates them the next. The horticulturist cannot be compared to the artist; the latter, once he has perfected his art, does so forever. In horticulture, on the other hand, there are always new things to come along that you don't expect, and which you therefore don't know without studying them. It is therefore only through the study of these facts and through experience that the horticulturist can overcome all the difficulties that arise in his cultivation. Until the middle of the 19th century, the trade in horticultural products remained purely local. As a result, gardeners did not feel the need to display their products. But since this trade has become almost international, like that which results from all industries, they have felt the need to make their products known to merchants in all countries. For over thirty years, market gardeners have played a major role in the annual spring exhibitions organized by the French National Horticultural Society. Their products are always much admired by the many visitors to these exhibitions, and win them a large number of prizes for the beauty and, above all, the perfect selection of their plants. Market gardeners don't take part in autumn shows, believing that at this time of year everyone can grow vegetables when there's plenty of water to water them. Despite this, we feel that they could still organize an exhibition at this time of year, where the hand of these skilled practitioners would be recognized, especially in the many varieties of plants they have so artfully selected. These include cauliflowers, tomatoes, celery and other seasonal salads and vegetables. At the 1867 World's Fair, market gardeners wanted to grow crops on the spot, but unless they had a special plot of land suitable for the purpose and considerable resources at their disposal, success was unlikely. In 1878, there were temporary competitions, i.e. the display of products capable of being delivered to the trade for the duration of the Exhibition. In our opinion, this was the only practical way to showcase Parisian market garden production. In 1889, this was the only way to do so, and connoisseurs from all over the world stopped to admire this unique production. This exhibition was the subject of an important report by Mr. Duvillard, secretary and rapporteur of this class. REPORT BY M. DUVILLARD Vegetable plants At the 1889 Universal Exhibition, class 80 centralized all products supplied by market gardening, vegetable growing and related agricultural activities. As with the other classes in Group IX, eleven competitions, representing the various successive periods of cultivation, were organized to enable visitors to follow more easily the different phases and the many advances in market garden production. In this way, everyone was able to get an accurate picture of all the improvements made by our horticulturists, both to increase and to enrich the products delivered for consumption, from the most sought-after early crops to the vegetables that form the staple diet. In the Class 80 competition, for example, we saw a succession of market garden varieties, the most prized of which were strawberries, pineapples, asparagus and melons, grown in the Paris region and available to a privileged few at the start of each season, Thanks to the special care that Parisian growers give to this type of cultivation, without neglecting the products sought after by popular consumers, such as potatoes, cabbages, radishes and salads whose families are so varied. The harvests exhibited in the Class 80 competitions were highly commended for the quality and beauty of their produce, as well as for the diversity of their species. It is indisputable that, for several years now, the horticultural industry has been undergoing the greatest development in Paris and neighbouring regions; workers have never neglected to use all the means at their disposal to facilitate the use and supply of the rich gifts of the earth and nature. The Universal Exhibition showed us that agricultural exhibitors had kept pace with progress, and, through the improvements they had achieved, that they fully understood the importance of the place they occupy in our century of civilization. In the galleries of class 80, all the vegetable products supplied by the Parisian countryside were exhibited in turn, over a relatively short period of time, to supply the Halles and the capital's markets throughout the year. The results obtained by the grain specialists were entirely in line with the very encouraging progress made by the market gardeners; the exhibitors of leguminous species had been able to broaden the scope of this specialty, and not limit it to species grown exclusively in our country; they were thus able to offer visitors specimens of all the varieties harvested throughout the world, which was scarcely possible for vegetables for which freshness and earliness are the primary qualities. From the point of view of education and experience, the exhibition of products grown outside our homeland gave the greatest benefits. We must also point out that all the efforts of our *I workers in the field were not wasted: for the duration of the Exhibition, the products they exhibited continued to be the object of special favor from the public and amateurs, who thus testified to their interest in our agricultural industry. On the other hand, our exhibitors had taken meticulous care to facilitate the study of leguminous plants, presenting them to visitors in a methodical order and layout that enabled them to follow, almost step by step, the progress of vegetable cultivation. The excellent impression made on the public mind was certainly not the result of satisfied curiosity: among our compatriots, as well as foreigners, it was with legitimate pride that we admired the brilliant results due, in large part, to the initiative of the growers who contribute so largely to the life of the capital and the civilized world. This popularity of the public, the great popular jury, did not slow down for a moment: every day we could see a large number of people, belonging to all classes of society, following with keen interest all the work of class 80, and paying great attention to the explanations and information provided by the exhibitors to the visitors; many of them collected important notes, intended as much to fix their memories, as to report to those who were not able, alas! to come and admire the great festival of modern progress, to which France had invited all the peoples of the globe! Farmers in other regions also appreciated the remarkable advantages obtained by Parisian market gardeners and grain growers; they were able to remember a few names or improvements of types, neglected or insufficiently known in their own regions. Thanks to the information they have gathered during their visits to the Exhibition, they will in turn be able to give new impetus to hortiO06 culture and make a powerful contribution to the development of field work, both in the provinces and abroad. From this new point of view, the Class 80 competitions have demonstrated that with intelligent care, sustained hard work and an equitable distribution of agricultural aids, the most advantageous services can be obtained from cultivation in and around Paris, as well as in more clement and hospitable climates. Now that we've talked about agricultural aids, without encroaching on the realm of agronomy, let us briefly mention the most favorable causes that come to the aid of the Parisian or suburban farmer: the main ones in particular are inherent to current progress, and it would perhaps be ingratitude on our part not to pay them the just tribute they deserve. First of all, we find a whole system of perfected agricultural tools and machines. The Universal Exhibition, among all its marvels, showed that science had achieved a great deal, and that it had not yet said its last word: it used to take a great deal of effort and toil to obtain, from rudimentary equipment, results which today would certainly be inadequate for general supply; productive forces were incomplete, cultivation faltered, and land often remained uncultivated, even in our beautiful country of France. Today, we are able to provide for almost all consumer needs. Secondly, we have found powerful collaborators in the fertilizers used in recent years. As the learned agronomist Schwertz said, "Whoever wants to get a lot out of the soil, must also give it a lot". In Paris, more than anywhere else, it was necessary to give a great deal to the fertility of the soil, and if we have just made a quotation from a foreign worker in our country, we 009 also note, to the glory of our national self-esteem, that it is still in France, especially in the vicinity of the City of Light, that the most brilliant results have been obtained in this respect. From all the products exhibited in the Class 80 competitions, it is clear that market gardening, better improved and perhaps better understood, has developed far beyond our expectations. The initiative and dedication of the workers have kept pace with the prodigious activity of consumption, while ensuring the satisfaction of all the requirements of our times. Perhaps the future will bring further improvements, but we are convinced that these will be inspired by the studies that the Exhibition's competitions will have led to. This will be to the credit of our farmers, who will have proved that they have never ceased to keep up with the times and with progress. And it is also with real satisfaction that they will have contributed, within the limits of their attributions, to ensuring the greatness and triumph of the Universal Exhibition which crowned the great centenary of 1789". At the 1900 Exposition, vegetable production will be widely represented in all the competitions taking place, and it is to be hoped that this industry will play a leading role in the great peaceful struggle that will take place on the threshold of the twentieth century. The admission committee for this class (class 44; group VIII) has made every effort to persuade the Exhibition's senior management to include mushroom cultivation. Mushroom cultivation had previously been included in group IX, class 54; harvesting equipment, instruments and products. As we have already said, this cultivation was begun by the gardeners of Paris, at least two centuries ago, and has since been continued by their descendants, a number of whom have become absolute specialists. In the temporary horticultural competitions, visitors and especially enthusiasts will be able to examine this culture as it is grown in the immense quarries surrounding Paris; they will also see the seedling blanks and the products of these blanks. A discovery made by modern scientists. The exhibition will also be retrospective, to show the progress made in each industry. This will not be its least curious aspect, to mark in a clear and well-fixed way the stage humanity has reached in this century of progress. The author, having been asked by his class to prepare this work for our specialty, has produced an abridged version of this history, which has been unanimously accepted both by the board of directors of the Paris region market gardeners' union, and by the committee of the aforementioned class. PLANTES POTAGÈRES gitired by Groupe vin (horticulture), Classe 44 (culture potagère) CULTURE MARAICHÈRE PARISIENNE Fistorique sorrrnaire de l'industrie Market gardening has only really made progress in this century; our ancestors were content to cultivate the plants they had, in the season when nature made them grow. The forced cultivation of the late 19th century, which became the basis of Parisian market garden production, is where most of the science of the modern market gardener resides. It is due in particular to the initiative taken in the 18th century by the illustrious La Quintinie. This art of making plants grow out of season is therefore only two hundred years old, and throughout the last century it has served only to satisfy the culinary tastes of kings and the powerful. At the beginning of the 19th century, a few bold and enterprising market gardeners tried to imitate the great gardener of Louis XIV and his successors, by forcing some plants. These men are the masters of modern gardeners, and we respectfully salute their memory in passing. However, for more than a century (1), market gardeners have been making a few layers in the air to advance the Raves, (1) Delamare, Traité de Police. Radishes, lettuces, etc. The great market gardener mentioned above acknowledged that he had learned a great deal from the Parisian "mareschais" (1). The latter, in turn, as well as their posterity, owe him a tribute of gratitude for the progress in cultivation he made in his royal kitchen garden. At the end of the 18th century, a small number of market gardeners had a few hundred bells and very few frames. Asparagus was first cultivated "à cloches", as indicated by La Quintinie in his Traité de culture potagère; then came other growers who cultivated it "à châssis", a method still used today. Other crops were also tried, by the sons of the former masters of the gardening community. It was not until the Restoration, when tranquility returned and trade took off again in a new and unprecedented way, that these crops became widespread. At the same time, a large number of young men and women left the countryside to set up families in Paris. These less well-off families tried to amass a small nest egg to work for themselves. Establishments were of little value; a spade or two, a rake, a pair of watering cans, a few barrels, a pulley with its rope and buckets, a few hoods, mannes, etc. constituted all the equipment for these arrivals. Consequently, water was drawn by hand, and produce was carried to Les Halles on hoods, as in (1) La Quintinie, Traité de culture potagère. O0 the old days, even though settlements were already moving away from them. At that time, they were located around Louis XVI's enclosure walls (intra and extra-muros), especially for the latter, while the sons of the former masters still lived in the suburbs around Charles V's destroyed enclosure. As the latter had a few frames and a number of bells, they installed cranks (1). This is a very old tool, but it requires the use of a horse to operate, and until then, settlements were not large enough to cover these costs. The arrival of the hand crank was therefore a revolution in market gardening, requiring the use of a horse and carriage, as well as the distribution of water in the marsh; with the bells, frames and accessories that this equipment entailed, this already formed a market gardening establishment, where production could take place all year round. Around 1835, piston and merry-go-round pumps replaced the cranks, thus solving the problem of drawing water from great depths, enabling market gardeners to tackle the plateaux around Paris, since water is the most important issue for market gardeners at all times and in all places. As the population of Paris grew rapidly during the 19th century, and the number of middle-income earners became much greater, early crops were in demand, and market gardeners gradually increased their equipment for these crops. In 1845, Messrs Moreau and Daverne, who wrote the history of their corporation, reveal that in their time it employed three hundred and fifty thousand frames and around two million bells. But since these authors wrote, the greatest economic, industrial and commercial revolution of modern times has taken place. The creation of the railways (1) Malpeyre, Bixio et Bailly, Maison Rustique. 900. Trade has grown steadily since then, and has gone from being local to our corporation to being international, and market gardeners' equipment has increased considerably today. Around 1860, a new advance was made in the guild: the installation of irrigation. This watering system, initially resisted by the older members of the guild, took little more than a decade to become widespread, and helped to increase market-garden production in great proportions, enabling growers to brave the most severe droughts. After 1870, a new crop was added to those already grown by market gardeners: a few young people began to grow the early turnip known as Navet marteau. This crop was a great success, almost doubling the number of market gardeners' frames. The cultivation of other early vegetables followed the same progression, in particular: forced Romaine on bell beds, one of the most marvelous and lucrative crops bequeathed to the guild by the old market gardeners of this century. At the 1889 Universal Exhibition, mechanical engineers presented gas and oil engines; a large number of market gardeners were quick to install these tools to operate the pump, replacing the horse which, given the size of the marshes and their remoteness from the capital, has enough work to do transporting produce to Les Halles and bringing in the manure needed for the farm. These small gas or oil engines worked very well, and young market gardeners quickly learned how to use them. At the end of the century, mechanical power was put to work in market gardening. It's a far cry from the way the first gardeners of the century drew water by hand. A number of gardeners have installed rotating "C" cities in their marshes, with portable rails to enter the squares; this is an innovation that will make its way and replace back-pack transport of vegetables, manure, potting soil, etc., in the century that is about to begin. In the very near future, we can expect to see small motor-driven ploughs replacing the spade. At this point, I realize that I'm encroaching on the future and that I'm leaving the questionnaire that's been imposed on me. MAIN PRODUCTION CENTERS At the end of this century, the main production centers for market gardening proper are on the right bank of the Seine: Maisons-Alfort, Créteil, Champigny Bobigny, Aubervilliers, La Courneuve, Stains, Asnières and Gennevilliers. The localities on the left bank with the largest groups are : Issy-les-Moulineaux, Malakoff, Montrouge, Bagneux, Arcueil-Cachan, Gentilly, Ivry and Vitry. TRADE IN PRODUCTS DURING THE CENTURY (exports and main consumption centers). Our ancestors left no written records to give us an idea of the turnover they were able to achieve, but based on the work so wisely done by Messrs Moreau and Daverne, in 1845, we can, by deduction, establish it approximately. These authors estimated that market gardeners in their day occupied three hundred and fifty thousand frames, about two million bells and that production could amount to thirteen or fourteen million francs annually, including mushroom cultivation, which became a specialty at the end of the century. They also cultivated beautiful1- 61- "1e produit n'appartient plus au domaine "n taking all these facts into account: for forced cultivation in the 208 middle of the century, deducting the cultivation of mushrooms and flowers, which belong to other specialties, we can estimate, without fear of deviating much, market garden production at the beginning of the century, at three or four million francs a year. By the end of the century, market gardeners occupied approximately one million frames and five to six million bells, cultivating around one thousand hectares of land, with an average yield of thirty thousand francs per hectare: in other words, this industry had grown almost tenfold in terms of business and much more in terms of production: the price of early vegetables being lower than at the beginning of the century, and only twenty or twenty-five years ago. So it's consumers in general who are benefiting from this increase in production. It is estimated that more than a third of this produce is exported abroad, notably to England, the largest consumer center for Parisian market garden produce, Belgium, Germany and, to a lesser extent, Russia. Les primeuristes have just presented their products directly at the inter-national horticultural exhibition in Saint Petersburg, where they won almost all the first prizes. This augurs well for opening up new commercial outlets for the market-gardening industry, which fears no competition in terms of product selection and beauty. The national horticultural exhibitions held every year in Paris, and international ones at intervals, are proof of this. The vegetable displays put on by the market gardeners' guild always win top prizes, and are much admired by the many French and foreign visitors. LAND VALUES 2 LEUIS : -- . -. In the mid-19th century, Y tells us that Louis XVI terraces and Louis-Philippe's fortified enclosure were worth between twenty-eight and thirty thousand francs per hectare. Those with no easy access were worth between sixteen and twenty thousand francs, including walls and housing. The sites occupied by market gardeners at the beginning of the century, in the lower suburbs of Charles V's enclosure, were already worth from eighty to one hundred thousand francs per hectare; today they are worth from five hundred to eight hundred francs per meter, and the latter, from fifty to two hundred francs depending on their location. The same authors estimated the rental of well-placed plots at twelve or thirteen hundred francs per hectare, and the second quality at eight to nine hundred francs, all including housing. These prices had roughly doubled since the beginning of the century. Between the time these authors were writing and the end of the century, market gardeners had moved away from Paris, and the same proportion existed for the increase in rents; they had roughly doubled, which meant that they had quadrupled during the course of the century. Today, land suitable for market gardening in the Paris suburbs sells for an average of three to four francs a meter, in field soil of course. To set up a farm: house, outbuildings, fencing, well, etc., you need to spend around twenty thousand francs. Consequently, a hectare of marshland is currently worth between fifty and sixty thousand francs. EXPLOITATION Market gardening, with the enormous equipment it requires, consists in producing rimeurs in autumn, winter and spring, along with 1- C1 11s, the finest commercially available. As for the market gardeners themselves, today they should simply be called "primeuristes": their method of forcing plants has not yet changed much; it is still done by layers of manure, as in La Quintinie's day. But with modern progress in replacing animal traction with mechanical traction, we can expect the price of this raw material to rise, as another industry, that of mushroom growers, employs more and more of it. At some point, therefore, manure production will not keep pace with the needs of this industry. Some market gardeners have already added thermosiphon technology to their crops. When the time comes, they too will be forced to use chemical fertilizers on their other crops. Moreover, the intelligent market gardener who loves his trade is like a traveller climbing a mountain whose sites are unknown to him. With each step he takes forward, new horizons open up before him, increasing the scope of his research and, later, often that of his knowledge. These are the reasons why Class 44 of Group VIII decided to present these questions for discussion at the 1900 Horticultural Congress. It's a sort of preparation for l'Avenir. MARAICH GROWING SOCIETIES AND COURSES The market gardening guild has a mutual aid society, or rather a pension fund. Founded in 1855, the fund has around a thousand members, and has provided, is providing and will continue to provide useful services to its members. In agreement with horticulturists, it has set up a mutual insurance company against damage caused by hail and storms. It also has a professional association, which was set up only a few years ago, and which is also destined to be of great service to the company, both economically and commercially. 900 A free public course in vegetable growing is given once a month in Arcueil-Cachan by Mr. Duvillard, also a teacher with the Chambre syndicale des ouvriers-jardiniers. EXISTENCE IMPROVEMENT (Wages, number of bosses and workers) Although this first question is not included in the questionnaire, it is difficult to talk about workers' wages without saying a word about improving their existence. At the end of this century, market gardeners in Paris are the only ones still feeding their workers; with the spirit of independence that drives the men of our time, the time is not far off when this state of affairs will cease; for, on both sides, people aspire to this moment, which will come with the enlargement and remoteness of establishments, and with other methods of selling produce. The patriarchal mores that existed among the ancients are tending to disappear by the day. There is no longer the mutual esteem that once existed between bosses and workers, and the latter no longer stay with the same boss for many years, as they once did. At the beginning of the century, our ancestors had a Spartan existence, which no worker would be content with today. We might even add that very few workers live as well as market gardeners; they enjoy all the benefits that civilization has given to mankind, they have the fortifying food of city dwellers, and the hygiene and fresh air of country dwellers. A distinguished economist who has established the mortality of men by corporation, estimates that it is one of those where they live the longest. The wages of both male and female workers have quadrupled in the course of the century. Most are paid by the month: from seventy-five to eighty francs in summer, and from fifty-five to sixty in winter. As they are housed and fed by their bosses, they are unaware of the rising cost of living and rents; the women workers who go to Les Halles earn as much as the men. It's quite obvious that the day they're no longer fed and housed, they'll have less profit, or else they'll live worse; however, generosity aspires after that day, which is hardly surprising, as men want to enjoy as much freedom as possible. The market-gardening guild we have just described comprises around one thousand two hundred establishments, making a total of two thousand four hundred male and female bosses, because it's worth saying here that, in this profession, women have, if not more, then as much work and responsibility as men. It's in her department that products are prepared for sale, and until then it's she who goes to sell them at the central Ilalles. These 1,200 establishments employ around 5,000 workers of both sexes, not counting children, who today start work at a younger age than in the past. Since the Third Republic passed a law on primary education, they hardly start work until they are thirteen or fourteen. In a word, and to conclude, market gardening is one of the hardest jobs men can do, but it's also one of the healthiest. In this respect, didn't one of our great classics, Boileau, write the following two superb lines? Work, to men necessary, Makes their felicity rather than their misery. END ~-.. 4 DetiEed s) GOOgle TABLE OF CONTENTS Ogu GOOgle Oguredo GOOgle HISTORICAL CONSIDERATIONS General Chapters 1. - Lutetia, its foundation, its first gardens. ... The role of mistletoe in pagan religions . . 1I. - Agriculture among the Parisii... ... . III. - Parisian customs ... ... . IV. - Parisian farmers under Roman domination ... . Gaulish and Roman property ownership . V. - The origins of gardens ... . . . . . The origin of terraces ... ... ... . 1. . VI. - Evolution of garden design in Paris ... ... . The Merovingian kings' interest in their gardens . .. . Charles V was one of the kings who most encouraged horticulture. . . The transformation of gardens during the Renaissance . Le Nôtre created the French garden style. Under the First Empire, the landscape style fell into disuse, and was regenerated by Gabriel Thouin. This regeneration was mainly carried out by Alphand, under Napoleon III . VII. - The esteem of the ancients and the great for gardeners. A branch of the Valérienne family took the name of Lactuciens... ... The first names of gardeners to come down to us... ...1 VIII. - The establishment of the first courtiers. ... Pages 2CU22 1 13 E 43 11 18 19 2 1- 2 24 26 28 29 30 34 Google PART TWO THE SUCCESSIVE DEVOPPEMENTS Gardening chapters 1- AV MIDDLE-AE IX. - General overview of the state of citizens. ... X. - Conditions and obligations of colonists... . XI. - Slavery and serfdom. The condition of serfs and their struggle for freedom. . . . . . . The different types of serfs... ... . 1- The emancipation of the communes is the greatest political event in our history. ... ... . XII. - Organization of workers' communities . . . Etienne Boileau, protector of workers in the Middle Ages ... ... ... . Louis XIV's advisors replaced these institutions with superintendencies and academies ... ... . . . " XIII. - Abbeys and their cultures ... ... ... . The rule of Saint-Benoit ... ... . "The best vineyards in the Côte-d'Or belonged to the abbey of Saint-Denis ... ... . The main tools used by gardeners in the Middle Ages XIV. - Constitution of land ownership... . . Different types of possession ... . . . . Type of cadastre drawn up by Abbot Irminon, at the monastery of Saint-Germain-des-Prés . . . XV. - Capitularies of Charlemagne, article 70 on gardens . . . XVI. - Weights and measures under the Carlovingians . Measures of length . Measures of capacity ... ... ... ... . Weights ... . Coins . . . " . . " The old system of weights and measures and the new Pages 41 43 46 148 50 52 53 57 59 60 61 63 65 66 67 69 71 765 75 79 79 14 GOOgle XVII. - Value of land, its rental or cens under Charlemagne. . . . . . . . . . . Value of the main foodstuffs used to feed the people. XVIII. - Confraternities . . . . . . . . . . . 1 The oldest gardeners' guilds . XIX. - Police ordinances and statutes of the ancient community of master gardeners . . . Order of the Provost of Paris, December 30, 1376. ... ... . Police order of February 8, 1473. . . . Letters patent from Henri III, August 29, 1576. Ruling confirming a sentence of the Ilôtel-de-Ville, for incompetence, and referring a case of the gardeners to the Châtelet. . . . Parliamentary ruling concerning the police ordinance of 1473. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . First statutes of the community of master gardeners in 1599 ... ... ... ... ... ... . Decree of Henri IV confirming these statutes . Measures taken against slush in the Middle Ages The signatories of the 1599 statutes . . . . Letters patent from the late King Louis XIII, confirming the gardeners' statutes . . . Registration order for the statutes, July 26, 1646 . . . . . . . . . . . . . Letters patent from Louis XIV confirming the statutes given to the gardeners by Henri IV. Déclaration du roi portant arrêt à la communauté des jardiniers des offices de jurés et d'auditeurs des comptes, avec douze nouveaux articles de statuts, juin 1697. . . . . . . . . . . Decree condemning the inhabitants of Roule to be visited four times a year by the jury gardeners of Paris, and regulating the visiting fees. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . Confirmation of the previous ruling, April 1620 . Défezse aux compagnons de faire acte de maitres et d'apporter aucune marchandise à Paris, March 17, 1655 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Arrêt d'enregistrement des lettres patentes du mois de juin 1645, nonobstant l'opposition des Pages compagnons dont ils sont déboutés, avril 1655 81 82 84 87 91 91 94 98 99 100 100 104 106 108 109 110 112 113 115 116 117 117 TABLE OF CONTENTS XIX. - Jury gardeners forbidden to prevent: bourgeois and journeymen gardeners from bringing their vegetables to market, June 22, 1658. ... Les jurés jardiniers maintenus dans le droit de visiter quatre fois l'année les marais et jardins, tant des maîtres que des compagnons, May 14, 1661. . The Edict of Nantes and religionists in workers' communities. . . . . . . . Statuts des Chapelières de fleurs inscribed in Etienne Boileau's Livre d'Or . . . . Statuts des bouquetières, in 21 articles, and lettres patetnes de Louis XIV confirming them, August 21, 1677 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Motto of the old community of master gardeners ... ... ... ... ... ... . Role played by workers' communities in festivities in honor of kings ... ... . XX. - Condition and wages of former gardeners . The principle of survivorship in the position of royal gardener . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Garden maintenance contract in 1583 ... . XXI. - Old treatises on courtillage ... ... . Treatise on the courtillage of a

bourgeois de Paris, in 1393... . . . . . . . . . . . . Olivier de Serres' opinion of gardeners. Knowledge required to be a gardener in the Middle Ages ... ... ... . Claude Mollet's horticultural treatise. . . . La Quintinie's particular inclination for vegetable gardening ... ... ... ... ... ... . La Quintinie's forced cultivation . . . . . . How to make the layers ... ... ... . XXII. - Growth of Paris up to Philippe-Auguste's fence. XXIII. - Enclosures in Paris from Charles V to Louis XIV ... . . XXIV The first markets and Halles de Paris . Droit de payage de Petit-Pont ... ... . Les Halles Centrales . XXV. - General considerations on the origin and hisPages 118 120 123 126 127 134 135 137 150 151 157 157 164 165 167 177 178 178 180 185 189 191 196 toory of vegetables... ... ... ... ... ... . 198 Cabbage and cauliflower ... ... ... ... . 198 LES JARDINIERS DE PARIS Melon. : . . . . . 1. Other cucurbits: squash, pumpkins, cucumbers, etc. ... . Tomatoes and eggplants ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . Bulbous vegetables: garlic, onions, spring onions, civets, etc. . . . . Root vegetables: beet, carrots, parsnips, radishes, salsify, etc. ... ... . Vegetables grown for their leaves: spinach, sorrel... ... ... . " . Vegetables grown for their seeds... . Strawberries ... ... ... ... ... . Asparagus ... ... ... ... ... . Artichokes and cardoons. . . . . . . . . . . Condiments: chervil, parsley, tarragon, etc. Pineapple ... ... ... ... ... . Potatoes ... ... . 1. . . . . . . XXVI - Vegetables, flowers, fruit, trees, considered from the mora! point of view ... ... . Memories that certain trees give when we see them again . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXVII. - Gardeners of the last century ... ... . The culture of Parisian market gardeners ... . Rent prices ... ... ... ... ... . XXVIII. - Market gardeners at the end of the last century and the beginning of this one. . . . . . . 455 XXIX. - The oldest market gardening families . PART THREE THE EVOLUTION OF market gardening since La Quintinie Chapters XXX. - The first market gardeners ... . 1 . XXXI. - The first movements of market gardeners in this century ... ... . Pages 201 203 207 209 211 212 213 214 215 217 218 218 219 219 225 227 230 231 234 236 241 Pages 247 255 A word of history about the 15th arrondont of Paris. 256 TABLE OF CONTENTS THE GARDENERS OF PARIS XXXII. - Expropriation law and its consequences . XXXIII. - Successive relocations up to 1860 . XXXIV - Relocations from 1860 to the end of the century . XXXV. - Old and new equipment . Watering systems ... ... ... ... ... . Bells ... ... ... ... ... . Glass frames ... ... . Progress made in the manufacture of window frames. . . . . . . . . . . Chests ... ... ... ... . Doormats... ... . . . . Small tools... ... . New equipment ... ... ... ... ... . 1. . . . . . . . . XXXVI - Ancient and modern trade XXXVII. - Clothing . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapters PART FOUR LES MARAICHERS In contemporary times XXXVIII.  XXXIX. - Present moral state. 3 . . . XL. - Current working conditions ... . XLI. - The intellectual state... ... . XLII. - The current political role played by certain market gardeners ... ... . XLIII. - Current residences of market gardeners ... . XLIV. - The value of marshes and their rental during the century ... ... . Fabulous increase in land .............................. XLV. - Value of settlements during the century, transactions to which they give rise. XLVI. - The market garden trade in the 19th century. 1. . 4 . . . . . XLVII. - History of mushroom growing . Pages 259 262 264 267 279 273 276 278 280 281 282 284 288 Pages 293 297 301 305 307 310 312 313 315 318 321 Mushroom beds by La Quintinie. 322 XLVII. - Mushroom beds in the Maison Rustique by Malpeyre, Bixio and Bailly, at the beginning of the 19th century... ... . Useful and practical means of producing mushrooms, by M. Duvillard, professor of vegetable cultivation at the départ! de la Seine Current production of mushroom cultivation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 457 XLVIII. - The current fight against harmful luscious insects and plant diseases ... ... . Statutes of the Association formed around 1878, to research the means of curing the lettuce and romaine sucker. . . . Report presented to the Académie des Sciences, on this subject, by M. Max Cornu. ... . XLIX. - La Société nationale d'Ilortieulture de France L. - La Société de secours-mutuels des jardiniershorticulteurs du département de la Seine Statuts de la Société... . . . Conditions of admission and membership . Initial subscription payments ... ... ... ... ... . Members' pensions ... ... ... ... . Funeral fund ... ... . Office organization ... . . . . General meetings and their holding . Discussions ... ... ... ... ... . 1)2 Company policy... ... ... . Administrative provisions ... ... . General provisions ... ... ... . . Moral and financial state of the Society at the end of the 19th century ... ... ... . .. . Critique by the author, who is a full member . . . . . . . . .  L1. - Association mutueile d'assurances de l'Ilorticulture de la région Parisienne, contre les dégâis causés par la grêle et la tempête Statuts de l'Association. . . . . . . . . .. Premium and subscription... ... ... ... . Indemnities ... ... ... ... . Claims ... ... ... ... ... . Pages 321 325 328 331 334 337 342 346 341 348 350 351 352 351 256 358 358 359 361 362 363 3ti6 318 369 370 371 Association members. 371 Association members. . . . . . 373 "TABLE OF CONTENTS 00 LI. - Experts. . ... Administration. ... Meetings . General provisions. . . . . .-. 4. . . . . . . . L11. - Syndicat des maraîchers de la région parisienne Statuts du Syndicat... ... ... . Name, headquarters and purpose of the Syndicat . Arbitration and appraisal, means of implementation, obligations of members, administration of the Syndicat. ... ... ... ... ... ... . Revision of bylaws, dissolution ... ... . Rules, dues, general meeting, Board of Directors ........................................ Presidency, secretariat, treasury, arbitrators, experts Allocation of arbiter-experts ... ... . Protest by the horticultural unions, forcing the Chambers to pass a law regulating the Halles Centrales trade. Decree by the President of the Republic concerning the sale of the Halles fairground produce. ... The Syndicat made its influence felt on the economic conditions of cultivation. ... ... LIII. - The confreres of our century ... ... . LIV. - The Jardin des Plantes ... ... ... ... . The men who have contributed most to its greatness ... ... ... ... ... ... . LV. - The Versailles kitchen garden ... ... ... . La Quintinie ennobled by Louis XIV ... ... . Cultivating the garden today ... ... . Growing melons ... ... ... ... . The national school of herticulture created by the 3rd republic in place of the royal kitchen garden . . . LVI. - Private horticultural schools. Fleury-Meudon... . Market gardening at the school ... ... . Cultivation of early vegetables ... ... ... . Equipment ... ... ... ... ... ... . Pages 373 374 375 376 377 379 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 388 390 392 394 396 398 401 402 404 405 406 406 407 Garden produce ... ... ... ... ... ... . 408 LVII. - Le refuge du Plessis-Picquet ............................. 410 Management and administration. 411 Market gardening ... ... ... ... . "412 Weak side of the establishment ... ... . 413 LVIII. - Le Nôtre school in Villepreux ... ... . 414 - THE GARDENERS OF PARIS LVIII. - Pupil placement chart ... ... . School organization and teaching . . . Different trades taught to students and decorative arts. Games and wages ... ... ... . Pleasure trips... ... . 1. .1 . Punishments. The estate ... ... . Water supply . Mushroom cultivation ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . 1. . LIX. - The Saint-Nicolas d'Igny brothers' school . . . 459 LX. - Workers' apprenticeships and public courses. Cours de M. Duvillard... ... . LXI. - Exhibitions. 1. . . . M. Duvillard's report on vegetable plants for the 1889 exhibition. 1. . LXII. - Universal Exhibition of 1900. A brief history of the Paris market garden industry in the 19th century, to serve as a retrospective exhibition. . . . Progress made during the century in terms of cultivation and equipment ... ... ... ... . Main production centers ... ... . Trade in products during the century . Land value and rental ... ... . Farming . . Vegetable-growing companies and courses . Improvement of living conditions, wages, number of owners and workers ... ... ... ... . Pages 417 418 419 120 421 422 423 424 4265 428 429 431 432 438 439 442 442 443 444 445 446 TABLE OF CONTENTS 5915ed9 Google - -- - - - D.. - 43 . - .----.. ---- - "- Dguieeds GOOgle To avoid fine, this book should be returned on or before the date last stamped below DEniEed5 GOOgle Digitized py CO